To, so other people in the
audience can follow along as
well.
So starting with Senate Bill 3,
the guardrails Bill.
Um, some changes that have
occurred just to give you all
perspective, this bill is now 15
pages.
Compared to its original bill
that was around 9. So we've
added about 6 pages worth of uh
language and text, so that's why
it's being done as a substitute
and not as an amendment.
So I'm gonna go through the
changes line by line just to
highlight them for you all. Uh,
starting on page one, lines 21
through 23. We basically tied
the behavioral health region and
reinforce the that it's created
according to what the
administrative offices of the
court determines is
inappropriate region. On page 2.
Line 2, we're adding.
Um, to the behavioral services
definition where allowing
telemedicine to be incorporated
within that definition. So it's
more forward thinking.
Um, within section one,
subsection C.
So it's still on page 2. We've
added a few items to the
behavioral health stakeholders.
It's still not.
shaped as an exhaustive list,
but this is just to reinforce
that there are certain people
that need to be part of these
discussions, um, depending on
the needs of a specific region.
So these include the public
defender department, the
district attorney's office and
the behavioral health region,
CYFD and then also including
school districts, local and
regional law enforcement
agencies, local jails, or
detention centers, behavioral
health associations and local
behavioral health
collaboratives.
Um
We've added a new definition
that appears as E at the bottom
of page 2.
And this one is a, a definition
for disproportionately impacted
communities, and it's defined as
a community or population of
people for which multiple
burdens, including mental
substance misuse, and physical
stressors, inequity, poverty,
limited behavioral health
services.
And high unemployment may act to
persistently and negatively
affect the health and well-being
of the community or population.
On page 3 within the definition
for generally recognized
standards for behavioral health,
we've added two items at the
very bottom of the list. So
we've added uh public health
officials and certified peer
support workers as needing to be
um have clear standards provided
by the healthcare authority.
Other than that, there are no
other changes within section 2.
Jumping over to section 3.
Which starts on page 4.
Uh, within paragraph A or
subsection A.
We've added starting on line 16
all the way through line 23, all
of that text, which basically
reads that and it provides
clarity of the process. So, as
you all know, the administrative
courts is going to designate the
regions, they're going to
convene the people or have
people help them convene um the
stakeholders, and then they're
gonna help.
You know, developed plants.
That's their role developing
plans.
Um, and then in the event that a
consensus on a regional plan
cannot be reached by the
behavioral health stakeholders,
the AOC shall be the final
arbiter of that regional plan.
However, the healthcare
authority shall verify that
nothing in that regional plan
jeopardizes the state Medicaid
program.
And if something in the regional
plan does jeopardize the state
Medicaid program, then that
section of the regional plan is
void. So this is just to make
sure that even though
We're giving locals the ability
to get creative. They don't get
too creative that it jeopardizes
our state Medicaid program.
Uh, we've added a new subsection
B.
Which basically reads a
behavioral stakeholder receiving
appropriations pursuant to the
Beaver health reform and
Investment Act shall participate
in regional meetings, provides
substantive expertise, develop
relevant portions of the
regional plans, submit annual
reports based on those plans and
share relevant data as requested
by the by a legislative interim
committee, the administrative
Office of the courts for the
Healthcare Authority. This is
basically saying if you're
getting money,
From the state
You are to contribute your
expertise and provide the data
and contribute in this way, um,
to ensure the success of the
regional plans.
We've added a new uh subsection
C.
Which basically reads for fiscal
year 2025, 2026, 2027, and 2028.
The administrative Offices of
courts and the healthcare
authority shall collaborate to
utilize current data to identify
gaps in any existing sequential
intercept mapping and supplement
the mapping to ensure complete
behavioral health coverage prior
to regional plan finalization.
Nothing in this subsection shall
prevent the development of
regional plans prior to the
finalization of the sequential
intercept mapping, any grant or
funding awards are contingent on
finalized regional plans
provided those regional plans.
shall be updated upon the
completion of sequential
intercept mapping. What that
subsection does, it basically
says, go forth, create your
regional plans, you don't need
to wait for the sequential
intercept mapping to be
complete, because that does take
time.
Um, so you can mobilize as
quickly as possible and once you
do, you're able to access money.
However, once your region has
those sequential intercept maps
updated, you have to update your
plan.
Right, so this way it's an
evolving process, um, as we're
starting off.
Now we've changed a few of the
items within um the subsection
of what a original plan shall
have. The first item changed, so
now it it reads um that it'll
include a phase implementation,
addressing behavioral health
service gaps, including the
continuation and expansion of
behavioral health services. So
it's just a rephrasing because
prior to that, it just said
expansion and continuation.
We really want to emphasize that
you need to focus on the gaps.
Address the gaps first.
Right? So that's what that did
in um 2.
On page 5, starting on line 23,
we've added kind of a safeguard,
so in the original draft, we
basically said you're eligible
for 5.
40s.
Or 5 grants. Now we're saying
it's 5, however, um, additional
priorities can be identified if
the healthcare authority
determines that the service gaps
in your specific behavioral
health region are large enough
to warrant more priorities. So
basically, if the need is super
duper high, the healthcare
authority can say,
Give us a few more items that we
can try to help you with.
So that's kind of a a fail-safe.
Uh, on page 6.
Uh, item 4 of the report or the
plan, sorry, um, we've added
language that uh once a
timeline, you'll provide a
timeline and performance
measures for each one priority,
and the part that's added is,
um, that include a plan for
developing data collection and
infrastructure performance
measures, feasibility analysis,
and sustainability plan because
we want to make sure that
whatever gets created is
sustainable.
And, and then we've added a 9.
Uh, uh, item number 9, which
basically says that
The regional plan will identify
how regional uh how they will
optimize, leverage or reinforce
coordination with the state
Medicaid program as the primary
payer of behavioral health
services. So this is to
reinforce that overall,
Medicaid.
is where the money's at for
behavioral health services.
If not Medicaid, commercial
insurance. This is to address
Everything else, right? But
Medicaid should always come
first, um, and the money that's
been appropriated in Senate Bill
2 is meant to build out the
infrastructure to then
eventually be able to leverage
more Medicaid.
Uh, we've added a new subsection
F that basically reads the
healthcare authority in
consultation with the
Legislative Finance Committee
and the Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee shall
determine baseline data
collection points to be
collected and reported in all
reports subject to subsection G
of the section and subsection G
is basically the reports that
will begin in 2027. So,
In other words, we're telling
everyone, this is the minimum
data that we need, so you can
start collecting it from the
get-go.
And then in the report that's
provided starting in 2027, we've
added an item 5, which is a list
of qualified and certified
behavioral health providers in
each region that provide
services described in this act.
So in other words, who are your
providers? Let's create that
list, and now you can create,
you know, brochures and
pamphlets and start to educate
the population based on that
data.
We've added a subsection H.
Which says starting May 1st,
2025 and continuing through
December 31st, 2025. The
administrative office of the
courts shall provide the
appropriate interim legislative
committees and the Healthcare
Authority a monthly update on
the status of sequential and or
sub mapping and regional
planning, and then starting
January 1st, 2026, the AOC will
start providing quarterly
updates on these things. So this
is basically to ensure that
You know, things are moving and
so you all are aware when
regional meetings are occurring
where they're occurring, who's
involved, and there's
opportunities to pivot
accordingly during the rest of
this calendar year.
And then quarterly after that.
Uh, we've added a new subsection
I, which reads higher education
institutions within behavioral
health regions shall coordinate
with the healthcare authority,
Workforce solutions department,
and other behavioral health
stakeholders to create a
behavioral health workforce
pipeline for the behavioral
services identified within
regional plans.
Behavioral health workforce
pipeline may include pathways
for people with lived experience
to enter the Beaverel workforce
in state and national
recruitment of behavioral health
professionals.
Increased awareness of
behavioral health careers within
middle and high school in the
region, optimization of state
funding to enhance or create
behavioral health educational
opportunities within the region.
Making recommendations to the
legislature to better address
the behavioral health workforce
needs of the region. So in other
words, once the plans are ready,
Those institutions of higher ed
in those regions need a pivot
and ensure that their teaching
courses and
Um, preparing the population in
that region to take on these new
jobs.
Right? And that's kind of the
idea, um, and in doing that,
they should already have the
funding through ING. You all
heard them yesterday. They have
the money, they should be
prioritizing these type of
programs for jobs that exist in
the region.
Uh, we've added a subsection J.
Which basically reinforces that
the healthcare authority is a
single state authority for
Medicaid.
And um
And that to reinforce that
nothing in any of this act.
Implies anything differently.
Right.
The behavioral services are
still paid for through Medicaid,
which is ran by the Healthcare
Authority.
Um, moving over to section 4.
We've made some tweaks on the
behavioral health service
standards, just to clarify
further that the healthcare
authorities still the entity in
charge of enforcing behavioral
standards. So the healthcare
authority coordinating with
other state agencies that have
behavioral health programs,
which I believe are about 17
will provide an initial set of
service standards to the courts
so that way when they go to the
communities, they have, you
know, like a little bit of a
background on.
What is um a proper service.
And then we've also included
language where the healthcare
authority will provide the
courts with what they know our
behavioral service access gaps
and priorities in that region.
So this way the courts can help
facilitate a more, you know,
informed discussion instead of
going in completely blind.
And then uh on line 18, page 9,
we basically changed the AOC as
the enforcer to the healthcare
authority to make that clear.
And then in subsection B at the
bottom of page 9, we were having
the healthcare authority work
with the LFC.
to uh work out the uh promising
practices.
Jumping over to section 5, which
is the behavioral investments.
We've added an entire new
subsection B.
Which basically says that a
behavioral health region may
request to repurpose any
unexpended balance of a grant
subject to the Herald Rural
Health Reform and Investment Act
to another identified funding
priority within that region.
And the request can be approved
if, for example, a grantee did
not, um,
Provide their report. So it's
like if someone's getting money
and you're not
Playing ball with providing the
data and reporting on time, then
guess what, that money is going
to be moved and we're providing
that flexibility within the
region, right? To ensure that
services are actually being
delivered, uh, at the same time,
if the grant purpose is not
meeting the performance
standards that are identified,
right? You're not really serving
people, providing 85% of your
time as actual service, you're
spending a lot less and it's
like you're not meeting
performance standards. So that
money should pivot to something
that's going to be more
productive.
Or for example, if there's an
audit or evaluation.
Uh, that's found that what's
being implemented is being done
ineffectively, then it's time to
pivot. There's no reason to
continue funding something
that's not functioning, and
that's the idea behind that
section.
In section 6, which is universal
behavioral credentialing
process. We've added language
requiring that by the end of
this calendar year, the
healthcare authority, and this
is on page 12 starting on line 4
through 11.
The healthcare authority along
with the LFC and LHHS shall
establish a working group of the
healthcare licensing boards to
streamline the process to verify
behavioral licensing and improve
the overall behavior health
licensing process and the
working group will provide the
legislature with statutory
recommendations if they're
needed. So we're really jump
starting a shift in terms of um
licensing.
Section 7, prohibition on caps,
we've added on on line 18 and 20
on page 12. That small uh little
caveat. So we're not putting
caps MCOs won't put caps on any
services. However, we want to
make sure that the provider
aren't taking advantage of that,
right? We don't want to
providers only just be, we're
going to treat everyone, but no
one's really gonna get any
continuity of care.
So we've added this line that
says, provided that patients are
able to receive behavioral
services pursuant to continuity
of care clinical guidelines. So,
The health providers are allowed
to, you know, expand beyond
their caps as long as
The individuals being served,
receive continuity of care, and
it's not just a let's sign up
everyone and just take more
money. So it's kind of a a cost
control. Section 8.
is a new section that we've
added, which basically requires
988 and 911 to be coordinated.
Uh, currently those two systems
do not talk to each other. So if
you call 911 and it's a
behavioral health emergency.
More than likely you're going to
be asked to hang up and call
988.
And vice versa.
Right? So we need these systems
to talk to each other and simply
transfer.
The individuals over. So we're
basically mandating that in
Section 8. Section 9 is a new
section that's uh the behavioral
health audit and evaluation
requirements. So this captures
your idea, Senator Gonzalez of
internal external audits. So uh
subsection A is the healthcare
authority shall regularly
monitor and audit contracts and
grantees subject to this act to
ensure that behavioral service
quality standards are met, and
to ensure financial and
programmatic compliance during
the duration of an active
regional.
plan
The healthcare authorities shall
complete a statewide gap
analysis of adult behavioral
health services every 2 fiscal
years. So basically the plans
that are occurring and the
reports that are occurring will
help the behavioral authority,
do a more statewide analysis. So
we still get that statewide
perspective, and we don't really
have a fragmentation of the
system.
And then
The
any data requests made by the
healthcare authority to a local
government body related to the
local government bodies's
behavioral health programs,
including their financial
information shall be provided
within 30 days of the written
request and shall be shared with
the AOC and the LFC. So
basically, if there's behavioral
health money, we want to know
what it's doing.
Where it's at, who it's serving,
and
You know, we're, we're kind of
giving that um data mandate to
the healthcare authority.
And then
Lastly, at the bottom of page
13, the healthcare authority
shall review regional plans for
reasonableness of budget and
service delivery to optimize
infrastructure and health
services throughout the state.
And then, uh, subsections B and
C on the next page.
Shifts the other audit component
to the LFC.
Where the LFC can do it through
their evaluation unit, and they
can also contract this out, but
they're gonna review and assess
the sufficiency of regional
plans, timelines, and resources.
Review the adequacy of
functional technical and
operational requirements,
capabilities and resources,
identify gaps and deficiencies
in regional plans.
A review sufficiency of staff
and other resources and
partnerships provide ongoing
real-time review of project
progress and deliverables
provide real-time review of
gaps, resources and deficiencies
and ongoing verification of
critical features, operations,
and program viability of
grantees subject to this act.
So in other words, the LFC is
there to identify.
Quickly, if there's a design
flaw within a regional plan, or
if there's an implementation
flaw, and basically with that
information, that region can
pivot and fix those issues
instead of us wasting money on
something that's not gonna work.
And then lastly, section 10
repeals the behavioral health.
Purchasing collaborative act.
Which, as you all heard, as it
meant for a long time, has been
very inefficient. There's very
little, if any, trust in it
functioning. So why keep it in
the books?
Moving on to Senate Bill 2, the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 2. So
just some highlights in this
one. There are some very minor
language tweaks throughout we're
also ensuring we've added a
reversion date at your request,
Senator Trujillo. So the
reversion date is 2029.
Right, so all of this money
ideally should be spent by 2029.
If not, it will revert, and
we're going to revert it into
the behavioral trust fund that's
being created in Senate Bill 1.
Um, we've added in section 2,
which is the appropriation of
the AOC for judicial district
grants, regional planning,
including regional case
management. We've added the
ability for them to spend money
on family support services. So
in the event, you know, this is
to make sure that this talks
well with the House package, the
crime package that's coming from
the house. So if someone gets
committed, what services are
there for the family?
Right, so the courts have the
ability to provide, I don't
know, counseling or other things
to the family. They have the
flexibility if it's something
that they feel is necessary.
On page.
5, section 7.
Which is the appropriation in
DPS and the healthcare
authority.
Or crisis response and recovery,
and this is the vehicle money,
right, for mobile units. We're
splitting the money. So half the
money will go to DPS because
they have their own crisis
response units. So make sure
they have the appropriate
staffing and money and then the
other half of the money would be
available for locals to purchase
equipment related to that.
In section 8.
Um, which is an appropriation of
the healthcare authority for
crisis response and recovery
teams.
Uh, this was a request from the
healthcare authority because
they too also have these mobile
response units. So having half
the money applied to them and
half the money for the locals.
So, uh, just a quick
clarification, this this version
does have a type of your 0.2
you'll have a 03 tomorrow, but
it should be in line 17, it
should say 6,
Million dollars.
Right? Uh, so it'll be 6 million
for the locals component and
then 5.5 million for state
agencies to do this work.
And then if you go to page 9,
sections 14.
Through 21 are brand new, and
these are new appropriations, so
now Senate Bill 2 has a total
price tag of 200 million.
And this is to
Completely capture uh the other
components that weren't
originally thought of. So, uh,
section 14 provides $3 million
to the healthcare authority to
be able to do the 988 and 911
coordination to make sure those
systems are interoperable and
have bi directionality. Section
15, uh, appropriates money to
the healthcare authority or
behavioral health patient
navigation.
So this is $9 million to ensure
that patients know how to access
the behavioral health systems
that we're creating.
Section 16 appropriates $1
million to the LFC.
To, uh, for them to use on the
audits and evaluation that um
internal external audit
mechanism that was created in
section 9 incentive Bill 3.
Section 17 provides an
appropriation to the Department
of Health.
Um, to provide youth behavioral
health services. So from my
discussions with the um
Secretary designate, uh, from
the Department of Health. They
are the ones that operate the
school clinics.
Right, and they have that whole
network. So if we're trying to
impact the behavior that the
schools.
They uh would appear to be the
most capable of actually getting
the money out and providing
suicide prevention training,
awareness, educational
resources, or other behavioral
health services, including, um,
if, you know, if they wanted to
get apps for their students that
relate to behavioral, they have
that flexibility.
So that's $15 million to be
expended over the next 3 years.
Uh, section 18.
Uh, appropriate money to Project
Echo, which is $2 million to
ensure that they can facilitate
training or behavioral health
providers and behavioral health
and provide behavioral health
services to patients.
Um,
And section 19.
20 and 21 provide an annual $10
million appropriation to the
healthcare authority.
For them to have regional
certified peer support workers,
justice liaisons, regional
behavioral health services
division staff, the
administrative staff to get all
this done and to implement the
audit provisions in Senate Bill
3. So we're doing that as a
growth.
To see like
What's the right size? See how
they're able to expand and
actually implement this before
it um becomes a recurring
expense to the budget.
And that is those changes with
the proposed amendment to Senate
Bill 1, it would strike the
appropriation or the transfer of
1 billion as common practice
within this committee. We don't
let any bills out of this
committee with an appropriation
attached to them, so that's
there.
Um, we are extending the ability
of that fund since we don't know
how quickly we're gonna be able
to get it to a billion, um, to
serve as a reserve for the state
for fiscal years 26 and 27.
And then we're standardizing the
language since it was adopted,
um, by LHHS and it's still kept
the language of substance abuse.
We're changing it to substance
misuse to make it more broad and
more encompassing.
With that, Mr. Chair, I stand
for questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Adrian.
First we have Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and uh thank you, Adrian and,
and all the folks that have uh
worked on a lot of this, this
stuff. I know a lot of people
have had hands and, and thank
you for listening to some of the
stuff that's already come from
members here at least, and it
sounds like in in other uh
presentations that you've been
having along the way.
Um, so I guess, you know, right
out of the gate, um, you know,
being the finance committee, as
you can imagine we're, we're
gonna have a different set of
questions, I guess. Um.
So who's going to own this like
A to Z.
To make sure that it's all
happening and that it's all
lining up and that um
You know, we can identify
slippage and where things aren't
happening because it seems to me
like there's sort of like a
Cascading effect to make it all
happen.
So there's that, I mean,
there's, you know, reporting and
analysis of, of what is being
delivered or not delivered or
Who, who's gonna have sort of
who's going to be on first tier
because you have a lot of hands
in the pot here.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, but
yeah, we do have a lot of hands
in the pot, and that's to ensure
that each section of this can be
done properly, right? So when it
comes to the regional planning,
the regional planning is going
to be on the courts.
But the beautiful thing about
this is they can ask the
healthcare authority, they can
ask the cogs, they can ask
anybody else, you know, to be a
wealth association.
For help in convening the
people. So when it comes to the
plans and, you know, getting
everyone together, that's their
responsibility. So they're the
ones to be held to account for
that.
When it comes to the delivery.
Of all of these mechanisms. It's
on the locals.
Right? It's on the local
providers, it's on the local
municipalities and counties and
it's on them to deliver the
system, but we're giving them
the tools to be successful. So
with the LFC and Healthcare
Authority having that audit
function in Senate Bill 3 that's
being added. We now know and can
tell the locals, hey, this
portion of your plan isn't
working.
Time to pivot.
Right? So there's that portion.
And then in terms of the service
quality and standards, that's on
the healthcare authority.
So they remain that single
entity. So instead of in the
past, we always had the one
entity that was responsible for
pretty much everything was just
the MCOs.
Now it's kind of everyone has
their role to play.
But we've created safety
mechanisms in this plan to make
sure that
Things can pivot, um,
When things might not be going
as well.
As we think they should. I
appreciate that chair and, and
Adrian, you're doing a
phenomenal job here. My question
was also geared toward, so when,
when, you know, this is a huge
undertaking here, OK? And so
I'm, I'm interested to know
like, is there going to be a
project manager.
Is there gonna be someone that
sees the continuum across the,
no matter what's going on in
each one of the silos, each one
of the areas, who's going to be
making sure that the entire
thing is tied together and
actually happening the way that
the legislature envisions it
too, because it seems like, um,
today we have projects that are
similar to this, but then we, we
end up
With overages in terms of cost
or or taking a lot longer than
we anticipated.
Uh, you know, like, like the
service quality standards and
the the throughput and the
deliverability, the number of
folks affected, if that's on, on
the healthcare authority, I
mean,
Do they know that they should be
building these things? I mean,
what, how long will they have to
put those together? So who's
gonna be the project owner of
the entire continuum of making
sure all this happens.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so within each
plan, they'll identify their
project owner for that specific
phase. However, within this
entire cycle, the appropriations
made in section 1920, and 21 to
the healthcare authority,
provide them with the regional
staff.
To be there, boots on the ground
that answer to the healthcare
authority to kind of make sure
things are going appropriately.
OK. I, I'm, I'm just concerned
that this is a really large uh
undertaking here in and someone
needs to own it. I mean, from
even above the regional area,
um, not sure who that's going to
be, but we should really be
thinking about that. And then,
um, Mr. Chair and, and uh Adrian
on avoiding duplication.
Uh, do we have any safeguards in
here to avoid duplication or I
guess another word could be red
tape. Seems like there's gonna,
they could pretend there would
be a potential for a lot of red
tape to get things done here.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in terms of
duplication, that's kind of one
of the reasons why we're having
the LFC and the healthcare
authority do the internal
external audits to identify
those things so that way if
there is duplication, it can
pivot to something else.
OK. I think that'll be important
to make sure that we're not
running any duplication or any
or creating any unnecessary red
tape, and then the 3rd and the
last item that I had to share is
an Adrian is I want to make sure
that we're we're focused
statewide with all of these
dollars. Uh, so my district is,
you may recall, I think you're
from the area. So I've got, you
know, the South Valley, the,
the, you know, very
unincorporated area of Bern
County and I've got.
You know, a vast part of my
district is incorporated
subdivisions, you know, that
kind of stuff.
How do we, and then, and then
you've got that, that's, that's
sort of in central New Mexico
and then you have these
disparate areas outside of, I
know most of the crime, most of
the, uh, you know, issues that
we're dealing with are in the
bigger towns and cities, but how
do we make sure that these
dollars are going to reach
You know, every part of the
state.
Uh, Mr. Chair, but yeah, so
that's why we added that
definition on disproportionately
impacted communities. So
initially for this money in
particular,
Those are the priorities.
Let's hit those communities that
are disproportionately impacted.
And then that uh I guess my last
question and share and Adrian is
um
We're not going to do sort of a
one size fits all. I just, you
know, like areas.
You know, where there may be
higher, you know, alcoholism
rates or whatever versus other
areas that really don't have
that problem. I want to make
sure that we're not going to be
cramming something down that an
area doesn't really need, and we
can use those dollars better
somewhere else.
Uh, Mr. Chair, er but yeah,
that's exactly why it's designed
this way. So to give you an
example, right, um, Elmo
Gorrdon.
Almo Gordo, you have a lot of
the individuals in that military
base who, if their kids have
autism.
There's no autism services in
Alamogordo.
So you end up having those
service members wanting to
transfer or leave, right? So
that could be a priority for
that area.
While in Rio Riba based on, you
know, with the first judicial
district did, their priority was
very much detox inpatient, so
it'll very much be tailored to
the needs of the region, and
that's one of the reasons also
why the healthcare authority
will provide the AOC before the
regional plans to get started.
It's like, this is what we know
are all the behavioral health
needs.
Or gaps
To date that because they've
been studying this, it's like
for this region or that region,
this county, that municipality.
So this way there's a starting
point to build off of, but it's
not going to pigeonhole that
everyone needs a detox center.
Everyone needs mobile units.
It's very much allowed to be
tailored at the local level. OK.
And I thought that was my last,
but I do have one more, so, uh,
you are familiar with the
serrebi Mesa in my district, I'm
sure right there on the bluff
there right by uh.
Coors and real Bravo or Dennis
Chavez. So
Is that a group that would,
would have the ability to access
funds like this or how would
they participate in some of
these.
They have a youth detox now.
They have a number of things
they're doing some wonderful
things there. How, how would
they access these types of
funds.
So, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Padilla, so I live right next to
that, um,
so, uh, the way it would work,
basically, so think of the
region would be probably
Bernalillo County as a whole.
If they identify that.
Youth detox or youth behavioral
services is one of their top 5
priorities.
Then they've identified it. It's
in their regional plan. They
have an idea of the stakeholders
who's going to go in and then
the healthcare authority would
basically authorize the money
and the beautiful part about
this, the money could flow from
the healthcare authority to the
county to surrender Mesa, if
there's like an existing line,
but it could also flow directly
from the healthcare authority to
the service provider.
Right? So it just depends on
what that priority is and how
it's
Designed.
So then, uh, uh.
There's gonna be a whole slew of
RFPs that are going to be put
out to make this, this so or
how, how, how is the
distribution gonna take place. I
know we have the procurement
code, this and that, but would
you envision the whole slew of
RFPs being put out for these
services or?
So behavioral health services as
a whole in general are paid for
through Medicaid dollars, right?
So in most cases, those
contracts already exist. So if
the idea is to expand the
services so they might need, you
know.
An extra facility to be able to
provide more care, or they want
to hire
You know, a new social worker
counselor who, you know, that
initial startup cost isn't
something that's covered by
Medicaid. That's what this money
is meant to do. But then the
actual billing should go through
Medicaid, should go through
commercial insurance and for
that small population of people
that don't have either.
That's where some of this money
could also
Um, go shorts. So it just
depends on the design.
Well, thank you very much and
thank you, Adrian, for answering
all my questions. Appreciate it.
Senator Truel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Adrian. This is
really good. You've made a lot
of changes and I appreciate that
we've been heard. Um, I have
just a couple of questions in
regards to Senate Bill 3, on a
variety of places. I can see it
on page 5. we're talking about,
uh, the legislative interim
committees and legislative
finance Committee getting data.
And if I was hearing correctly,
there's been some challenges in
getting data from the healthcare
authority, Department of Health
in the past. Do we need to put
any language in here that
ensures that doesn't violate
HIPAA or, uh, I mean, has the
Department of Health or the
health authority suggested that
there's some sort of a language
in there that would give them
that ability to provide us the
information knowing that they
are not.
providing names and birthdays
and that kind of stuff.
But that's what data means. I
wonder if the definition for
data might be helpful.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Trujillo, so
Definitely federal law
supersedes everything, right? So
HIPAA is in federal law and the
healthcare authority has to
abide by it. So no matter what
data requests come through.
The information, especially like
Medicaid data would be redacted
in certain ways. And that's
common practice already, um,
which does unfortunately slow
down the process. Um, but at
least it's there.
Uh, the beautiful part about
this though is it's not just
data in relation to patient.
You know, who's getting what
services. It's also the
financial data, the expenditure
data.
Right? And that doesn't need to
be redacted. And that's
something that can flow fast. So
that'll allow some flexibility.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Adrian. So
going to um uh Senate Bill 2
under section 16. That's the
only one that is left, um, as
year 2026 and subsequent fiscal
years and then doesn't revert to
the general fund.
Correct, Mr. Chair, Senator
Trujillo, so Section 16 is the
appropriation to the LFC to do
these audits, um, basically it's
like, here's the money, we're
not going to revert it because
we don't know when you'll need
it, right? Um, so to give them
that flexibility. All right, Mr.
Chairman, thank you, and they
feel comfortable with that.
We can ask them right now. John,
do you feel comfortable with
that?
There we go. OK, cool, um, and
then and then my last question,
um, Mr. Chairman Adrian is, I
have never heard of the
government results and opportun
program fund.
Is that a real thing?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
yes, it's growth, right? So it
was created last year and it's
done primarily to uh test out,
you know.
Before we put something in the
recurring budget, let's see if
it works. Let's test out and
work out some of the kinks and
um that's the program fund for
state agencies.
Mr. Chairman, and, um, Adrian,
thank you. That's why I didn't
know it, um, if I was just
taking the first letters, I
would have seen grow.
Thank you.
Senator Steinmo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Adrian,
good morning. Uh, a couple of
questions I want to follow up
with Senator Pilla said because
I think it's actually a super
important question, which is who
is writing her on this whole
thing.
And it looks like the bill, it's
the healthcare authority is the
primary entity managing the
behavioral health services
division. It's what Bill
actually says is the chief
overseer of behavioral health.
So,
I don't know if that's you back
there, Nick. Um, that Nick was
in the room. There he is. So I
guess, madam, madam secretary of
the Healthcare Authority. I, I
guess I just wanna ask, um
secretary, I just wanna ask, I
mean,
What is the plan? Is there gonna
be one person who's basically
going to be in charge,
monitoring the progress of this.
That's kind of part.
One of the
Per question here.
What's, what's your thought, I
guess, at this point, juncture,
Madam Secretary, about who will
be the accountable person here.
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair
and Senator Steinborn, um,
So I do think there's a little
bit of a bifurcated
accountability structure. I, I
do think that's, that's really
what's, I think you're picking
up on something that maybe
somewhat intentional in terms of
the legislation, um, the
healthcare authority would be
charged with everything that
it's charged with in the bill,
as that would mean, uh, setting
the standards, uh, working
together with other entities
being very vocal and active and
sort of the gap analysis and
what services are needed in
each.
community, but I do believe in
terms of the, with the way the
bill is structured now. The
administrative office of the
courts is really charged with
being the convenor and doing the
plans, so they really are the
ones getting the funding to do
the plans and set the regions,
that is not going to be with the
healthcare authority under the
structure, uh, and so I think
You know, while the agency, my
agency, the healthcare authority
would be charged with sort of
all the pieces that are clearly
set forth in the bill.
I, I do think there's two points
of accountability there and at
that point of accountability for
the planning is really with the
AOC.
Right, and, um, Madam Chair, um.
Adrian, so
Is AOC here in the room?
Mm.
So, I'm gonna ask you, and if
Madam Secretary, maybe you kind
of just stay nearby for a
second.
I see, I'm, I'm curious your
thought process. Do you have a
point?
I heard um
parts of this film.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, um,
The Chief Justice, uh, said this
yesterday in a meeting.
This is not a role the court's
requested, but one that we are
happy to accept if that's the
legislature's direction. Um, we
want to be partners with you in
Um
Trying to find solutions in in
behavioral health and in this
really important area.
Um
This is a big
Undertaking for us. We are not
Um,
Central players in the
behavioral health.
Um, universe right now, we are
trying it um hard to stand up a
few pilot programs around the
state, uh, including in in
Donana County, Mr. Chair and
Senator, um, and so we, we have
to build that infrastructure,
um.
Within AOC and we'll, we'll get
right on that, but
No, I don't have an immediate
person that I can throw on this.
Um, but yes, we will get going
on that very, very quickly. Mr.
Chair, sir, thank you for
answering that question.
Candidly, I'm wondering, Adrian,
why, why designate AOC to
oversee those those regional
plants in the first place.
Given that
Given the fact that then you
kind of remove accountability
under one roof.
Under the healthcare authority
that is in charge of
implementation of that. Why?
What's behind that decision?
Uh, Mr. Chairson or Steinborn,
so there's multiple reasons for
it, right?
Um, the first one is.
Up until now, the entire
behavioral system has only had
the executive accountable the
entirety of what
the entire behavioral system has
only had the executive be
accountable. This is allowing
all three branches to be
accountable.
Right, so the courts need a
specific rule.
The special session, the money
that you all appropriated for
the pilot.
prove that they're able to do
it.
That they're able to do the
regional planning and do the
same mapping and then get
You know, some behavioral health
components stood up.
So we have a success, an example
of success.
Right? And then if you look at
like the Miami model we talked
about this last week, right?
It's, it's the courts over there
that were the primary drivers
for all of this. And when the
courts know what services are
available.
Then, you know, they have an
incentive to ensure those
services are functional.
Because it can prevent people
from ever going into the
criminal justice system, right?
Intercept zero of the sim
mapping is literally how to
avoid even 9/11 ever having to
be called.
Right, and making sure people
have services. So there's a very
clear incentive for them to be
involved and know.
At least on the regional
planning side, like what's going
on and that regional planning.
It it's literally a symbiotic
relationship with the sin
mapping that the courts would
have to do.
So it it talks to each other, so
there's logic behind it. I do
want to point to page 4 on
Senate Bill 3.
Line or the sentence starting on
13 through 16.
So this is where the regional
plans and coordinating the
meetings and all that takes
place and this line.
Allows AOC.
Right, to ask any behavioral
stakeholder, including the
Healthcare Authority.
To provide support and
coordinating these regional
meetings. So even though they
currently don't have, you know,
the ability to.
Coordinate everything.
There's nothing stopping them
from leveraging existing
resources to make it happen.
OK.
Um, along those lines, Mr.
Chair, so, I guess, I mean,
you're gonna need to hire
someone, right, to be in charge
of this thing, uh, because of
the, the regional plans are
incredibly important, right?
Because as you say, it's the
building block of services that
then get deployed in that area.
So,
I could see that being a
potential breakdown and somebody
needs to ride herd on that and.
You know, and it'll be kind of
interesting what happens if a
behavioral plan is really
scotched together, you know.
Kind of on the cheap and
You know, you have not all
providers, not all regions, not
all leadership created the same,
right? And so,
Who backfills that leadership,
but the leadership doesn't show
up in the region.
Is that AOC's wheelhouse. I
don't know.
Um, clearly though they've shown
leadership and I appreciate that
and commend you guys for that.
Um, I'm sure you'll do a
professional job if we're, we
task you with this.
Um
But occurs that it would
probably be wise, Mr. Chair, if,
if, um, I don't know that you
have to do this in statute, but
I don't think it's a bad thing
either. And maybe it's already
there if you have a kind of an
executive committee per se of
the key leadership.
That
You know, works together to
resolve issues so that there is
integration.
Is there anything like that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Sarah
Steinborn, that sounds like the
behavioral health collaborative,
which hasn't worked for the last
20 years. I don't mean the
behavioral health collaborator,
Mr. Chair. I'm talking about the
secretary. I'm talking the the
head of AOC. I'm talking about
the people who have these huge
responsibilities underneath
them, make sure they are working
together.
And not in a silo saying, well,
that's not our wheelhouse,
that's their wheelhouse. I think
it's essential they work
together as a team because we
have created a
Bifurcated structure.
Does that make sense?
Kind of common sense.
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
I'm, I'm not opposed, I think
probably whether the statute
says that or not. I I envision
that's working very closely
together, uh, if that creates
some additional guardrails for
you all. I'm not opposed to
creating some kind of executive
body. I do agree, uh, with Mr.
Avila that the collaborative
hasn't really worked, so I think
you're envisioning something
different, um, which is just
sort of a convening sort of
process where we're making sure
that we're talking to each other
than that, more than that, Mr.
Chair, it gets back to the
original question, who is in
charge?
Who is in charge? Where, where's
the accountability to make sure
that the system gets executed
the way it's intended, what you
have to do is you have to have
actually not a huge group of
people, a small group of top
managers saying,
Where's the plan in this region?
Where's the plan on this region?
How we deployed services, where
do we need help, you have the
key people in these different
silos talking to each other, and
that has to be set up, whether
or not that's in law or not. I
mean, that's kind of a given
because I, I'll be honest,
actually, Mr. Chair, we do see
lots of examples in government.
Where
We don't align responsibilities
in the most logical way.
Literally like, I can give you
an example, renting a park in
Las Cruces that involves using
the street, the park says sorry,
that's the street department.
It's like, really? Like, you
guys don't work together. Do you
have a similar situation here.
We have different
responsibilities both
independently, mutually
exclusively important. So
anyway, enough said, I think
you'll have to develop those
leadership structures so that
We execute this plan.
So
I think there was probably one
other little question, but
Anyway, I will let that go.
I'll let that go for here. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, just a
couple of things, Adrian.
Uh, so will this be?
An office within an office, or
will it be a brand new office?
Or a department.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
this
There's no new office being
created.
So the behavioral services
division already exists within
the healthcare authority.
They will have now a few
regional staff folks that
actually branch out from Santa
Fe instead of being concentrated
in Santa Fe. And then within the
AOC they may have a new.
Division, um, but that's to be
determined. They have the money
and Senate bill too that'll give
them the flexibility to do what
they need to do.
But they might just end up
hiring a few staffers.
To uh coordinate the regional
meetings.
Oh, here, Mr. Chairman and
Adrian to our secretary, you
know.
This is a big project.
You know, and would you be able
to handle that internal.
Or do you foresee that you would
have to crawl.
Quite larger of an office.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
uh, we've been working really
closely with, uh, Mr. Avila to
sort of talk about resources and
make sure that the agencies
adequately resourced, so I
think.
There's a lot of funding, um,
and some of that funny would
definitely support the
administration of the funds, um,
so I think that would be needed.
We would definitely, you cannot
administer these level of
investments under contract
without additional resources and
administrative, you know, all of
the data and making sure that
all of that's done. I do think
um the bill sort of envisions.
Providing those supports to the
agency.
OK. Thank you. And uh Adrian and
uh.
Um no
On Senate Bill 2.
When you mentioned of the
unexplained balances would go to
the trust.
Then how would you take money
out of the trust.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez.
So the trust, um, operates the
same as every other trust where
5% of the balance of the year
and balance would be usable.
Right, so once you get it to a
billion, if any of this reverts
in there, it'll be a billion
plus, and then only 50 million
would flow year after year.
OK.
Then the, the last part that I
have is um.
I know, on your example that you
mentioned like.
What works in Alamo Gordo might
not work in Ria Riba.
And uh how would you form like a
need assessment that
That's what we are Rebo wants.
And uh I'll just give you um
In the past, you know, um.
One time we had a program for
Penasco.
But the community was not in
agreement.
And how do you finalize that
that is their priority.
So I'll point you to Senate Bill
3.
Page 4.
Line 16 and basically the idea
is a consensus, right, at the
regional level.
If they can come to a consensus,
and it's good.
But when a consensus can't be
reached, then the final arbiter
of that will be the
administrative Office of the
courts.
Because, you know, they are
bitter.
A lot of things all the time,
so.
So in the situation like that,
right? Where everyone thinks
something should be at Penasco,
but Penasco doesn't want it.
Well, there's a disagreement,
there's no consensus. So,
The courts having the they will
be the facilitators will either
try to get them to a consensus.
Or just say, OK, there's no
consensus, we're going to shift
to a different priority.
So they have that flexibility
right very well, thank you.
Senator Lin.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
guys for coming in. Adrian, I
hope you're feeling a little
better. We missed you last night
at dinner, so.
Hope you're getting better.
This is a huge undertaking.
And you know, I, I hope you, you
see that.
That we're just asking
questions, trying to get our
head around it. It's not, it's
not like we don't know how hard
you guys work at this.
And, but when you take all of
these different organizations.
And try to get them all on the
same page. That makes me very
nervous.
I don't know where the guard
grills fall. I don't know where
the oversight comes. So for
example, let's say one of these.
Behavioral issues.
It's not working.
Whether it's in behavior health,
AOC, wherever.
Who's, who's going to make the
change.
Does that come back on us as a
committee or?
How, how are you gonna regulate
Each group trying to talk to
each other.
That's a tough question, I know.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, senator.
So
It it's difficult to
Realize or to picture how this
would work. But I want to take
you back to the success of the
pilot in the first judicial
district.
The the way it was organized is
they brought in
Not only individuals from the
court system.
But also behavior health
stakeholders.
Uh, which captures, you know,
basically the same definition we
have, but they brought all these
people who
Realistically, if you were to
ask them individually, they
would have said,
The priority for this region is
the program I'm running.
Right? It's like it's what I'm
running and
That that's what would have been
expected, but what ended up
happening was in having all
these individuals there.
It was literally a brainstorming
session.
So going through.
At 6 different tables, and each
table identified a different
intercept with the judicial um
Uh, with the criminal justice
system.
And it's like, OK,
Right before someone calls 911.
What options exist in our
community. Let's brainstorm and
identify what we have.
What don't we have? All right.
Let's turn to the next table.
All right, after calling 911.
Before the officer gets there.
What exists? And then, you know,
you can go through the different
elements.
After doing that, everyone has a
sense of.
What the community's needs are.
And then it's, everyone got
literally just 5 stickies.
You get a sticky, you get a
sticky, right? Based on
everything we've discussed
today.
What are the top 5 priorities
that we should focus on.
identified those, put them up on
the wall, categorize them.
And you ended up with about 36
different.
broad categories.
Then every person that was in
there.
Who, you know, had personal.
Interest in seeing the succeed.
Received 3 stickers to go vote.
Now look at all these things. If
you could wave a magic wand and
fix 3 of these things, what
would they be?
And you suddenly saw, even
though people had a broad range
of ideas.
Everyone coalescing around 5 or
6 items.
And that's what informed their
plan, and that's what resulted
with them picking up AOT for
that district.
Right? So,
It it's a cycle.
But without having seen it, it's
hard to to imagine how it would
work. So something similar would
be done on the regional plans,
right? It's not just
Where you interact with the
criminal justice system, the
regional plans are, all right,
let's look at all of our
behavioral health. Let's look at
autism. That's not something
that you really need to think
about when it comes to the
criminal justice system.
Let's think about other things.
It's like, OK.
We have all that, and now let's
focus in and identify those
priorities for what works for
that region. What's our
priority? Alma Gordo's priority
might be to keep their service
members there.
Right, to keep that base
relevant.
And if that requires autism
services for the kids.
Then that's a priority that they
will
gravitate towards. So it
It is possible that they might
not reach a consensus and
everyone might
You know,
Um
Divert, but at the end of the
day, if the courts
Do
Anything similar to what they
did in the first judicial
district. I don't really see
that as a real problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
that was, that's.
You made it very simple for me
to look at and I like that. But
it does bring up a question, for
example, if we take Alamogordo.
Let's say Almogordo drops the
ball and they don't, they don't
take care of autism.
What's the repercussion? How do
we
Who steps in and goes, OK, Alma
Gordo, you're dropping the ball.
Let's fix this
Who has that authority?
And I will point you to page 9
on Senate Bill 3.
Lines 15 and 16.
So before the regional plans can
get started.
Right, or any of that regional
planning.
The healthcare authority will
provide what they see as
behavioral access priorities or
gas for the region. They kind of
like, this is what we know.
You all need. So for example,
the almo Gordo autism is
something they know that gap
exists.
So, the courts will now know,
hey, you know, maybe we can have
these discussions and make sure
this point is brought up.
And then if at the end of the
day they choose not to do it,
that's fine. They can choose not
to do it. That doesn't mean that
the healthcare authority
independently.
can't still work on addressing
these other priorities that at a
statewide level.
Right, based on their gap
analysis, they, they should be
focused on.
So, Mr. Chair,
Adrian, so with the.
So when you pull funds from
them?
Would you stop funding, say
Almogordo, if, if they just
refuse to administrations change
whatever.
How, how do we say, OK, we've
got a problem in Amor, you've
got to start taking care of
this.
What do we get to do to say,
To say that.
We just
Take their funding away, I, you
know what I'm saying? It kind of
makes sense.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, so
you, I mean, you always have the
full appropriating authority,
you can always remove funding at
any point in time, that that is
something that's within your
wheelhouse and and power. Um,
the healthcare authority cannot
remove.
Funding. However, they can
Determined based on the regional
plans.
OK.
Like, these align with the real
gaps, and it's like,
It's impacting
disproportionately impacted
communities in your region. So
they'll prioritize what gets
funded based on whatever you all
appropriate.
But they also have other
mechanisms at their disposal.
They have other funds, they have
other
Uh, programs that can fund other
things that might not be in the
regional plans, but might be a
desperate gap that the regional
plan forgot to.
bring up.
But the thing is, the healthcare
authority will be there. They'll
be present during these regional
plans and those meetings.
And ideally, they'll be bringing
up like, hey, you know,
The data shows that
You have a huge alcohol issue,
you know, alcoholism issue here.
So maybe a detox center might be
beneficial, you know, like
they'll be bringing those ideas
to the table.
And then collectively if they
don't all coalesce around them,
that's fine. That's a decision
point for the locals.
But the healthcare authority
still has other mechanisms that
can help.
bridge those gaps.
Thank you. And then just my last
thing just
Um
Kind of in conjunction with with
Senator Steinborn and, and
Senator Padilla.
When we
How, how many new employees do
you think we're gonna have to
add across the board. I mean, I,
I understand AOC is gonna
definitely have to have
To hire somebody. So what,
what's the cost gonna be now
across all of those agencies.
Are all of them gonna have to
hire new people.
Or is it just AOC?
The
Uh, Mr. Chair. So within Senate
Bill 2, we cover that. Um, so
with the courts, we're
anticipating their costs, um,
For the regional planning port
portion was 1.7 million.
And then for the healthcare
authority, it'd be 10 million
per year, and that would cover
either the contracting to get
all the work done or the hiring
of staff to get all the work
done.
OK. Thank you. I appreciate it.
You, you did very well answering
some pretty tough questions
there, so I appreciate it.
Mr. Chair.
I think that's why he's sick.
Yeah
Sent her Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and, and
again, we do appreciate all the
work everybody is doing on this.
It's a massive undertaking. So I
just want to go back to my
original line of questioning
because I think it's, it's gonna
be important that we say this
out loud and I have a, I think
these are all wonderful ideas
and wonderful things that we're
working on, but I'm, I'm worried
about the throughput.
And so, um, you know, in my
business when we undertake a
large project that affects
multiple areas of the business
or uh way back in the beginning
of my career and I worked for
other organizations, we would
set up what we call a group of
champions, if you will, you pull
someone from HR or someone from
IT someone from training and
quality and operations and
whatever, all they would do is
manage the project from A to Z
for a period of time. Sometimes
it's 1 year, sometimes it's 3
years, sometimes it's 6 months
or whatever, um.
It seems to me like we need to
have something built into this
plan that has a uh a management
structure of some kind, because
um if you're an expert on the
The health side of whatever, I
mean, you, you're, you're,
you're doing your part. And like
I said earlier, I'm worried
about the train staying on time
and, and, and not just turning
into a
$600 billion you know, price tag
or
You know, the, the data and
information and quality and
performance analysis, not you
know producing what we're hoping
or thinking it's going to. So
can you
Build in some sort of a
management structure that is
either management or a project
management office or a PMO or
something to just keep the
thing.
On time and moving and
identifying what I call when I
manage a project for my clients,
I call it slippage. When there's
slippage there, we want to put
together an action plan to, to
get over that. Um, and the only
way we do that is if we have
someone that's kind of watching
the entire spectrum of what's
going on, no pun intended, but
we, we, we need to have that.
What are your thoughts, uh,
chair and Adrian?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Center for the,
no, definitely, I mean, ideally
the A services division at HCA
should serve that role. So we
can make it more explicit and
really reinforce that they're
The primary group of champions
that are meant to manage, um.
This project because they're
gonna manage the money.
Right? So they should be able to
manage and audit and do all the
other components, but yeah, we
can work on that.
Appreciate that chair. I, I
would like to see something in
here that is called a project an
office of project management or
a
You know, PM or whatever you're
gonna call it, um, and that it
be funded so that there are
dollars to actually manage it
and that there are a
You know, some sort of a set of.
Directional, um,
Project planning methodology.
Out there, you can hire project
managers any day of the week,
um.
So I appreciate that. Thank you.
There's signboard. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, along those lines.
I would recommend thinking about
having a lead project manager
type, not even, maybe even go
beyond a department, but
actually create a coordinator or
whatever, uh, just a thought,
but that maybe
It includes statutorily.
Um
A team that involves AOC is a
part of that.
And whoever else is connected at
the hip of this, and finally, I
might suggest, Mr. Chair, that
we asked this entity to report.
To, you know, um, performance
benchmarks to the LFC. I don't
know if we have anything like
that in here, maybe like
quarterly reports of progress on
the key benchmarks and maybe you
can indicate that too, being
status of plans, uh, deployment
of funds.
Um
Um
Forgetting the right word, but
I, I think there's gonna be a
situation where your
interventions, you know, where
you're gonna have to help a
county.
Pull through where the
leadership might not be there. I
think that's gonna be really
important for us to kind of look
in and say, OK, how's this thing
going and then really be able to
manage it together, but have
direct people in charge.
So, I
I think this is a really
positive step forward on this.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Steiner,
so I, I would point to section 9
that captures a lot of what
you're asking in terms of um in
Senate Bill 3.
What page? Uh, 13.
Because that covers a lot of the
data.
And um
The internal external audit and
evaluation and allowing to
really
Quickly determine if there's an
a design flaw within regional
plans or potentially an
implementation flaw as plans are
being deployed.
Um
And that would be ongoing.
So, yeah, Mr. Chair, what I'm
saying and I hear you, they are
responsible for collecting data.
What I'm saying again is that
management oversight, execution
mode of looking at this high
level, putting it all together,
integrating all sides of it.
And then having someone in
charge and then reporting.
Collection aggregate for the
performance data to the LFC. So
that'd be my recommendation.
Because, you know, these are
executive departments.
We're, where's the legislative
branch, so if we want to know
how it's going and we want to
help manage the managers then we
kind of need that.
So that's my suggestion, and uh.
You know, for what it's worth.
Thank you.
Thank you.
You know,
See, I'm trying to think.
How many years has it been since
Governor Martinez was here and
it kind of got all destroyed.
8 to 10.
Rebuilding it's not easy, right?
I tried and it doesn't seem to
work and so.
You guys were not here yesterday
for AOC for our hearing, I think
you had another meeting and so
what's your thought on the
process of this now. I know you
guys met yesterday.
Went over it in detail.
What is A AOC's perspective on
the accomplishing this.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, like I said at the
beginning, we, we will take
legislature's direction and
really try to to do everything
you asked us to do. I think
we're in a good
Overall, space, I think.
What the courts can bring to
this is that convening get folks
together and talk.
Um, portion, but it's the HCA
that's got.
You know, the behavioral health
expertise, and I think this
draft.
shifts us in the correct
direction there.
Um
I don't relish the idea of being
the ultimate decider if nobody
can come up with the regional
plan, um.
But, uh, that is something that
I think, you know, we, we would
drive toward consensus as much
as possible because it's the
local folks that understand the
need.
Um, and folks parachuting in
from
Santa Fe or Albuquerque.
Don't necessarily understand
that, right? Um, so we, we need
to keep that focus, I think.
Um
With them and and try to come up
with that locally. Uh, this is
gonna be a big undertaking for
us. This is a huge expansion of
What we do in terms of effort,
but we we will take it on
because this is a big
Important project for our state.
I don't know if there's a
particular item, Mr. Chair, I
can speak to. No, I mean, we,
you weren't here yesterday and
that was a concern, so I wanted
to know where you stand.
And so
You took it on in in
Espanola and and Rio Riba
County, right? Was that the only
county that that you guys did
the pilot project in, uh, Mr.
Chair, so far we've done SIMs
mapping and rea Reba County and
Santa Fe County with that uh but
uh appropriation from the
special session this summer. Um,
we're looking to continue to
expand that. Um, so I, I do view
this as sort of a continuation
of
Of that work, sort of a kind of
a natural outgrowth albeit a
much larger scope.
Um
I think that's all I have to
say, Mr.
Well, you accomplished that
within less than 6 months,
right?
And so, but I mean, Santa Fe
County is one of the largest in
the state, so we are that's one
of the smallest in the state and
so you've been able to
accomplish that and I just
wanted to have the confidence in
your voicing, you know, we've
done it in these two counties,
right? And so it's not
impossible. It is not
impossible, Mr. Chair, and I
think, you know, we have some
good momentum coming from these
counties. We also have
incredible partners in these
counties, both the county
governments and the providers in
these areas, um, and so if you
hear any hesitation.
For me, it's just we don't know
what's out there and if there
are folks that, you know, you,
you show up in a county or or in
a new judicial district and
they're sort of like,
What are y'all doing here? You
know, sort of attitude, um, but
I think
Because we've got
Um, a lot of funding, and
because we, this is the way it's
going to flow, folks are gonna
want to come to the table.
They're gonna want to talk, and
we're gonna be able to do this.
You know, relatively quickly,
knowing that we have a a large
geographically diverse state.
OK.
It's, that gives me a little
more to come. I mean, you're
gonna go to rural counties where
There's more cows and people,
right? That's right what's
what's their focus can be? It's
probably not gonna be that,
right? And you're not gonna have
any input and then
You're gonna go off into the
next county in the same judicial
district, and they're gonna say,
oh we don't want it, we don't
know, right?
They don't have the knowledge or
the skill set to decide that, or
the county and same judicial
district, and they're gonna
overrun the other two counties
for what they need.
Regionally and so
I could see some of that
happening.
Um, and
So that's a concern.
Um
But I mean
If we don't try.
We don't know we can succeed,
but if we don't try, we don't
know if we're gonna fail or not,
right?
Right now we're just nowhere,
right?
We're just watching the waves
crash in the ocean every single
day.
Not changing the direction or or
trying to change the pattern,
and I think that's something
that happened.
Even the only thing that kind of
Maybe I should have brought this
up earlier is how, how are the
timelines gonna play out? I
mean, as we all see this as a
crisis, right?
We all see this as moving as
quickly as we can.
I mean, once ALC you come to see
this bill moving. I mean, they
should start gearing up what
they need to do.
And and are we getting them
prepared even though the
legislation hasn't really.
Has been signed. Do you think
they're in that mode looking at
everything I know.
The Secretaries are they were
here yesterday talking about it.
Um, AOC Carl shook his head.
Those on the
Can't hear him, but he.
He seems to be in agreement that
you're preparing for what's
coming down the pipe. So Mr.
Chair, uh, yes, we have started
some real preliminary work
preparing because we do
anticipate some some form of
this passing.
Um
I think a big
a big challenge for everybody in
state government is uh during
the legislative session, you end
up with two jobs just like all
of you, so we finally get a
taste of what it's like, um,
and, you know, we're trying to,
to keep tabs on the session and
do our day jobs and then adding
another thing is, is always a
big challenge, but yes, we want
to take this on and
Be ready to hit the ground
running once others passage of
something.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, yes, definitely.
And one of the new additions
within the substitute is
basically requiring starting in
May.
So we're giving AOC kind of a, a
grace period of like get, get up
and rolling, you know, go talk
to people higher we need to
hire, um, starting in May,
they'll be providing monthly
updates to both the healthcare
authority and to the
legislature.
Of where they're at in terms of
planning, convening, scheduling,
where they're meeting, how
things are going to the
legislatures, so you all can
provide the feedback of like,
OK, you know, maybe you haven't
convened the right people, you
need to include so and so, or
if, you know, they've scheduled
something for
Your specific community or your
district.
Maybe it's a good idea for you
as a legislator to be there
during those meetings as well,
right? So that'll start in May
and it'll go through on a
monthly basis through till the
end of the year.
And then after that it'll be on
a quarterly basis. So for these
initial critical months.
The legislature.
We'll be able to, you know,
Um
Hold the AOC accountable but at
the same time offer support.
Right, and the healthcare
authority at the same time, uh,
and the key to that is being
informed.
But I mean, and I mean Sanborn
and McKinley, right? They're
both in the same 11 and 118.
It's still 11
And you're gonna have two
different things, but what I see
is them already organizing
behind the scenes, right?
Saying, here's where, here's
when we want to have our
meetings.
And here's how quickly we wanna.
Get it out or get to the money
to get get services.
If, if they plan early and say,
OK, and in May.
30th, we have a plan. We work
through this, right? Since.
The session ended in March.
And we have a plan and they
start early and come with that
plan.
And have those regional planning
means, how quickly can we fund
them?
Uh, Mr. Chair, as of right now,
Senate Bill 2 in order to avoid
a constitutional deficit has
most of the money starting at
the start of fiscal year 26, so
July 1st is as early as the
money can flow with the
exception of the money that's
going to the courts to, you
know, do the regional planning.
And and why can't we trigger it?
Uh,
you can, it, it's just, uh, in
the LFC rec.
All of the FR 25 money has
already been claimed, so we
would need to switch other
things over. It's just a matter
of which items you want to
switch to.
Um, FY 26.
Has there been any conversation
with
Behavioral health people that
say, oh, we could if we could
get the money, we could.
We could do it earlier.
Whether it's a reimbursement
rate or
Where they all saying let's
let's get a good plan and then
So I think Mr. Chair, that at
this juncture, it's like
everyone's coalescing around the
idea of having a solid plan and
making sure that plan, you know,
has worked out all the timeline
issues, any potential.
You know, performance data
issues, those type of things,
so.
That that's the feedback we've
gotten. However, that doesn't
mean that providers, you know,
aren't willing and ready to go.
Um, however, in order to ensure
the success of this, you need a
good plan.
OK.
See for questions.
Anybody else have any other
questions we're gonna hear these
tomorrow.
Uh, thank you, chair, for
allowing me to go for a 3rd
time. Uh, just, yeah, I, I just
want to make sure that we're,
we're sort of, are we in
agreement now that there will be
some sort of a management
structure, project management
office put together to oversee
this, um.
And it'll be built into this
legislation somehow through
amendment or how are we going to
make sure once again that we're
gonna, that there's someone that
wakes up every day eating,
sleeping, drinking, trying to
make this thing successful.
I'm just worried if we're
waiting for some meetings to
start in May and, and then we're
waiting, it's all wonderful
planning at this point, but
someone needs to make sure that
those are happening. Someone
needs to make sure that the, the
money is lined up the way it's
supposed to. Someone needs to
make sure that the, the goals
are are defined, um, ahead of
time so that everyone knows what
their sort of North Star is,
what they're aiming at, what
they're focused on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, but
yeah, I think there's agreement
will go to the drawing board,
come up with the language and
include that in your 0.4.
And, and so then some mechanism
that encompasses both your
concerns and Senator Stein's
Beautiful. I love to hear that.
And so, chair, we're not gonna
start when do you anticipate you
wanna?
Take action on this thing
because they've got to have some
time to put that together now,
tomorrow morning, so we'll meet
this afternoon again and we can
see something.
I don't, I don't know what where
council is, so we.
We can have the framework, not
necessarily the drafted
language, but we can have the
framework by this afternoon.
I mean, I would really like to
see it leave this committee with
that as part of the actual uh
action before, before we let it
go anywhere else.
Yeah, it will. It's just
drafting.
0.4 version of the substitute in
the time to draft that, right?
And, and what we really wanted
to do is make sure everybody
saw.
2 and 3 in its hole with the
amendments.
So we're shooting for tomorrow.
And if we get some other
feedback that
We may have not seen that people
are looking at that may need to
be built in, and we'll have to
go over that and then adopt
that.
As an amendment to the
substitute.
And I appreciate that chair, and
I like the way that you've lined
this up. We have the the
departments in here yesterday.
Now we have the folks working on
the policy now and then, but
before it leaves here, we should
have that. Thank you.
OK.
Thank you guys. Appreciate it.
Let's see.
Madam Secretary Thainreb.
We're ready to talk about budget
cuts, are you?
days.
We hear the house is
overappropriating over there,
so.
morning members of the
committee.
Good morning. Go ahead.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Noel Montagno and I'm the LFC
analyst for the taxation and
revenue Department.
Agency code 333, uh located
behind tap 3 in your binders.
To my far right is Ariana V.
Hill, the DFA analyst for Tax
and Rev and in between us is the
cabinet secretary, Stephanie
Chardon-Clark.
If you'd like to follow along on
volume 2, it's on page.
66 to 72, and there is a high
level of both the LFC and the
DFA recommendation in your
packets on page 5.
Overall, there was a very slight
difference between the
executives and uh the LFC's
recommendation, uh, the
executive recommendation for
general fund revenue exceeded
the LFCs by 322.4,000 or 0.4%.
I'm not going to pass it along
to DFA for any comments.
I don't have anything else to
add.
Turn it over to
sector.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll
go pretty quickly through the um
department slide deck, which
looks like this.
Um, the theme of our budget, um,
request in the executive
recommendation this year is
similar to what you've heard in
previous years. We're always
trying to chip away at our
funded vacancy rate to allow us
to bring it down further. Um,
we're always trying to keep um
momentum going on improving our
IT systems, not just to keep
pace with um changing best
practices, changing fraud
attempts uh as well as working
smarter, not harder with the
ever-growing mission and the
same number of employees more or
less.
Um
Let's see, uh, C2 requests. I
know you'll have a separate
hearing on that. So I won't go
through those in detail.
But those are listed on page 2.
I think I can also skip page 3,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, that it just provides
the differences again that the
two analysts have just gone
through.
I just slide 4. I just kind of a
couple, I think helpful big
picture, um, things to consider
about the department and our
operating budget. Um, we do, uh,
try to manage reversions very
carefully and we average about
4%. Um, you know, we've, we've
kind of drilled down into what
causes us to have reversions,
and it definitely varies over
time. Like if there are supply
chain issues post COVID or, or
sometimes it's non-recurring
appropriations that came in
below budget, which is, which is
not necessarily
really a bad thing, but the
contributor to our reversions in
the 200 category tends to be
internal um promotions, which is
a good thing, but it does tie up
our budget. We did a study that
showed about 43% of the
positions we fill get filled
internally creating another
brand new vacancy at the moment
we fill. And so we are, you
know, restricted from being a
little bit more aggressive in
our budget projections for that
purpose, but, um, to the extent
we revert to 100s, it's because
of internal fills primarily. On
the next
slide, we have our vacancy rate
and we're currently at about
19.9%. We did a little exercise
yesterday to figure out, OK, if
we're at 19.9%, how many of
those vacant positions are
funded. Uh, we think it's about
1.3% of the agency is currently
vacant and funded, which is 14
positions out of about 1040.
So we really are up against our,
our funded vacancy rate. And so
when I say in each program,
we're trying to chip away at
that couple% year by year.
That's what we're talking about.
You can see there are times
where a vacancy rate has fallen
pretty precipitously in the last
6 years, um, came back up during
COVID a little bit with just all
the workforce, um, issues that
were going on at that time. Now
we should expect to kind of
hover around this 19 or 20%
vacancy because that's all we
can fill. We have a hiring
freeze in most of our divisions.
Um, and the last slide I'll,
I'll cover Mr. Chair and members
of the committee is really just
to kind of emphasize that I I
mentioned a minute ago, our
mission keeps growing, the
amount of revenue we collect on
behalf of the state and local
governments has grown just as we
know that revenues have grown,
but our FTE count has come down.
Um, the number filled his, has
come up with the FTE count has,
has shrunk. So, you know, we're
in the position to just rely
more on IT systems to automate
everything we do to try to touch
paper as little as.
possible to try to intervene
with humans as less as possible.
And so, again, we're always
looking for ways with your
support to be able to be as
efficient and automated as
possible.
And with that, I'll stand for
questions. Thank you.
Christians from committee
members.
Tina, thank you.
Nobody has any questions.
Steinborne has one now. Well,
Mr. Chair, it's real simple. We
really uh speaking for myself,
appreciate the job that you do
and it sounds like we're pretty
close, so I hope we support
whatever it is you're asking
for.
We're sure that you, you're
gonna do a good job with it. So,
it's all I have in this chair.
Sad.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and I have
to echo the Senator Steinborn's
comments. I learned a lot about.
Texan rev this year over this
last year, 1 year and a half, I
am amazed at all of the
wonderful hardworking people
that make so much happen for the
state that nobody knows about
it. I mean, it is really
amazing. It, it's really kind of
shocking and then I had no idea
myself. So I've learned a lot
about you over the last, I said,
year, year and a half, and um I
think if folks really understood
exactly what's going on in your
department and they would be
truly amazed at all the the
wonderful hardworking people you
have. So I want to give you
kudos for that. And, and, and,
you know, like everything else
we kind of talk about up here,
leadership is
top down and so secretary and
deputy secretary and directors,
you, you, you really do, uh, a
great job of just, you know,
it's not an exciting sexy topic
all the time, I'm sure. So
somehow you have found a way to
lift up your people and it shows
and you're doing a great job. So
I just wanted to echo that.
Thank you.
Center trio. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and likewise, I mean, I
really appreciate your staff,
um, they jump on things. I
reached out to the secretary
this last week because there's a
janitor in the building who was
having troubles getting his ID
card and she took care of it
within 24 hours, so I'm really
appreciative of that. I do have
one question though, um, HB 47,
I've gotten some questions from
others as to whether or not um
the department and that's the
veteran.
s tax which I believe we voted
on in the last election, it
passed overwhelmingly, um,
there's, do you have the
necessary.
funds in order to implement
that. I recognize because we
worked together on IT projects
and um tax and rev projects are
a little bit more intense and uh
take a little bit more time and
the specific.
Is there enough funding for you
to implement that the way that
House Bill 47 is requesting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Trujillo, I appreciate your
insights into that and let me
say too, I didn't introduce the
team of amazing folks that are
here with me today and an
attempt to be brief, but I
appreciate them all being here
to help if I have questions I
can't answer. Um, so House Bill
47 is mainly going to be
implemented by county assessors.
So on that particular bill, we
don't have much of an impact.
Um, there are bills, you know,
we've, we've written FIRs on
dozens of bills that have a
pretty minor impact.
1 or 2 so far that have a very
major, you know, multi-million
dollar impact and um you know,
that is the reason for the 5
million we typically request as
an IT implementation special,
um, the idea behind that being
that the tax package comes
together once the budget is
pretty much done. And so it's a
contingent appropriation that
makes sure we have funding to
implement these legislative
mandates and the tax package and
not at the expense of forced
vacancies.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate that.
Thank you. Just to continue on
that, we didn't build a tax
package in the budget this year.
There's
No capacity, so we're gonna
See what they come with, cause
they got to be revenue neutral
in order to handle that we've
done 2.5.
billion dollars worth of tax
credits over the last
4 to 5 years.
And so the capacities.
Not there, the GRT was a large
one.
There's a whole pile of them and
in
And so, as you make that
conversation, I mean, we did not
build money capacity in the
budget for
tax, uh.
Productions.
And so, I, I'll just tell you
one thing to, uh,
You know, since you've taken
over that seems to have changed
the way things happen. I go to
the MBD a lot.
Like a frequent shopper there it
seems all the time. Sometimes
when you gotta write $30,000
checks because you bought a
piece of equipment and it's a
little hard to swallow, but
that's just the nature of the
beast. Um, but they are, I will
tell the girls in Gallop are
really good.
Haven't, can't say for any other
places. I will tell you one
thing when they broke into my
truck and took my wallet, and
then they found my wallet.
My driver's license was in
there. So when I went to the
airport, I said, I'm gonna use
this old driver's license to see
if it scans under the federal
system.
And if it's canceled and it
wasn't.
So I don't know how that talks
to each other what the time
frame is, talk to each other. I
did have my paper one just in
case in my passport. Um.
And so, uh, just FYI, I, I don't
know how quickly those cancel,
but when you go through that.
TSA PreCheck, which I went
through.
But it's not, it wasn't
registered as canceled or
anything but I, I was glad to
get through there quickly.
And then pull out paper and
passport and.
it's licenses and everything
else to verify my
identification, so.
I appreciate that. um.
We'll see you in about a week,
maybe when the budget crosses.
doing
Tourism.
Mm.
Oh, I'm sorry, uh.
RLD
Go ahead, we're ready.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Noel Montagno. I'm the LFC
analyst for the regulation and
licensing department agency code
420 located behind tab 4 in your
binders.
Uh, if you'd like to follow
along on volume 2, it is on page
159 to 168.
Uh, before I continue, I will
start with uh HAFC action, uh,
they did adopt the LFC
recommendation yesterday.
Going over these differences for
ROD, the executive, uh.
Overall recommendation exceeds
the LFCs by 1.3 million or 2.1%.
The recommendation also exceeds
the LFCs for general fund
revenue at 2.8 million or 14%.
Uh, the LFC's recommendation for
other interagency transfers and
other state funds does exceeds
the executives by 2.3 million or
18.5%.
I will pass it over to DFA to
see if they have any comments.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I do
not have any, so I'll turn it
over to president, I mean,
Superintendent Beatty.
Very well, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I'm assuming you want a
quick version of this?
No. OK.
Well, I'll go through it
relatively quick, but Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to
come before you. RLD uh touches
a lot of lives, a lot of
different people.
Senator can vouch for that
wealth, but uh we consist of 8
divisions, which is ASD CID FID,
ABC, BCD securities MHD and CCD
which is cannabis.
We have 378 total leftees.
78 vacancies of that, but 47 of
them are in the process of
either got have carves out or uh
interview process set up or
actual offer letters going. Uh,
one of the challenges which
gives us 20% vacancy rate, one
of the challenges we have
obviously is there's a lot of
jobs out there, it's not
uncommon now for somebody to
apply to come start and they
already have another.
job offer from another state
agency and they move across
within a week, 1 week and a
half, 2 weeks, so, uh, it's a
challenge, but we're gaining on
it, we're able to stem the flow
on the, was able to go before a
state personnel and get the
inspector's certification or uh
classifications raised that
helped us immediately we gained
5 more new inspectors over that
deal, retaining some, get some
new, so.
Oh her specials, I believe.
And who's running it? Uh, you
have a copy of our specials, I
think they've, uh, both our
analysts have went over that and
uh the request for the boards
and commission an additional 5%
which we come forward with every
year and it's been uh approved.
The construction industries, uh,
that's the one that uh we did it
received 32,000 permits last
year, did 88,000 inspections,
uh, the group by our turnaround
time is down to 2 to 3 days,
generally speaking. My plan
reviews down to within 2 to 3
days of the applications are
approved, there can be some far
outlying areas that are a little
bit slower, but all in all I
believe we've got a really good
handle on it and I can tell from
that from the complaints we
received, we get very few of
them anymore. Uh, we're trying
to become more and more through
all our RLD.
Customer service friendly.
And uh we work really really
hard at that. Uh, the only thing
I'll go over on the reversions,
I had a big reversion in uh CID
this year, I believe some of you
already heard of it, but the
reason being is that was my
elevator staff. I wasn't able to
get him hired, wasn't ready for
him to be hired yet, but I hired
my first elevator employee, uh,
in January, he started the rules
be going through pretty quick
and then we'll start hiring but
instead of just trying to use
that money up and spend it,
saved it back, put it back in,
and we'll be asking for it again
because we need it to, to hire
the staff now that the program
is going forward.
But it
To get into the program, it just
wasn't ready to have 7
individuals sitting around
waiting for something to do. So
that's the reason I made that
decision and held off on that,
so we're looking for that now.
Was able to hire a gentleman
that's from the industry, which
I was happy about that on the
financials, um, there was a
decrease in their budget, and
the only reason that is is um we
were asking to have MHD put back
into the general or put into the
general fund. Uh, it's been
coming out of the Murf fund at
some point we're concerned it's
gonna be going away, but uh
that'll be your decision how we
do it, but that's the only
reason that shows a decrease
because
We always take that money from
HD out of the Murf fund.
Mm, alcohol, oh and the other
thing about financials too,
y'all gave us some new positions
last year and our director over
there is working really hard to
fill these positions. Now that's
a tough division to fill, uh,
qualified people for having to
train a lot of them, but he's
been able to start moving that
forward, maybe we can get back
to the accreditation.
Alcohol beverage uh.
Post interviewing for the two
alcohol employees, that's taking
a little bit of a challenge
getting them up and running, uh,
but, uh, we have also got them
on the sales for license
Salesforce licensing platform
now too. So renewals and
applications will be done
electronically on a lot of cases
and a lot of times on the
renewals anyway for most
divisions, alcohol is a little
bit different. The renewal
process is a lot quicker and
more efficient now.
And it's more friendly to the
customers. Our ASD, HR, we
really worked at stepping it up,
getting our files cleaned back
up. One thing I'm really tickled
with our ASD, we were able to
hire 3 in-house programmers, uh,
they save us a lot of time, it's
more efficient, and they can
work for us right when we need
it as opposed to having to go
out to contract to do that, and
we've got these new licensing
platforms with uh in most of the
divisions now and it's really
important to be able to tweak it
when we need to tweak it and
tweak it real time without
having to go out for a contract
or something, so really
with that. We've also ramped up
our security of trying to make
sure we don't get anything
happen to us again like
cyberattack, part of that goes
through training the employees.
We worked really hard at and and
they catch me periodically with
these spams it's getting harder
and harder to pick them out, but
we're working really hard. I've
got now where I won't even open
an email unless I know you, so
send it to Juan, he tells me if
it's OK to open.
ports and commissions, we got
the last 20 on the licensing
platform, which is really good.
Um, they've held 3 constituent
days this last year, which
brings the constituents in where
they can get licensed real-time,
uh they're the division that
seems that that's been the most
functional for.
Uh, also the documentation and
having these online is the is
real time for variation,
verification of their licenses
if they're trying to move or get
a job or something. So it's been
really beneficial for that
securities, uh, I mentioned this
yesterday, it's a small budget
but a huge return they put back
in the general fund 22 million,
it's a real small group of them,
there's 13 or 15 employees
working there full time, uh, so
they really work hard and work
at it, keeping it, you know,
working on the consumer outreach
fraud with some of the elderly
folks. I think they've done 10
so far this year.
Manufactured housing.
Uh, it's one of my smallest
groups, but they work the
hardest with the affordable
housing. Uh, it's quicker
housing at times when you need
it, uh, so it's been really good
to have that group. Uh, I'm down
to, I was fully staffed there,
now I'm down 2, I think shows 3,
but I think I'm down to this
year they pulled in 68 permits,
6800 permits and did 8500
inspections.
Cannabis is uh we're we're
asking for increases. I was told
and I requested to come in with
a flat budget and for the most
part it did till we got over
into cannabis, uh, what we've
done with the cannabis is we've
asked to include 10 more FTEs
for uh
Compliance, they call them
compliance officers basically
inspectors. We need them bad
when we were able to add the 7,
we went from 1011, 22
inspections to 2,944. Everybody
knows cannabis is in the news
every day, every week, usually
I'm getting beat up in the news
over it for some reason, good or
bad, it didn't matter which side
I land on, but we're in there
constantly, but we've asked for
10 more FTEs there, uh, whether
we get 7, 10, whatever, it's
gonna be helpful, we really need
them and that's for the
inspection, but we've also
asked.
For an expansion of to include
law enforcement.
A capability so we can handle
the criminal. I can tell you
this, this started with uh the
prior superintendent's
brainchild. It was hers, what my
ideal to start with but before
Senator Trio left, she had
started this. I just wasn't
ready in in the position yet to
handle it last year, so now this
year we're trying to get it
moved forward. I just wasn't up
to speed on how to get a bill
through well enough. That would
include one special agent
supervisor and 6 employees, so
that's a 1.1 billion expansion
if we get that for employees.
It's highly critical that we do
this. We've tried everything.
world we only have cannabis but
administrative authority, so as
soon as you do something that
you're not supposed to do and it
becomes criminal activity, we no
longer have any.
Any cloud, anything, any, any,
any recourse for it.
It has to go back to law
enforcement. Law enforcement's
buried, they're understaffed,
they've got all they can handle,
and was sitting in one of their.
Issues that they can handle all
the time. So if you get a call
for an unlicensed uh activity, a
lot of times they're off on
either shooting or uh fentanyl
problem or something that's even
greater. So this is in
cooperation with law
enforcement, they're supporting
us with it, and it's much
needed. It will give us the
ability to, and we still have to
go through the ULA. We still
have to go through the court
system to get the approval to do
this. It's not like we can just
go out and do what we want, but
we'll be able to do our own
search warrants, we'll be able
to do, you know, have the
individuals handle stuff
properly to the investigations
properly.
And deal with these ones that
just like got took down
recently, so that's for the most
part is what we're asking for
and with that I'll just stand
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let me ask you one question.
Have you had your hearing in the
house yet?
For the HB 10 law enforcement?
No, or, uh, your house built to
yes sir, yes,
and did the House recommend
anything on cannabis or what did
they?
Thank you chair and members of
the committee, uh, the House
recommended a matching the
agency's request for uh
cannabis.
So the LFC recommended two
different grow appropriations,
one for the compliance offers
totals of 4.4 million over three
years.
Uh, uh, 2.3 for the first year
and then 1.038 recurring.
And then the second one, their
expansion request was
recommended to be a grow
appropriation for law
enforcement.
So 1.61 total the first year and
then 1.15 recurring, so at 3.9
million in total, the agencies's
request is a little different.
The compliance officer they
requested uh a total of 7.305
through grow appropriations for
3 years. First year would be 3.3
million and then it'll be 2
million recurring.
And why would we put FTEs and
growth.
When we're creating a new
division that's just
enforcement.
John, you have an answer for
that.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman John
Courtney, uh, LFC. So yesterday
HFC acted on the recurring
budget. They, they took the
HEFC, I mean the LFC recommend,
sorry.
The grow appropriation, um, is,
is basically intended to
To, you know,
That this out and, and accompany
it with those performance
metrics that um we're hoping to
see, um, since this is a new
program. So the idea being that,
you know, we would fund uh
positions through the grove for
those 3 years and assuming it
works, I, I think as everyone
expects, um, and those, those
performance metrics look good.
It's would then be built a
candidate to be built into the
recurring budget subsequent to
that.
But
If they put him there and they
have they passed the other bills
they need for enforcement.
You may not be able to calculate
if
If it's working or not, cause it
may have worked.
Just by putting the new laws
into place and putting the
enforcement there, so say for 2
years there's a lot in the 30
year growing tanks because now
they got some enforcement in the
words out on the street. How we
gonna manage that and grow and
really calculate if enforcement.
Worked, I mean, that's
It's a different situation in
agency, but this was one of the
ones where
You know, enforcement in the
laws passed in their in
compliance.
And
8080 some 90% of them coming
into to effect and how are you
gonna really track that
enforcement and grow if it just,
if it's like this, and then you
get enforcement in statutes and.
Goes like that.
Mr. Chairman, that, that's a
good point, you know, um, the
That LSC sponsored bill for grow
uh House Bill 181 to put those
account accountability
guardrails in there.
Um, would basically, um, set up
a structure where um you could,
you could study the, the
performance of the of those um
compliance officers itself.
Um, while still considering the,
the potential changes of the law
separate from that. So we would
build some sort of, some sort of
comparison, some sort of
counterfactual to ensure that.
Um, that you all are, are.
Get what you pay for in terms of
that investment.
Mr. members of the committee,
just having it passed and have
the ability isn't going to
change. It's gonna be a
challenge. They already know
they're illegal. They already
know the state police can get
them in the local law
enforcement, they don't care.
It's gonna take some hard work
and it's gonna take more than a
year or two. My goal is to get
this thing stood up and running
smoothly before my time's up,
um, I believe it'll make an
impact.
I don't believe it's gonna be
hauling them in jail and
throwing them in there because
it's 4th degree felony, it's
gonna be taking the crops and
get rid of the crops for the
illicit market that costs them
the money, it's the money that
drives it, right?
So I understand where you're
coming from, but I don't believe
just by having it passed is
going to be enough to spook him
into doing it right. This group.
That we're dealing with the.
have much
Respect for
Law enforcement or any other
rules that come along, it's
gonna have to be forced.
I mean, I don't know the.
Do you want to put state police
officers in growing based upon
the number of tickets you get
annually, either get your money
or don't get your money. That's
kind of the same thing, right?
Is enforcement there and
enforcement not in there. And so
are we incentivizing, well,
maybe not in this situation,
you've got an issue. What are we
incentivizing them to, to make
sure they're out.
Or incentivize and make sure
they're out there, but are we
going to have them to start
nicking every single detail and
They can come into compliance,
that's the only issue in and
growers tended to watch and
track stuff, but I don't know
how that really works in the
enforcement field. It'd be
interesting to see, I guess, so
questions from committee
members, Senator Trejo.
Mr. Chairman, I'll have to agree
with you for a number of
reasons, but one of them being
that if the money goes into to
grow and it's limited, um, what
What's going to happen is that
the department's going to have
to hire law enforcement as a
term.
And that's a big jump, right,
for some law enforcement to go
from maybe DPS or local law
enforcement over to a term
position that could conceivably
be eliminated once the funding
is stopped.
This is a, this is law
enforcement and we know that law
enforcement needs to be done.
It's not a question of whether
or not they're, you know,
they'll do the job, they'll do
the work. I, I just, I think
grow is not the place for it. It
needs to be added into the
budget so they can hire
permanent employees to fill
those positions so that they
know, um, you know, they've got
a job at the end of 2 years and
it builds in. Uh, the other
thing that I'm concerned about
is that this is a really
important
function for the department, the
law enforcement, and we've got a
new administration coming in in
just under 2 years, and is that
administration, if this is not
built into the budget, um, will
it get built into the budget in
2 years. That makes me a little
bit nervous, so I, I would
prefer that it's just built into
the budget, maybe the money, uh,
Mr. Chairman is dependent upon
House Bill 10 passing, um, my
understanding is that it's gonna
be um read into the floor today
and
potentially will be coming over
here and then we'll start
working on it over here.
Uh, the analyst is shaking his
head. I mean, you have
contingency language on this, on
this.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Yes, the
uh special agents are contingent
on the passing of household tax.
Oh, that needs to get stripped,
so need to make sure that 10
comes in here.
I mean
The agency needs them.
should be contingent on that
bill passing, I mean, why that
was done that way, but that
needs to get stripped out house
built in I don't remember who's
the sponsor, John.
I'm the sponsor over here, um,
when you get a hold of that bill
and make sure it comes to
finance and let's strip the
contingency language because no
matter what the agency needs the
funding, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that.
No, no, no, you're OK. Thank
you. I appreciate it. So, um,
just a couple of questions
outside of cannabis. Um, I'll
have to say, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Superintendent, it's kind of
nice to get interviewed and have
people talk to me and not ask
questions about cannabis, um,
so, so I'm glad they're now
asking you those questions
instead of me. Um, I have heard
from some uh individuals in the
community that there's a modular
home.
Factory, maybe I'm calling it
something that it shouldn't be
called um being built down in
the Roswell, Carlsbad area, I
believe, and there was some
concern that there wouldn't be
enough uh inspectors because
they'll be doing it similar to
manufactured homes. They need
inspectors. They requested that,
you know, we look at a new
bureau and I said, I, I think we
just need to make sure that
you've got plenty of inspectors.
Are you aware of that?
facility in the old barn, uh,
where they, uh,
structed
buses
A my and senator, yes, I, I
believe it's probably built
wise, but we've dealt with uh.
It's sometimes the left hand not
knowing what the right hand's
doing. The upper management will
be hollering up here needing
something. We've already dealt
with it and had it worked out,
so I don't believe for a minute
we've impeded or slowed the
growth, it's obviously it needs
to be quick growth. It's
affordable housing and they're
trying to get it done. Uh, the
last secretary that brought it
to my attention, I told him set
it up, we need to speak to the
upper management, but generally
it's coming from somebody that
the top that didn't realize
what's happening at the bottom.
I, I believe we have it covered.
I haven't heard any other
issues. I did tell them if they
want to sit down and have a
meeting if we needed to, much
like we did with Carson.
In that time, and sit down,
let's figure out what the real
issue is and it is, but I
haven't heard any other issues.
Until this was brought up for
several weeks now, so or maybe a
month or two, but uh we're
always willing to look at it,
but right now I believe we
absolutely have it covered.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Superintendent. I assume
that you did, and it was a
couple of weeks ago when I had
heard about this issue. So what,
where is the department at in
getting financial industries and
securities into the online
system. Maybe not securities
because they know that they're a
little bit different, but
financial institutions, I think
was the last one and
We have alcoholic beverages up
and running.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, and Senator, alcohol
is is up, we finished it. I
mean, we made that.
Desperate run till July 1st,
which in hindsight was not a
smart move for me to push it
that hard. I realize now, but we
got alcohol up, we got 20 boards
up, looking at securities now
financials we have set back, we
haven't started on that one yet.
Uh, still need to deal with like
the elevator and some of the
others, but we got the funding
that we're fixing to start,
we've got an RFP out, um, I
believe it's.
ones that I believe it's ready
to go, uh, but it's been vetted
so I think we're getting closer,
so I'll have a 11 year and a
half to to get the rest of them
on.
But alcohol, like with all of
them when you start is a
challenge up front, you know, a
lot of his training even on
staff and you know how stuff has
been done for years and years a
little more difficult, but
ultimately it's paying off, it's
paid off in CID, which I didn't
think it would, and it did. A
board just starting to pay off
now, it's taking a while to get
over the hump so alcohol is
right there on that hump right
now too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
Superintendent, I won't say I
told you so, um, but I will say
congratulations because it's a
really big lift and, and
although it's, it, it
ultimately, you know, has some
staff savings, those staff can
actually be then put to use in
other areas that the department
has been underserved. So one
last question I have for you,
and that is, is the um is the
fees for the technology, have
they been built enough into your
systems so that it's not a
scramble for money.
Yeah
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for asking that because we both
experienced that. Uh, one of the
other asks that wasn't flat was
in boards asking for an
additional 500 to cover their
fees. We got them covered in the
rest of the the bureaus or
divisions, but we didn't in
boards that we got left out for
however I don't know how, but so
we did ask for an increase in
that. So
Moving forward, I think this
July 1st is going to be much
more pleasant than it has been
recently and uh and you're
right, you can say you told me
so because I was the one that
kicked and fought the hardest,
so it helps me push my other
folks forward, you know, but uh,
but if we can get that 500,000
increase in the boards, it's
imperative that we get it so we
don't scramble and scrape every
minute again. This year's going
to be tight to the end, but past
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would
just ask that we could try to
make sure that when the budget
comes over here, particularly
since boards and commissions are
enterprise funds anyway doesn't
come from general fund, it just
comes from money that they bring
in, um, and then one last
comment, Mr. Chairman, not
directed towards the
superintendent, but, you know,
the fees that are coming in for
cannabis or nowhere near the
cost of us trying to, um, you
know, as a state managed the
actual industry. If you look at
the fees, it's just.
$3 million in the budget for
cannabis is 7.6%, like somehow
or another, we've got to figure
out how the licensees are gonna
pay for what it costs to
actually implement that program,
so I'll leave it at that, Mr.
Chairman. We'll look forward to
bringing that fees bill in here
you amending it.
I'm on, I'm, I'm, I'm in support
of that, Mr. Chairman Senator
Brant.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and, and
I won't look at Senator Trujillo
and say I told you so, but um I
think I said that that wasn't
going to cover it.
Cannabis.
But um
You know, that's really where,
where I was going and she hit it
right at the end is is the the
cannabis fees are nowhere near
covering and then we're going to
increase.
On the law enforcement side, I
see exactly why we need to do
that and I support doing that.
But that's gonna bring that up
to almost $10 million and we're
bringing in 2.8.
So it sounds like we need to
have a pretty large increase in
the fees that we're charging on
the cannabis side, get your
response on that.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee and senator, it's
always something to look at. I
mean, I think it takes a while
to get to the point.
If we do get to the point that
it pays its way, if that's the,
the will and what people need
and want, well then you're
you're absolutely right.
Industry obviously won't like
that, uh, but maybe it's
something we need to sit down
and discuss and talk through and
bring in some of the leaders and
ourselves and see what would it
take? I mean, we can set
in-house and look at fees and
see what it would take to make
it.
I don't know make a profit but
maybe break even. I mean,
obviously we're gonna be a ways
from there, right?
But um the increase to isn't
just in the law enforcement,
it's gonna help the the people
that are in business a lot, but
it's going to protect the
general public.
In more ways than one.
If we can run some of these out,
these facilities do more than
just cannabis illegal.
And if we're pushing them out,
and I don't know where we're
gonna push them to, maybe
Oklahoma. I don't know where
they'll go, but.
My concern is getting it done
here, but I understand your
concern. I'm sure more than
willing to sit down as industry
leaders and visit with
legislators and see.
could be looked at or maybe
possibly done.
Mr. Chairman and uh.
Superintendent, I think they'll
just go back across the border
in Mexico.
Because a lot of
funded and run
the cartels.
And
That's why they really don't
care about law enforcement, um.
So, as far as the law
enforcement side goes, I'm
guessing that bill will come
through here.
Law enforcement side as far as
the adding law enforcement House
Bill 10, yeah, it should.
OK
save my questions for that till
then.
Thank you. Thank you.
Senator Steinmo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. uh.
So
Superintendent.
You could
Good to have you here today.
Quick question, you know, we had
a well publicized situation in
Las Cruces area where we had a
cannabis farm.
be created in a neighborhood and
it was kind of
not done in the most direct way.
Because they were not, wasn't
clear initially what they were
going to do, and then suddenly
They turned it into that, um.
have um
And I
try to pass an amendment on a
bill.
What last session came a few
votes shy of uh prohibiting
creating a farm inside a
neighborhood.
Where pesticides are sprayed in
this kind of stuff is it.
Is your division
Do we have any steps in place to
keep that from happening?
And I, I'm not talking about
other kinds of
Reduction or whatever, but
specifically that kind of a
situation.
Mr. Chair and members Committee
and Senator, what we have done
that's a little bit differently,
we've changed the rules to where
Initially, a license.
They, they came, they applied
and they got a license. Now what
we're doing, and, and they had
to sign a document saying they
were going to do it correct,
right? They were gonna follow
the rules of the planning and
zoning the local municipalities,
get a business license, go to
the water, you know, the office
of engineer and get a water.
However, it became apparent that
a lot of them weren't doing it,
they'd take a state license,
say, hey, we're in business and
start. So now what we're doing
and it has slowed things down,
it, uh, now what we're doing,
they have to, we're the last
stop,
you know, they're supposed to do
it anyway and they weren't doing
it, but now.
Before we issue a license, we
have to see the planning and
zoning, right? And if the, the
county or the city hasn't didn't
give them the sign off and they
don't get the license to
proceed. Then if they do
proceed, it goes back to the
criminal which I can't do
anything about at the moment,
but it is a criminal activity at
that point. So I believe that
probably answers or helps with a
lot of it to make sure these
folks, and this includes all the
way from the building, the
construction, the water, the
planning and zoning local
business license, everything
they have to have.
You'll hear complaints at times,
especially if it's a production
that's needs water. I've seen
the engineer sometimes it takes
them 6 months to get through
that process, but if it takes 6
months, takes 6 months, we don't
issue a license until that's all
done and where are the last stop
now. So I believe that will at
least alleviate probably a huge
percentage of it, I think so,
Mr. Chair, so basically our law
defers to the local government
in terms of zoning. We really
don't have any zoning issues per
se built into the law. So
So you're saying you, you need
them to check those boxes before
you give a permit.
Or you give a license and that
makes sense to me. I just, yeah,
ask you to just kind of be aware
of that situation. I'm sure you
probably already are, but um.
Yeah, it'd be one thing if it
was an internal grow house, but
this was a situation where
They were just
It was out in the open, they
practically had a chain link
fence. I mean, it was in a
really nice neighborhood. It was
just on every level, kind of not
done right.
And right across the street next
to neighbors, spraying, and so a
lot of concerns here for the
neighborhood in every respect.
So
I don't know if the law empowers
you to kind of be mindful of
those kinds of things when
you're considering a license
when you're approached by
someone.
Just to kind of flag it so it's
not missed, just.
So we have kind of good
neighbor.
Instincts about what we're doing
and how we're doing it.
Yes sir, Mr. Chair and Senator,
we are mindful of it and that's
one reason we went this
direction, to try to make
certain that the planes on, I
mean if the, if the municipality
allows it, there's nothing we're
going to be able to do about
that. If they say yes, you can
put it right there, then that's
something we don't have, but we
are able now to go out there and
say, hey, you know, we don't
give it because a lot of times
they were holding their license
up saying hey, we have a state
license, we can do this. We
didn't have a clue, a clue what
we are trying now to do
pre-inspections, uh, that's a
new thing we have.
uh with additional, uh, not law
enforcement but additional
inspectors that's something
that's very important to get out
and look at them prior to it and
make sure they've checked all
their, you know, we're, we're
reviewing the application to go
out and see the location
actually as what it's supposed
to have. Let let me ask you
this, Mr. Chair, um,
Superintendent, does, do you
have the power to create rules
about
OK, so you don't control zoning,
but to make sure that.
There are environmental hazards
presented by an operation on
nearby neighbors and things like
that that you have.
Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee and
senator, we have the power to to
adopt or or present rules, get
them approved and run them
through public hearing and get
them adopted.
There's certain pesticides and
certain sprays they can and
can't use. The first thing we'll
do is go through the plan in its
own. If they're not allowed to
have it, they can't have it. It
goes beyond that and my CCD.
Director may have to step in
here. I think it probably would
reach out to the environment if
they're using the product that's
going across and affected the
neighbors or if it's not a safe
product.
I mean we get a list of what you
can use, can't use and then
there's a percentage that can
show up in the test.
OK. Thank you. That's just,
again, be mindful of and be as
protective as you can, I think
of people around them, and I'm
not, I, I supported it, I voted
for it, so I'm not coming from
that perspective, just about,
you know, looking after the
interests of the others as well.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr.
that makes good neighbors.
Makes no neighbors, right.
That would fix that problem, you
know.
10 days.
I think that's it. I don't have
any other questions or anything
you want to wrap up with.
No, I just really appreciate Mr.
Cherry all allowing us to come
in here and sit in here and uh
telling you what we need and
listening and the questions that
came and the things that we're
learning. Every time I leave one
of these committees, it gives me
that much more to understand
what I'm gonna get asked in the
next committee for like HB 10
and things but uh.
One thing I can't tell you, I
think we're bringing customer
service to RLD and I'm very
mindful of the money we spend.
It started with Senator Truhill
and I'm keeping it moving
forward and I'm very mindful of
what we do and what we ask for.
So generally speaking, if I come
ask it's for a reason. I'm not
asking for a new desk or
anything fancy.
Thank you sir, and I appreciate
the changes you have, man,
you've always been very
responsive and reactive to
what's happening with her.
Marijuana or whatever the other
situation, I'm still not that
happy with PSI though.
Mr. Chair, I understand that.
Thank you. Thank you.
That's it. We're adjourn.
