Level two to sixty thousand and
level three to seventy thousand.
And Mr chairman I'll just remind
you all that.
The teacher tier salary system
is tied to the principles and it
was actually LFC analysis I can
find that it had it laid out
yes.
So we have responsibility
factors for that we add on to
assistant principals and
principals that starts at one
point one for assistant
principal in elementary it goes
all the way to one point six for
a high school principal so they
start with the level three
teacher based so this would be
seventy and then they would put
those responsibility factors so
this is not only a salary
increase for teachers it's also
salary increase for principals
and assistant principals.
Very much need to do because if
we don't have good salaries for
them then we don't get teachers
leaving the profession to become
principles and those are really
one of the best principles and
with that I'm ready for
questions thank you we're gonna
go to the audience in support
we're gonna go to zoom in and
some may be here I just don't
know.
We're gonna start for because I
don't have anybody on the list
again.
So will I'm just going to skip
the room adri Q. and.
And Human.
Okay maybe this.
Yanzu.
But.
Hello thank you for having me
speak I'm here to see in the
state address the one
I teacher for the last decade in
New Mexico and when I started
teaching for my first like six
years right to jobs at a time
meeting very difficult to the
an effective teacher I'm I'm one
of the many teachers are the
story like that when I tried to
sign up for benefits to the
retirement set up with an
investment account basically
usually teachers have a spouse
that supports them so they can
put their money into a savings
account yes and it's just
unfortunate that we are in
charge of taking care of
people's children I'm trying to
set in New Mexico and we're
barely making them not
I just I think this is long
overdue and it put us on par
with several states that hasn't
really gives teachers
you know an additive balance
don't get in it for the income
that they get in the house for
the outcome of that too we can
stay in the profession nearly
and hopes and dreams and love we
we have to take care of
ourselves and our fans thank you
thank you amber Valencia.
New Mexico and then special
education teacher in Farmington
I'm also state ambassador for
the New Mexico public education
department and I'm here speaking
on behalf of myself and I thank
you for allowing me to see
what it is because New Mexico's
unique to face teacher shortage
that is not a crisis level
probably notice for teaching
eighties in the state with many
teachers.
On teachers primary teachers
plan is almost.
Twelve years without.
And I could make a financial
sacrifice to be able to see to
pursue my passion to serve
children and unity if I had a
family I could.
I wouldn't have been able to
afford to be a teacher I would
never from calling I would never
have.
Historically.
Teaching position in education
which is a special education
teacher at one.
There were two teachers who are
working on not as.
Maybe you need right now things.
To jot twelve hours a day and in
her words she has to do a job
that she loves she has to work
another job to do so.
I appreciate you coming here
today this is just one step in
looking at issues for the state
of New Mexico speaking with the
practice in our education thank
you.
John darts are you on zoom I
don't see in the room I seen in
the capitol today.
Yes I am here is
I wanted to first say thank you
to sponsors for bringing this
legislation forward my name's
John the FTC Mexico and I don't
want to take away from the two
previous speakers and their
stories but it is something in
here often within the range of
educators in New Mexico and some
of the one of the long way to
make a how to but also to start
filling our classrooms and in a
professional education once
respected and one that incoming
students or folks seeking second
careers with the fire
department as professionals we
actually start for for this
legislation and again the
this report.
Thank you JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
eighty one percent speaking on
behalf of a greater opportunity
chamber of commerce this is what
we want the chamber supports
increasing teacher salaries and
raises and sign a little cross
teaches teachers.
The key workforce shortage areas
Mexico to the center and
increased helpful in alleviating
problems pertaining recession
you here revenues plentiful the
chamber also believe that every
child had access to a great
school in high performing
teachers and kids are and what
kind of classes each year and we
help extended learning
requirements will accompany
additional compensation for
teachers as a long time admirers
of the difficult job teachers
daily basis greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce's sports
legislation it is very
appreciative to sponsors in the
meeting so we're for bringing us
full thank you thank you Alicia
to deal.
I am.
We should be there.
Amy Parente.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name drugs I am a
network for media for fussing
Mexico
I get to work with our state
best and brightest educators
and policy fellowship I get to
hear their stories about
challenges and successes in
their classrooms it is clear
that our educators want what is
best for New Mexico students and
their community.
Our
reserves and have developed
ideas in the right recruitment
and retention of New Mexico
educators we are critical time
education in our state and
nation we face teacher vacancies
that have.
Leading the five thousand
students without access to a
certified classroom teacher.
Our leaders understand the
impact of this crisis in the
overall profession and most
importantly the impact it has
had on our students.
We support salary increases as a
strategy to address the
retainer.
Teachers more competitive
additionally we would like to
thank you Mexico Pete for
supporting teachers and aspiring
teachers by we licensure
opportunities until March thirty
years we are is to take place
longer we also recommend
provided stipends to teachers
for billing additional
responsibilities for work areas
thank you for your time
consideration is most important.
Thank you Kelly Kelly appears.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Kelly
heroes and I prob educator I
moved to use nine two stories
for today workers all the moving
parts to this family's the
school gym teaching.
You are just and then helping
them make their own to take with
them then there's Christina
systematically handed out or I
axes cars I heard so that
students to create cracked
through virtual schools in
partnership with the national
center Senator teachers but
thank you so much more children
none of us and his profession
with dollar signs dancing in our
heads the use of low salaries
Senator Hey Hey taking hold to
value we need to press the
patient as an instructional
coordinator in an urban school
districts I see them going above
and beyond every day they may
not work right but they are very
thank you for honoring the work
that you in and outside the
classroom I support Senate bill
one when educators are repeated
everyone in the community.
Thank you thank you Chrissy's
Krispy solders.
Alicia Cooper.
Was the last name because I
think they're misspelling Alicia
Cooper either.
Yes.
And members of the committee on
these.
First teacher New Mexico
international school I'm also
plus policies.
Twenty one is here I reiterate
my support my full support
percent.
Gratitude to the sponsors for
this bill to support all
teachers but it.
The importance of this bill for
our.
I
agree because I was able to.
I had a really is.
But those are often out of reach
financially and for me.
Limiting many teachers ability
to advance.
And many of these teachers are
exceptional.
I learned from an expired by
level two teachers who do not
hold.
Every single day our our school
wants to find some of the most
inquiry based and hands
disciplinary instructions to my
students for an hour each week
and the creativity knowledge and
ability to cultivate artistic
sensibilities dollars tunes is
remarkable this level two
teachers often at school on the
weekends for current student
work for display she is also
doing immerses
for second.
expertise dedication also marked
by readers Committee years and
this matter based on more common
especially because the level
three pay scale is not.
And our school community really
needs teachers like with spider
Education.
So given and the importance of
our level two teachers in the
state Committee hospice and
thank you for the opportunity to
to support thank you I don't
have anybody else on our list
resume we're gonna go to the
audience in support.
Stand.
Thank you Mr is a committee
stand rounds for the New Mexico
school superintendents we
support this is part of a three
step process to help our
shortage of teachers you know
there's about a thousand
openings today this is really a
recruitment tool.
And as we try to compete
regionally we're behind the
reason we believe that the
supporters to better pairs so we
urge our consideration of this
in your thank you.
Thank you Linda.
Mr chairman.
The single for the Santa Fe
public schools.
Strong support we have about
sixty five vacancies and of
course you know in Santa Fe on
cost of living is right hi this
is really going to help us.
To hopefully recruit more
teachers percent thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name state
employees with University of New
Mexico and we stated strong
support we thank the sponsor
bring the bill forward we see
this as an important
concept in helping us retain
good teachers here in the state
thanks to your investments in
our in our teacher training and
education programs we we really
want to pursue these kind of
options to keep the teachers
here that we've invested in
thank you thank you anybody else
in support anybody in opposition
questions from committee members
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman procamp
question where does this put New
Mexico just so we have a
contacts would assist put us and
regional
Context.
Mr chairman and senator.
You know that's a really tricky
question to answer because as we
raise salaries what of all the
states surrounding us to with
the same teacher shortages they
raise salaries it's too too too
too soon to tell I've talked to
senator again Kernan about this
a considerably in the past to
work with her on so many bills
and she tells me the story of
yeah in the woods they just go
over the the boundary to pretend
boundary and teach in Texas and
they often get a ten thousand
dollar boning sinus.
Yes.
Can't talk anymore
They'll get a stipend for being
bilingual they other states
around us to steal our bilingual
teachers because of the pay so I
think this is significant enough
of a boost especially with the
seven percent that we may just
be leaders in in our area it'll
be the first it'll be the first
to be real first but what what
he tells me is that so you've
got a Texas average salary
that's not what the small towns
next to our border to because
they don't have the state class
formula like we do they have
teacher salaries are based much
more on property taxes so you
know you've got middle and other
other cities and they just they
just pay much more than we do so
will we'll still have to fight
for teachers even with this
raise thank you madam president
I think it's an awesome bill for
the state of New Mexico I'm sure
we all to but I I want to ask
the question so that we kept in
mind that this was in the end
that this is that continuing
evolving things like everything
that has to be competitive and
and the south thank you so for
that thank you Mr.
Senator I'm going to be a look
at the rack up she you can see
the differences right now we're
lower than Colorado by about
thirty four hundred and lower by
Texas so this just make should
bring as well above that I'll
put you on the list Center
would.
No question sorry centers here.
I'm sorry.
In that.
The one in the dresser is the
tall one Senator Burt I am not
wearing a kilt today what can I.
Well that didn't fight who is in
the direct.
There but and I'm sorry.
I'm confused thank you Mr
chairman and thank you for the
information this forward
appreciate
I would say that you know that
the three groups that we have to
rely on that really get paid
terribly our military that keeps
this country safe police and
safety officers to keep your
home safe and teachers who we
intrust our kids to to educate
them and so I am in support of
this and I'm going to vote for
this
but I have to say.
I have to say that it's not long
at I can't speak for other
people on this committee or in
this legislature.
But we have to see better
results coming out of schools we
have to see better grades
special in the state in various
we have to have better
graduation rates we have to
lower the dropout rates that
doesn't happen overnight I
understand that but I think.
This moves the dial forward
because the the battery paid
people the the the quality that
you get that comes with that
will help track that course to
get that done but but I'm very
serious I am I want to see
better results on our schools
and I think that's a bad thing
to ask for because we got a lot
of improvement to do so I'm just
asking I'm gonna vote for this
and I will support we need
better results.
Our schools and that's the
challenge that you all have.
Thank you Mr.
If I could just very briefly I
agree with you completely and I
do all kinds of things to work
on how we're teaching students a
specially early literacy I
really do believe reading as
foundation and if you don't
learn to read in elementary you
just don't think it later on so
that's why my focus has been
early literacy in and I
appreciate that Mr chairman I
I'm one of those two if you if
you're not reading it level by
three we're gonna lose our kids
I think I mean that's a little
of the great I should say I I
just think you're gonna lose
kids and there's a lot of other
things and I appreciate the
incentive programs we have
Ulises for teachers to to
increase their level for teacher
to become administrators we have
different programs within PED
that
and encourages people to do that
I think all I support all of
that one one good but it does us
no good if we're not getting the
results of.
So anyway this thank you for
your comments Senator thank you
Mr chair.
First of.
The state almost passed out when
he saw me walk in the room and I
was afraid when Linda stood up
and walked away that she was not
going to help resuscitate him
but he recovered.
She.
We have to work with.
The literacy part of this it is
huge and so well I'm going to be
a Scott for just a bit more.
Scotland in the in in the
fifteen hundreds and before was
it almost entirely illiterate.
Then they started learning
English in about a twenty year
period.
They went through the Scottish
enlightenment where they
literally literally had the
greatest engineers the greatest
architects the greatest medical
doctors the greatest humanist
the greatest authors for that
time because the whole learn to
read and write.
It was such a dramatic change.
In the big difference was you
went from a nation that had zero
literacy in any language to
almost one hundred percent
literacy in English in English
was not their native tongue.
I want to.
I want that it's time for more
real people to wear kilts.
Because I think we would learn.
The other thing though we talked
about recruiting in this is a
recruiting effort but to do this
anywhere here or any other bill
out there actually have a
recruiter and I ask that because
this is a uniform.
Scottish from uniforms still
uniformed.
But I was a U. S. army
recruiter.
Difficult to recruit people to
say all follow me I'm gonna
paint you green I'm gonna make
you all around in mud people
gonna shoot you come on it's a
great job.
Do we have any recruiting effort
for teachers.
Mr chairman and senator yes we
do a whole variety of things one
of them is is our our grow your
own program we're trying to get
our educational assistance to
become teachers we have a
what's the name of it four words
for what's the name of the so we
have a teacher recruitment in
the high schools that was
started at New Mexico State
University
that has chapters all over the
state it it's not in this comic
for late for teachers and so
that's very robust it was
started by by Karen Trujillo so
but also districts districts go
to Spain and Mexico and
Philippines to recruit teachers
our colleges and universities
have had a pretty significant
drop in the number of people who
in turn fifty pound teachers of
the the only exception to that
is in western I believe western
has one of the best teacher
pipelines because there are
reading programs are based on
the science of reading unlike
anywhere else in the state so we
do have recruiters but frankly I
mean you heard them.
The pay will recruit people and
some of our high school students
that are trying to be teachers
have now changed their mind
other high school students who
had thought of being teachers
have changed her mind because of
the salaries that they're
hearing about so this this bill
is a recruitment itself but
districts have to recruit
teachers because we don't have
enough and they do it all the
time and so.
Really I think we have we have
to have a a dedicated
recruitment efforts the military
has a dedicated recruitment
efforts and so not that I'm
saying we've got to be army kind
of recruiters but we need to
have a an absolute dedicated
this is what I do all day I go
around high schools and talk to
seventeen eighteen year olds and
say please join this service.
Obviously the pace help for that
so I appreciate that I'm gonna
vote for you.
In ask you to have another New
Mexico enlightenment where we
have a hundred percent literacy
thus the greatest engineers
architects doctors except for
I'm with you on that thank you
Mr thank you Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam pro tempore rating
that's forward of course I
support this one hundred percent
I have had several fellow
educators reach out though who
have asked about weather's
ancillary providers are included
in this counselors can you speak
to that please yes so Mr
chairman the you know the
ancillary personnel will will be
able to get the seven percent
any district or school that as
any kind of extended learning K.
five plus for the two two extra
weeks or some flexibility there
up some small part they will get
a salary increase because those
programs are based on paying
their real right not like well
here for fifteen dollars an hour
you can do this in the summer of
this this tier.
Three tier is designed for
teachers it's not designed for
other things we have twenty two
thousand teachers in the state
if we don't pay attention to
paying them more we will not get
them how we did we do have apps
we have.
They can season all in every
area bus drivers custodians
secretaries EA's we've got four
hundred fifty EA slots that are
empty right now but this is not
a pay scale for everyone the
state pay scale with very
specific ways to move up for
teachers but the ancillary will
we'll get the same salary
increases in.
You know any I know in
Albuquerque public schools of
course they have a local
bargaining unit and they just
bark and the same salaries for
all the ancillary I think many
districts are to do that.
Thank you for that clarification
madam proton thank you Mr
chairman.
Padilla thank you Mr chairman
thank you pro tempore bring this
is just a phenomenal thing we're
going to do here this is history
being made it just to as an
aside this is the first time we
will be the highest paid
teacher salary in the region.
Do we know Mr chair we should
rejoice that we should put that
on the cover of the newspaper
put that in the Denver
newspaper.
Mr chairman you just have to
remember that that there's a
teacher shortage around this
whole country and that the
states around us are going to be
doing the same thing we are so I
want to celebrate it but you got
to wait to see what other states
do to but you know I believe
that will be you know centerman
else listed those you know those
figures but these are accurate
anymore and they're not accurate
for every town in Texas for
example so
I mean I hope you're right but
I'm skeptical about that not I
don't want to say that because I
I don't know yet.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you pro tem I you know I'm just
as Representative Garrett and I
were the ones that brought the
whole the grow your own teacher
that that rolling it was a
phenomenal can you imagine going
from a an EA salary going to get
your degree get your certificate
and then moving to this minimum
pay this is phenomenal we're
gonna do here in this is
fantastic it thank you Mr
chairman I just also want to
make note I know that Senator
Hemphill and senator
diamond had a photo taken the
other day but I was really
hoping that maybe Senator share
in the pro tempore take a photo
as well.
Today.
Mr chairman we just did that
could I get a copy of that
please I'd love to have the
structure.
Senator Padilla good luck with
that picture.
Senator Gonzales.
I got one more Senator
Rodriguez.
Quickly thank you Mr chairman I
just want to reiterate a lot of
the comments that have been made
today to thank you Senator
Stewart for bringing this bill
forward you know I've always
said that our teachers not only
now but in the past have always
had very huge demands and
particularly now during this
pandemic we are required to do
so much more having to deliver a
good education with lot with
distance learning and so on is
just huge when they themselves
are going through so much and
their families you require it to
be counselors teachers sometimes
parents even nurses you name it
there's so much on our teachers
so this is the definitely
beginning of something that we
need to continue to do on going
so thank you for this that's all
I have Mister chairman of
there's a motion on the table by
Senator Gonzalez thank you
You know.
Unless you're married to teacher
Mr teacher right every parents
drop their kids off of the front
door in the state okay teach my
kid and keep them safe during
the day you hope things don't
happen and they got little
snotty noses and built not a
remarks in the bathrooms image
you you're at the day care with
an educator and and people
realize that and how education
is changed in the last ten to
fifteen years how we deliver
that to kids right how do you
keep up with training and how do
we change it and the main thing
is our children are dropped off
there everything is safe and
they're gonna come back the same
day better than they were a
little more knowledge in and
maybe a few scrapes on the
playground and and socialize and
so these people that we leave
our children and our hands are
is
should be very well respected
because lord knows I've been in
the principal's office of my
kids a couple times
it was was the principal.
The gathering there.
we'll talk about them anymore.
But for teacher in a specially
COVID just changed the whole way
they had operate and we're
teaching you lessons plans and
then you got to do online and
then they got to make sure they
have wifi cards in the changes
and then.
Currents are going to be parents
and if they don't have the right
material they're just it goes on
on the I think this is a needed
to happen we know that you can
no longer live in America on a
nine month contract as certain
salary right can expect to get
through the rest of the year and
everybody has a family and the
cost of living's got up and
everything's gone that in so we
have this ability right now.
And so we're counting on them
right to change or educational
system really counting on PED to
set the tone to change our
educational system that we've
seen some statistics that were
pretty bad in the budget but
We have the ability right now we
have the ability thankful to a
lot of things in New Mexico not
just one industry but thankful
to a lot of other nations we do
this but it's it's a good move
right now we have the money on
it show some respect maybe it
will help with a teacher
shortage I think we'll have been
sent by somewhere that as we
move forward and all our
shortages so with that I do have
a due pass motion from Senator
Gonzales.
Have a second from Senator
Campos
How we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes
thank you for yes Senator Campos
yes Campos yes.
Yes the.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
yes yes yes Mr PH test center
here yes.
You sure yes I want.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and Senator yes thank you
that is eleven point unanimous
thank you senator you do have a
due pass motion the first for me
it not.
You are here when the sun came
up in your here with the same.
The indication from.
Thank you
everybody be aware so council
we're trying to get the junior
bill wrapped up I think they did
hand out some sheets on language
and stuff on the junior bill
council that said that they
won't have that bill drafted to
maybe Saturday or Sunday but we
need to get that moved along
because we have capital right
behind it and so the capital
comes over from the house we're
gonna put all on one bill and
we're waiting still waiting on
the exact.
A finalize numbers but we're
getting close to the timeline of
when they can write the bill and
and get it moving along and so
as we move along in house bill
two is going to come over on
Friday so I hear that you have
some rack up sheets of on the
high levels in what's in there
and so get ready because we're
gonna have to we're gonna have a
lot to move around we have a lot
of money to steal appropriate in
different areas make sure your
doors are going to be they can
be lined up at your doors and
and you can have two hundred
ninety four text messages like I
had yesterday and so just get
ready and can make sure that
we're all here we're gonna try
to how to let everybody know we
put you back on the texting.
so we can know what just in case
and then we'll have to be
reactive if we have to come in
and do some changes every bill
we're gonna hear over the next
couple of days is going to be a
non money bills and so we can
get them moving across the
state.
We're not coming in the morning
going to come in the afternoon
you can try to keep that to the
afternoons hopefully we don't go
as late as we went today we'll
try not to go as late as one
today if we do the morals in the
building that I know Senator
dollars that the school boards
are in town and.
And they were they want to meet
so that time is and so.
That's the game plan so far but
you know how fluid will have to
be.
So that will probably change
meetings at the college.
Okay.
Thank.
