I think we got a quorum. We're
gonna get started. Kelly,
Senator Shindo's gonna sit there
with you on the Kapa LA Bill.
Uh, build appropriates 1.2
billion.
More than 1400 capital projects
statewide under this uh
Uh, 1. billion, uh, $1.2 billion
of
Mm
Appropriation of 799.
a million general funds.
29292 million in severance tax
bonds and 100.
33 million in the other state
funds.
Nearly 600 million of general
fund and the build appropriate
to projects prioritized by the
House Senate members and the
governor.
Remainder is appropriate to
state agencies, judicial, higher
education projects, some of the
state agency projects are for
the benefit of local entities.
So
Additionally, this year they're
bipartisan group of House and
Senate members was more than $50
million to cover 90 projects in
the bill for completion of
existing capital projects.
It's funding by legislators.
Representing all regions of the
state with the goal of fully
funding the request or the
entire project.
As a result of this effort, the
legislature was able to direct
significant additional sums to
critical infrastructure,
services and quality of life
projects in our community.
Uh, an additional 8 million was
provided for water line
expansions in Curry County.
An additional 2 million for
skilled nursing facility Re
River County.
An additional 1.3 million for
early childhood facility in
Eunice.
An additional 1.1 million for
real-time crime center in uh Las
Cruces, 1.6 million for water
system improvements in Maxwell.
An additional 975,000 for
housing infrastructure in in
Harding.
An additional 3 375,000 for
Puaqui Pueblo Behavioral Health
facility, and additional mailing
for community services complex
in in Haus Pueblo.
Uh, the chart, uh, before you
list all the projects and
amounts included in the bill by
county.
So this point or
for questions in the committee.
Or
Kelly, you have anything bad?
Mr. Chair, no, but I'll be
available for questions. OK,
we're gonna go to the audience,
anybody in support?
Nobody likes Capa Alley, but
they're all here.
Zoom?
Mhm
In opposition, no, nobody.
Everybody got everything they
wanted.
Um,
questions from committee.
Members
Tears
Does this
I've heard that there was one
additional
put in at the last minute $10
million for abortion clinic in
Uh, red tone
Is it accounted for in the
money, uh, the House members was
telling me, oh, I don't even add
up, so just tell me surely that
it's all accounted for, it's
all.
Hadn't subtracted right, Mister
Chair and representative.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, thank
you for the question. Uh, I am
assured by the Legislative
council Service as well as our
staff at the LFC that their math
is 100% correct and that the
discussion yesterday on the
House floor about the math being
incorrect was likely a faulty
calculator on.
In in in in one of their hands.
And Mister Chair and, and
representative and senator.
I know the governor's got all
the rights in the world to put
in whatever.
piece that she wants into this.
I'm, I'm kind of disappointed
that it came in so late that I
was not able to see it ahead of
time.
Mr.
I'm just disappointed.
Thank you for the opportunity
for the question. Thank you.
Represented
Senator Padilla. Uh, thank you,
chair, and thank you uh to the
sponsors, uh, Senator Shindo and
Representative Linte, thank you
for all the work that you did.
I'm, I'm sure this is a very
painful effort. I've never been
in the middle of it the way you
guys have this way, uh, but
what, what is the smallest sort
of like buy into a project. I
know that we've had in years
past where governors have made a
decision to veto things that are
at a certain level. What, what's
the smallest amount uh that
maybe somebody put into a
project and that and, and if
you're, if the, if the sponsors,
maybe they would be.
to prognosticate, I mean, is it
even worth it to do that? Or
should we just begin to put a, a
floor and this is it, nothing
smaller than that. You see where
I'm going with that, Mr.
Chairman Senator Padilla, the
smallest one I saw was, uh, I
think a 25,000 for a particular
uh piece of uh.
Uh, equipment or something.
So even though that's small,
it's a purchase of a, I, I think
an equipment or, or something I
can't recall, but that was the,
the smallest amount was German.
And you, do you want to see in
the future maybe a, a minimum
amount of some kind because I
see one here that's $18,000.
And I'm trying to figure out
like, you know,
That's a lot of money to us
individually, but you know, it
might not get you out of the
parking lot if you're trying to,
you know, whatever, so.
Oh, there's one in, uh, you want
the first page in Albuquerque,
is that the one, yeah, if I may,
Mr. Chairman and Senator, you
know, it, it's, it's a work in
progress, this capitality
process has been one that we've
inherited and
It's been told to us, it's just
the way that it is, right? But
it's a matter of how and in
terms of we had an LSC
subcommittee this past the uh
interim committee interim
sessions, pardon me, that
discussed about pathways forward
in terms of modernizing the
capital outlay process and this
is one of those, uh, by which we
have not yet fully committed to,
but the point being is that
there's going to be a point
where I think in terms of the
capitality process, we begin to
set a floor because if we don't
set this floor where nickel and
diming this process to a point
where they may never be able to.
spend this money because it's
never enough and the project
continues to go up in price and
then at, at the end of the day,
we just continue to add to the
unspent balance that we have
today, which is close to again
$6 billion. So that being said,
Mr. Chairman and and Senator,
uh, absolutely, I do believe
it's it's a work in progress,
but we're not there yet. OK, and
thank you for that, uh, sponsors
and Mr. Chair, and I'll ask this
to Kelly then, you know, in, in
Bernao County we attempted and
Senator Tobiasson, I'm going to
make sure that we work harder to
make sure that every uh
legislator in Central New Mexico
are part of those meetings, but
we tried really hard to do some
coordination. The large county
with a lot of legislators, uh,
my particular Senate district I
have 5 state representatives, so
2 of them have their whole
districts sort of inside of mine
or most of their districts, and
then I've got, you know, but
again, there's 5 of us there. So
what I normally do is I say to
the, to my, my colleagues there
in the house, all I'll fund 50%
of this and then 2 or 3 of you
need to fund the other 50%
somehow because the House
members get slightly less than
the Senate members.
Is there any uh thing that can
be done to maybe help with
coordination on, on the regions
of the state. Maybe we could set
this up around maybe around the
cog kind of footprints or
something. You wanna care to
comment on that at all?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator,
certainly, um.
So, you know, I think there are
several attempts that kind of
coordination and,
uh, within this process, it is a
good practice, and, uh, does sex
getting more of the funding that
they need. Um, and certainly,
uh, we could sort of start
looking early in the interim at
some sort of, you know,
technological solutions or
additional tools to help make it
easier for you all that want to
do that, um, to do it
effectively.
And then share my last question
is back to the sponsors again,
uh, you know, over the last, um,
Uh, to, actually 3 years, I
guess I've chaired the New
Mexico Finance Authority Act
Oversight Committee blah blah,
uh, do, do we have a committee
that maybe could just travel
around. I know we talked about
doing that in LFC at one point,
but the travels around and looks
at these much larger, um, like.
capital projects is to actually
see them get the the local
community that wants this large
thing. Is there any effort to
put together like a work group
of some kind to go check these
projects out so that we know
more about them before we show
up at the session and then
everybody's just on top of us
like we got to get this going.
And I think that's where a lot
of the the small amounts of our
dollars go. But if we had an
opportunity to maybe help each
other.
You know, in a big way. I, I
think a lot of us would do that
because we want to see, see big
things done around the state.
Uh, is there any talk about
maybe
Building some sort of a working
group to look at larger
projects.
Uh
Mr. Chairman and Senator, uh
currently the Legislative
Finance Committee staff already
does this type of, of vetting or
touring of the state in terms of
the larger projects, so I, I
have full faith that they're
going to these projects, touring
them, making sure they're shovel
ready in some cases, or at least
have planned design or even in
some cases, the land to develop
that, that project, right? So I,
I know that they do that uh in a
continuous basis throughout the
year in regards to a legislative
uh bicameral body. I, I don't
know of one yet or the plans to
have one of those.
But I do again, just wanna
mention that the Legislative
Finance Committee team does in
fact do this throughout the
year. OK, thank you chair and
thank you, sponsors. I'd really
like to see us do that. Thank
you, chair.
Any other questions from
community members, Senator
Tobison, do you have a question
or?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. There was
just an item that I wasn't clear
on, I think it's on page, what
did I say, 25 now I've closed my
book. Um, it says something
about a museum hill.
Property for $5 million. Do you
know what that is?
Mr. Chairman and senator, so
that museum Hill property is one
that once was in the governor's
statewide requests and that's
something that the work group
may, may, may recall that we had
long conversations about pushing
back in regards to that
shouldn't be a statewide
priority, that's more of a
localized priority that should
be spent and paid for by the
governor's local share and or a
combination of the governor and
legislators local share to pay
for that type of, of purchase.
So it's not a statewide that's
likely that is a local share.
OK, thank you, cause I think I
saw it somewhere else earlier.
So thank you for the
clarification. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
You see any other questions,
Senator Gonzalez,
chairman move for a pass.
Uh, before we do that, I, I have
a couple of questions. First of
all,
People don't realize that you
guys met the subcommittees met
the Senate and the House
subcommittees met. We had a
little bit of extra capacity.
You came back and you fully
funded projects. Maybe you could
highlight one or two of those
projects for us that you fully
funded where they were short,
maybe.
Just pick one or two and they
tell us how you did it and then
tell us how you, how you fully
funded those projects.
Mr. Chairman and, and, and
senators. So in the process of
negotiating in past practices,
we typically leave the
governor's office after
negotiating with nothing to show
for ourselves here in terms of
any capacity left to help fund
any of our localized projects
and so typically, that being
said, it's spent all by the
governor for their priorities,
right? So this past, uh, this
past go around what we did is
We retained the right to about
$50 million for a, what we
considered a closing fund for
existing projects to fully fund
those projects and to the
chairman's 0.1 of those, and
I'll make mention just in, in a
couple of points, uh, an extra
$8 million from this closing
fund was provided for a
waterline expansion in Curry
County.
This is a project that already
had $6 million appropriated to
it by the governor, but unless
we had come through with this
type of, of true injection of a
one-time investment, you would
see it nickeled and dimed until
it grows to a point where we
would never be able to fund it.
And so to those points, we were,
we were proud to see this type
of project fully funded finally
so that these individuals in
this county could enjoy that
benefit. So I think it it it
showed that uh we know our
districts best, we know that we
have projects that sometimes
don't get the love that they
should, but
Through this closing fund, we
were able to expand that and
utilize it in a way where we
showed uh great capacity to
bring a closure to these larger
projects, Mr. Chairman and and
senators.
Thank you.
Uh, uh, that's the first time
we've done that.
We're we're changing capital
slowly.
And so it can't be a drastic
move because everybody doesn't
read everything. They show up
with their list. There's some
that the governor, I think is
gonna have to veto. Kelly, did
we not have a limit this year of
what the capital outlay projects
could be.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, no, not a
hard requirement, um, LFC for
years has recommended a floor of
at least $50,000 appropriations.
I believe the Senate had some
internal guidelines, which you
could probably speak to of, uh,
maybe at least 100,000, correct
me if that's not right.
Um, but at the end of the day,
um, those are recommendations,
um, there are not or that set a
floor for the amount.
And Kelly, what's the lowest
number in this capital outlay
appropriation.
Um, Mr. Chair, so I was just
flipping.
And could you look up that
project or you sitting over
there and looking at him, but
he's not paying attention.
Look up that project, see what
the dollar amount they requested
was and she had $4000 even.
touches that.
That's one of the things.
I mean
Affordable housing in
Albuquerque. We put $100 million
in the budget. He's a, here's
another 7 million, um.
Domestic violence center in
Gallipo, they spent the money
the wrong way and nobody's even
doing it two days ago, still
haven't got that.
I don't know how we're gonna
is the worst thing we're doing.
We're wasting money.
We are absolutely a waste of
money.
People show up with a project in
in an idea, and they have no
plan.
They haven't, they don't know
what the cost is. They don't
know what they're gonna do, they
just know that we're giving them
away free money.
In in in time and time again, we
underfund projects.
We don't ever complete them.
We at the 6.
Roughly 4 billion mark with
this, this is 1.8 billion, I
think in capital.
at the end of the first quarter
of FY 25 across the capital
program we were, um, that number
should come down a little and.
Those 6 billion.
Next year it was 5.9, it may
come down, it's just, it's just
call it 500 million, but he's
looking for that number.
So we just call it 6 billion.
5.9, 5.5 we pumped 1.2 back up.
Uh, that puts us back at 5
point.
7 billion
5.7 billion.
Mr. Char it could put us, it
could put us close to.
So
$7 billion I mean.
What warning
For me is, if we come back and
we're looking at cuts.
We're gonna look to cash first.
Uh, and this is one of the
places that we're gonna look and
we're gonna look the hardest.
Uh, Rios on unless you come back
with the reauth for one year.
I'm not hearing the Rio bill.
Unless you're gonna fund
projects.
At least 80% or above, and this
includes to the ec.
We're gonna mend them out.
Hindershindo will have control
of the capital bill.
Next year.
We got to fix the problem.
We cannot look like.
The craziest people in the world
when somebody walks by and says,
oh, here's $500 for your
project, even though it's gonna
take a million.
It, it can't continue that way.
Common sense can't in the state
cannot financially run and
operate this way.
Um, those projects that are
really short.
If they gave him $50,000 for a
$300,000 project.
I assume that Ze is gonna whack
those.
These projects are not complete.
I'm assuming the executive is
gonna go through there and look
at them really hard because it's
time.
I cannot give you a winning
lottery ticket, and you sit
there and not cash it.
Time and time and time again. I
can't sit there and say you want
to turn a shovel and there's not
enough money to to build the
project, but even though you cut
the ribbon and turn the dirt.
It doesn't work that way.
Refund things in the budget,
just like I mentioned, the
Albuquerque housing in their 7
million more.
Um
We're gonna have to, I mean,
it's tough love, but I mean, how
many total projects are listed
in here, in this new capital.
Mr. Chairman and senators, more
than 1400 projects, 1400, Kelly,
we were about 6000 projects last
year, that's total projects,
we were over 5000 of the old
ones come offline.
And I think we did the math the
other day. Wesley, you had 6 or
7 staff working on 6000
projects, shaking his head yes.
So divide that out and 600
projects apiece, it's
unmanageable.
Until we
Bring it upon ourselves and, and
do some tough love.
Uh, we're not ever going to fix
the problem.
Mm
$6 billion we could build a lot
of nice things across New
Mexico.
You can build a lot of nice
things, if we just would say.
Yeah, I'll use an example in
Gallop, you can.
build your domestic shelter
completely, right?
Instead of piecemealing it for 5
years now.
And never getting it done and
the money, it's unspent or gets
spent in another direction and
we never account for that.
I mean, we could fix I'm just
looking at the bioark zoo, we
could fix the zoo, everybody
goes to the zoo.
across from across the state,
you're smiling, uh, I've been
there in, in with kids and so
everybody college students, I
mean, there's nice things we can
have.
We're never going to achieve the
nice things until we
Have our gumption ourselves to
say we're not gonna do this
anymore, and I, I.
I think that's where we're gonna
have to head we can't continue
to leave $7 billion in the bank.
And just watch itit thing
happen.
Um
I mean, capital LA for me is the
worst thing I do because I
create winners and losers.
And I know what they need, and I
can't fund everything they
needed to the to the correct
amount.
And they need water lines, and
they need sewer lines, or they
need infrastructure.
I can't fund it correctly cause
I don't have enough money.
Went on LFC this next year
really tackling this, I mean,
this is.
A tough conversation to have,
but it's one that needs to
happen because.
350 million in interest I could
make.
Or I can just let it sit there
in the bank and do nothing.
I don't think the people of New
Mexico want that to happen.
Senator Steinborn.
So I don't, I don't think the
people of New Mexico want to see
that happen when we could reduce
their cost and their burden by
spending this money in places.
Uh, that we could.
We're gonna build a new hospital
at UNM. There hasn't been a new
hospital built other than Los
Lunas and they're building one
in.
In 30 or 40 years. All our
hospitals are old and worn out
and updated all our groups
student dorms are old from the
60s and the 70s.
Let's build nice things in New
Mexico, but let's do it with
tough love and and a way of
thinking that creates things in
a process.
Build a new team league, build a
new event center in Cruises,
build things that attract people
to the state for quality of
life.
Um, but
This is, this is.
Just crazy to me, Senator
Steinberg, you've got one
question real quick. We're
wrapping up. Well, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate it and we do need to
move projects quicker. I just
always wonder when we hear these
numbers, we have like 4 times
more capital outlay available to
us we've ever had. So to me,
these numbers are a reflection
of the fact that we have so much
more money. What I wonder is if
we're spending it at a slower
rate historically than we have
ever spent it.
Or if there was just a lot more
projects because there's a lot
more money.
So I'm not sure we have a new
problem.
Things do take too long, and I
think the guidelines we're
working on earlier and figure
out how to more smartly budget
for things that
Take up a lot of this money
seemed to be a smart way to do
it, but anyway, I just throw
that out there for kind of an
academic question that maybe
We don't have to answer today,
but I think we, we look at this
eye popping number and we act
like we have a new problem. It's
just more money, but I don't
know that things are any more
historically worse.
It's just my question, but you
don't have to answer.
we have a motion
for due pass from Senator
Gonzalez.
And a second from who was that?
Padilla.
We call the wrong
Senator Brent
Send your compost, send your
composts, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezonia, Senator
Lanier.
Yes. Senator Linier votes,
Senator Padilla
Padillas, Senator Steinborn,
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator to
you.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes no. Senator Sendos Senator
Munoz.
Yes,
yes.
We have a do past 9 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
Thanking him to passion.
Uh, we're journey, we're gonna
go back to the floor. I don't
know what we're doing on the
floor.
What that day's gonna look like
the rest of the day.
Mr. Chairman, is this from you?
Thank you.
Danny.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They gave you a little gift if
you want it. If you don't want
it, you should.
