be here with you this morning.
Um, I know it was last Wednesday
when we first hop over here.
Increasing stack of papers, our
budget priorities for um.
This fiscal year 26 budget and
again highlighting at the time
made as an agency in a very
short period of time in reaching
more so.
Again, we have a uh a
supplemental request for this
year for our family infant
toddler program. We have seen an
8% increase in the number of
children needing early
intervention services. These are
children with developmental
delays or disabilities and uh
we've worked very closely with
the HCA to make sure that we
are, um, uh, securing all the
Medicaid funding. We still have
a $5 million gap that we are
truly hoping that this committee
will help us, um, address.
Our operating budget for 26,
Dolly Parton imagination
library. We currently have
$660,000 in our budget and we
want to have this additional
money, the focus of this
legislature over the last two
years and improving literacy
starts very early, and so these,
these funds will make sure that
every child in New Mexico gets a
book every month and really
builds that home library, which
we know is so critical to early
literacy and literacy beyond
kindergarten.
Uh, again, our tribal investment
strategy has been incredibly
successful. We have
intergovernmental agreements
with almost every tribe, pueblo,
and nation, like to see that
additional 1 million of the
governor's $3 million request,
uh, come from this committee and
then again, the colos, so much
of the work and the things that
we're funding, uh, if we don't
have that local investment, that
local buy-in, and that
coordination, uh, it makes it
more challenging, I think, for
us to get the kind of outcomes
we want, so we hope to see that
2 million.
So that every community in New
Mexico has access to these
coalitions.
We talked extensively about the
workforce and I wanted to just
highlight again the importance
of that wage scale and career
lattice for the incredible early
childhood professionals who are
doing this work.
And I think the important thing
here is we are asking them to
increase their credentials, to
go back to college to get either
their child development
associate credential, their
child development certificate,
and associates, a bachelor's,
and so the reward for that we
hope is in higher pay, uh, that
would be delivered through this
budget ask. And then, of course,
making sure that infants and
toddlers in our state are
actually families with infants
and toddlers. We are only
currently meeting less than 30%
of the need, and we want to see
that.
that increase to closer to 46%.
Um, then we have, uh, Fitids
replacement. We really, uh, I am
very hopeful that you will, uh,
see, uh, the way forward to use
the trust fund to give us $3
million to replace a very legacy
system that was only built to
deal with payments. So
everything that we do in
monitoring and overseeing our
family infant toddler program is
done manually. We, we can't do
anything, so this is really a
true modernization effort and we
have a discovery project
underway.
right now that you funded in 25,
uh, we've also used federal
dollars to to fund that, and
it's exciting and, and that work
will be completed here in the
next month, so we'd like to move
forward with that. And then
again, uh, the special
appropriations to look at how do
we better pay, um, early
childhood professionals who are
working in childcare through a
quality childcare pilot, and
that is $100 million that is all
contingent on house of and that
we hope to hear on the floor
today or this week sometime.
So with that, I also wanted to
bring you Senator Lanier had
asked about outcomes at our last
hearing, and I what I brought
was some from our family, um,
engagement survey that we do
annually. So you'll see there
just some outcome data from
parents about how they feel
about childcare, uh, and then I
also, Senator Woods, um, Mr.
Chair and Senator Woods, um,
have a great study that I got
from a colleague about quality
of early childcare and education
predicts high school STEM
achievement. So I do think while
we don't maybe have
The data right here in New
Mexico, but we can get it and we
will be collecting it. We have
evidence that high quality
childcare makes a difference in
children's later academic
success.
Um, finally, Mr. Chair, uh,
people had asked about childcare
funding and what it works, so
this page is a more detailed
explanation, both of our um
group size and ratio, which of
course drive revenues and so on
the front page, you'll see the
QR code will take you to our
page where you can go in there
and play with the cost
calculator and come up with your
own scenarios, um, but on the
left you'll see the rates that
we pay a childcare provider and
uh then how many children they
can have, so you can.
see on this page a two-star
program, same number of
classrooms is serving 112
children, uh, and on the back of
5 star program is serving same
number of classrooms, 78
children because of those lower,
we did this scenario running an
assumption that 70% of the
children in these childcare
programs would be receiving
childcare assistance and 30%
would be private pay tuition.
So you'll see there the number
of teaching staff and then the
expenses and the total income,
uh, so for the two star, this
program had a total revenue at
the end of the year of 35.
And on the backside of same
5-star program had a loss of
111,000758.
Um, you see some of the salary
assumptions on the 2nd page and
also there is our performance
measure for the department
around the percent of infants
and toddlers participating in
the childcare assistance program
that are enrolled in childcare
are target for that set by the
LFC and the DFA is 75% for this
year.
Quarter 2, we were only at 67%.
So we're gonna want to see more
of our childcare centers moving
to this five-star.
Um, a 5 star level program level
4 or 5 star, uh, and so that
gives you just uh.
A very snapshot glimpse of what
it is to run a childcare
business in New Mexico.
Right
like that, OK, um, questions.
In the woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK, yeah.
I see you in this uh five-star
program level right here you
gotta.
Revenue less expenses.
110 111,000 upside down.
So what?
I mean, how can we expect
someone to go into that.
Maybe I missed that somewhere.
I'm sorry, I.
Maybe brain's not working very
well today, but
What
With, you know, income is less
than expense, so.
We're upside down. So how are we
going to encourage these
providers to become five-star
providers.
Woods, um, such a great
question, and I like to make
sure that running a high quality
center also allows you to break
even with the resources, so I
think the um, the answer to how
they make it work is that they
are paying, they can't pay the
staff, uh, the wages balance,
um, and they also may not be
able, like a director may be
covering classrooms, um, rather
we assume that for every 4
classrooms, you need a full-time
floater to do brakes, um, end of
day, beginning of day because
again the
most of these programs and
centers are operating at least
10, if not 12 hours a day to
accom some of it is probably
that's how they're making it
work is there doing double duty
and they're paying all the
staff, but.
This would be if you were hiring
all the staff that we assume and
paying, um, the benefits and
this
And that's assuming also, Mr.
Chair.
That's assuming uh
A 3070.
Private pay.
Um,
so
For a kid
private pay
Per individual, what?
What is Germany? Is it a
different cord to the age, kind
of break that down real quickly.
But I don't know how much time
we have. I don't want. Yes.
We, we got some time. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, I must say this is so
exciting to be able to talk
about committee because it's,
it's such important work. If you
see at the top of the page,
it'll tell you what um the state
is paying for age of child, so
you see infants at 23 and this
is annual per child. We pay
monthly family.
Uh, and a school around and then
4 year olds, you can see and 3
year olds, uh, um, for a five
star.
And on the front page, you'll
see infants in a 2 star.
We're paying 12,900.
So
So essentially what is this?
About the same that a private
pay is gonna be.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, no
family would pay.
So on a 5 star.
Infant, what would a private pay
be?
Mm
Just
wild guess I get it um
providers.
Um, we use a, a, an estimate
based on our 2008 and we've
increased it based on inflation.
But many businesses charge even
less because families in their
Kind of our push towards a
universal tree as well.
Supported quality care.
Killing you what to say.
Thank you.
400 a month would be 48,000 a
year, wouldn't it?
4800
OK.
Untruth.
All right, Senator Brent.
I think it's German and thank
you and.
Secretary, appreciate the
So, um
Help me to understand.
what the taxpayers are getting.
For their money.
asking for quite a bit more to
go in. What what are they
getting?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator Brand, what they're
getting is access to quality
childcare so that they in their
communities can go to work, can
go to school and make sure that
businesses in their in their
community have employees who can
come to.
Fuel the economy. It's a huge
multiplier effect with
childcare. Is they're hiring
locally, they're buying locally,
and all that money is generated
in the community and you're
getting care for children whose
parents need to go to work. Oh
no
Chairman, sorry, you're not a
madam.
Madam Secretary, um, yeah.
Sorry about that.
Today's day, you just don't
know.
So, um, but
Mm
I sometimes wonder as much as
we're spending.
What, you know,
In in a family that wants to,
why don't we just give the money
to
One of the parents to stay home.
I mean, we're giving $23,000.
And that's not even counting
everything for your department.
Um
I mean, I know there's a lot of
other country, well, not a lot,
I know Finland does that.
7 years old.
They, they give the money to the
parent, they don't even start
school in Finland until they're
7.
So, and very successful.
one of the most successful
countries in the world, I mean.
And
go to work or go to school and
improve their, uh, family, you
know, a choice that this
legislature has department and
making sure that we're not just
offering any kind of care, but
so that the relationships of the
caregiver.
can be and can enhance the
learning of that.
That's what this legislation
that has been the focus and so
we don't want to just offer any
care and infant health outcomes
across the state. Do we do
anything, uh, Mr. Chairman and
secretary, do we do anything
like, you know, as, as people
get older and they have to have
care.
Um
Do we do anything like that
where the family can be paid to
help take care of the child, but
would do we have something like
that for
Young children
Let, let's say my, my
daughter-in-law.
was pregnant, if that's true.
We're gonna have another
grandchild in October.
Let's say she wants to pay her
mom.
To watch the baby so she can
continue working. Do we have
anything that helps with that?
to care for the child. Then
you'd pay her mom.
registered homes that we have in
the state are exactly that
grandparent.
Um, providing the care, uh, and
so that, that is absolutely I
know we're getting ready to hear
from CIFD here in a minute.
You know, so I can't say that
that every parent is a better
place for every child.
But I would say that uh
99% of the time, the best place
for that child is home with the
parent.
Or with a family member
And some don't have that
available and some families
either have a one parent family
or or both of them want to work.
So this is, you know,
Good for that, but I think we
ought to think about how we can
support those who
Maybe one of the
two parents don't want to work.
And
Because there's never anything
better for a child than being
home with.
Thank you.
All right. Anybody else?
I don't have anybody else uh,
Senator Woods.
OK, let me get back to
something.
You was wanting to take more
money out of your.
permanent fund.
Let's talk about that a bit.
Explain what you want to do
there.
OK
Thank you. uh, to 500 to
currently has about 100
appropriated in House Bill 2.
looking at that, if you look at
the this um budget priority 26,
27, and 29 million in 29, this.
House bill, that's what House
Bill 71 will help us do, and
it'll help us continue.
The great work that we have
built, we continue to support
the eligible for, but cannot
access.
OK, so you're talking about 250.
Million is what you get today.
And you said that was 5% of
what?
The 3 year Kelly knows.
Move the bumps and flows or
speaking of.
OK, yeah, but you, you said
instead of a 5 year it would be
a 3-year average 5% of a 3 year
average.
But the essentially the
differences were.
We're taking the 250 out and
replaced it with a 500.
As a minimum
whichever is great.
It, and we've already increased
spending and House Bill 2, you
say, by 100 million 400.
So we're sitting
We're sitting
Where are we sitting on the
spending right now?
OK.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Senator Woods, uh, in your third
volume on page 887 is the um
Is the uh trust fund. And so if
you look at 2026 that the bill
doesn't pass and 298 is what
they get.
87,
it's also on the back of our
budget policy priorities, the
graph if nothing changed, and if
I did get a response on the
private page 11.
uh and uh for a two star a
month.
Just so that's.
Sorry, Mr. Chair thank you
uh
so anyway this just for your
reference, uh Senator Woods, uh,
so we'll go to Senator Padilla
for a question. Uh, thank you,
Chair, and, and thank you
secretary and just also for
Senator Woods. So what you just
heard.
I, you know, what, what, what
happens in either one of the
scenarios, but I just want to
remind everybody on the
committee that every single day
this fund.
Um, continues to move in the
direction that will shrink
general fund usage over time. Am
I saying that right?
And so eventually, and the
reason I get so, you know, this
is one of my primary kicking
points here in the legislature.
That's why I came here to begin
with. Um, is to self-fund early
education. So if we just
continue going down this path,
that, that
cost to the taxpayer in the long
haul just is shrinking every
single day.
I want to help people feel very
comfortable about their more
comfortable.
OK. I don't have any more
questions, so.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Kelly.
Uh, moving on to uh CYFD see the
secretary somewhere up there
issues.
Uh, Mr. Chair, would you like me
to introduce, uh.
Myself, yes, go ahead, I'm
sorry, I'm just, I'm reading
this stuff and I
I saw, I saw the secretary back
there and then, OK, she was
fast. All right, so we'll go
ahead, go ahead.
Hello, Rachel.
at the table is I walked through
Thank you, Rachel.
Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Rachel, thank you
very much for that information.
I know it's a lot of
information, um, we're looking
at rates across the nation, as
Rachel said, you know, doubling
our rate here would put us at
the top of.
All of the rates, um, we were
able and so assuming that that
is updated and correct. We have
a chart that we passed out to
you that lists all of the other
states information that was
readily available. I will note
that when we looked at this
chart, New Mexico's rates were
significantly less on the chart
that we were using by about 2,
and so that.
Doesn't give me much confidence
that the other rates are
incredibly out information and
so just want to point that out
to you as we're looking at
those, um, before I increased
New Mexico's rates, we were down
somewhere, you know, near West
Virginia, um, in those lower
rates down below. We were like
30th. Now we're up about 15th or
16th, um, based on those new
rates still lower than what we
would like to be for families
that are providing these, the
other thing that we're looking
at is, you know,
What is included in some of
those races. Rachel pointed out,
our rates give additional
consideration for
extracurricular activities or
band expenses that foster
families can submit for
reimbursement for. And so one of
the things that we're looking at
is when we do these rates, how
do we make it easier for foster
parents so that they're not
continuously having to submit
receipt, all of these other
things. How can we in a new rate
that we do.
Absorb some of those additional
costs to make it easier for them
to be able to do that. So
another thing that we're looking
at as well. Um, so you have that
information, it kind of shows
you where we are on foster
rates, um, as Rachel said in the
breakdown of the other bills
that are out there. It's hard to
do that analysis, not knowing
which of those versions will
pass and what the impact would
be on the department, but as you
can see, there are quite a few
bills that touch CYFD that would
have an impact and so just wanna
make sure that you have.
that information for your
consideration.
Um, that you might have based on
this information. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Madam
Secretary, instead of spending
my day and a half at home this
weekend with my family. I spent
a day and a half doing a deep
dive because this is a
complicated and somewhat
confusing, um, situation that
we're in, and I'm passionate
about this is I know you are
too, OK? But
I've got a binder highlighted
color coded, tabbed, um, and
I've got a series of questions
for you because I need some real
clarity here. Um,
I, I look at you as a for-profit
entity and your profit is
measured in the outcomes of
these children that are placed
in foster care, OK? So we know
that we're not getting the, the
outcomes that these children
deserve.
So I spent time going through
the Kevin asked arbitration, um,
as it relates to the budget and
I'd like to start there, um, on
remedial order number one action
item number one, the arbitrator
directs CYFD to take, and I
quote,
All steps necessary to request
from the legislature full
funding for caseworker and case
aid positions and tells the CYFD
take into account historic
attrition.
Then on page 19 of the
arbitrator's final decision, he
wrote, and I quote,
CYFD's workers also need to know
that the state has a plan to get
ahead of their retirements and
resignations of their
colleagues, that should they
continue will just lead to
further increases in their
already excessive workloads and
encourage yet more turnover,
unquote.
So I read that as to mean that
you should be over hiring.
Is, is that an accurate
statement?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobiasson, yes, it is.
OK.
And when I'm looking at the
budget, and gosh, I've got so
much here, like, where do I go?
Um
I'm looking at was what was
highlighted in the budget. And
I'm looking at
I believe we got this Saturday.
I don't remember what day we got
this.
This is page 7.
We have recurring requests of 40
million.2 dollars. Um,
non-recurring, a total of 32 and
change, OK, 32 million. But last
year there was just over a $12
million deficiency. This year
there's a $20 million
deficiency, and I want to know
where was DFA on this because
isn't that kind of spending
outside of the budget illegal?
was on, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Tobiasson, CAFD is not
operating outside of its budget.
Those funds have been budgeted
that $20 million is in our
current year budget. We're just
not realizing the cash, so.
It's a difference between what
we actually bring down.
Versus what is in the budget and
as I um stated when I was in my
budget presentation, I believe
that there has been
over-budgeting of federal funds,
um, they have estimated an
amount that they anticipate that
the department will bring in and
they still budget us at that
level, so we have not overspent
our budget.
And Mr. Chair, who is they?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobias, I believe that they is
the legislature, so the budget
that we receive has been
allocated by this body, um, and
that is the budget that we put
into our system and use over the
fiscal year.
And that has to do with moneys
coming from the federal
government as well. Is that what
I hear you saying, um, Mr.
Chairman, OK, and Mr. Chair.
Is, am I seeing in the budget
that we're asking for $750,000
for a contracted entity to look
at how you filled out your forms
to the federal government
because the federal government
is saying you're not spending it
appropriately.
Um, I don't believe it's 750,000
line item. I believe that there
are several um.
Different contracts that they
are looking. One of them is a
study for foster parents, and
OK.
OK. So let, let me move on
because this is
It just is a quagmire. I don't,
I don't understand and maybe I'm
missing something, but.
An agency this size.
It seems to me like we're
missing something.
Something, something's not right
and I'm really trying hard to
understand and piece all of this
information together, um,
because not only do taxpayers
deserve an answer.
Let alone the legislature, but
these children in these foster
parents deserve an answer. So
actually, I'm gonna go a
direction I wasn't expecting. So
last night I get a text from a
friend who I actually haven't
talked to in several months,
just life, how that happens. She
saw that my Senate bill 305
passed unans unanimously last
week in committee, and she
texted me.
Not even knowing what my
legislation is that I'm carrying
this year.
So she says,
Gosh, I saw that this passed. It
gives me some hope, she said.
I have a lot to tell you about
my mother-in-law.
Who has been a foster care
parent for over 20 years.
Her treatment foster care kids,
so she has treatment foster care
kids were being discharged from
treatment foster care to regular
foster care, and they didn't
have a home to go to and would
have been part of those kids you
spoke about that were sleeping
on the floor in offices, and
that ended up in that empty jail
over Christmas.
So she forfeited her treatment
foster care license, forfeited
it.
And negotiated with CYFD to pay
her a little more than what you
normally would get for regular
foster care kids, and they still
have not paid her the right
amount.
Months later,
She's about to go in debt while
trying to give them a good home
in stability.
Again, she's been doing this for
over 20 years, and I'd be happy,
um, Madam Secretary, to connect
you with this foster care
parent.
Which leads me to another
message I got last week, which
is a little over a week ago,
adoptive parents and foster care
parents did not get their
reimbursement payments. I can't
even imagine how in the world
that would happen when I think
you all do that on a regular
basis, but it didn't happen. The
message that went out or the
statement that was made was
hopefully
They see reimbursement in the
next week or so, and I'm
thinking hopefully, um, I
remember a woman that I met when
I was knocking doors for my
campaign in my district. I
knocked on her door. She has 6
nonverbal children in a very
small house, the 7th foster
child is verbal.
And I was really confused by
this scenario because this is a
single woman with 7 foster
children.
And I know that you, I have a
quote from you the other day
that we have plenty of beds.
And so if we have plenty of
beds, now I'm wondering.
What is a bed, cause I have a
casita here. I've got a bedroom.
I've got a a pack and play in
the closet, um, there's a futon
that folds out and then how are
you placing these children in
How do you play 6 nonverbal
children in 11 verbal, 7
children with 1 foster parent.
How are those children
How do they have a chance and
how does that poor foster parent
have a chance, and she must be
super passionate to do that on
her own. I can, I cannot imagine
I have 2 children, 2 boys.
Anyone else have 2 boys? No,
yeah, OK, yeah, I can't imagine
6 nonverbal there.
I'm really confused how we're
structured and I'm looking at
this from uh
Operational and organizational
management expertise as a coach
of every kind of business model
you can imagine and putting
something like this together
requires leadership, management,
and culture.
They have to be fully aligned
for something of this magnitude
to work for these children and
these foster parents. So I'm,
I'm throwing a lot at you, but I
think my questions are
I don't know, let's start with
what's a bed?
It is determined based on, you
know, their house, the footage,
what that looks like, how many
children they can accommodate.
So if they come in and say, you
know, we can take 8 kids and our
staff from licensing goes in and
looks and assesses the family
and says we don't believe that
to be the case. We believe you
can take 4 kids, they would be
licensed for 4 based on that
assessment.
So I don't know, I thought we
have a kids that we can put into
one house, which I'm being told
is 6, so I don't know how a
family started looking into a
while back when they started, I
think since last summer when I
went to a fishing event that was
held and I met a family that
had, you know, several kids,
maybe it's the same family. They
were all there, they, you know,
when I was really impressed with
them and so that's something
that I definitely think we need
to look into because they
shouldn't have the burden of
that many kids.
especially nonverbal because
they all do deserve special
attention. I agree with you
100%. I will look into that, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, I would
think first and foremost, and
I'm gonna be tough on this, you
shouldn't have to ask how many
children can go into a home.
It's 6, I heard you say that,
but you should, you shouldn't
need to ask that. You're living,
breathing this every day, I
would imagine of your life. You
shouldn't have to ask that
question.
And if I'm having to ask it, in
addition, we have a problem,
especially if I know the answer.
I and your staff member know the
answer. You should know the
answer. It's your job. It is,
and I'm sorry, but it is your
job, and children, this is about
children's lives. You should
know every answer to every
question, quite frankly, that
I'm about to ask.
So
Of the parents that did get paid
finally a week plus later. Let's
go back to that, Mr. Chair.
I'm hearing that.
The vast majority of them, maybe
all of them, didn't even get
paid the proper amount of
reimbursement. I need to stop
saying paid because our foster
parents don't get paid, they're
not making money, as you know,
many of them are going into debt
personally out of their personal
family bank accounts to care for
and love for these children who
deserve it. So,
What happened, I would really
like to know why did parents
across the state get incorrect
reimbursement amounts. How does
that happen?
Um, Mr. Chair, the file comes
from our fax system. It then
transfers over to the Department
of Finance and Authority and the
checks are run through the share
system. When the file was
received at DFA and that happens
in the system during the day
while staff are working on the
system for their daily work. So
when the file arrived at the
Department of Finance and
Administration, it had an error
code that it um came across with
and so they did not run the
checks because there was an
error. We found.
about it the next morning, um,
and so they started working to
determine what the problem was.
They reissued the file DFA
accepted it as a special run and
checks were run the next day, so
they should have received their
payments within 24 hours of that
glitch. We sent out a notice
from us. I understand that there
was something sent by a worker
that said hopefully it will
happen. That worker didn't have
all the information on the
glitch in the file. They made an
assumption that it was because
of
the first being on a weekend,
which was not accurate, and they
sent an email response
prematurely before us looking
into the issue. We then sent a
letter to clarify that that
payment was um run in error and
that information was being
gathered to determine how we
could fix that issue. My
understanding is it was not
statewide, but we're still
looking, um, from the
individuals that we know of that
received improper information.
They stipended amount.
was correct, but it had other
information that was not correct
to the situation that they were
with. And so if you have
information that somebody
received an incorrect amount.
Um, I would love to get their
information so we can reach out
and, and get that resolved.
So
Mr. Chair, it sounds like.
I don't know if it's a certain
batch or something, um, of the
names that you have, how long is
it going to take you to figure
out the proper payments or
information. OK, what's
reasonable
and they have all received their
payment within 24 hours. OK, I
will look into that. Thank you
for that answer. So let's go
back to the beds. So if I'm a
single mother and I am a foster
parent, Mr. Chair, um,
Anyone Max's 6 children in a
house, so this woman that I met
has 7 and 6 are nonverbal.
Again, I, I cannot begin to
imagine the stress in that
household and maybe continued
trauma since there's, I, maybe
I, I'm not an expert here, but
how does one parent in one
household.
Even begin.
To help in a give attention to
the needs of 6 nonverbal
children of all different ages,
and
What qualifies, am I qualified
as a single person to take care
of all 7 of these children? How
many would you qualify for
today. If I said, hey, I'll,
I'll take kids, it's just me and
my little house.
How many square feet do I need?
How many beds and what are those
beds do I need and how many
children would you allow me to
take? And I'd prefer you not ask
an employee because I would hope
as Cabinet Secretary, you
yourself would have this answer
for me, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Tobiasson, I do not. Um,
I don't do the assessments for
that. We have a team on a daily
basis, they go in and make those
assessments. Um, I have not that
information. OK, so I would
think I'm gonna go back to this
is gonna be my, my theme here
today, which is leadership
management.
culture.
And I would think at the very
least, you would know the basics
of what a parent would qualify
for, what square footage, what
constitutes a bed, what type of
children any parent could take
in mass um 6 nonverbal children,
1/7 verbal, and a very small
house.
With like 2, maybe 3 bedrooms at
most, um, I don't understand how
that would even be a scenario,
and again, I'm going back to the
Kevins arbitration decision, all
the things that they have said
that you need to be focused on
and doing, and I'm really, I'm
overwhelmed. I mean, I wanna
show you I'm
I'm flipping overwhelmed.
By what I am learning.
So I am now, I feel like I'm now
personally the advocate for
that, how many children are
under your care?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Dubyson,
we have about 2100 kids in our
family.
2100 children and their foster
parents that are maneuvering
through what I, all I can say is
actual like chaos, lack of
leadership, lack of management,
lack of culture and this body is
looking at HB2 trying to figure
out what do not you need, what
did these children need? What do
these foster parents need? What
are your caseworkers need.
I'm, I'm at an absolute and
utter loss. So now I'm gonna ask
you the tough question.
Twice
Your department, Mr. Chair.
has put forward a plan.
Submitted it to the federal
government for the match, I
believe it's like $78 to every
$100 that we spend something
like that, what's the match?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobiasson, it varies. So it can
be anywhere from 30% match up
and down for the programs that
we've submitted we're estimating
twice.
Your department has been denied.
And when I looked at the data,
the national data of the states
that have been have submitted
and been approved by the federal
government. Every single one of
those approved states have put
forward an evidence-based plan.
I hear that your department has
put forward another plan to the
federal government. We should
have that answer in April.
Can you tell us right now, is
that an evidence-based plan.
Like the rest of the nation, has
been approved, is that what was
put forward to the federal
government.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobiasson, the plan that was put
forward has work that is
evidence-based in it. Some of
the work that we are currently
doing specifically with Families
First is an evidence-based
program out of the California
Clearinghouse that is not yet on
the title 4 Clearing House, but
it is in for consideration.
OK.
So I feel like that's not a
complete answer, Mr. Chair. So
is it
I know we consider New Mexico
different because we have
different populations, but I
also want to say in here, I know
that there are 12.
12 Native American entities that
have been approved because of
the evidence-based plans brought
forward. I think what I heard
you say or not say is that what
you put forward was not a
complete evidence-based plan. Is
that accurate, Mr. Chairman
Senator Tobiasson, yes, it is.
So, Mr. Chair, in April when we
get the answer from the federal
government.
Let's talk percentages. What's
the percentage chance that the
answer.
Finally, the 3rd time.
will be a yes from the federal
government based on what you
have put forward.
Mr. Chair, the plan that we
submitted, um, has a very good
chance of being approved.
Percentage.
Wow, OK, that's more hopeful
than I had imagined, Mr. Chair.
I'd like to ask, who loses their
job if the answer is no.
Because 3 strikes in my book and
you're out. So who loses their
job in April if the answer is no
from the federal government.
Where, where is the
responsibility because these are
children's lives that we're
talking
that we are gonna be doing is
happening right at this moment
that that wasn't my question
though, because the problem
here, Mr. Chair, is that we are,
we are losing so much money, our
taxpayers are pouring in to this
horrific challenge that we have
in place right now. We have
created what I'm looking at.
We are responsible.
So if we're leaving millions
upon millions a year on the
table because we can't put
together an appropriate plan, I
would think.
I, I can't remember how many
states, but it's almost every
other state in the nation except
for maybe 3, that said, hey, we
don't need the federal dollars.
We got it handled. So if every
other state in the country has
been able to put together a plan
and submit it to the federal
government for these matches,
whether it's 30, 50, 70% match
on the dollar and we're trying
it for the 3rd time if we get to
know who loses their job.
terminated, the prior two plans,
the agency, I believe the plan
concerns that they have to work
with us to address those, to fix
them. Um, but I believe that the
staff that have put in the time
and effort to submit this plan,
did an incredible job. They
worked with, um, philanthropy,
and I don't believe that I would
be terminating those individuals
if the plan is not approved, I
would be working with.
I think you and I just aren't
going to see eye to eye, Mr.
Chair, on a lot of the solutions
here and as we look at HB 2.
I, I'll be combing through more
of this information. I'll be
calling more people, um,
I'm just appalled.
I'm appalled at what we've spent
that.
Went nowhere
I'm appalled at what we've spent
that wasn't budgeted. I've, I'm
appalled that we can't put
together a plan and that you'd
even actually, Mr. Chair, have
to ask the federal government,
Hey, basically don't give us a
no. Would you just work with us
a little bit on this.
What are we
Doing it evidence-based, I mean,
facts are our friends. The
evidence is there of what needs
to be put forward to actually
help move these children from
basically being further
traumatized, quite frankly.
I mean, I was upset the first
time we talked because I had
just learned how horrific this
is. I've had time to process it
and now I'm just, I'm ticked.
I'm more than ticked.
I'm angry for these children and
these foster parents that aren't
getting the support in, in the
help that they need, the, the
dollars, which again I told you
these foster parents aren't
making a living off of this.
These foster parents are feeding
and clothing and housing
children who don't have families
that can take care of them.
Period. End of story. Um, Mr.
Chair, I'm done.
Center Tree Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you secretary for being
here today. I just have a couple
of questions about the
information in, in this um part
of the
Uh, information that we have
today.
Um, and, and I, and I just, I
just want to say I appreciate
the work that you've done to
help us work on Senate Bill 42
to try to get it to a place that
We can try to make some changes
and so I, I wanna preface that
first that you've been a very
instrumental part in that, and I
appreciate that. Um, I'm
wondering, you indicated that
for the um reimbursement um for
childcare or for foster care on
page 3 that
Table up there in the left hand
top corner.
I noticed the Colorado's like
more than double what New Mexico
is, is Colorado having success
in recruiting and retaining
Foster families, or do you know?
Yes, Mr. Chairman, you take a
team of the um advisory council
members to Colorado to visit
with them to get more after the
legislative session. Great, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Secretary, I look
forward to hearing that
information and I'm glad that
you're taking folks up there. I
do notice over on the side, um,
where it has uh
information about foster care
that one of the things that
Colorado County did and I
suspect may be happening
throughout the state, not sure
why they identified just a
county, but they went through
the application and the
licensure process and they
reduced it by 62%. Have you
already started doing that or
have you done it? or is there
possibility that we could work
on that.
um, Colorado is a county
operated, so each county.
probably why you're seeing that
information and yes, we have
gone through our licensing
process. It was something that
we did, um, last year we were
able to cut down that time that
it takes for licensure, um,
eliminate some of the paperwork
that is, um, being done. It's
something that we're looking at
again right plus program to
determine, you know, we have
brought on individuals from
Oklahoma that really thrived in
their foster care plus or
enhanced look at our system and
help us to understand if there
are other barriers that we have
that we can work through, right?
And
Um, that's, that's good to hear,
Mr. Sherman's secretary. So I,
you brought up Oklahoma. I've
got them circled here too, and I
noticed that they're doing that
outsourced, um, so like a, an
outsourced agency to do foster
care recruitment and retention.
Um, I wonder if, um,
And it seems like it's working.
I wonder if you might be willing
to work in the interim on
something similar to what the
economic development department
did, which is they created the
partnership, which is a single
point of contact for um, uh, you
know, doing the things that the
state can't do in recruitment
and retention of businesses.
Maybe we could use that same
model, um, for foster care
recruitment. I just throw it out
there. I'm not looking for an
answer right at this very
moment. I know you need to think
about it, but I
I would really love to work with
you on that if it's a direction
that you're exploring, Oklahoma
was here, not sure of the time
frame, um, and they were working
with us. We're interested in how
that works for them and it is
something that we will explore
if it looks like it would be a
better opportunity for us here
and I'd be happy to have you be
part of that. Thank you, um, Mr.
Chairman secretary, so is there
money in the budget, um, and I
don't need you to point to a
line and Rachel, maybe you can
help with this. Is there money
in the budget that would help us
move in that direction. If you
make a decision.
Or is that something that would,
we would have to look at next
year once you get more
information. um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Trujillo, there was
funding allocated through Grow
last year, um, some of that
funding we're using this year
for the contracts to bring
people in to help us evaluate if
we determine that's how we would
go that same money next year
that we're using this year for
those contractors would be used
to stand up some of that
programming. Great. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chairman Senator Bran.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
Secretary, thank you for your.
Your answers on Saturday and
thank you for coming back today.
I, I hope.
Um
That we can.
Figure out how to partner with
you to make things better.
Um
I, I have like, um,
Tobias and I've also been
looking.
Is there an echo?
What
What
we don't wanna
don't go there today.
You hear something dripping or
what?
Alright, let me, Senator B make
your question quick if you
No, we did have a leak in here
the other day, a leak, so.
And there's
Other access panel right
All right.
So, um
And
Over the Kevin agreement.
And
Focus on your
For.
Some of the findings
Um
a workforce pause.
2023.
right after you came on
I first came on board in May of
I was being told that we
At a deficit
Um, and I wasn't sure exactly
what that looked like. Um,
honestly, our books weren't in a
position where we could just run
budget projections and so I
wasn't sure where we.
financially, um.
that looked like
Filling those vacant po
And so we paused.
that we did was really
fiscal year
I keep on.
I'll see
With
Mhm
And
Thank you. I appreciate that,
that, that helps a little bit.
Um,
Why
Help me understand why we're not
receiving the federal funds.
That every other state is
receiving.
I, I'm not, I'm not
understanding why.
They're picking on poor little
New Mexico.
they're picking on New Mexico.
We submit, um, based on
expenditures. So if we do
programming and we have
I don't know, $50 million that
we believe is eligible for some
sort of reimbursement. We, we
submit all of that, they run
their calculations and then they
send us based on largely the FAP
rate? What New Mexico is
eligible for. There are a ton of
charts and graphs that my staff
worked on diligently over the
last couple of weeks. I think
those have been provided to the
LFC. I would be happy to sit,
set some time aside because, you
know, they, I can.
Give you my limited explanation
of what it is, um, but they
could be, you know, really
detailed and give you that
information. Happy to do that
with any of you who want that.
Um, and I believe Heather is
here and has graphs. We can
provide those to you, but just
as an example in fiscal year 24,
we submitted more money.
As an expenditure than we had in
any of the previous years.
What we received back was
actually less, and as I said, I
think part of that is the FAP
rate. I'm sure that there are
other things, you know, that go
into consideration. I apologize.
I don't know exactly how the
federal government determines
their rates and reimbursements,
um, but my staff understands it
clearly and um would be happy to
set up that time for you to look
at the reimbursements.
OK, thank you for that. Um.
So did I understand you said
correctly. I'm sorry, I forget
your name.
Rachel, thank you. I'm gonna
write it down.
And like the worst person at
remembering people's names.
Rachel.
We gave the department $200,000
last year.
To
Have someone look into why they
weren't getting that federal
funds and they didn't spend it.
Can I point out a couple of
things related to.
It does, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, um, Senator Bratt,
can I just add to that a little
bit. So I just want to clarify
on the allocation that we got
and it's been reauthorized. It
was not spent because as she
said, you know, we reached out
to Casey Family Programs to see
if they knew.
Anybody who we could hire to
come in and do that audit.
They found somebody and then
they paid for that contract, so
the contract for that and so we
still did the work, we just, um,
didn't use state funds to pay
for it.
And so why do we need an
additional 500,000 this year
then?
Like
That's essentially what we're.
And
So let's get back to to
workforce, um.
I, I saw a, a chart flow chart.
Um
And, and I don't have it with
me. It was on my computer and I
did not bring that in here
today.
But, uh, you have a lot of holes
in your flow chart.
A lot of vacancies in management
area.
And kind of back office area as
well as in the caseworker area.
Um, I mean a lot. I was, I think
that may be part of the reason
we're not getting some of the
federal funds is because I'm not
sure you have the workforce you
need to.
keep the records and submit them
to the federal government.
What is that
Accurate.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brandt, yes, our total vacancy
rate of the department is 25%.
So we're lacking 1/4 of that
workforce. We do have about, and
I could be wrong, um, you know,
anywhere between 15 and 20%
vacancy rate, um, and so, you
know, that's part of our
struggle in trying to keep that.
But we're operating with a 4, I
mean, 1/4 of our workforce is
missing.
And, and
Then Secretary, is that mostly
in
Our social worker area or is
that just all, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Brandt, it is mostly in
our, I mean, our largest
vacancy, I guess, our largest
number of, um, but you know, our
vacancy rates are high. Our
office of the secretary is 30%
or um family services is 38% and
our behavioral health is about
29%.
And so as we're looking at the
budget, you're, you're wanting
to increase the pay.
Is that right to, to try to get
those in or is it, what, what do
you think is the reason you're,
you have such a shortage.
Um, Mr. Charity reasons and one
of the studies that we want to
do is we're not a study, but a
contract is bringing an outside
entity rather than our internal
staff to really do exit
interviews to get a clearer
understanding of exactly why
people are leaving. I don't
think it's just hey, we've
increased pay, there's been
significant, um, investments in
pay for the departments, um, I'm
not saying that they don't
deserve to be paid more. I
absolutely think that they do.
It's incredible work that they
do, but I don't think that.
That's the number one reason. I
think a lot of the reason is
burnout when you're operating
at, you know, only 75% of your
staff there and the caseloads
continue to remain high. Every
time somebody leaves, that
caseload gets redistributed to
the workers that have been there
past the 6 months that can carry
a case load. If you're a new
worker and you've been there 8
months and somebody leaves and,
you know, 15 more cases get
added to your case load, um.
It's a huge burnout for them.
And so it's really something
that we're trying to figure out.
My hope is that my hope is that
as we continue, if we can get
the case aids in, that can take
some of the burden from the
existing workers right now to
help with some of the paperwork,
the administrative work, the
filing, the calling of
credentials, some of that
burden. So if they do have a
higher caseload because people
have left.
We've at least taken some of
that administrative work off of
their plate for them to. Thank
you and and I think you're
probably right. I think the one
of the biggest reasons is, is
burnout.
Because their caseloads are are
just too high. What are, what
are your average case?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brandt,
our average caseloads for
workers right now, they should
be 12 per worker for um
investigations and 15 for a
placement, they're probably
anywhere.
For more than double what the
optimum level would be more than
double.
I believe some case workers in
some locations may have 60.
And
Mm
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
where's the, the hardest area?
Yeah, is that Bernalillo County?
Y several counties some of them
are doing pretty good from from
some of these color charts, but
some of them are are.
Not
OK, and I noticed the Bernal Leo
was one of the counties that's,
that's really struggling.
Not just with
Workers, but with foster care as
well. That's correct.
So, um, one of, I, I remember
last year, um,
When some of us were trying to
run some bills to
Paint some things at CYFD and we
were, I was actually asked by
the governor herself to not.
Because they wanted to give you
time because you were coming in
and going to do some
reorganization. Did you get that
reorganization done?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brandt, um, yeah, that we're
working on, but as I mentioned
earlier, the number one.
For us was really getting under
control and understanding where
and really what money we had to
spend. Um, you know, one of the
things, and I think it's been
brought up often is the
reversion rate for CYFD and if
you look back at it
historically, you know, CYFD,
the protective services
typically has not had
reversions. If we do, it's
incredibly small because money
may be um contracts that falling
colors after the um the end of
the fiscal year and so that gets
reverted. But it had mostly been
in juvenile justice and
behavioral health.
I think in prior years, you
know, they would look at those
and they would reallocate if
they could funds that maybe
could have been provided to
those other entities. It was one
of the reasons that I had asked
last year for budget, um,
transfer authority between
programs so we could really
right size and understand, you
know, how the agency was
functioning and where we needed
to do those investments. Um, I
think we did end behavioral
health and juvenile justices
last year with additional money
that got reverted, um,
We've been able to move that
from program to program, it
would have reduced that deficit,
and it would have given us a
clearer picture still to
understand, you know, where,
where our expenditures and how
those need to be realigned
within the department.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Um, I know this is a lot of work
and I wanna tell you, um,
I, I, I used to ask the last two
IFD secretary under
Blessed governor
these same questions, so it's
not like
You know, I'm not picking on
you.
It's, it's just an area where
there's just a lot of concern.
Right, I mean, all of us hate
it, hate it.
When we see a child being
abused, and we hate it even more
when we see a child who dies.
Whether it's in custody, you
know, in our custody or care.
Gusty makes them sound like
they're prisoners and they're in
our care or not.
Right, and so that's, that's the
reason that all of us are asking
these questions.
Not because we want to
criticize, we want to figure out
what do we really need to do?
But she knows the finance
committee.
To help you get this department
where it needs to be, because I
will tell you I've been here for
13 years, this department's
never been where it needs to be.
It just hasn't. It's, it's been
like.
The red flag department forever.
So we need to, let's figure this
out. Let's become a team. Let's
figure out how we can fix these
things. Um.
You know, you've got case
workers that, that according to,
you know, this covens.
You know, that are are doing
things that.
You know, take their time.
There's one part in here it
talks about um
That half of their work time is
spent in meetings.
What kind of meetings?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brandt, that is the a staffing
for a child in custody, right?
So if we have somebody who's an
office day, their team,
including the behavioral health
team, um, maybe somebody from
the TFC, definitely something,
somebody from Presbyterian, they
get together on a daily basis to
find out what has changed. Have
we made progress? Do we need
another analysis? And so they're
constantly looking at that they
have daily meetings to determine
if kids aren't in appropriate
placement that we, um, have
those meetings to determine
where we are.
and moving forward. So if we're
sending a child out of state for
a treatment, there's another
meeting. We have family meetings
that were required to
participate in. We have, um,
meeting, there's a lot of
different staffing 40 kids on
your caseload, and you're
required to have meetings for
those of your time that would
take up.
And I guess
Part of that's your job, right?
So you've got to have those
meetings so you can make sure
the right interventions are put
in place.
Um, but half their time in
meetings, that's, that's
phenomenal. That that is.
A lot of time.
OK, um,
Do the, do the um case workers
are, are they doing are they
transporting the kids?
Places is that part of what they
do, or?
Um, and, and.
I guess for me, even a bigger
question was are they
transporting the parents
somewhere?
Um, it depends. I mean, if
they're transporting to school,
if we move them outside of their
school just and there's not
other transportation available,
then they
The case workers or the case
aides is really where we're, um,
so a case aid would do that. But
if need be, a caseworker would
transport them to school if they
have a medical appointment or a
treatment and there's not.
Um, somebody available to take
them if they're in a foster
family and they're working, um,
they would provide
transportation to them to a
treatment or a therapy, um, so
yes, they do do some
transportation. OK.
I thank you for for the answers.
I appreciate it. I think we
really need to work.
Together as a team to figure out
how we can
I'm not even say come in
compliance with this work
because this is kind of the
minimum, right?
We don't want to just come into
compliance with this.
We want to make sure that these
these foster kids who have
already gone through
More than most of us will ever
go through in our lifetime.
Mhm
Um
We want to make sure they're in
the best homes possible.
How do we do that?
You know, how do we, I, I
appreciate and agree to, to, you
know, the idea of raising the,
the
The help the the funding that is
there for the the family that's
taking these kids in. Um, I also
have a personal story about
A uh a, a family I'm very
familiar with.
Who, um,
Had been a foster parent for the
state.
And it was not a good
experience.
Um
In fact
She ended up getting arrested
and um.
Because of a basically a false
report.
Spicy way to eat.
And um
She showed on finally was able
to show all the emails and text
messages on her phone.
And they were embarrassed to
drop the charges, but she won't
work with ever again.
And they were taking
A lot of kids.
And they were one of the few
families that's willing to take
teenagers.
That's rough, right? because I
mean you that.
I, I'll take in a 0 and 5 year
old.
3 to 5 year olds.
Anything above that, you don't
want me taking care of him.
Because um I don't have the
patience for it anymore. I'm too
old.
I know you think 0 and 5 year
old that's, that's the kids I
like.
Mm
The only ones I like above that
age are my kids and my
grandkids. That's it.
I know
I just don't have the patience
for him. It's too much energy.
But when you have a family
that's willing to take in.
Teenagers
And they're treated the way this
family was treated.
It's no wonder we're we lose
families.
And it was probably because
Caseworker had too many cases.
And they got mixed up.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brown, I
agree with you, and it's not a
way to, you know, treat
families, and I think increasing
their stipend is a start. It
also, there's a lot of
responsibility that still falls
on the agency to ensure that
we're there to support them, you
know, whether that be through
training or, you know, community
events, there's a lot of work.
And I do like your, your idea of
getting the.
The social worker aids.
So they can help with some of
those other things, maybe help
with some of the paperwork, um.
Because it's, it's a ton of
stuff like I said, my sister
does this in California.
And it is a ton of work.
Hi, amount of respect for your
workers, um.
But it seems like you have holes
all up and down your flow chart
that we need to address.
You need to address. I don't
think it was helpful to not hire
for 3 months.
I don't think that helped you at
all. So thank you, Mr. Chairman,
I appreciate it.
Thank you. I don't have any
further questions. We'll see
where we get, we're gonna rack
up the bills are all out there.
So we
Kind of waiting on the house to
finish fixing their stuff and
see where you guys are. Thank
you. Thank you.
We're done.
