Chief Justice, well, I'll stay
out of that arena, chair.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak and, and thank the
committee for the opportunity to
present, um, again, um, we're
gonna keep it to 10 minutes on
opening and then stand for
questions.
Um, I do want to reset it a
little bit from this morning,
um, for those that are here and
uh
I know you all are well aware of
this, but I think it's sort of
a, a fair reset.
Uh, my name is David Thompson.
I'm Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court. We operate
Um, the clerks in two ways as
the Chief Justice operate the
courts.
We have an administrative arm
and that's called Restack, uh,
to my right.
As I described earlier on each
one of your name tags, you have
your county or the many counties
you represent below there.
Um, in each one of those
counties, you have a magistrate
court.
Uh, Berlio Metro court, but you
have a magistrate, those are
small claims.
Uh, non-felony cases.
Those uh counties aggregate into
a district.
And that's district court.
That's where felonies are
trialed and you'll hear about
district courts.
District court facilities and
security is maintained by the
county by statute. So when we
talk about finances, that's one
of the complications there.
Above the trial courts, there's
a court of appeals, there's 10
of those judges will be talking
about the Supreme Court and the
Court of Appeals.
Um, you can go there whenever
you think the district court has
done something wrong. That's an
appeal of right. So we have 10
of those.
Uh, I'm on the Supreme Court.
There's 5 of us. We only take
cases that um you petitioned
for.
Uh, as part of our duty and my
duty as Chief Judge Justice. I
rotate out every 2 years, so for
continuity, we have Karl, the
head of AOC.
And we have a governing
structure called the New Mexico
Judicial Council, which is a
trial courts get together and we
have our own budget committee.
Um, the vets, the budgets that
we're gonna advocate for you
today. There were questions
previously about a unified
budget that is a judicial
concept.
I'm dating quite a while back.
It is driven through that
process up to us and we come to
you with one budget so that each
county is treated as much as we
can, the same.
Um, and that is in essence, the
way we operate.
I will turn quickly to what I
would have shared with you, and
I think you have in your
material.
Um, in the PowerPoints.
Um, and then I will ask Carl for
specifics in regard to some of
these requests.
The largest requests and our
first priority, of course, is
pay increases.
For our employees, um, and we
have additional supplemental
information to ensure to you
that, and we thank you very much
for the judicial pay raises
you've been very kind to us, as
has the governor in signing that
bill, um, but this is for our
staff. Security is one and court
modernization. I received a lot
of questions on the House side
and court monetization, um,
because a lot of that money
involves information technology
of the people I've brought to
AOC staff, among others.
What is our staff if there's any
questions with regard to that.
And the others are financial
staff. We operate both port.
Infrastructure as far as
technology and court security as
far as technology and it is
robust, so I brought orchard
folks.
I will stop. I'm going to turn
it over to Carl on employee
strike that compensation. Thank
you for the conversations in
this in this regard, but they'll
um just if it's OK to share a
few highlights for those that
haven't been in the
conversation. Yeah, we have some
new members to highlight them
and.
He's got a full page picture. I
mean it's bigger than the
governor.
You're not even get a full page
at this space, which one would
you put on top?
Well, we'll heal up and we'll
put your full page picture in
there to justice. I, I requested
a thumbnail, Mr. Chair, but, uh,
somehow I ended up with a very
large one.
How that happened.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I want to say
thank you for all the
discussions we've had on our
employee compensation, um, as
I've discussed with you, our,
our average classified employee
is about 18% behind the average
executive branch classified
employee in terms of
compensation. And so we
submitted to LFC staff this fall
plan to bring up our lowest paid
staff. We want to focus on
folks, um, making less than
$45,000.
We gradually taper that until
you reach $100,000 and then
there's no provision for anybody
making more than that.
Um, we're really, really focused
on the, um,
Lowest paid folks there.
want to have parity now with the
executive branch and then we can
stop coming in every year as we
have for the last several years
and asking, asking you all for
the.
Uh, for that ketchup.
Security.
Yeah
We'll touch on security now
please, Carl.
Um, we have a one-time request,
uh, one time $25 million dollar
request for courthouse security
that's um really facilities
improvements statewide that
works out to about $420,000 per
courthouse. That's things like
X-rays, scanners and
magnetometers, um, that's our
badge swipes, that's um.
Uh, security cameras and those
kind of things, LFC does have a
recommendation for 6 million of
that, that'll give us a great
start. We really appreciate
having that last point on
security kind of ties to the
facilities questions and each
one of these counties, usually
the county, um.
The seat Santa Fe, for example,
is what will hold the
courthouses, so there are a lot
of facilities throughout the
state.
Have a slide on AOT I'm not
gonna talk about I provided.
I'll stand by the briefing in
regard to that. AOT is
outpatient assistance treatment,
the reason why I included that
slide as it is an example from
um the special session to now,
what we did with the money that
the legislature appropriate and
the governor signed during the
special session. Um,
And, and, uh, we're very proud
of that, I think through the
AOC.
Uh, in, um, using the money
wisely. We have a few um court
statistics I'd like Carl to
highlight so you can see what
the trends are with regard to
the workflow that's coming into
the district courts and
eventually the Supreme Court.
if you tell him what slide page
you're on or you want the slide
to change our Zoom operator.
Thank you. We're on number 6,
please.
Uh, Mr. Chair, our case filings
and new cases opened in our
courts across the state were up
in FY 24, uh, about 4% in
district court, 8% across our
magistrate courts and 9% in the
metropolitan court.
Um
We, uh, one of our performance
metrics is our case clearance
rate and that's how many cases
we dispose of versus how many
are coming in the door.
brand, I think you do have our
presentation. It was that
multicolor.
Yes, yes, or page 6, yes, yes,
page 6 of that is where I'm at.
I apologize. They are printed on
ours.
So
We don't have page count, so
what is
it shows it so he can look at
the and show the audience,
otherwise I'm gonna get
statistics on the top.
quick stats.
It's not you have a different
one, OK, um.
Our case clearance rates, that's
how many cases we finish versus
how many are coming in the door.
So if you have a 100% clearance
rate, that means you finished as
many cases as come in the door.
Our district courts are right
there, 98%.
Um, magistrate courts actually
are, are getting ahead of it a
little bit, 102% and our court
of appeals and the Supreme Court
are also ahead of the game,
finishing more cases than get
started.
Um
We'll turn to the AOC request. I
think your analysts in the
previous meeting and I very much
appreciate the work strike that,
appreciate the work at DFA and
LCD Alice, they've come to all
of our
Budget committee meetings, so
they have, I think in depth
understanding of the way we
operate, um, they summarize the
differences.
Well between the DFA
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation, um, but Carl
will highlight a few of the AOC
request differences.
Um
Mr. Chair, as you know, the
AOC's budget is split into 4
programs. One of those is called
administrative support called
P559, and I want to highlight
just one request for the
committee this uh at the moment.
That's our language access,
that's our court interpreters,
our state constitution
guarantees every party, witness,
and juror.
Uh, on a court case, the right
to an interpreter if they don't
speak English as their first
language.
And our need for interpreters is
climbing rapidly. We're up 41%
in 24% compared to 23.
Uh, at the same time,
Uh, interpreter rates around the
country are going up. Our
neighbors in Arizona are at $65
an hour, uh, over in Texas,
they're more like 85 an hour.
Um, we're at $57 an hour for our
contract interpreters, uh, and
we just can't keep up. We have
this rising demand and really
low, uh, really low pay, uh,
hourly rate for these
contractors and so uh we
appreciate the LFC
recommendation there, uh, to
fully fund our request. What is
not currently in the LFC
recommendation, however, is our
request to add two
administrative staff just to
take care of the scheduling.
Currently, I have a few
interpreters who are my
employees.
Um
However, because of the
increased volume of hearings and
trials that need interpreters,
they are stuck doing scheduling
work rather than being in the
courtroom doing the
interpretation work. So I'd like
to hire a couple just schedulers
who don't have that, uh,
interpretation expertise so that
they can, I can get the
interpreters back in the
courtroom.
We have, um,
Uh, our other programs are
called statewide judiciary
Automation, uh, like court
operations division in the
Special Court Services, and I
want to pull out of a special
court services.
Um
The pretrial funding because
there's a major difference
between the executive and LFC
recommendations. So we do have
this slide deck. What page are
you on so we can try to follow
you. I'm on 10, it's called
pretrial Services funding.
an art like that.
That's fantastic. I apologize
for that, Mr. Chair and Senator.
You advance a couple.
Mr. Chair
pages are double-numbered.
That's why if you look, there's
2 page 82 page 9's, 2 page 10s,
just so you know.
I think they don't do math.
be over here in the finance
committee.
learning how you guys do math.
If you could just advance it
like a couple I think will be
there. This, this is the page
we're on.
Yes
It's not changing on my side.
I'm sorry.
OK, I'll continue, Mr. Chair, if
I may.
Uh, the, um,
For several years now, the
pre-trial funding has been, um,
Partly in each district court's
budget and partly in
the AOC budget and this year the
Um, we requested, uh, a number
of programs around the state to
make sure that we have pretrial
services operating in every
judicial district and so we need
to add the 5th judicial district
in that's uh Chavez, Eddie Lee
County's, the 9th Curry
Roosevelt, um, the 10th and the
7th.
Um
DFA and LFC both, um,
Look like they're meeting that
request, but LFC puts all of the
pre-trial funding in the AOC
budget including the existing
programs.
It's not our request. We can
live with that if that's the
legislature's direction. My
major concern there though is
The majority of that funding
funds our employees in the
district courts and I need to
make sure that those folks stay
employees of the district court.
I can't manage them from Santa
Fe or Albuquerque or Las Cruces,
where we have our offices.
Um, and I want to make sure that
they can stay perm employees,
right, not term because that'll
just create these these big
recruitment challenges.
Um, the LFC also meets our, our
expanded requests through some
growth funding, uh, which also,
um,
It kind of poses that
recruitment challenge, right? It
means our new employees have to
be turned.
And this includes uh our
electronic monitoring unit
that's based on Albuquerque and
monitors, uh, folks ordered a
GPS statewide. They, they
monitor about 215 people on
average every day.
And uh
Funding them with grow is great
because we meet the need,
they're funding and current
one-time funding expires this
year.
I already have a lot of trouble
recruiting for those positions
because those are the folks who
work nights and weekends and
holidays, tracking folks on GPS
overnight.
Um, and so if we could
You know, potentially look at
some recurring general fund for
them, it would help me in that
recruitment, uh, because
everybody knows if you, if you
go get a state job,
If it doesn't say
term funding, it says term
funding and that means
To the employee, who knows if
that's going to get funded again
as soon if I take that job as
soon as I can, I'm bolting for a
perm job, right? Um, and so that
that just makes the challenge of
monitoring those folks, uh, all,
all the more difficult.
All right, a chair members me
that.
We are asked to present both
with regard to Supreme Court
Court of Appeals and then all
the trial courts, so the slide
that will follow.
I will call it 10B, senator, so
we have 2 10s, uh, 10B is a list
of the districts and you heard
from the district attorneys this
morning, so each one of these
districts will have a separately
elected district attorney, um,
we are in essence, I believe
part of the executive.
Um, that you will also see it
from the public defender, the
public defender is a little more
as I described earlier,
centralized in the sense that
there's a commission.
Was a statewide public defender
and those public defenders go
out, some of the districts are
big enough to have their own
public defenders, some of them
rely on contract.
Um, car will highlight any very
quickly.
Any particular needs in the
district and then I will quickly
address the Court of Appeals and
the Supreme Court.
Mr. Chair, the difference
between LFC and DFA in the
district courts is primarily
that treatment of pre-trial
funding, moving it to AOC versus
executive leaves it in the
district.
Couple of items to highlight in
the 2nd district court, um, they
are requesting a new judge this
year for the family court
division, um, that did not make
it to either reckon so we'd
appreciate you all taking a look
at that. In the 3rd judicial
district in Donana County. They
have a number of employees
funded through
Um, the child support services
division.
Um, and that money is ultimately
federal funding and so
Over the, over the last couple
years we've been trying to move
those employees throughout the
judiciary on to general fund
funding so that we can use them
in a in a more efficient way,
we'd appreciate.
I look at those as well.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee with regard to um
Supreme Court needs and.
Well, let me go in the director.
Let's start with the Court of
Appeals.
Um
With regard to the court of
appeals, it's much of what
In a similar vein of what we
need at the Supreme Court. They
handle all direct appeals, so
the requests um that we would
advocate for them or certainly
those that assist them in
writing opinions.
Which include um lawyers and
paralegals.
Also includes that courthouse in
Albuquerque next to law school.
is we talked about facilities
that they, they own the building
the way that was structured. Um,
so the building improvement fund
is a nice service to that court
in particular because as things
break, we're we're able to
repair them.
Um
Quickly
Um, I have Miss Liz Garcia. I
want to introduce you to her and
her face
a short point on the Supreme
Court. She's our chief clerk of
court. She operates um what I
describe as everything within
the Supreme Court, um, Ms.
Garcia, you want to highlight
one or two things from our
budget request.
Mr. Chair.
Members of the finance
committee, thank you for
allowing me to be here to uh
present the Supreme Court's
budget. Um, we wanna be very
appreciative for your support of
our number one.
Priority employee compensation
42 employees are directly
impacted out of our 55, uh,
full-time employees, that's 76%
of our workforce, it makes a
tremendous difference in
recruitment and retention.
11.1% of our employees have to
work a second job to make ends
meet.
In FY 24, we have transitioned
to a term-based appellate
schedule, that means that our
pills are being heard and our
opinions are being published
within the same year, which
results in timely resolution of
our cases to our New Mexican
citizens, um, we are asking.
Or if the FY 26 budget is
approved and funded.
Our clearance rate.
Um, our dispos disposition rate
is improving. We have been able
to take care of our cases,
timely, um,
At this point, we are improving
up to
110% clearing our cases in a
timely manner, want to highlight
our budgetary strength comes
from strong leadership. We have
8.1 low vacancy rate, a very low
reversion rate of
07 % in FY 23 and 3.5% in
current fiscal year. Um, the
term schedule helps us with our
work at the Supreme Court. We
know that our
Cass matter to New Mexicans. We
are the last stop in the road
for many complex cases for our
citizens, the request for
attorneys, paralegals, and
editors helps us with our
caseload and is essential to our
operations. We stand in support
of the DFA recommendations.
Um, and we would also highlight
that we have done a
comprehensive facility needs
assessment.
Um, that's been really
methodical and recommended by
the capital outlay Group.
Thank you, Miss Garcia, um.
As I told
Uh
Your house colleagues on finance
are building is.
Right next story 8 years old
and.
As I told them, like my face
after 555 years, it takes some
work, so we've done a complete
evaluation of it. You've been
kind enough to improve makes
funding for some of those
improvements and we continue to
protect that historic
courthouse.
Um, we will close, um, Carl and,
um,
Overall things you want to touch
on and then we'll send for
questions.
Uh, Mr. Chair, just a request to
this committee. I know you all
have other committee assignments
as your
Hearing bills, there are lots of
proposals this year, many of
them.
Uh, start to say, well, judges
need training in this, uh, you
have to have extra hearings for
that. And I'm just asking you as
I know you always do as members
of the finance committee and
keep an ear out for are there
mandates here that are going to
require funding, right? If
there's extra hearings, gee, do
we need more public defenders
and prosecutors to make sure
we're covering those hearings.
Uh, if there's training
requirements, is there funding
that provided uh those
trainings. If their data
reporting requirements, um, you
know, we've been coming in the
last several years asking.
you all for some some data
analyst positions that haven't
been funded, so do we have the
tools to provide you the data
that that you want if um there
are those kind of requirements.
And with that, Mr. Chair, happy
to stand for questions, of
course.
Thank you.
Um, just to go back to one
thing, on the $6 million in the
AOC.
Let's see if I get the right
page.
Request, we know that there's
A correction that's gonna happen
somewhere along the line for the
6 million.
She
I don't know it's hard to follow
a two handouts.
That $6 million or 8 we transfer
the money to AOC. They're
looking at that, and we think
they're, we may have made a
mistake, correct?
Is this in the security one
time, Mr. Chair.
I have 2 persons. It's hard for
me to follow two presentations.
To chair, um, great question. So
that $6.7 million isn't a
mistake. So basically what
happened, we reached out to the
AOC that the LFC wanted to
recommend centralization in the
AOC for pretrial services. They
gave us an amount by district of
what was generally funded and
other funding sources. But what
we did was we only took the
recurring dollars in pretrial,
and we moved it over to AOC and
that total to $6.7 million. So
it wasn't a mistake.
It was just a calculation based
off the the um uh material that
AOC provided. Uh sorry, Mr. Cher
wasn't on the same wavelength
with you there, and we agree
with that number. There's no
question about that, Mr. Chair.
It's just for the additional
funding that we need, um, both
for the electronic monitoring
unit and the pretrial services
folks in the districts that we
haven't yet covered.
Um, currently it's in there as
grow funding, which is just
going to make it hard to recruit
those people if we can look at
that. I, I know that's hard.
It it shouldn't make it any
harder, grow as a way for us to
track your performance and if
you're getting them higher or
not getting them harder. It
doesn't hinder you in any way of
hiring.
It's an accountability for the
legislature which you know,
everybody needs including us
that I certainly understand, Mr.
Chair. It's that that grow money
means I have to hire people as
term instead of perm employees.
So it's just harder to recruit
folks, especially that
electronic monitoring units
existed since 2021. Let me ask
you, is it grow money for 2
years?
Mr. Chair, um, great question is
for 3 years. So 3 years gets you
stability. We'll see where you
come out in the 2 and then look
and see if you got the higher
and what level we need to be at
if we got to go higher, we'll go
higher. But
It doesn't hinder you in any
way. Let's make that very clear.
It gives us accountability, it
shows everybody accountability.
We're gonna monitor it to see
what happens in pretrial because
the conversation about crime and
everything else and we're just
gonna be a little extra cautious
in how we do that, so there
should be no hindrance.
Understood, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
I, I'm, I'm, and I, I will tell
you and I'll tell you this
publicly because I shook your
hand and told you I was gonna
fix the bottom pay scale for
you. We do see some scaling
here. There's 34 employees that
that are below the $45,000 mark
I am on page, I think this is.
3
And then there's another class
from 45 to 60 of 5:45 and that
total is about 9 million and
then, you know, the, the 75 to
100,000.
Uh, and
That's a pretty high pay scale
already in the state. I mean,
with benefits and everything
else, a district judge would
benefits and everything, the
cost of the state is, is
290,000, so I mean.
Our, our pay is pretty high and
then when you include benefits,
so, uh, uh, we'll have that
conversation. I committed that
to you. I'm gonna tell you, I'm
gonna do it publicly so you feel
comfortable about it and, and I
know that it's a concern, it's a
concern for me.
You want your employees focused
on what they're doing and not
focusing and they got to get off
at 5 and go to another place.
Um, so
Yeah
Thank you Mr. Chair, Senators,
we appreciate that conversation
and take that into account, one
of the questions we got on the
house side is how do we know
it's going to go to those
employees, you'll see we track
them by employees, so we track
them if they are in that range,
district courts are instructed
to make those pay increases to
that individual.
So you're sure that happens. And
and with that, that's, you know,
I'm not saying this happened
with you, but when we do pay
increases, we want to make sure
that everybody's on board,
right? That you start from the
bottom to the top to bring those
up and that you don't service
the top and then try to save an
employee that's threatening to
leave when actually you need to
make sure that person's not on.
Snap benefits while working a
job.
Mr. Chair, members of committee,
that, that's why I emphasize
that point, it will go by
employee. We are not enormous,
we're able to literally tell the
district volume.
OK.
No other questions?
Oops, I'm sorry, you got to
raise your hand.
Sometimes I holding the pencil.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So just
clarification, I heard you, uh,
Thompson say that the counties
and, and I'm not clear that I
understand this whole, I was
trying to look in the
Constitution and see where it
says who's responsible for what.
But if the, the, the counties
are responsible and I, I get
that they are and why are they
not providing those security?
Why are they not providing the
um the things that are needed
for because it's the building
that they're responsible for.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, good
question. Most of the counties
do, and they do the very best
they can. The the sheriff's
office is normally the
The front line for that
security. Um, they are making
decisions themselves with regard
to allocation of resources, um,
so that, um,
Has put additional obligations
to provide security in um
In form of the actual structure,
so a lot of these requests will
be to improve.
Um, the structure of the
facility, um, I was just at the
2nd judicial, which is not an
entirely old courthouse that had
a very bad incident.
Um, they have
Good security. We had some
questions. A lot of it is the
physical nature of the way that
some of those courtrooms are
built.
Um, so we, we do appreciate.
The
um sheriff's office, um, we have
looked at different ways to
provide um people on the ground,
especially in rural communities,
it seems harder.
Um, but, um, some of this money
would benefit the the the
structures especially.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you. I don't have my sheet
in front of me, but I know you
had a, a bunch of rios, large
amount of rios according to the
courts. Carl, do you have that
number in front of you and
what's the total amount and tell
us why that we number hasn't
moved.
Mr. Chair, the sheet I have in
front of me is, let's see, I've
got um
Mostly just language changes.
Look at, I'd have to get
together with you, Mr. Chair, to
figure out exactly what you're
talking about. Um, I know.
For example, uh, we asked for
that, um, special appropriation
over the summer.
Um, that you all gave us a 3
million. We, we did ask to
extend that. We're going to
spend probably about half of
that, a little better than that
this year.
Um
We did ask where.
likely to spend all of that $16
million for our courtroom
modernization that's that FTR
would likely to spend that this
year, but will likely in
spending there are two different
things that, and so that's why
we asked for reauthors because
if there are supply chain
disruptions or who knows what's
going on as you order things for
overseas.
Um
Stuff that's out of our control.
So we did ask to extend that,
but we're planning on spending
all that this year, um, and
that's why you saw a request
for, for additional.
Um, if there's a
particular item you remember Mr.
Chair, I can get together with
you just took my sheet of paper.
And so we have 3 $320 million in
Rios and and we're gonna go
through them with a fine tooth
comb. If they have not been
there for 2 or more years and
you haven't got them done.
I'm not interested.
We're making significant
progress on significant in
getting it done are two
different things. $320 million
is a large amount of money to
leave laying there, that's
across the board. I don't know
what yours is exactly.
But at some point.
The spigot's gonna stop.
And if we don't prepare
ourselves now and the downturn
economy when we don't have the
money, and we gave you the money
and you didn't finish the
project, you didn't use it.
Then
That becomes a real big issue on
fixing things correctly, so.
We
But, uh, Mr. Senator, we will,
um, probably the largest
Portion of that is um
The FDR detects and tech
projects and we can give you
detailed spend-downs on those.
Um, there's much IT projects as
they are infrastructure
projects. We emphasize to the
courts that that is a focus of
the legislature, the unspent.
A
I will describe as capital, um.
And so we will uh
We'll focus on the detailed spin
down for you. I remember a
couple of years ago when Artie
came to me for that and so that
was the most helpful thing to
the courts in in translation and
they thought they could get it
done and we're still working on
it 3 years later it makes me a
little.
We
we
We have upgraded 55 district
courts, um, chairman says, um,
senators and we'll continue to
update you on that progress.
OK.
Appreciate your time, no other
questions from committee
members.
Uh, I do need to spend some time
with you on PTO.
I just got numbers today.
Uh, we will stand by.
OK, you'd like to meet
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
members.
public defenders, are we doing
that today?
And
I gonna start or DFA.
I will, um, Mr. Chair, I got the
directive that I will be doing
the, I'll be speaking on the LFC
recommendation because that's
what was chosen in HAFC. The
difference is as well anything
HTFC flagged for you all.
But for the public defenders,
they are agency 280 in your
volume 2s, it's page 57 to 58
for
For budgetary detail, again in
volume 2, it's pages 57 to 58.
Good. And then in volume 3 on
page 43, you could see um cases
assigned to in-house public
defenders. It gives you an idea
of the cases assigned to the
public defenders by region, just
to give you guys an idea of what
BDD is dealing with.
But with that, I forgot to
introduce myself. My name is
Felix Chavez. I'm the LFC
analyst and with me is Mario
Semiglia, the, uh, my
counterpart at DFA.
With that an overview of the
public defender department, um,
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund by $3.2 million
which equates to a 4.1% increase
compared to the FY 25 operating
budget.
The LLC recommendation partially
supports the agency's request to
increase the number of staff
attorneys, investigators, case
managers, and social workers to
support the agency in every
aspect of defense.
With that, the differences
between the two recommendations
to summarize the LFC
recommendation exceeds the um.
Yes, exceed the executive by
$1.3 million in general fund.
The LFC exceeds the executive
recommendation by $319.2,000 in
personnel and benefits, and that
difference is mostly because the
LFC is focusing on providing
support staff, multilingual
recruitment and retention
dollars, as well as attorneys.
The executive recommendation
includes funding for new support
staff and attorneys.
However, on the FTE side, the
executive recommendation
increases FTEs, while the LFC
does not because the LFC is
providing funding for the
category in order to reduce
vacancies, and the reason
because of that, if you look in
the packet on page 5 is a
personnel calculation.
And in that what we work, this
is what we work off of on our
assumptions and it shows that
the FY 25 operating budget for
FTE is 516.
However, NFI 25 at the time of
this report, we, they were, they
had 439 filled leaving 77
positions vacant, so LFC saw it
best to provide funding to fill
those positions before we
increase them.
And um
With that, the other, the other
bigger difference is that the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC by 1.6 million in
contractual services for
contract attorney recruitment
and retention. You see did not
provide further funding there.
And on the HAFC side, um, HAFC
members, um, question the
workload the PDD is having as
well as the, the flagged the
transition that PDD would like
to do to uh hourly pay model for
their contract attorneys.
And they also flagged a $1.7
million.
special appropriation that would
help initiate this transition to
hourly pay. This is not included
in neither of the two
recommendations.
With that, um,
Um, I was just extracted to
speak. I don't know if you would
like me to pass it on what
you're gonna say is I'm gonna
hand over to my colleague DFA
for any comments.
Exactly, I'll copy you. I'll
pass it over to my beautiful
friend Mario for his comments.
Thank you for the beautiful, but
I gotta be good friends. I was
at the beginning of the session.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you, Felix. Uh, Felix
said, the House Appropriations
Committee took the LSC rec for
the public defenders, uh, the
biggest increase, uh, the
biggest difference between the
exact and the legislative re was
the $1.6 million in contractual,
I know.
previous sessions we've worked
to raise that contractual rate
and uh we all know that it's
extremely difficult to hire
attorneys in the state of New
Mexico, so, um, the public
defenders, raise that issue too,
they have to use outside counsel
or contract counsel, um, so we
recognize that need to but um
besides that, the differences
weren't, weren't that.
That's dire. So I will pass it
on to Keith Bauer and TR Estas.
Then, go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Bennett
Bauer. I'm the chief public
defender for the state of New
Mexico, um.
With me today is uh uh the
relatively new chair of our
commission, Gina Maestas, and
I'll introduce a couple of
people and then ask her to make
a few comments to you before we
get into the details. Also with
this is Commissioner Peter
Schoenberg.
Um, Deputy Chief Jennifer
Borrello, who's in charge of uh
the offices around the state,
uh, Deputy Chief Randy Chavez,
who's the uh in charge of
contract council all around the
state, which includes uh
Conflict council in places where
we have offices, but also
provides all of the
representation in rural areas
where we currently do not have
an office. Deputy Chief Sidon
Sanchez, whose administrative
services deputy chief or general
counsel, Adrianne Turner, our
human resources director, Ronald
Herrera, our CFO, uh, Debbie
O'Dell and uh our deputy
director of policy and
administration, Teresa Edwards,
uh, who came from LFC and Deputy
CFO Robert Cardone.
Um, so if, if I may uh introduce
uh Gina Maesta, she has uh
Long, I guess history in state
government, which is really
helped us so far with the
commission and uh chair myis,
would you like to say something?
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
committee members. My name is,
he said it's Gina Maestas, and I
retired from state government
after working for 25 years, uh.
I, I've been retired for 13
years and I know that you all
know uh Artie Pepin and of
course Carl, I served in that
position as AOC director before
RE.
And I was also chief clerk of
the Court of Appeals and Chief
of Staff attorney for the Court
of Appeals during my time.
Uh, working with the judicial
branch.
And I've born, raised and
educated in New Mexico. I
graduated from law school, uh,
UNM law school in '86 and I've
been a lawyer for almost 40
years. I'm honored, I was
honored that the commission
elected me to be their chair.
And I, my most gratifying work
that I did during my legal
career was when I was a public
defender. Early in my career, I
worked as an appellate public
defender. So, uh, I'm, we are
appreciative of the support,
financial support this committee
has given to the public affair
in the past and we look forward
to uh your continued support and
all that chief Howard uh
describes some of the, the needs
of the public defender,
particularly the contract
attorneys. We really need
assistance with the contract
attorneys. I was approached
about
Doing the contract as a contract
PD when I retired and I just
could literally not afford to do
it because it was so just even
keeping an office open to try to
do that work was not really
doable because the rates are so
low and the rates have gone up
thankfully, but uh there's still
some more need there to pay the
contract attorneys
appropriately. So I'll let Bauer
proceed. Thank you.
Thank you, Jeremiah and Mr.
Chair, I'll, I'll keep this
relatively brief understand
where we are this afternoon, but
I want to point out that our
budget request was for about
13.5% increase, and I know that
not all agencies come in with
that and you hear everybody
needs it, that is, and I'm sure
that's true. Um, but I, and I
understand the executive in the
LLC recommendations. We
Represent close to 75,000 cases
a year around the state of New
Mexico, and I want to draw your
attention particularly to the uh
graph on the overhead projection
here and in your materials
showing the felony case
assignments that we have and
you've heard this some from the
courts too, uh.
In 2018, we're at about 21,000
during COVID, a lot of things
slowed down in the court system
and the number of felony case
filings went down, but uh I'm
frankly alarmed by the increased
workload that we have. And so
when you've got that increased
workload, even a 5% increase in
the resources doesn't allow us
to even retain the number of
attorneys and staff that we need
to do that work. So I
It
I, I hope that you'll take a
look at that, uh, and, and think
of the work that we have to do
to represent New Mexicans and
people in New Mexico, uh, two
things. First of all, our staff,
um, drawing your attention to
our vacancy rates we took to
heart what we were told in this
committee last year, which was
take the money that you have and
put it back into your employees.
We have a 9.5% vacancy rate uh
overall and our non our core
staff vacancy rate is at 5.1%.
That's almost structural
vacancy. You can't build
positions any faster than that.
So we have a great HR
department, fiscal department
were on it. We hire people and
these people are local, they
generally are raised and live in
these communities for our 13
offices. So, uh, those are
people that we are able to keep
now. Our attorney vacancy rate
while still concerning, is
really pretty low, and part of
that is because we took money
you gave us and put it back into
salaries. We also raised
contract rates.
Within the last year and a half,
the base rates by 20% and that
has allowed us to not quite keep
pace with where we were, which
is why we have introduced the
concept of.
Pain or contract attorneys
hourly rates. This is how the
state of New Mexico compensates
people on the risk management
contract. They pay way more than
we're even contemplating and
asking for to do civil work
representing the state when
they're sued for money damages.
We have attorneys who have to go
to courtrooms around the state
of New Mexico, go to jails, talk
to our clients, talk to police
officers, do jury trials and uh
and we simply have
To move to a rational way of
compensating them, which is
through paying them for the work
that they're doing and holding
them accountable for that work
by actually having them keep
track of their time, telling
them what they're doing and us
having some oversight of that.
So, uh, I wanted to explain
those. There was a mention of
pain, uh, people who are
bilingual, which I think is
really important, more and more
around the state of New Mexico,
we need, uh, employees, lawyers
and staff who can do that, who
can do this work, and we need
to.
Compensate them for that
service. So, uh, with that, I
think I'll uh leave it for
questions for the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK.
Uh, we'll go to the committee
for any questions.
I don't have anybody.
Actually, chair.
Senator, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I just, I wanted to
just
Highlight the fact that you did
take us seriously when we're
talking about the vacancy rates.
I think that's just great, you
know, just keep it up in, in
the, in on the attorneys.
It it's pay.
Sure, is that right?
Is it pay that's making it hard
to, to, to fill these positions
that that is a big part. I mean,
I'll tell you, Mr. Chair and
Senator, it's, it's pay and it
is we are going out and
recruiting around the country to
bring people in because we're
not getting that many lawyers
from University of New Mexico
Law School. We get 5 or 6 a year
and we have, I don't know,
dozens of positions we have to
fill every year. And so we are
going out of state to recruit
those people to bring them to
New Mexico and we keep them
through pay and frankly through
camaraderie and giving them good
work.
And trying to keep their
And their life
Somewhat manageable. I mean our
attorneys work there, their
butts off, but it, but pay is a
huge part. We do geographic
differentials so that in in
smaller communities, we pay
additional money, that's partly
through our geographic
differentials and money from the
public attorney fund, which this
legislature created, so we thank
you for that, yes. And so chair
and uh thank you for that. Um,
so the 13.9% or 243, that's
actually what is vacant. That's
not made up by a.
contract
Is any of that sort of consumed
by a contract. So on top of
that, you have the contractual.
Attorneys.
Correct. So, yeah, we have our
FTE. This is the number
correct. OK. OK.
Thank you.
Well, we'll give you that
direction again. Please go fill
out those roles, because you,
you need them. I know you do.
Yes, sir. Thank you, chair.
For the presentation.
move on to
Department of Public Safety.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LLC analyst for Public Safety.
OK, go ahead and uh
It really got the handouts
already.
OK, yeah, I think we're good to
go ahead and say what you see
um, so again my name is Scott.
I'm the LFC analyst and public
safety with me today, my
counterpart from DFA Diego
Jimenez, Chief Whistler, and the
cabinet Secretary Jason Bowie,
um.
girl.
Oh yes, and uh Deputy Secretary
Sylvia Cerda, who did not have a
chair for so um we'll go very
quickly through some high-level
differences uh between the LFC
recommendation and the
recommendation and we'll hand it
to the cabinet secretary. Um,
one note that I'll make um the
LFC and executive
recommendations are up by about
$5.3 million or 2.8%.
The LFC recommendation adds
approximately 6.6 million or
3.6% in general fund revenue
above the FY 25 budget where the
executive ads approximately 11.9
million or 6.4%.
One note yesterday at the end of
the HAFC hearing, the HAFC
adopted the LFC recommendation
while adding in.
Um
$1.6 million for the stately
step increases, which are just
the standard um
It avoids compaction and state
police salaries, so it's the
kind of planned increases for
those officers every year that
brings the total increase to
$8.2 million for the adopted
recommendation or 4.4% increase
over the previous fiscal year.
Um, so with that, I'll hand it
to my 3 minutes to go over.
One of the program
The total differences I guess.
Thank you, go ahead.
Uh,
Thank you, Scott. uh, Mr. Chair
members of the committee is, as
Scott said, I'm Diego Jimenez.
I'm the uh DFA analyst for for
the Department of Public Safety.
um.
As far as the uh
Differences go, I think the
executive recommendation.
Included a couple of
Of items that that the LLC
recommendation did not, for
example, in the law enforcement
program, um, the executive
recommended $1.2 million for
body and uh vehicle cameras,
which is a recurring expense
that was um previously funded um
with a non-recurring
appropriation.
Um, additionally, and I think
that Secretary Bowie will
probably go into greater
details, so I won't spend too
much time here, um.
In in accordance with what the
agency's request was the
executive.
Recommendation focused a lot on
the statewide law enforcement
support program and ensuring
that um
Employees across the various
divisions within that program
are are compensated
appropriately.
Um, and with that, I think I'll
hand it over to the secretary.
That's share, good afternoon,
um.
If if it's, if it's appropriate
to the chair, I would like to
just introduce some of my staff.
But sure, go ahead. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. I mean Bowie. I'm the
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety. I always think
it's important to start with
recognition for the people that
work at DPS, uh, the three of
us, Secretary Serna, Deputy
Secretary Serna, and Deputy
Secretary Weasler, we often get
credit for the organization, but
it's really the people that are
seated behind me, uh, that, that
do all the hard work and the
heavy lifting. So uh with that
Sheila McDonald, my SD director
Amanda Trujillo, my budget
director, and Roberta Vijo, my
CFO, uh, since yesterday, we've
had all the district commanders
uh in.
Uh, in attendance as well. And
so they've come from every part
of New Mexico. We really
appreciate them being here. I
know we have some, some new
senators, uh, potentially as
well, and we wanted to extend
and offer that uh the district
managers are here for, for you.
And so if there's anything you
need.
8 in the LLC recommendation was
5.3 million for a difference
between the executive and the
LFC of 1.5.
Um
I mentioned uh in, in our
analyst just mentioned it
yesterday, uh, house
appropriation recommended an
additional 1.6 million for the
officer step plan and what that
is, and I want to be clear.
A lot of people seem to think
this is racist for the state
police and there's been some
concern about us continuously
getting raises. Uh, this is not
that, uh, this is, this is a uh
our step plan which has been in
effect for uh more than 20 years
as the chief reminded me. Uh,
he's been here longer with the
state police than I've been with
the organization. And, and so
what this is, is these are just
uh our step increases uh if we
don't get that funded each year,
then there's obviously
compaction and an officer within
the rank structure, say the
sergeants, uh, officers,
sergeants or lieutenants, they
don't get the next step
increased.
Uh, if that's not funded. So
that's what this is and the HFC
recommended an additional 1.6
million to to fund that
yesterday. And we would ask for
the same today.
Um, in car body cameras, you see
there's a deficiency there, um,
it's an annual subscription
model. This is something that's
statutorily obligated, and we
would ask for support on that,
and then uh you'll see common
amongst these next few slides is
our published rates are due a
GSD risk premiums uh was not
recommended funded and so we
have a deficit, I think it's a
1.5 million of
Across the agency that would
that would impact us.
Going to slide 4, is our special
appropriations request uh for
the law enforcement program, if
you look uh to the first table
there section 5, there were some
executive and LFC auditions,
which were uh really
appreciative of and I would
just, um,
Point out that those are for
Senate Bill 2.
Um, I believe, uh, the chair is
very well familiar with Senate
Bill 2 and uh so for public
health and safety initiatives
and so we very much appreciate
that uh addition there um.
Moving on to slide 5 through 8.
I won't be covering those again,
uh just to make sure that we're
concise. They're really just
there for your review, but I, I
will say this uh before I do
gloss over it.
Again, if you're new to the role
and, and need uh information for
what DPS provides. We're glad to
uh to go over these, uh not only
here in this presentation but
even beyond these meetings, um,
and
I think maybe the more important
part again is my advocacy for
the rest of the organization. We
always get a tremendous amount
of support at DPS. Uh, people
love the uniform, uh, I, I, I,
it's my job to point out the
rest of the organization that
provides that statewide law
enforcement support and services
as well. And, and that's what
these slides 5 through 8
represent.
So, moving right on to page 9.
This is the uh the roll up for
the SLES program. Uh, it shares
the same format as the slide we
just went over the executive uh
fully funds our requests, uh, or
an increase of $4 million or
16%.
While the LC recommendations
supports only 700,000.
Uh, leaving a difference or a
shortfall of of 13.3% or and or
$3.3 million.
Um
We have very much a need in this
area, and we can expand upon any
one of these justifications, um,
but we're trying to fund uh
salary study increases, um, for
the laboratories, make sure that
we're effective there, uh, in
one of your earlier slides, I
think it might be slide number 6
or 7 demonstrate some of the
work that the lab is doing, uh
looking for proper alignment,
uh, uh within uh law enforcement
directors Bureau. Really what's
common amongst most of these
requests is that there
Support for existing programs.
We're not asking for anything
new. This is really a a
maintenance here for us. We're,
we're hoping to really support
the programs that we currently
have and uh keep those going.
We've gone to slide 10, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, our SLES specialist
law enforcement.
Um, a statewide law enforcement
support specials. Uh, we're
grateful for the fingerprinting
support. We're still seeing a, a
shortfall in the IT upgrades and
what I would point out on the IT
upgrades is that this is our CSS
data center, uh.
This serves the entire state of
New Mexico, not just state
police, not just law
enforcement, but all of our
criminal.
Uh, this is the, the, the FBI
information that we disseminate
across the entire state.
And so if this, if we see system
failure here, if we were to have
a cyber attack that we wouldn't
be able to um
To overcome, this would be a
catastrophic failure for the
state of New Mexico uh for that
as well.
Slide 11.
Coming near the end.
Uh, program support.
Again, uh, my advocacy for them
as well, grants management, our,
our budget, our HR.
DPS based increase request was
984,000 executive
recommendations supported our
request, which was a 14%
increase.
Of the recommendation was uh 517
or 7% increase, which for us is
a shortfall of 6.9%.
And I just want to emphasize
just for a moment on, on our
request for uh OLA uh.
Our agency has about 1350 FDE.
Our agency naturally just by
design has a high risk, high
liability, nature of police work
and the function of its
operations. We have a tremendous
volume of IPRA, uh, services
