doing a tremendous job but
overworked and I would ask for
support on that.
Uh, last, uh, slide 12, uh,
included for your awareness is
our C2 request and our capital.
continue to help.
Um, ensure that your team is
paid the way it's supposed to
this and that. The chair, um,
it's, you know, 2 years ago, I
passed the legislation to do
that land swap in Albuquerque.
just give us a little bit of an
update on where that is and, and
when do we
When are we going to start
seeing that project move. So I
know that project is on the way.
We, we actually walked through
with a lot of the architects
and, and looked for their
proposals for the site. We
recently had a just a a minor
setback, uh, we ended up, um,
might not be using the right
terminology or a DS director,
GSD director is here and he
could clarify but uh we ended up
having to move uh.
To another architect to to begin
the project but it is underway.
It's uh we we're doing well with
that, um, if you need additional
update, I can call him here to
the front, but we're we're
moving forward with that and
we're very excited about it. Uh,
thank you, I just wanna make
sure it's moving along that it
was not a pleasant experience
for me. I don't know if I'll
ever carry
what do you anticipate actually
winding up in that facility, uh,
you know, 10 years from now,
what, what should we expect will
be happening there. Uh, I can,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, I
can certainly let the chief
expand, but we're very
fragmented in the, in uh
District 5 right now, the
Albuquerque Metro area we have a
lot of leased space we have a
lot of uh.
State police in a lot of
different buildings basically
we're hoping to bring all that
together, um, chief, if you
would expand.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Padilla, um,
yeah, I mean, our hope is we're
gonna as the cabinet secretary
mentioned, uh, we're gonna
consolidate, um,
123, at least 3 offices that we
have in the metro area into that
facility, um, and our, our hope
is to also do some other uh
expansion.
To build out for the future, um.
So as long, along with our
dispatch, we're looking to maybe
do some real-time crime center
slash uh we've had discussions
with the Fusion Center to maybe
uh do some, some joint housing
of personnel there, um, and so
as we move through the design,
which as the cabinet secretary
mentioned, we had a little
setback on that, but, but we are
getting uh started on the design
and that's gonna be happening
over the course of the next, uh,
several months. And so we'll
have a lot more um detail to
provide here, hopefully in the
not too distant future.
I appreciate it and I knew you'd
have a terrific answer for that,
chief, and the secretary. I just
want to make sure that we get
the project moving because we've
seen cost escalations through
the roof on, on public buildings
and public works projects and we
just need to get the thing
moving and done before it turns
into double what we'd originally
said it would cost and all that.
So thank you, chair.
Thank you, Senator Campos. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair, and
again to the secretary and to
you Chief. Thank you both very
much for
Your ongoing efforts in dealing
with so many issues here
throughout New Mexico.
Uh, I was just taking a look, if
you will, at the uh general fund
high level information.
And taking a look at this, I'm
gonna kind of combine the issues
and uh and hopefully we'll have
that response.
But when I start to take a look
at it, um, going to item number
5, line 5, we're talking about
uh state police retention in
essence going to number 7 body
cameras we're talking about how
we were going to fulfill, if you
will, the role of an officer as
the, uh, deal with their due
diligence on a regular basis and
then we go to line number 20.
and with possibly more and more
unsolved cases and the need, if
you will, excuse me as we go
forward with um the forensic
work that definitely needs to
occur.
And then to line 31, uh.
As we move forward, uh, we've
seen a NIMS and with GSD there's
been an ongoing uh increase in
litigation and there are quite a
few cases that are out there
that uh still haven't been
resolved or settled and and that
being the case, and so what I'm
trying to point out as we deal
with it.
Do you all have the tools at the
level that you need in order for
us to ensure that we retain our
officers.
Provide them with the equipment,
ensure that they have what they
need as they go out to continue
to not only enforce the law, uh,
but to be good public servants
as they deal with our
communities, our neighborhoods
in the entire state. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Miss Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Campos, I
really appreciate the question.
I, you know, um, not very often
do people ask that succinctly as
far as do they have the tools
that they need, which is why we
asked for the equipment uh for
the police officers. I would say
the state police officers are
very well equipped, um,
vehicles, uh, personal
equipment, and we have they made
tremendous investments in in
that.
Uh, that being said, um,
We recognize the times that that
there are shortages, which is
why we request, obviously, these
programs to continue and as I
said, this is a maintenance year
which is why we're asking for
these things. I think we're in
good shape. Could we certainly
do better? We need more
manpower. Absolutely, we've done
a tremendous job making
investments in public safety and
trying to get people through the
door, um, we're still short. I
was having a conversation with
the Chief, uh, not long ago and
the numbers manpower alone that
we have, um, are similar to when
he started 20 years ago.
For the state police currently
and so it's very important for
us to have these investments in
technological advancements,
which is why we're asking for
these things. We're very excited
by our intelligence-led policing
program, um, that allows the
sharing of information across
jurisdictions so that we can be
more efficient in doing our jobs
and so on the technological
side, we're looking at a lot of
solutions in order to uh
Make up for the shortcoming uh
in in in manpower in Chief. I
don't know if you have anything.
And, and so if I may, Mister
Chair, and I realize uh people
that could be online paying very
close attention to the budgetary
request and in no way do we want
to give the impression that
we're weakened in any way, but
as we do go forward, uh, I
really hope as we consider, if
you will, the final numbers, um,
that we do support and we
provide the resources that you
need, uh, because we see right
now in our state.
With what's happening at the
federal level.
As we move forward and we deal
with these issues here at the
state level and going into our
communities, we definitely see,
if you will, um, the need not
only for public safety, but to
ensure that our citizens feel
very confident in the work that
we all provide. So with that,
Mister Chair, I just thank you
very much. uh, again, uh, Mr.
Secretary, Chief.
Thank you for the work that you
do. We're gonna keep going
forward, but again, uh, keep
asking because we need to ensure
you do have those tools that are
important for the public safety.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Senator Brown.
Thank Mr. Chairman and uh
Secretary, I still want to call
you chief, but
He was my chief in Rear Rancho
um chief, it's good to see you,
both of you, uh, you know how
much I support law enforcement
and the job that you guys do
keeping us safe. I, I can't
thank you enough for that.
For all of your staff and all of
your officers who put their
lives on the line for us every
day.
I have some concerns, um, we as
a legislator mandated that you
wear body cameras.
And now we're not funding it.
Is that, is that, did I get that
right?
Mr. Chair, um, I take it that
you're, you're directing your
question to me in this, um.
There was a recommendation not
to fund and then they, you know,
the analysts might have an
explanation for this, but yes,
you're right, we're statutorily
obligated and and we welcome
that. We welcome the camera
system and and we would need
funding for that. It was
something I actually voted for
because I actually think it
protects you.
More than, uh, it protects the
other people because there's a
lot of false claims made against
police officers, having that
video.
Protects you. I just don't
understand why we're not paying
for that when we're the ones who
obligated them to wear it, is
it?
I know you're just the the
analyst for LFC, but is there a
reason we're not.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Brent,
nice to see you again, um, yeah,
I mean, so ultimately this is
something that was funded in a
special appropriation last year
as in line with LFC budget
guidelines, you know, if there's
still an unexpended balance
that's anticipated to be there
at the end of the fiscal year.
We would rather see that be
reauthorized before we fund an
additional ask. Um, usually we
do that a couple of times before
we build something into the base
budget. We know that there's
recurring costs, but over the
last couple of years, the LFC
and this body has taken the
approach of kind of
incrementally making progress.
towards funding things that
should be in there, so a couple
of years ago, Amo wasn't in the
base budget that's been
rectified this year. We're
adding fuel and vehicle
maintenance. Um, we'll see that
there are some things like in
this base budget, if you look at
uh on that high level the
aircraft maintenance line 9.
It's a $500,000 you know,
recurring appropriation that the
executive funds, the LFC instead
funds that in a special
appropriation of $1.5 million
over three years. So it's just a
approach difference, I think.
And we did 1.5 million then in
grow, right? Is it in a special,
a 3 year special, not quite grow
because yeah, um, there's also,
I think in the Capitol Alley
framework, I don't want to get
over my skis on this, but one
helicopter that's a replacement
at 3 years out, the helicopter
they have now is not gonna be
functional, so kind of like
getting this to the end of its
life cycle. I think the cheaper.
OK.
All right, thank you for that
and um.
Gee, I've had some other law
enforcement.
Community agencies, not just law
enforcement, but
Cities and things talk about
this, the, the issue with the
IPRA.
Um
And
Since we, we added the.
Cameras, my understanding is a
lot of requests are for the
video.
Um, and
My understanding is there's one
company out there, I don't even
know their names, so I'm not
gonna name them. That is, uh, a
major
Contributor to this issue.
Where they will request this
information and then they sell
it.
Um, are you guys seeing that as
well is that
Really adding to your IPRA
request.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brand, yes,
that's correct, and, and, uh,
and that's not just specific to
any one agency across the state
of New Mexico law enforcement
agencies are seeing uh the
request for for.
Body worn camera, um, and
sometimes even it was like a
blanket uh request every month
from, from the same attorneys
and, and it's a tremendous
let me back up for, for a
minute.
We want, we want the
transparency in our policing and
so we believe in body worn
cameras. We believe in the
information being out there with
the sheer volume of requests. If
you have uh 4 police officers
and 1 call for service for one
hour. Uh that's 4 hours' worth
of footage that one person
sitting there reviewing
redacting, uh, making sure that
information is is able to go out
and, and I believe uh this is my
opinion that in a lot of ways
our ER has been, has been
weaponized. we had experience my
previous agency where we had a
every requests from certain law
firms every month they were
requesting police reports, uh,
and related to to traffic
crashes so like a cold call
people who were involved in
crashes to, to serve, you know.
For their practice that the
column for representation in the
crash, um, that's not what was
intended for and, and it's no
different for uh what we're
seeing for and I see my deputy
secretary uh took a seat next to
me, so she probably has some
additional information, some
numbers, but I can tell you that
in, in general terms, it's a
serious, serious problem for us
and, and again we're all about
the transparency with the way
that it's being utilized we
spend.
A tremendous amount of man
hours, uh, personnel hours to to
resolve these issues, Deputy
Secretary, if you would, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, just to
clarify and provide a little bit
of perspective on this, uh, in,
in 2024, the Department of
Public Safety fulfilled 13,000
requests. We reviewed 308,000
pages.
We also reviewed over 15,000
videos.
And 22,000 audio records.
With a 10 day average response
time. So just to give you a
little bit of a, of an idea of
the volume, um, that these
zippers are coming in to our law
enforcement records bureau and,
and the amount of um staff time
and resources that this demands.
And my understanding also is
that that they're even
requesting like autopsy.
and things like that that
really.
You know, it's bad enough the
person has passed away, but then
you're requesting autopsy photos
that are then being put online.
Uh, and sold to companies that
were sensationalize that. I
don't think that's what our IPRA
is for. It's really for us to
To have that transparency and I
fully support that transparency,
but I think it's really being
abused and we're we're gonna
have to do something about that.
Legislature at some point.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt,
you're correct in that the
privacy issue is very concerning
to us.
Someone request us into their
home.
To address an issue that's
happening in their home by law
required to record that.
And, and now I don't think when
you called that you have the
anticipation that your life
story was gonna be out there for
everyone to see.
And, and that's a, that's a
serious concern for us as well.
We're, we're doing what's
mandated by the law.
But I have serious privacy
concerns what's happening inside
people's homes and there's
things that people in in their
darkest moments will share with
us that quite honestly should
not be shared with anybody who
requested.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you both of you, all of
you, and, and please pass on to
your officers how much I
appreciate what they do for us
and uh.
we support them. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brent.
Senator Tobiasson, then I have
uh Senatorary compost for the
second time.
I thought I heard my name, Mr.
Chair. OK, thank you. Um, so I
am new here. I'm a freshman
senator, so I'm trying to catch
up and it's gonna take me a
little time, so we probably
should visit.
But on the surface, it just
looks like we aren't funding
you.
Appropriately. I'm, I'm making a
gross generalization here and
I'll get some of the history on
this, but your friends over with
the public defenders team just
told us that they show a pretty
significant uptick in in
projected cases. So can you give
us some statistics as far as
where you all seem statewide,
um, what are the increases in
crime? I know we're told here, I
think in Bernna Leo that crime
is down, um.
I think we all have questions
about that. So what are you
seeing right now and where are
you projecting?
Mr Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you.
Um, I appreciate the question,
you know, uh, crime might be
down in in certain categories,
but I can tell you that the
volume of work for police
officers certainly is not.
Uh, again, we're, we're
shorthanded, and there's never a
shortage of, of calls for
service uh in general that
require police officer's
attention.
Additionally, you can always
just go by just to call for ser
service because there's a lot of
mandate placed on us and how we
handle a call for service,
right? And so if you have a
layered response to a problem
and you're required to
de-escalate. You're required to,
to provide crisis intervention
services. At the end of the day,
you're just gonna get a number
on the back end of that call
that says that, you know, this
is, this is the final crime
stat. When you look at how many
Uh, how much manpower went into
properly handle that call for
service to make sure that we
providing the right service that
to de-escalating to make sure
that we're working with all of
our other partners. Those are
numbers that are hard to
quantify.
And, and so our police officers
do a tremendous job across state
New Mexico and, and, and the
Mexico State Police no different
to make sure that we're meeting
that expectation of our
community to handle the calls
for service properly. It's not
just one or two officers showing
up on the call, and then there
you get your stats. Um, there's
a tremendous amount of officers,
a lot of times needed for each
call for service. And so, um,
I hope that answers your
question a little bit as far as,
as what's needed for for a
resource.
And so uh I'll turn over to
Chief and see if he has any
additional to add for that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Tobias and so
just for a little bit of, of, of
perspective. So I think
Last year I think crime was
technically down from the year
before, but obviously that
crime.
Was up a significant amount in
in several years before, um, but
just a couple of quick stats
just to kind of give you an idea
of the trajectory of activity.
So for state police for the
fiscal year, the last completed
fiscal year, uh,
We had 11% increase in arrests.
We had a 39% increase in DWI
arrests.
At an 18% increase in criminal
investigation cases.
17% increase in narcotic
investigations.
Um
And I think our overall our
arrests and citations were built
up 11%, so.
There was no shortage of work.
OK, thank you, Mr.
Thank you, uh, Senator Campos,
for a 6 time. Uh, thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, and at this
time I defer to my distinguished
colleague, Senator Steinborn,
because he hadn't had his first
shot and then I'll come back and
I didn't mean to go and use that
term, but that's so.
Senator Steinborn, if I may
Mr. Chaman.
That's why Senator Steinberg,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um.
director, I just wanted to thank
you, your, your department for
what you do and uh thank
everybody here for the work you
do. We recognize how difficult,
dangerous it is, valuable it is
to the citizens, so I, I want to
thank you for that. I see, um,
Captain Larcher, forgive if I
use your wrong right, but, uh,
Las Cruces, uh, in the back and
the whole Las Cruces team. I
appreciate you guys.
And, uh, Chief, I just want to
publicly thank you because it
was never really public and it
was, you know, the grand scheme
of things, not the biggest thing
in the world, but I want to
thank your department for
increasing the death benefits to
our search and rescue uh
volunteers in the state. It's
really unique, and I, I didn't
know before I really got into
the work that search and rescue
volunteers who go to some of the
most difficult environments to
help rescue people.
Or volunteers, but they actually
have to be dispatched by the
state police.
They have to be given a mission
and that this volunteer.
Apparatus basically is an
extension of our public safety
and the state police. It's a
really unique law that we have.
But, um, the director.
Recognizing and being educated
that are death benefits for
these volunteers was kind of
inadequate, raised them.
To a significant appropriate
level so that we can strengthen
that capacity to say, I just
want to acknowledge you.
Sir, and thank you again for
your work on that and all that
you uh your department and
officers do.
Thank you very much.
Mhm
Was that your question?
OK, all right. Oh, you know,
usually he goes on for like 15
minutes. I'm surprised that I
got I thought I had a good 10
minutes to talk to my assistant
here, but, uh, obviously that's
the first, uh, Senator
Steinborn, I totally surprised.
Uh, it's about 10 questions to
go, but there's uh Senator
Campos for the 2nd time. Thanks
again, Mr. Chairman. So I want
to go back to a few things in
terms of the vehicle replacement
cycle. Are you on task, uh, with
that?
cycle on an annual basis, uh,
that's one question. The second
when we start talking about body
cams, uh, the other issue is
with the resources that you do
have, if you will, in the
special, will that carry you
through the next fiscal year in
terms of the body cams update
replacement and, and those are,
are, are two related capital up.
But then the third question that
I have last year uh had
legislation to go ahead and uh
hire if you will, two pilots,
and I don't know what finally
happened there, so did you
increase the number of pilots
that you have for your uh.
Uh, your helicopter and some of
the other uh aircraft that, that
you have.
Thanks chair members of the
committee. I'm gonna go out of
order here. Um, we've made some
progress on the pilots, so I'll
start real quick with the
shortage in the special for the
bodyorn camera. Uh, we owe $3.6
million so we don't have that.
We're currently on a
subscription model for that and
so previously we had a watch
guard, uh, as our body cameras
we've since replaced that with
Axon, that's on the subscription
model, uh, and, and so we do
need a funding to to continue
that. Uh, we have some good news
on, on the pilots.
Um, yeah.
Hard working with Spo and and
restructuring their salary so I
allow the chief to give an
update on the pilots and on the,
the fleet situation.
Sure.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Campos, um.
So I'll start out with pilots.
We did go before the spell
board. Uh, we had to create a
new job classification for
pilots. We were able to do that.
Um, I believe we are currently
advertising um for those uh
positions and we do have a uh
pilot going through the
commission side that's in the
academy right now. Um, so we do
have a couple of different
tracks there that we are, that
look promising to uh increase
our number of pilots in the
agency as it relates to uh the.
Vehicles, um,
As you, as you might recall, I
know we had this conversation in
this committee before Senator uh
Munoz want us to do an analysis
and give a full kind of over
cost to completely get our fleet
back, um.
Where it has been in the past
and where we would like it.
Currently our fleet, uh, we're
retiring vehicles at 150,000
miles or more. We would like to
get back to the 100, 115,000
mile range to retire because uh
our analysis show, you know,
about 115,000 miles or
maintenance costs drastically
start to increase, um, so if
you'll, you'll look at the
budget. I know we kind of talked
about things kind of being
shifted around.
We had requests.
Of 17.9 million in capital
outlay which came out of our
study that we did, um, that
Senator Munoz had requested to
kind of get us to where we
needed to be, um.
That is currently on the LFC
recommendation funded as 6
million under specials, um, so
we do have a
$11.9 million dollar gap there
uh on vehicles and so obviously
any uh assistance closing that
gap would be beneficial for the
overall health of our fleet.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. That's all I have.
you of just have a question on,
on the aircraft, uh, how many
aircraft or what types of
aircraft do you have?
This chair members of the
committee, so we only have
currently have one aircraft, the
A 7, and uh currently we, we
have challenges. We're we're
beyond the, we're outside of the
warranty period at this point,
and we saw a lot of maintenance
discrepancies uh over the last
year. Um, we had a warranty
repairs uh near $800,000. And so
part of the challenge for us in
New Mexico in particular is that
um the aircraft uh is loaded
down for dual missions. So we
have our patrol missions that we
run, uh, if you can imagine, uh.
Helping units on the ground and
then it's also used dual purpose
for rescue missions on our
rescue mission, uh, the
helicopter doesn't see it as
much wear and tear, it's kind of
A to B, if you can imagine.
Whereas when you're working in
the, in the Albuquerque metro
area or any other community is
constantly orbiting and along
with the weight, the altitude
that we're at, the weight of the
vehicle or the weight of the
aircraft, the altitude and being
hot in New Mexico puts a
tremendous amount of strain on
our aircraft. So we only have
the one and we're seeing so many
maintenance disc.
for for a very low amount of
flight time. If you compare that
to some of our other states, um,
Arizona has a total of 7
helicopters and 2 airplanes, uh,
Colorado has fire aircraft, um.
3 helicopters in Utah, 15, uh
helicopters and 11 airplanes in
Texas and we have 1, and we're
trying to do all of it with the
one helicopter, so 5, 5.5 years
ago when uh.
They thought it was a good idea
to take the aircraft and then
outfit it to have a dual mission
capable has actually been a
detriment to the program and so
it's the reason why we were
looking seeking replacements,
we're looking at a
Helicopter that would be rescue
mission possible and also one
that would be for patrol
operations, Mr. Chair.
I, I appreciate that. Uh thank
you for that explanation because
uh yeah, I'm surprised, you
know, I thought maybe you had a,
a few. I I had no idea that we
only have one that had dual
mission and so forth, so.
Yeah.
Uh, any other questions from the
committee? I don't have anybody
uh on the list, uh, so I
appreciate Secretary in Chief
and, and your entire staff, and
thank you for what you do for
our citizens.
You.
uh
you guys can keep it down. Uh,
we got one more committee
meeting, so as you uh leave the
The hearing room, uh we have uh
corrections department.
LFC E, uh, go ahead. All right.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Again, my name is Scott Sanchez.
I'm the LFC analyst for public
safety with me today, my
counterpart from DFA Mr. Diego
Jimenez, Cabinet secretary for
Corrections Department, Alicia
Poo Lucero and their ASC
director, um, sorry.
CFO, yeah, ASC director, yeah.
Ed Smith.
That's it. All right. The very
high level, uh, the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue to the corrections
department by a little over $10
million or 3%.
Where is the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by approximately
$15 million or 4.5%.
Programmatically, the
recommendations largely focus on
covering increases in the cost
of a state-run prisons and
privately operated facilities,
so slightly at different rates.
The main differences are that
the executive recommendation
adds $200,000 in funding to the
program support program for
staff training and recruitment
initiatives at the Corrections
Training Academy and the
executive adds an additional
$1.7 million to increase funding
for the agency's um.
For
Program, uh, that covers, right.
Uh, yeah, transitional living
facilities in the men's and
women's recovery centers.
Um, I'll let Diego add a little
bit more of the differences for
the exec, but we'll have the
secretary.
Uh, thank you, Scott. uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
I actually don't really have
anything to add. Scott did a
good job of covering all the
differences.
All right, Madam Secretary. Oh
yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that, Diego.
Uh, all right, I'm Alicia Defo
Lucero. I'm the cabinet
secretary for the corrections
department. Uh, it's good to be
sitting here with uh these
gentlemen and sitting before you
again today, uh, so you all have
a copy of our slide show. I
think we might be one page
ahead, uh, just a couple slides
I want to draw your attention to
the first one there, uh, well, I
guess 2nd 1, whoever's
controlling the slides, uh,
corrections department
leadership, I've included this
slide here just so that you all
can see, uh, the, the, the
director level members of our
team and also
to let you know that these folks
are available to you, uh, at any
time that you might need a
question, uh, for your
constituents or if you're ever
interested in coming and
visiting one of our facilities.
I just want to make sure that
not only myself but that my team
is available to you. They're all
sitting behind me too, so if you
wanna ask him questions, uh,
please feel free. Uh, the next
slide over what you'll see is
just uh our locations and so in
the first picture there you see
the uh facility locations and so
what it shows you.
is where we have our locations
and you see the state
facilities, uh, state operated
institutions are there in
Clayton, Grants, Las Cruces, Los
Lunas, Roswell, Santa Fe, Santa
Rosa, and Springer, and then we
have a, a private facility
operated by the Geo Group in
Hobbs, uh, the Lee County
Correctional Facility as well as
a contract where we take up a
portion of the facility in
Chaparral in Otero County, uh,
where they provide.
Uh, proprietary sex offender
treatment uh for a number of
our, our population, uh, in the
second, uh, picture there what
you see is a breakdown of our
probation and parole regions. So
in the probation and parole
division, we have uh 46 district
offices that are located across
the state. They're broken down
by these regions as you can see
here, we also have an interstate
compact office and an office of
security threat intelligence,
where they work closely on
operations.
with our local law enforcement,
state police, US Marshals, uh,
things of that to that nature to
go after uh do warrant roundups
and uh going after absconders
and and uh other things like
that in the community working
towards public safety, um.
Not included on the slide, but
something that we did in about
2019 was we created a separate
budget program code for uh
reentry, and that was primarily
because uh when I first started
in this role, uh, and I had been
with the department for those of
you that don't know me, uh,
since 2001 is when I started as
a classification officer. I've
spent a lot of time in a variety
of different positions in uh
facilities across the state, but
one of the things that I had
noticed over the years was that
reentry had always been
sort of
thought about as an afterthought
or for some administrations it
was important and so they they
would create positions like the
reentries are or whatever it was
that they called it at the time,
but either they would lose
funding or it just stopped being
a priority. And so the agency
really wasn't doing a great job
before um doing work to prepare
people for release, um, making
sure that they had a viable job
skills and things of that nature
upon their release and um so
when, when we created the uh
budget program code, we pulled
staff and
functions outside of our adult
prisons division and our
probation and parole division.
We combined those areas and then
we expanded services. So now
we're doing a much, much better
job of providing uh education,
vocational training, and then
with our corrections industries
division, which is a separate
enterprise fund within the
agency, uh, combined the work
between those areas we're able
to start planning for release
210 days before a person gets
out and well before that we're
doing treatment and
job training, uh, variety of
things, uh, located in our
facilities across the state,
providing a lot of different
types of programs that we, we
had never been able to provide
before. Uh, so enough about the
agency, now I'll move on to the
money stuff, uh, so moving on to
that next slide. This is just a
really high level overview and,
uh, I mean, really all it does
is shows you the breakdown of
our 25 operating budget, the
executive recommendation for FY
26 alongside
the LFC recommendation for 26
and then uh in that last column
you see the uh difference
between the two recommendations
and we break it down by budget
program code include a total
there at the bottom, uh, the
main thing I want to have uh
committee members take away from
this slide is just to see that
the executive recommendation
includes what we believe is a
modest 4.5% increase over FY 25.
All right, on that next slide,
uh, recommendations.
This just shows you some of the
real major differences, won't
read through the entire slide,
but I will just point out a
couple of uh basic things for to
draw your attention to. One of
the main differences between the
executive recommendation and the
LFC recommendation is that we're
asking for a flat budget in the
community offender management,
uh, budget program code which
covers all of probation and
parole, where the uh LFC.
is actually reducing the
community offender management
area by a million dollars, and
then in the uh
In the area of reentry, we were
asking for a 1.7%, which is
supported by the executive, an
increase of 1.7 million not%,
sorry about that, and, uh, at
the same time the LFC is
decreasing the reentry division
by $551,000 and in the IMA area
we're asking for a 13.1% dollar
figure, million dollar increase
and the LFC is just $1.1 million
below that number.
Uh, moving on to the next slide,
and I'll just go over this one
relatively quickly. I've spoken
to some uh committee members
before the committee regarding
this subject, but, uh, this is
not about our request moving
forward, but rather a
supplemental request that we
made for us to close our FY 25,
uh, safely and uh so what what
it was was we asked for $7
million general fund, uh.
ple ment al to close out FY 25
primarily to cover salaries and
benefits for correctional
officers and facilities and also
to cover a significant shortfall
in our behavioral health and our
medical services inside a
facilities and so what we've
done so far is implement some
austerity measures to see what
we can do to bring that number
down, but ultimately we, we need
a supplemental in this area, uh,
I've provided you on the second
half of the
Slide some items that we've
identified as solutions, uh, to
meet the immediate needs of that
supplemental request, and one of
them would be of course to adopt
the executive recommendation and
provide a $7 million in general
fund for that supplemental. Uh,
the next one would be, uh, and
this is after we're talking
austerity measures, uh, doing
things like maybe not ordering
some things that we would
otherwise order in our
warehouses and um working
towards other methods of cutting
costs, we
that we could move forward to
close out FY 25 with about $5
million general fund, of course,
is preferable, but in the event
that that's not a possibility.
We do have other state funds
available to us in the
penitentiary income fund, and
so, uh, as a last resort we
would ask that you please fund a
$5 million supplemental request.
From, uh, either general fund or
or uh other state funds.
And uh in this next slide,
What you see is just the lots of
information kind of about our
corrections industries division.
I mentioned this briefly before,
but what this area does
is
It's a self staining part of the
departments and enterprise fund
within the agency and what they
do is they provide vocational
training, a lot of meaningful
work activities. They produce
goods and services, and they're
also working hard to build the
social skills and the work
skills or inmate populations,
uh, one of the things I
mentioned in the prior committee
and I wanna, I'll just make sure
you're aware of it and and
invite you to come and visit
anytime. Uh, we opened a a
little store in Santa Fe right
outside of our administration
building called Old Gumby's
Country.
store and in this little store
we sell uh products that are all
made by inmates, so they're
either made in our, our
different shops like our welding
shops or carpentry shops, um,
but we also sell inmate arts and
crafts there and other things
that they make, so you'll find a
woven, uh, rugs, blankets, etc.
pillows, really neat stuff, uh,
crochet and other things like
that that the uh men and women
are producing in our facilities
that are available for sale to
the public. Uh, the reason I'm
even talking about CI at all.
is because uh they would like to
take over the operations for
commissary. So right now we use
a private company to do
commissary and we would like to
take it over, but in order for
us to do that, we would need a
budget increase, we believe of
$5 million in order to increase
in our spending power, our
purchasing power rather, so we
can buy bulk items to resell
back to the inmate populations,
uh, in doing this, we believe
we'll be able to provide the
product quite a lot cheaper for
the
inmate population and then of
course it's another way of uh
reducing our dependence on
private organizations. Uh, this
is not something that was
included in the exact re or in
the LFC wreck, it's something
that we kind of thought about
right before session started,
and so I bring it up to you just
hopefully that you might
consider, uh, increasing our
budget there, no general fund
money at all. It's
self-sustaining money that we,
we just increase our purchasing
power to sell and the money just
keeps getting put back into CI.
That's how that.
works. And, and then the final
slide you see is a just inmate
population and general fund
budget growth, and I include
this slide only to show you that
our populations are increasing
and I show the population
increases relative to what has
happened in the budget from FY21
through the present time. And uh
with that, Mr. Chair, I will
stand for your questions.
Thank you for the presentation.
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I notice, uh,
One of the main complaints that
they have.
Is that you move borrow money
around from different blind
items.
And Madam Secretary, I was just
wondering.
Um
Why tell why you do that if you
could.
Mr. President.
Mr. Chair, yes, Senator Woods,
um, so we, we learned, uh, in
working with Senator Munoz,
thank you, and, and of course,
uh Chairman Small, um, from
House Appropriations that the
essentially what we were doing
at that time was we were moving
money from the 200s in order to
cover costs in things like uh
facility maintenance because you
know capital is one of those
issues we just never get
anywhere close to what we need
in capital, but we still need to
do things like replace locks,
doors.
windows and variety of other
things to maintain our
facilities, um, and so a lot of
times we were moving money from
that area, they can see savings
in order to
Make up for some of those
deficiencies we had in those
areas, uh, and we did.
We learned our lesson and I
believe that we've shown that to
you now and that we haven't done
bars since the time that we had
that conversation with Senator
Minos, uh, what we realized was
that we were asking for the
right amount of money, but we
were not necessarily asking for
it in the right place and so it
really took us having to work
with these, with these folks
with this body and go back and
say how can we do this right so
that we're asking for money in
the right place, making sure
we're giving the legislator.
Legislature a chance to uh
appropriate the money in the
right places. Yeah, and, and
with that, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, I know we've talked
about uh uh other fun, other
state money transfer to your
budget and, and
Miss I was.
You know
It, it says for behavior health
and other health costs is where
you're needing money. Could you
elaborate on that a little bit,
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chair, absolutely Senator
Woods, so, um, two areas
actually, so behavioral health
and health costs in so we have
our our contract with our uh
medical vendor, which is Wexford
Health. We had been in a
contract with them and then we
went out to RFI to get
information on medical vendors,
we ended up selecting them. They
were the most cost efficient and
it provided continuity of care
since they had already been our
vendor, um, but when we
renegotiated the contract,
services changed. There were
greater needs like
for example, they have increased
some of their nursing staff to
provide Medicaid assisted
treatment, which is something
that we're starting this year,
um, and then we also asked them
to include a mental health
component, so they're in
facilities where we have a very
difficult time hiring full-time
state employees. We asked the
vendor to include those
positions in their contracts, so
our numbers went up there. I
mean, not just for those
reasons, but also for just the
higher cost of doing business in
general.
And so what this will do is
cover a shortfall in that
contract, and then it will also
cover costs and salaries and
benefits in the area of uh
covering over time and other
things like that to make sure
that we're staffing our
facilities appropriately.
OK, ma'am, madam sectarian
Merman, this is one that's plumb
off the wall, so please, uh, I
apologize for it, but my, my
local
County are telling me, you know,
why should we have state
prisoners.
When we're clearly not getting
paid to do that.
And I know this probably may not
be in your wheelhouse
whatsoever, but uh.
It's a question that they always
hit me with, so Mr. Chair.
Battery Secretary, if you could
kind of brief me on that.
It's because we're picking up
their cost of their healthcare
and that's an offsetting cost
where mentioned secretary.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Um,
Senator Woods, it's very much
within my wheelhouse. In fact,
we do pay for uh any inmates who
are our inmates, and when I say
that, what I mean is a parole
violator, not a probation
violator, and so sometimes
there's some confusion between
counties and us or sheriff's
offices and us, and it's a
conversation we have with New
Mexico County Association
regularly, but the way that we
identify uh the a client whose
hours who we
will pay for it if it's a person
who was supervising on parole.
They go to a county jail on a PV
parole violation. And so what we
try to do is get those people
moved to our facilities as
quickly as possible. If that's
not possible, we pay for every
single day that they're housed
in any county jail, and there is
a separate fund, uh, $5 million.
Thank you very much. That's
managed out of DFA that
specifically to cover the costs
of state inmates in jails, but
just to be clear, a person who's
on probation is sentenced to
probation by the court, and they
are being sent back to jail by
the court or by law enforcement,
and so those are not people that
we uh would cover the cost for
in jails.
OK, well, thank you for that
definition.
Thank you much for, uh, Mr.
Chair.
And I just think you look like
the president today.
Governor, thank you, uh, I have
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, it makes me happy that
I'm not the only one that gets
that confused, um, Mr. Chair and
secret, I may be a little
biased, but I think you're one
of the best, if not the best
secretary that we've had for
corrections. Um, in my
recollection, and so I
appreciate the work that you do
and that your staff does. Um,
for the LFC analyst, I'm
wondering,
Um, first of all,
What is the reentry success.
Anybody have those numbers? like
what's the success? Is the
re-entry helping people not be
recidivate and come back? Is it
successful?
Uh, I can respond to that, Mr.
Chair, Senator Trujillo, uh, so
we, yes, we've seen a
significant reductions in our
re-entry numbers. Uh, now just
to be clear, re-entry calculated
over a 3-year period, right, so
I wouldn't necessarily be able
to know that what I'm doing
today is making a difference
until 3 years from now, which is
sort of frustrating, but we have
cut reentry numbers several
years in a row. We did start to
see some increases in uh 2020.
5 in our first and 2nd quarter,
well, actually just our first
quarter reporting, but still
overall we're at least 10% lower
than what we were, um, in fact,
in 2019, the number was 49.2%,
uh, which was our, our
recidivism rate, and then it
dropped down progressively from
there. It was 44, then 44.1 or
44.5, then 44.1, 37.5, uh, then
35, 39.2, we had a
little spike and we saw it go up
again at 41, and now we're
starting to see a reduction
again in quarter 2 at 37.
Well, that's great. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. So, um, back to
the LFC recommendation. I'm
wondering why we're recommending
a lower amount than the 2025
operating budget.
So Madam Chair Senator or Mr.
Chair, Senator Trujillo, I think
that the
Do we want to keep in mind is
that when we look at the
re-entry numbers, right? We can
see that um
It's never been below 35%. That
was the, the lowest it got in
about 2023. That was great.
We've seen it tick back up. So
the question that we ask is
what's working, what's not? And
the goal is not to cut funding
to this program, but we see that
vacancy savings would largely
cover the amount that was taken
out of that budget, we shifted
that funding back to the inmate
management and control program,
which is where the cut took
place last year, um, you know,
about $10 million was removed
from that program's budget
because that was the slush fund
that kept getting.
money barred out of it to cover
costs that were for, you know,
facilities maintenance for
contracts.
Corrections department's been
great about working with us to
kind of rectify some of that. I
mean, since 2013, the LFC in
this body has been asking for a
statewide facilities management
plan.
Money got put in the budget last
year, went out to RFP, they're
working now. So LSC sees this as
a maintenance year for this
budget. The goal is to put money
where it needs to be in order to
maintain the operational level.
If you look at the, the high
level, we put the number at
about 102.5% of operational
costs for FY 24.
Um, it's hard to swallow the
budgets need to grow 3 to 5%
every year just because of the
passage of time and so kind of
counter to that when we look at,
you know, the fact that the
budget for this agency has grown
by almost 90% as the population
of inmates under their control
has gone down in the last 10
years. We're just trying to
right size this and make sure
that as we wait for the results
of that facility's master plan
as we wait for an analysis
that's gonna tell us probably
the unpopular opinion that we
need to close a facility or two.
And then decide which ones are
going to get the ax.
Until that conversation gets to
happen, we're just trying to
keep things where they are, make
sure that these prisons can
operate safely. They can operate
with the staffing levels that
they've got and then we could
have the tough conversation
going into next year about
what's gonna, what the
corrections department's gonna
look like in FY 27, 28, 29.
Thank you, Mister Chairman. I
will just remind the committee
that I paid nearly $12 for 2
dozen of eggs last week, so the
costs going up 3% is 90% is,
yeah, that's about what I 90% of
what I paid higher than what I
paid last year at this time.
No more eggs, I guess.
Um, I, uh, so I'm wondering, um,
I'm looking at page 7, for the
correction industries and, uh,
uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm excited to
hear. I'm gonna go by that store
and see what I can find that I
might enjoy, right? That's I
really like that idea. What's
the balance right now of that?
Is it a revolving fund? Is it a
what is it?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Trujil, I will have Mr. Smith go
into detail about that, but just
to be clear, it's an enterprise
fund, so they are self
sustaining. They make the money
and then they invest it back
into programs, but Ed, you know
the numbers, so.
Uh, excuse me, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Senator Trio. So right now, I
think the fund balance, we're
still waiting for our final
audit to be released by the
state auditor, but it's gonna be
about $2 million. The money
we're requesting for this is new
revenue that's going to be
generated. It's so we do about
between 5 and 6 million a year
in the canteen sales, so we
would basically be just taking
it over in the program. So it's
not using fundal, it's
generating all new money. OK.
All right, Mr. Chairman, thank
you for that and um all of the
boards and commissions that are.
LLD or Enterprise too, so that's
a, that's a thing that's uh I
understand. Um, you did talk
about, um, some of the skills
that the um or being uh learned
in that. I heard welding, um,
you're looking at taking over
the commissary. What are some of
the other skills and are
included in that, are there
business planning, um, classes
and and opportunity to learn how
to run your own business. It
sounds like the common
might be helping, could be
helping with that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo.
So many exciting things are
happening all over the place at
different facilities and a lot
of it is collaborative work
between corrections industries
and the reentry division, um, so
things like we, we have welding,
carpentry, uh, we do.
I mean, I don't know that it's
an industry necessarily, but it
certainly is preserving artwork
and that's the, the weaving with
the looms and everything and the
work they're doing there is
beautiful. We, we've got a CDL
class happening now in I believe
3 different institutions, uh, we
are working very closely as well
with uh the Department of
Workforce Solutions. We're able
to get federal funds, Iowa and
things of that nature to cover
certain costs for uh classes to
take place, so we have HVAC
right now in Otero in Santa Fe.
We're looking to expand.
have that all the time. We have
a culinary arts classes are
taking place in Santa Fe with uh
that uh famous chef, uh,
Fernando Ruiz, and he's teaching
the inmates how to, how to
teach, you know part of that,
the organization that he works
with has a component where they
teach life skills and those
business planning types of
skills, but we also work with
women in leadership, goodwill
industries, a lot of other
entities and vendors that we
were that we partner with and
they provide a lot of those
types of service.
services for us, things like
mock interviews, uh, how to
build a budget, how to use
computers, um, and then
recently, in fact this year in
July we rolled out tablets for
the first time ever, which is
awesome and they have lots of
built-in programs and things
that the inmates can kind of
play with uh free of cost on
their own time so that they can
pick up additional skills and uh
and abilities uh but just every
facility has something different
going on, and of course that
means that we're still working
really hard on our
education, so high school
equivalency is one of our major,
uh, priorities, things also like
uh higher education. We work a
lot with higher ed department as
well, so, uh, we're trying to
partner everywhere we can
maximize as much federal dollars
as we can just to expand
services everywhere.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will
just say if you haven't gone to
eat it, Escondido, it is amazing
food, and they were one of the
vendors at the uh Super Super
Bowl, um, which was just this
last Saturday, and my husband
and I both voted for them as the
best seafood soup and the best
overall soup. They didn't win,
um.
They were delicious. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Just a few things and uh uh one
of them is to follow up with um.
What Senator Trujillo was
talking about.
On um
Well, first of all, how many of
the inmates?
do not have a high school.
diploma.
Mr. Chair, I'm looking behind me
at my reentry, uh, director, and
he and I both went like that. I
don't know for certain, but we
will get that number to you. I
will point out though that we
are beating our own record and
in fact we have uh such we've
improved our rates in high
school education equivalency
earnings so significantly that
of all of the higher learning
institutions in the state, uh, 2
years running, we've beat every
single one of them and we beat
our own record and so we're on
pace to do that again this year.
uh, the other one, Mr. Chairman,
is um.
Is there any uh
Connection with um
With our institution and also
with our state.
Knowing where we have big
shortage in some occupations
like I'll give you an example
like uh uh accounting, getting
accountants is just a real big
shortage for our state.
And to where that could develop
into.
You know, some of these trades,
you know, a a little bit higher,
you know, I know that uh welding
and some of these other ones are
very popular, but you know, um,
other needs within the state and
you mentioned CDL, which that is
one of them.
Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Gonzalez, we're not necessarily
identifying programs based on
need, but we are trying to
identify programs based on what
those jobs pay out in the world
so that we can make sure that
when people are leaving, they're
able to earn a living wage, a
true living wage, and not do
really anything that would
prevent them from going back to
any other.
Previous behavior that got them
incarcerated in the first place,
uh, but things like HVAC, I mean
that's another one of those
things that we know and we have
talked to various chambers of
commerce. They tell us that's an
area where they're just hugely
short and it's all over the
state, so they tell us not only
is it a very high paying job,
but it's a
It's just in great demand, and I
would say that one area where
we're intentionally focusing on
where shortages exist in our
state is, uh, in the area of
peer support work in uh things
like addiction recovery. We do a
lot of work, uh, not just with
UNim's Project Echo but with the
Office of Per Recovery and
engagement through healthcare
authority to train our inmates
so that they can become peer
educators themselves. That means
when they get out they can
actually
get a job with Medicaid to help
other people either through the
reentry process, like, like our
work with Project Echo or with
really anybody who is dealing
with addiction recovery, so it's
definitely something we
intentionally scaled up for that
purpose. We know there's a huge
shortage of, uh, any types of
behavioral and social service
providers in the state.
Hello, Mr. Truman, just a few
more things, um.
With um
What was the address of that
store?
Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Gonzalez, Director Yates behind
me here is gonna get that. He's
gonna get you a card that has
all the information for the
store, the phone number, the
address, uh, but we're located
on Highway 14 right by where our
office is, uh, so if you're
familiar with Highway 14, you
know, they used to have those
big buffalo corrals, so it's
right past where the buffaloes
used to be right before you get
to the administration building
for corrections right before
Santa Fe County jail and the
state penitentiary.
OK, I'll look for the buffalo.
Oh,
Uh,
so, uh, uh, with the proceeds
that will be there, that will be
back to them or
Who keeps those, whatever sells.
Mister Chair and Senator, it's
sort of two different things. So
one of them is uh inmates, they
work in shops that are CI shops,
so we have a, we have a big
print shop that was one of the
things that we teach printing
and we have a big welding shop,
big woodworking shop, carpentry,
um, metal shop, things like
that. So when the inmate works
in a CI shop, they get paid a
wage for working in that CI shop
and then those proceeds go full.
to reinvesting into corrections
industries programs and when it
comes to the arts and crafts,
the breakdowns a little bit
different in the situation where
an inmate is purchasing the
equipment to make the arts they
say they're buying the canvas
and the paint, then they're able
to set the price on the item
that they're choosing. We we,
you know, we have him give us
like a sliding scale so we can
negotiate with people, uh, but
then when that
Purchas made the item is broken
up into different things, so
part of the money goes to
victims reparation funds, uh,
part of the money gets put into
the inmate account, part of the
money goes back to corrections
industries for reinvestment and
growth in the uh in the area, so
sort of broken down with an
emphasis on restitution.
Um, Mr. Chairman, like, for
example, uh,
Right here on where the rooms
for 317.
committee rooms, the furniture
on the outside.
You know its uh was done all by
prisoners.
So when something like that, is
that just gifted to the state
from.
Agency to agency or?
Or there's a compensation to.
Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez, I
am sure that all kinds of
entities would just love it if
it was gifted, but no, we need
to be able to charge so that we
can purchase the materials and
then also reinvest any uh money
in a couple of things, right? It
covers like the cost of the
staff salaries and things of
that nature in the corrections
industries division, but it will
also be used to be reinvested
back into the area, so whether
that's for purposes of
expansion, starting a new
program, whatever that is, but
we do charge for our furniture.
although I do believe there are
prices are very reasonable and
uh I would say more than
competitive with the with public
entities, uh, in, in fact,
you'll see that on our store
you'll be able to find things
like dining chairs and tables
for very reasonable prices,
solid wood, beautiful work.
Very well, the last thing go,
Mr. Chairman, is um.
One of my constituents knew that
you were going to be here. So
they emailed me then they wanted
me to give you this and then we
can follow up after.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I am
looking for the rest of you in
the spiral bound, what is that
number 3, our spiral book, page
156 and in FY 23 you gave back
almost $2.8 million to the state
FY 24 you gave back just over
$700,000 to the state. And this
year, you're, you haven't asked.
So can you help me fill in the
gap? What's changed so
significantly for you.
Uh, sure, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Tyson as the
secretary mentioned working with
Senator Munoz and then in
addition in FY 24.
The, the budget that passed, we
are as an agency had already
moved $9.8 million from salaries
and benefits to contracts and
other costs to kind of start
that off and then with the LSC
recommendation and we got
adopted last year, the reduction
in inmate management control
program kind of right size, so
to speak, so the reversions have
dropped in that 2.8 million was
about 7/10 of 1% of our budget,
so it's like minimal.
Out of our 300+ million general
fund, but by right sizing the
budget and some of our own
movements, it's, it's dropped
drastically.
Uh, I don't mind we overcut them
last year.
I'll admit to that, and I'll
apologize for that. I mean, put
the blame where it is. I will
take responsibility and, and we,
we overcut them because what
happened the prior year. So
that's why we got a backfill, so
That is mine and Adrian's fault,
we'll take the blame in public
and admit to that and so we'll
fix that and get you right size
this year.
I see, Mr. Chair, and then going
to the commissary, which is a
really neat idea. I'm a business
coach, so I love that idea. Um,
do you have a pro forma and can
you tell us what your profit
margin goal is.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Tobiasson, if you don't mind,
I'll bring up director James
Yates, who oversees corrections
industries.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, our goal is to
get it at 35%.
That's where we want our profit
margin to be at, of course,
that's, you know, excluding um.
You know, salaries and, and for
operational things that we have
to take care of as well.
So, and then I think we can, you
know, cut that middle man out.
And you know, you look at if if
mom or dad sent them $10
hopefully we can turn that into
$13 or $14 to make it better for
the citizens that are.
giving money to their family,
they're in prison.
OK
Awesome. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, and the presenters,
you know, you're, I have to echo
what Senator Trujillo said, I'm
always pleased to hear from you.
It's just always great news,
good stuff, very positive,
forward thinking, which is
exactly what we should be doing
with this department. Let's
let's turn a challenge and pivot
positively in life and, and I'm
glad you're trying to do that.
Um, I do have a more specific
question around budgeting and if
you don't have this today, I'd
just like to know what it is. I
think if you look at uh FY 23 on
your very last slide 8.
The FY 24.
It looks like about an 18%
increase from uh, you know, 324
to 325 or whatever. But what
were you, what was the
percentage on
On the um
On the 324 that were transfer
special supplementals. What did
those equal, if you put it all
together as a percentage.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator P, I
think the
Category transfer bars we did in
FY 23 were like the largest and
it was about 20 million, so
probably.
5%, 6%.
You know
So that was transfers. What
about specials and
supplementals. Um, Mr. Chairs or
Senator Padilla, the specials
we've had have mostly been for
like hepatitis C. We had um.
Uh, special in the reentry
program out of our own funds to
help with, you know,
transitional living, the
residential treatment centers,
um.
And we've had some specials to
help implement the electronic
health records over the last
couple of years and there's been
virtually or no reversions out
of any of those. So then if you
fast forward to this year, uh,
well, 24 to 25.
Uh, I'm sorry, 25 to 26, it's
looking like you're looking for
a reduction of 4%.
Well, you got 375 to 314 or 12
mil there, that's about a
reduction in, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, this is excluding the
compensation packages, so you'll
see some things out there where
it shows us with a slight
increase because just the direct
salary and health insurance
benefits we've received over the
last 4 or 5 years is in excess
of 22 million, but this is not
counting those packages, that's
the reduction over 4 years. So
on the upside, what is the
difference uh so you're
Is net net a 4% increase? Is
that what you're
I think I heard the secretary
say that earlier.
Senator Padilla, 4.5% increase.
So thank you. And so, but if you
were to tack on like your
transfer specials and
supplementals, what would that
actually become.
As an increase.
Mr. Chair, Center P, I have to
like
Go back and add that up on
paper. I'm kind of old school,
but um right now in the
recommendations.
Um, the LFC recommendation is
33.9 million out of grow for the
map program the DFA
recommendations 20 million, um,
both have substantial specials
for hepatitis C, the continued
hepatitis C treatment. I think
DFA is 25 million and the LFC's
40, 40 million mix of general
fund and special revenue funds
and so, so you mentioned the hep
C stuff when I was asking you
about 23 to 20.
For. So if you know that it's
out there, and you know that
it's something that you're gonna
have to do. I, I would much
rather there be accurate
budgeting and, and, and the,
the, the real story because, you
know, we give you a budget and
then just so you come in with a
Transfer special and
supplemental or whatever, then
you can just start moving money
all over the place, and that,
that isn't an accurate picture.
So the, the 4.5 really doesn't
sound accurate to me. It sounds
like it's going to be
significantly higher.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
yes, at some point, I think it
would be great if we had Matt in
the permanent base budget, we
had hepatitis C in the permanent
base budget, but we haven't got
to that point yet with the
reductions and we're trying to
get back to where we were at
this point, but that would be
great.
OK, so I am very interested to
know what this really is, if it
doesn't sound like it's really
4.5. It sounds like it's
probably something higher. I
would just like to know so that
we know exactly what this,
these, and I'm probably gonna be
asking that to every department
that comes in here because we
saw some pretty uh interesting
numbers the other day that makes
budgeting kind of a fantasy
camp. I mean, I mean, we can't
have that. I mean, that's no way
to, I said this the other day,
there's no way to run a state
budget or a circus. So, and I'm
sure you want to know this so
that you can plan better.
Would you agree?
Mr. Chair Senator Padilla, I
definitely would. I mean, like
Ed said, right, with math, just
that's an example because it's
so uh.
Present at the forefront right
now, so we're starting it this
year. We're only doing it for
people who are coming to us from
jails that are already on it,
but we don't know what even we
need at all. So what we were
looking for was a money over a 3
year period and we think that
it's gonna be broken down in a
certain way, uh, we really
aren't going to have an idea for
I'd say at least 6 months, but
maybe a year to really know how
much money that will cost us.
Uh, I do hear what you're saying
though, and it would be much
more, uh,
Clear and obvious to not only
this body but to taxpayers in
general to be able to see what
that number is overall. We will,
uh, do the math and get that to
you, um, and I do believe that
we will be able to do that with
Matt and probably hepatitis as
well once we have a better idea
of what the actual cost of that
will be moving forward from the
medication, the staffing, and
all of the various things that
it will take to implement. Well,
thank you, chair. I'm, I really
am very interested to see what
that comes out looking like. And
then the
Excuse me,
the last question I have is, is
along the um the staffing levels
and the vacancy rates. Do you
still have a percentage that
you're not allowed to fill?
And what is that?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Padilla's
not that you're not allowed, but
your guidance from
your superiors might be all
right, let's leave, you know,
we've got to leave 7% vacant.
What is the, the story for your
department? because that's also
got to make it very difficult
for you.
So we definitely have had those
limitations in the past, but
what I'm gonna say is that
There are certain facilities
where if we're able to get the
staff we're telling them come
whether we have the positions
funded or not, but the
positions, uh, the percentages
typically used to sit around 15%
where we were told like if you
hit that mark, then you can't
hire a single additional person
because you won't have the money
to do it, but I've taken the
stance of we have such a
shortage of correctional
officers and positions like
probation officers that if we
have people that want the job,
we're hiring those people who
want the job.
Uh, there's a few exceptions
like, uh, in the Las Cruces
area, for example, we have
almost a waiting list of people
that are wanting to work at that
facility, whereas I have these
shortages, they're fairly
significant in uh facilities
like Santa Fe, where I am
missing staff. So what we're
doing is we're having our HR
staff call those applicants now
and say, hey person who wants to
work in Las Cruces. How about
Santa Fe instead? How about
Santa Rosa instead? We can't
bring you on board yet, but we
will bring you on board in one
of those locations.
So while that is true, I would
frankly rather come back to this
body and ask for supplemental
money and salaries and benefits
before I turn away a person who
wants to be a correctional
officer,
I would agree. I think you're
absolutely right on the mark
there. I, I will publicly say
that, you know, on the staffing
levels, I don't think you should
have a forced vacancy route I
think you should have that 15%
rule or whatever if we budget
you that way and that budget is
signed by a governor, you should
be able to fill those positions
to that level, whatever it is.
I don't know, I don't know what
what how else more clearly to
say that. Otherwise, we should
give you 115% of your, of your
budget that you're asking for
you can actually staff the place
appropriately.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
I don't know that I'm supposed
to respond there, but that would
be awesome.
Yeah, it just, it, it never
make, it's never made sense to
me that we force the departments
to it's fantasyland with those
numbers, you know, so, OK, thank
you, chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Munoz,
thank you just to wrap that up
and let's talk about the FTE
situation because we're short in
the prisons, right? That's the
whole reason you went.
We gave you so much room and
leeway previously, but then you
made the transfer and then we're
like, well, you're really
looking for FTEs or not, that
becomes the issue, but you had
that room, you had that, we know
that they're doing overtime,
they're doing double duties,
right?
Throughout the system and, and
so we can't help you with
recruiting, that's the agency's
job, and, and, you know how that
goes, not that they think prison
is nice and lovely and it's a
great job and it, it's really
not a glamorous job. It's, it's
a hard, tough job, and it's
mentally hard and tough on those
people, and so we get that.
So, but I did admit to you in in
me and Adrian did make a
mistake. We'll admit where he
made mistakes and did that and
we'll get your supplemental and
get you back where you need to
be. I don't have a problem with
you blaming, that's the truth
and you blame me for the truth
all day long.
It won't hurt my feelings and
it's honesty and so.
We'll fix that. We'll work with
you just.
You, you're well aware of the
tire employees, let's get those
guys when they're not doing
double shifts and they have a
family life, and they have some
quality of life and they're not
just at work the whole time and
that'll how we recruit those,
but that's, that's your job.
It's interesting to me.
How do they crochet in a prison.
No.
Mr. Chair, if I, if I may just
to speak on the, on the issue
with the vacancies, so it's not
necessarily the case everywhere.
Well, we do report an overall
vacancy rate of approximately
30%. It's really driven by two
locations and and those two
locations are Santa Fe and uh
and Santa Rosa, but I just wanna
be clear that for right now in
Santa Fe we have 3 prisons on a
compound and 1 of them is fully
closed in Los Lunas we have 3
prisons on a compound. One of
them is fully closed, and in
Santa Rosa.
600 beds, only half of them are
filled, right, so we are trying
to make sure that we're
balancing for purposes of safety
and not burning people out, uh,
there always will be a need for
overtime except in those
facilities that have a 100%
staffing, even though, uh,
believe me, they still are
trying to get some overtime
posts and we're having to work
on controlling that, uh, very,
uh, very closely. We monitor it
very, very closely, um, but how
do they crochet honestly lower
custody facilities. I'm not
trying to give crochet needles
to the, the more.
uh, seriously dangerous violent
inmates just inquiring minds
wanted to know
and so, uh, you know, it's good
to keep them busy and it's good
to try to get him saying, OK,
here's something else you could
do right and if you have an
interest in it, go do it. I was
a trash bag operation working in
Grant. How many trash bags have
we sold? I think I asked you
during this LLC but that was
very interesting to watch him
make trash bags in prison.
Mr. Chair, I have to say it's
not the most lucrative business,
uh, in, in fact, Mr. Yates can
give you actual numbers if you
want to come back up, James, uh,
I mean just the good bad it's
going.
OK, he's telling me I'm gonna
get back to him, so, uh, Mister
Chair, we will uh get back to
you on that, but I will say that
we have determined that the cost
what it cost us to produce each
trash bag and then to sell it
and to be able to be competitive
with, you know, Walmart or
Staples or whoever the big
vendors are out there are, I
don't know that our operation is
really, I don't know that it
makes sense and so it's one of
the things that we're having to
reevaluate.
Then why teach it?
I mean, it's not gonna be a
lifetime goal or lifetime job
that they can come out and
succeed while I have that inside
the prison. Mr. Chair, I echo
that. I agree 100%. It's one of
those things that was in place
for for many years and we kept
continuing it, but as we're
evaluating corrections
industries where they're
actually profitable, where we're
losing money. I think that we
might be finding that we're
losing money in that area and
there are some areas where we
have the ability to be
profitable, but we had been
doing such a bad job in the past
of.
Tracking how that worked, that
we weren't, and now we are, in
fact, Mr. Yates has done an
excellent job of being able to
identify where those financial
shortcomings were and whether
that meant increase the prices
or production or whatever it
was, he's really been able to
make sure corrections indust
industry stays in the black.
And, and then I, I asked you
earlier, I mean, the, the prison
in Lee County is going to come
up for sale.
The state has no interest in,
you told me no, but you may
change your mind, that's your
problem. We have no interest in
buying that prison.
For any shape or reason because
if we have to replace a prison.
It'll probably be in in the 900
million.
And we can buy one that's been
maintained for
And today's market 260 is what
they're saying, but it's a
stranded asset, so who knows
what you could get it for.
Um
We have no interest in buying
that prison, is that still your
stance or?
Mr. Chair, as well as we
discussed, I think that price is
outrageous, especially for the
price that we just paid for the
purchase of the facility in
Clayton, which was the number of
the bonds for the age of the
facility and I believe the
amount of work that needs to be
done. I, I didn't think that
cost was even
Something to be discussed. I
thought it was a complete
nonstarter and so I mean, maybe
if the Geo group came back to us
with a reasonable number, maybe
we can have a real conversation,
but I don't believe that number
to be reasonable and in the
event that we were to build a
new prison, uh, depending on
what happens with the strategic
plant or uh
The plan, the facilities master
plan, um.
I, I would envision one gigantic
facility located in a place
where we could always staff it
with a whole bunch of high tech
stuff that might minimize the
need for same number of staff,
so I don't think that it's a,
it's a fair comparison. I, I do
think that number is outrageous,
and, uh, as we discussed it, it,
I, I believe there's also the
possibility that it could just
simply be a negotiation tactic
or technique, um, and I mean
that's kind of where I'm sitting
now. I'm not sure.
What will happen as we move
forward, but I at this time I
don't believe uh that purchase
price is reasonable to even
consider the prison in Clayton
was really to get rid of the
debt and they, they couldn't
operate that. So that was a fire
sale and not a bad deal for the
state, but it helped everybody
out of the situation.
This is just a flat out
purchase, uh, I mean,
I, I hope you would at least
have a conversation and say, you
know, you shoot us a number
that's reasonable, not what you
think a market rate is, it's a
stranded asset.
There's not really much else you
can do with it.
Uh, in, and so if you're
interested, we should, we should
have that conversation while
we're here because we don't want
to come back and say, oh, we
should have bought that prison.
Uh, not that I'm one of my
prisons, but I mean.
It, it, it's something we may
have to do if we need it, but
not empty beds in the prison
population sounds like we have
plenty, but if we have an aging
prison somewhere other than
grains.
That you can close.
To share, uh, understood and uh
I'll definitely look at it a
little bit closer and if need
be, I'll reach out to you. Yeah,
I think that's something we need
to look at. No, I agree. You're
one of the secretaries that I
trust and we, we worked our
numbers in, in they didn't come
to be true and so I apologize
for that and and so.
Um, but we'll get it fixed and
get it right size, but you know
you do a good job. I appreciate
you.
Thank you.
Mm
Thank you all.
Thank you to members.
Uh, Nadia.
