Good afternoon everybody what
we're gonna here Senator forty
seven before here the rest of
the presentations of the longer
senator Wirth last the quicker
we get them in net for
revocation of his license.
So and I mean I don't know what
your colleagues are you may want
to take some of that one.
L..
And so center what you're going
to see sure thank you Mr
chairman I appreciate the chance
with Senator Diamond this
morning and morning all to
present Senate bill forty seven
this is a bill that passed the
Senate two years ago thirty four
to four went through this
committee what the bill does is
stop a practice in New Mexico
that allows the department of
motor vehicles to suspend
driver's licenses for non
payment of a penalty assessment
of fine or for missing a court
hearing what the bill does not
do is stop motor vehicles from
terminating licenses for lots of
additional full listed in more
serious crimes that's still an
option here's the stunning thing
right now in New Mexico over
three hundred and eight thousand
licenses are suspended.
And so we have a situation where
obviously if if you need to pay
your fines and you can't pay
your fines need a car to be able
to get to work to do exactly
that and yet we have a policy
here that for prevents that from
happening so essentially this
bill would stop that practice it
not only prevents it
pro actively moving forward but
the Judiciary Committee Phelps
that it was important we also
reinstate all the licenses that
have been suspended jobs for the
fine issue or for the failure to
appear it does not mean that
that provide goes away in anyway
it's still there and so again
it's just using the driver's
license as a collection tool
would be barred under this Act
and with that I yield Sierra
thank you Mr chair the bill
removes language that allows in
V. D. the ability to to suspend
someone's driver's license
really just for two two reasons
failure to pay a ticket or
failure to appear in court
additionally as my co sponsor
mentioned it is retroactive
we're if a person's driver's
license is currently suspended
for either of those reasons the
license would be reinstated I
just want to highlight not just
what the bill does was
importantly what it does not do
so this this legislation would
not change the driver's
obligation to pay for the
citation Senator Wirth it does
not eliminate suspensions for
dangerous drivers D. wise would
be included in that and it does
not limit the court's discretion
to impose sanctions of criminal
in criminal or traffic have
cases really what we're doing is
creating a centralized entity
just the courts to respond for
citations and we're removing the
DMV's involvement through this
legislation.
Our expert when is Michael may
have some more comments to make
on as well.
Thank you for having me today Mr
chairman and members of the
committee there I have nothing
else to add of happy to answer
any questions that you might be
very clear up any misconceptions
thank you we know we don't have
anybody on zoom so can go
outings anybody in support.
I'll just do one or two people
on this side and then.
Just wanted to not only all I.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf The New Mexico from
lawyers Association we
appreciate this one for work on
that bill we advocate on behalf
of clients for criminal legal
reform this I partisan measure
seeks to eliminate a cycle of
poverty recidivism affecting
many New Mexicans in this role
state transportation is
essential to a qualitative life
and this reform effort
recognizes that reality the
passage of SB forty seven could
be the legislature's balanced
efforts to get dangerous drivers
off the road and insure the debt
based license suspensions are
not consciously targeting the
most financially vulnerable we
appreciate your support.
Thank you more from that side it
mentioned we're going to.
Thank you Mr chair Deborah
Condit register lobbyist for New
Mexico voices for children
action funding we stand strong
support this thank you thank you
anybody in opposition.
I see state police chief
standing back there of the race
Sander.
Committee that sooner or later
will not be.
to questions from committee
members Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
So we just get this right they
still own
hello yes of whatever the the
penalty just so you get a
speeding ticket hundred Bucks
whatever still but if they don't
show up then there's that the
feet and you're saying no fee
and no suspensions if they don't
show up to give initially to get
their license suspended is that
right.
But in the current world.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator share so the still will
have to pay the fine and any
court costs because it but they
will not have to pay the
driver's license reinstatement
fee to the motor vehicle
division the court still have
the ability to compel people to
come to court by issuing bench
warrants which we know that they
always do at the same time the
issue a notice to motor vehicle
division they issued the bench
warrant and the issue the notice
to motor vehicle but this bill
would get rid of the notice to
motor vehicle.
Senator missed this one second
we don't have the bill we're
getting copies of the bill right
now so as we ask questions just.
So the bench warrant is one
thing but we're not going to
send the police out looking for
folks for a speeding ticket.
in so at least the way I'm
looking at it and.
Please I'm trying to figure this
out for true honest you're not
trying to be smart.
The driver's license suspension
all seems to be a powerful tool
to get people's attention.
Now you've taken that away
because you've taken in the out.
Is that is that correct that
that that the suspension goes
away because motor vehicle
department can no longer they
don't know about it so they
can't spend less.
Mr if I can Mr chair and senator
share all we're doing is
removing infinity's ability to
suspend a license any kind of
sanctions can still be imposed
by the courts and so we're we're
trying to streamline the process
of their doesn't become I think
you there's many cases and in
the D. was not notified of the
right the courts were responding
to one percent from medication
there you could still have for
for a number of reasons is set
at the court's discretion your
license suspended but it would
not be done by motor vehicles
department would be issued then
the courts notifying whatever
vehicles to do it and just Mr
chair if I could one additional
thing that if this is a
habitual thing and you've got
violations that are triggering
points against your driver's
license there's a specific
provision if you cumulated at
least seven points but less than
eleven points and the division
has received a recommendation
from a judge in that scenario
your license can be suspended so
again if this is a have a visual
thing and there's a whole string
of these it's not just wiping
and process not letting any of
them claim you still owe the
money it's just that pool kicks
in when it becomes a real
serious issue.
My only concern Mr chairs that
we were giving up of a valuable
tool of.
Course I don't want my license
suspended for speeding I don't
want to inform for speeding
whatever.
But
But I think there's a valuable
tool I ignoring the court's.
Then there's suddenly it.
A strong incentive for me to no
longer ignore the courts and I
think we're taking that was.
Or this is my concern so how do
we make sure that people than
just don't.
Okay.
I'm not gonna pay this ticket
and I'm not going to go to court
what are you gonna do to me.
So one thing that's important
Senator Diamond said this of
this process is through the
motor vehicles department so
they're not what happens is a
two track process for example if
there's a D. W. why and and a
lot and the licenses revoked or
was a recommendation for that in
the court process there's a
whole separate hearing that
happens in motor vehicles that's
part of that as one as we talked
about the Judiciary Committee so
it's just within the motor
vehicles department you know the
court's going to have a string
of potentially other remedies I
think it's a pot you're right
it's a policy choice for simple
failure to pay a penalty
assessment right now this tool
is kicked in and are I just I'm
still.
I have a much lower number in
terms of the number of licences
currently three hundred eight
thousand licenses suspended that
that's a I mean we only think
about that what happens when you
know for state police when
they've got when they're picking
someone up when they're driving
on a suspended license think
about what that does to the
system of having them having to
come in go through the whole
process of so.
I mean there's a fund there's a
line here and you're right at
the people can be a a collection
tool with three hundred eight
thousand of the suspended right
now I don't think that's really
working to collect the for the
fine.
Mr chair and I read that three
hundred making FIR.
That's currently right now.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee that is the current
number that taxed Representative
reported we didn't have that
updated number but we have it
now and so I have to assume at
least two of you have suspended
license based on the total
number of
I don't know all these dust out
here that most of them were
suspended to Mr chairman and
senator you would be surprised
there's many senators I'd
visited with that have had their
license suspended for this very
reason there is
various heads of agencies that.
Meeting Mr up and our of the
public defender.
All members
it's okay so it actually is an
extremely common practice and I
think what Senator Wirth is
saying is that with three
hundred and eight thousand
suspensions it actually shows
that it is not a good tool it's
so that it's not compelling
people to come and pay
it's something very different in
my experience as a public
defender a lot of my clients
would actually abandon their
license because we could never
afford to pay all of the staff
on underlying costs we're
dealing with some of that with
another bill that we're working
with the courts on
but there's so many things that
can compound which is why that
number would be so high and I
would stress that the courts
still have multiple tools they
can send notices they're
starting to do text text
reminders for people to come to
court on there also now doing
online hearings for which is
bringing down their failure to
appear right and the also of
course the issue bench warrants
and all of these cases most of
my clients were much more afraid
of going to jail than they ever
were of their license being
suspended so many didn't know
that their license was suspended
and then they got arrested on
both the bench warrant and
charged with a crime which was
driving on a suspended license.
To share of my last point is
Monica should be chosen better
Sanchez but thank.
Any other Senator Rodriguez
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth and Senator
Diamond lysine lady here for all
your work I think this bill is
long overdue really I know it's
been tried before and lots of
debate happened and so on and so
now it's time to to do this but
I do have a quick question to
just crossed my mind Senator
maybe you can help me because if
a person decide doesn't pay
their fees then can this also in
addition to all the penalties
that now exist lose your license
for example or suspend
can a person be sent to
collections also because it's
some rate debt so how does that
apply with thank you.
Yeah would be exempt from that
right Mr Chairman as Senator
that's correct the motor vehicle
division has the ability to send
people to collections and they
certainly could do that should
they desire to.
So basically what I'm trying to
get to is that Mr Chairman is
that the penalty is just far too
great not only do they get their
driver's license suspended but
then they for the for the reason
that they can't pay their debt
whatever that rest reason is
behind only they know but then
from there it further or can go
to collections and hurt their
ability in the future to you
tomorrow alone are or anything
because we know it can haunt you
forever when you get sent to
collections so anyway yeah I'm
glad I asked that that's another
reason senators to get to so
thank you Mr chairman I applaud
you for doing this.
Number one make sure the mission
today.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr me Mr president I
guess will be president.
Chairman I'm not sleepy Jones.
So we're talking Mr chair we're
talking about the insurance.
Just for give me an idea how
many the end torture outstanding
today.
Miss Mister chairman and senator
I have no idea how many
outstanding bench warrants there
are I know that there's been a
lot of talk in the news about
the insurance in Bernalillo
county specifically but I don't
know.
Absolutely no idea the name of
the insured gas we've got a
population of two point one
million.
Any any percentage anything.
No okay I will put you know
further.
An analysis that I have he said
it says this is bill create a
conflict with the non resident
violator compact.
Mr chair.
Mr chairman and senator it does
not we worked with the motor
vehicle division and taxed Rav
in twenty twenty one to amend
the language so that it would
not violate the introducing.
Okay.
So I have no idea.
It's not necessary.
For me to know everything I
guarantee.
To tell you the truth.
When I read this yesterday.
When I read the bill yesterday.
I thought to myself one day.
Would they put the stipulation.
In the law.
And the only thing that I could
come up with was that people
were being responsible for their
actions.
They was telling.
It hello they're saying.
You need to be a responsible
service.
And if you could be a
responsible citizen.
We're going to put more in the
law to force you to be
responsible.
Trying to make a.
Action.
By removing your driver's
license because essentially
where I live.
The driver's license issue is
your meal ticket.
I have so far at in the country.
That if I don't have a driver's
license I can operate a business
I can't do anything.
So what would make me rush down
to do something.
Is taking the driver's license I
have even seen bills in the
legislature that put
when the kids don't come to
school when it when they are
absent.
From school to take the driver's
license away from them in the
argument is well they can't work
if you do that they can get
their if they don't have a
driver's license.
And what we're trying to do is
make people responsible
citizens.
So just with that thought in
mind I'm not gonna be able to
vote for your bill because we
need responsibility and freedom.
If we're going to be free we
need to be responsible.
So Mr chair thank you for the
opportunity thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chairman
recognizing me and.
I don't check to number one.
Number two my colleague here
just took all the fire out of
what I had to say as well but
but I have to reiterate the same
thing where is the incentive for
people to change their behavior
if you keep giving them a pass
we keep taking away
response building results.
What you're going to they're
never going to change their
behavior I thought that's what
we're supposed to do with
incarcerations or or things like
that it's it's to to make a
point been given the opportunity
to change behavior this in my
opinion lessons the opportunity
to change people's behavior
you'll have repeat offenders it
will just continue to go on and
on and on at because you're
basically giving them pass yes
courts can implement stuff like
that.
But the nature of the Courts in
today's world is it the they're
pretty much giving everyone a
pass as well and that's the
reality of the situation so
there's no no reason for people
to be responsible for their
actions and the there's no
incentive to change behavior I
can't support the bill but I
appreciate what you're you're
attempting to do but I can't
support it because I think it's
it's wrong for society in
general thank you Mr.
Thank you.
At coming if you have young kids
to drive right a driver's
license when they first get is
freedom right.
And and then the state please
guys in the corner to your kids
speeding down the road or
driving reckless and teenagers
do it right and the cops pulled
over and they give the ticket it
changes their behavior right
because they learn that right
but I played in the in the in
the.
Thirty two times this year
right.
And and seen more people stand
in line state I want to
reinstate my license where to go
back to the course and bring
this paper well you can get this
and you've got to go back and
get that and they did to me and
registrations to I want ten
times or vehicle and and so but
it it affects the person is
really working right but I'm how
we control that that use
behavior because former senator
and all the user judge before my
first to get us going his office
and get a lecture then it in the
**** chewing about my driving
behavior and how I should behave
and that change the way I I
reacted right.
Allow we're going to control
that now because with teams I
mean when Senator house you
don't know what they're up to
right you think you know that
they're up to but you don't the
ship trackers on your kid's
phone but modeled.
But I just for the younger ones
I'm not there there's gonna be
some responsibility right to
teach and that like.
Driver's license he got some
freedom.
You're getting if you get a
ticket there's going to be
consequences right I don't have
any get that and maybe it's not
I don't know we do that the
driver's licenses actually I
think it's a real privilege for
you drivers and I'm more worried
about their behavior than the
adult behavior because the
ticket may be for no insurance
well.
You know where I live people
gonna make a decision to pay
your insurance or the term pay
the power right there's tough
decisions that people that don't
have a lot of money that are
poor that have to make that that
I think this will help.
But I think it's also going to
change the behavior some kids
the same old you know I had
enough to go to court because I
get to get money to go to and go
to court I don't like the
failure to appear part because I
think an appearance by the by in
front of the judge helps and
change that behavior or gives
them a motive to fix it or not
do it again whatever
so I like it but I just have
that question about you know you
can as a parent can Graham by
the collar you can tune them up
everyone that they're gonna be
kids and kids can be kids my
kids a six this morning doubled
over by sheriff you know.
And they're twenty three and
twenty one well nothing I can do
about it you've didn't stop the
stop sign and that's part of the
law but that change our behavior
for the day because again do
they stop at every stop sign
they went to during the rest of
the day and stop light make sure
that we're hoping
I agree with that when we I know
the Supreme Court Center Wirth
took away they did a path for a
bill that was pushed a couple
years ago and they said that you
cannot charge a fee.
As spring court says fees are
illegal.
I know if you read that case or
not I I'm not a lawyer so I read
it so I know that the the the
Supreme Court is bringing to
build takeaway fees for the
heirs and and I think as we move
forward after changes to provide
so that we don't have a hole in
their budgets I understand that
you know some of these go to
specified agencies in what they
do this is not a big number this
is
first years one point six and
then it drops to fifty eight
thousand six hundred fifty seven
thousand in recurring costs
I just don't know how we can be
careful as we move forward
because every little six hundred
thousand heads up increasing got
ten of it six million and we
gotta we gotta watch it so I
just the failure to appear just
doesn't make a lot of sense
because I think that they have
to take time and after of course
then they know they got some
skin in the game so.
Any other questions from
committee members see non.
Have a motion moved to pass Mr
chair the motion for do pass
have a second by Senator
Hemphill we call the roll.
Senator Burt.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
No.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods nope.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator then yes yes.
So we have to pass thank you for
your time.
That is.
We're gonna start with the
district attorney's.
and we're gonna start with the
game a list going the.
Yes.
We're gonna start with them and.
Mr chair we have the vice
president of the New Mexico
district attorneys association
Farber remote.
That's alright with you.
Good afternoon.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Brandon gray I am the LFC
Judiciary analyst I'm joined by
Mario simply at the DFA
Judiciary analyst as the chair
said we'll go through the
district attorney
recommendations and now I'll
give a brief overview pouring
into with some of the materials
you have and then we'll get
right into it
if you'd like to read the policy
analysis for the judiciary
agencies that's in volume one
page fifty eight
if you'd like to see the budget
narratives the LFC budget
narratives that's volume two
starts on page thirty three and
if you want to map at any point
of the judicial districts that's
in volume three page forty
three.
The first page of your packet
should have a high level that
looks something like this the
breaks down all the districts
the LFC and executive
recommendation the page after
bullets.
Thank you to which should be in
that district attorneys packet.
All right
so start summarizing that now
the LFC recommendation increases
district attorney budgets by
five point six percent the
executive increases it by three
point two percent the LFC
recommendation contains a cop
one point three million for
attorney and staff compensation
at two percent targeted so above
the statewide at the statewide
employees so under the LFC
recommendation attorneys and
staff to receive seven percent
compensation increases in FY
twenty four there's also a
moderate work load adjustment
given shared between districts
in the LFC recommendation hands
all note that those
recommendations fully fund
request to swap general fund
with the with a federally funded
positions.
The last and the last thing I'll
draw your attention to is on
page three the special
appropriations
the one the one that's missing
from your packet from the DA
packets in the AODA packet is a
two million dollar special
appropriation recommended by the
LFC Act for recruitment and
retention for districts
statewide.
with that Mr chair all now have
do a remote give her
instructions.
what was the house REC.
Mr chair the HFC adopted LFC for
all districts except except for
the twelfth.
Thanks at the twelve to the
state Mr chair in that district
there was an expansion
recommended by the executive
that was not recommended by LFC
and that districts preference
was the executive.
They add up the number for the
twelfth in that.
Today Dr number the they took
the executives is wrecked on the
twelve to the twelfth that's
right.
This one check so members know.
What's happening over there
great.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Romo landed elected
district attorney for the
thirteenth judicial district and
I'm also the vice president of
the New Mexico District Attorney
Association Mr mine toria was
under the weather so that's why
he sent his regrets for not
being here.
On behalf of the New Mexico
district attorneys association
we have submitted.
Another number but three
priorities which we would we
would **** to be considered the
first priority is an increase in
the general fund for the
administrative office of the
district attorney
the second would be a unified
priority requests for expansion
of the administrative office of
the district attorney's for two
permanent full time employees
and the third the final and
continued priority that affects
all of the district attorney's
offices is enough funding to
meet the continued demands of
recruitment and retention of all
staff particularly attorneys
the administrative office of the
district attorney
will I thank you Mr Valdez go
into more detail but a lot of
the funding that was lost for
training is what this general
fund expansion is four to make
apps for some of the training
needs that they have that effect
and benefits all of the district
attorneys across the state we
also submitted a letter through
Senator to Senator Steinborn
two first of all
On behalf of to to to begin
restructuring the process of how
acted and pointed district
attorney's pay structure
is is calculated to remain
consistent with and in
proportion with the own comp our
own compensation plans so we've
made
competitive in that regard with
other agencies and other than
standing for questions I will
just on behalf of the
association I do we do want to
express our thanks for all of
the work that that you all do as
well as on the the continued
support of our budget request
to talk with the team.
Did you want me going to the
agency requests are not yet.
So I I will stand for questions
the committee members at this
time Brendan are you from DFA.
If they have any wrecks or.
Comments on that VFM and
comments excuse Mr I forgot to
Mr Smith Madam Mr chair
committee members DFA like we
went this process yesterday in
the house and we have reached
consensus on all performance
measures with LFC for the AODA
and all the days offices and
will just as they come up we'll
go back and forth and tradition
of that please use our that's
the scenario don't be nervous.
I think we're good thank you
we're gonna call of the
thirteenth barber Romero okay
did you have.
Mr chair yet do Romo is the
thirteenth DA so we can just
keep loans that nobody told me
that I'm sorry.
Mr chair like Mr Smith said I
think we'll rotate back for
second get to tired of either
one of us
and yeah so this is agency to
sixty three page twenty three in
your packets if you'd like to
fall on their and then falling
to page fifty one
the district intense Santa
Siebel and filling to counties
and the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
for this agency by twelve point
nine percent the executive
increases it by five percent the
primary differences
compensation.
Going from for each district and
also in the stress district
there's LFC contains additional
revenue to fund on unfunded but
authorized FTEs I'll have to do
a Romo make your presentation.
This.
What was the point market would
make springs to order DFA make
their comments and then we go
to.
And your name Sir.
Mr chairman assimilated DFA of
Mr pre covered everything for
the thirteen second pass on
today Ramona except the remote
thank you Mr chair them my name
is Barbara how and I am the
district attorney for the
thirteenth judicial district I
also have with me today my CFO
and I've been of utis because
sounds as well as my chief
Information technology director
you that good Ole who put
together the numbers that you
see in the handout.
I personally want to thank all
of the committee members as well
I know that that what you all
have to do is
Easy and I know that when
everybody has their hand out
it's it's a taxing job that you
have we do appreciate
you it's supporting our
budgetary needs our agency is is
only asking for increased to
fill the line vacant positions
and an increase in compensation
so that we can bring all staff
up to the mid point pretty in
New Mexico District Attorney
Association approve salary
schedule and that's again to
keep moving for in trying to
tackle this retention
recruitment issue I would I do I
would like to note that our
agency has been very fiscally
responsible we had is here a lot
of finding for fiscal year
twenty to we also reverted point
zero five percent following
point zero five percent of our
agencies general fund budget.
And with that I will stand for
questions.
Thank you question from
committee members.
point zero five is what MHM
dollars of rivers a little over
three thousand dollars thank.
Thank you I'm seeing the
question from committee members
thank you do a run thank you
Senator senators and Mr chair
thank you were going to go to
the tenth Tim rose.
Mr chair committee members will
not present HSD two six zero the
tenth judicial district attorney
which is page eighteen year
packets in page forty seven the
volume to the tenth district
contains Harding quay into Baca
counties and will hand it off to
Mr great the cell numbers Mr
chair D. A. rose was unable to
join us we have and result as
from AODA filling in LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by ten point eight
percent the executive
recommendation keeps it flat
with FY twenty three the LFC
recommendation includes two
percent compensation and funds
and and funds and unfunded the
authorized FTE with that Mr
chair all have Mister bill does
make his prediction thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
on Mister Census regrets that he
could not be here he had to
leave on and
Committee a prior commitment he
did want to thank you for all
your hard work and did it that
he was satisfied with the LFC is
recommendation and we stand for
questions thank you questions
from committee members.
Thank you thank you.
gonna go the twelfth Scott.
How can a guy I'm a table in the
the twelfth the eleventh and the
third so long as an extreme
line.
Mr chair we now have agency to
six to page twenty one in your
packets the sink this district
includes linking in Ontario
counties I have Mister Smith we
present the numbers.
Chairman committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by seven
point three percent well the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by ten percent the LFC
recommendation included two
percent compensation increase
for attorneys and staff
excluding the compensation piece
LFC recommendation is two
hundred and five point eight
thousand lower than the
executive recommendation no not
this is the one agency that HFC
accepted the executive
recommendation instead of the
LFC recommendation and without
introduced Mr district attorney
the honorable Scott king.
Good afternoon my name is Scott
key and I'm a a district
attorney from Otero and Lincoln
counties good afternoon
as a are analysts have have told
you we actually advocated for
the executive of budget
recommendation based upon a
couple of things primarily as we
as we see from both
recommendations the
The replacement of the vocal
positions in the high to
positions that were under funded
was very very important and both
of those recommendations
actually fulfilled that priority
of of our our districts in
addition the executive also
recommended expansion in H. R.
capacity and that was based upon
our agencies a request for
assistance and recruitment and
retention our our district is
short seven seven tourney's and
we currently have nine attorneys
working for us and that to
county area that we refer to as
the twelfth that is such an
important priority that
we we asked to fill and H. R. as
an expansion in order to fill a
void of a person that would work
relatively full time on issues
of recruitment and retention.
here recently in fact to on
Monday we had two staff members
who returned from Washington DC
to go on a junket in order to go
to the NDA
It was at a job fair basically
for people in attendance from
all over the country of lawyers
going to a a a and do a
conference in on both Sunday and
Monday they in fact had a job
fair that's been our first
opportunity to go out and
actually learn about the
problems nationwide in terms of
recruitment and retention of
attorneys the one thing that we
did learn from that conference
and talking to other folks from
around the country is that
indeed recruitment and retention
is something of concern not only
in New Mexico and you you'll
probably hear that as a
resounding commonality of all
the districts but it's a
national problem to we cannot
recruit people for a variety of
reasons that expansion is such
an important aspect of all of
our office trying to be creative
in terms of.
More attorneys that we determine
that expansion was so important
that we would as for the
executive recommendation that
was about a hundred and.
Two hundred twenty five thousand
more than the LFC recommendation
and that's why we chose and we
asked for that recommendation to
come before
The legislature.
we we have also and plans in the
coming months to visit Colorado
couple law schools in Arizona as
well for that recruitment and
retention effort by by our
office and we hope that we can
do more in that that aspect as I
think we've seen in the past you
wanna UNM a law school has just
not produced lawyers that have
the goals of being a prosecutor
in this frankly one of our our
issues has been
A a recurrent problem in New
Mexico is that we no longer have
the DA clinic at the the law
school so we have very few
people that are applying for
jobs in New Mexico we hope to
remedy that and and we hope to
come back to for you to
described next year what
successes we've had with that HR
position but having said that we
we would just we would stand for
questions obviously but we would
to hope that that expansion is
is approved.
Thank you Mr chairman from.
Senator Steinborn since then
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
that Mr K. welcome to the
committee quick question for you
it's funny I had a staff person
asked me about this just today
about the people who live in
chaparral New Mexico so for
those who you don't know
Senator.
One of in the middle of our very
rural part of Dona Ana County
was actually split between Dona
Ana Carroll County it's a.
It have you found that you have
a lot of
Basis from chaparral they have
to drive in your court and is
that a real hardship for the
folks to do that well Senator
said interesting because it's a
very close but obviously to a
dynamic County but also every
close to el Paso as well it's a
of a community that is growing
it also has though to our prison
there that has some special
hurdles that we have to comply
with it as well but to answer
your question directly because
we have some undocumented folks
down there and we have a border
patrol checkpoint that causes
some problems in terms of
getting victims and witnesses
from chaparral to our point in
Alamogordo but that's why we
have victim advocates as well
and and that's the importance of
the those positions we have the
ability it's a it's kind of
paper having but we have the
ability to get of victims of
crime through the checkpoint
with some federal help as well
and we've met success in that
area well I guess you you make a
really good point so that
victims are one part of it that
than the people who are accused
of the crimes and their rights
of defense but maybe you know
they're concerned about being
able to make it over there too
so I'm wondering is there enough
of the caseload.
That you see that even warrants
having up the court house
there and chaparral closer
chaparral.
Mr chairman and Senator
Steinborn we up we have trouble
quite frankly having attorneys
in all of our courts we have
five district courts in both
counties and we have a a total
of for metrics and with with
nine current attorneys we have a
trouble attending all of those
those hearings and with COVID
come coming out of COVID we have
some judges that are insisting
on in person parents and getting
back into that habit so while
that may have
some favorable aspects for the
folks that live in chaparral
probably not in in terms of
numbers that would allow us to
do such a thing and traveling
approximately sixty or seventy
miles south to have someone
attend the court.
Thank you for the question yeah
thank you just a curiosity is it
the AOC that determines need
based on caseload and comes
forth with those kinds of
requests that come how the
process works well the course
that you know I'm I'm I'm
familiar with that who makes
recommendations in terms of of
of the Courts and where those
venues are and so you know on a
historical basis we have we have
courts in Alamogordo we have
courts in Rita sue and cares C.
okay I'm with you maybe our my
district attorney has some stuff
from as well maybe not but
anyway okay thank you thank you
Mr.
All.
Thank you all Mr chairman.
Thank you for being here of just
one.
Maybe if you could provide us
with a maybe a couple of simple
soulful.
We deal so much with vacancies
so what are those remedies that
you're talking about.
Well the victims of the Mr
chairman and
Senator of vacancies now rule
the day and you're gonna hear
from dust from all over the
state that have shortfalls that
are affecting the way that we
conduct business center courts
seven you know what with the
total of sixteen FTEs that are
authorized in our office having
only nine attorneys is you can
just imagine what that does in
terms of attendance in court
it's an effort that has actually
gone.
Worse over time.
No there there's been times when
we've had shortfalls obviously
and and vacancies and overtime
you're all very helpful and and.
Filling vacancies in particular
with brand new attorneys with
the idea that maybe just maybe
you can focus on attention to to
get young attorneys to think
about a career in prosecution
it's been very very difficult
based on the pay a quite frankly
at the moment we're just happy
to have bodies that second get
into court and fortunately but
we've we've managed to
For filler statutory
constitutional duties but it's
becoming very very hard to do
so.
All Mr chairman of what I'm
interested.
You mentioned the we're working
the that we have some
Representative school.
What are your strategies that
you're looking at two well our
strategies is to get more money
for young attorneys get more
youngers more money for older
attorneys to have them stay
longevity in this particular
profession is very very
important the other creative
ideas is to bring from out of
state attorneys in order to
become attorneys and prosecutors
in New Mexico and that's where
we for we're focusing our
efforts in out of state matters
because quite frankly it's it's
tough for everyone when you're
stealing from no actual district
and taken their attorneys to go
to your district because the
shortfall is still there the
best of all worlds is to bring
new attorneys into New Mexico
show those those new attorneys
what New Mexico is all about and
and hopefully recruit those
people that have families
etcetera to New Mexico.
Well thank you thanks to a
server thank you Mr chairman and
just a note to the committee
also the the twelfth again is
the district that has more
trials a jury trials and and the
attorneys in the is a wrap up
longer preparation for those
they spend more days in court on
individual cases opposed to
working cases thrown a kind of
regular basis and being down
seven I think attorneys what you
said really makes for a tough
load on that so support of that
additional H. R. person and and
traction of additional attorneys
will be greatly appreciated for
the trial.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
other questions from.
Thank you for presentation thank
you.
The eleventh Division to.
They miss Martin.
Mr chair members of the
committee member of the Martin
district attorney for McKinley
County eleven judicial district
division to.
That that that.
Mr chair committee members will
not present HSD two six five the
eleventh judicial district
division two district attorney
page twenty four your packets in
page forty nine the volume to
the eleventh district contain
San Juan county New Jersey were
joined by the honorable
DA Bernadette Martin and I'll
pass it on to Mr gray with the
LFC.
McKinley County my bad
Senator.
Mr chair of the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by three point four
percent the executive increases
it by five point four percent
the LFC recognition includes
compensation including the
executive
and the last thing I'll note
about this agency is if you're
looking and bowling to there's
mistaken falling to it's been
corrected for your diff you
packets is just a staff
technical error with that Mr
chair all have D. A. Martin take
presentation.
Thank you well my stories about
the same as the former dust
presentation I have three
attorneys full time other than
myself.
we have four vacancies otherwise
were full staff.
We have enough of legal
assistance we have HR people we
have IT we have investigators we
have otherwise everything we
need.
Our remedy to deal with our
shortfall in attorneys at this
point is to seek out contract
attorneys I have people who are
in doing institution is
specifically D. W. Y. but they
don't want to move to Gallup.
they have a home where they're
at they're dug in
and the the good thing about
being able to work with contract
attorneys the state is majority
of our hearings are by Google
motion hearings pre trial
conferences final pretrial
arraignment those are all done
by Google.
That not only helps me in that
area but also saves a lot of
time for us to travel across
town even across town to sit and
wait and sit and wait.
Right now the Google here is
still pretty quickly
So the in person hearings are
jury trials preliminary hearings
pretrial detention hearings all
of which are.
R. the numbers are high for us
I'm told we had twenty seven
jury trials in twenty twenty two
I don't think that's right I
think that's for a six month
period that's how often my
attorneys are in jury trials
every week for jury trials in
fact tomorrow there are thirty
five jury trial schedule in
magistrate court thirty five and
we end up fighting to get the
one done up that will lose time.
will have a hearing there were
time runs out tomorrow and if we
don't do that jury trial I. E.
the police officer doesn't show
up or the victim doesn't show up
it gets dismissed and it's gone
for good.
So our need for bodies is is
extremely important hence the
the request for their contract
prosecutor funds in our budget.
We have now three magistrate
court judges one was recently
elected and in addition are
District Court judge Robert
Aragon has retired so we'll have
a vacancy there so for now I
believe those hearings in
District Court will be bottle
necked
And I don't know if when the
next century trials is schedule
we had one recently this week
double data homicide two day
trial of defendant was found
guilty.
So but we are in trial and the
the barriers we have to this
hiring is a location it's not
necessarily the work it's the
location people do not want to
come to Gallup.
I don't know why Gallup is
fabulous right Mr chair not a
good argument for me.
so.
And recruiting for us for me is
near impossible I I just can't
take the time to go to a job
there I'll try it in the a a
summer conference or whatever
that is also and get my silly
credits but it's it's impossible
to take the time off and go in
fact I had eye surgery last week
and I missed three days of work.
I feel guilty because I was
helped I'm still having issues
with my vision but at least I'm
going to be fine and other
people who need medical
attention attorneys.
I tell we'll get it done we'll
figure it out get the local
figure it out so the dire need
for of the contractor any money.
Otherwise I think our conviction
rate is higher than it had been
in the past several years we
work hard to get convictions and
treat especially DWI offenders
because it's our worst problem
in our county.
And of bring them to justice
especially if there is a
homicide involved we go to trial
we tell the jury and the jury
decides.
Thank you I'll take your
questions thank you any
questions from committee members
Martin what dollar amount would
you need for contract attorneys.
I think what we have in the
budget and was granted I think
that is yeah.
If it's at one fifty five but
I'm putting out another of ours
P. E. R. B. a request for bid
and if I could get two or three
is going to be higher.
I
Hundred and.
An additional hundred thousand
hundred thousand Representative
Sonney perfect thank you thank
you.
Just make sure you hire just a
cat.
It's exciting work I keep
saying.
It's it's good work.
And for those you don't speak
madam I said thank you and our
dates over here have a good
in and out she just.
Thank you Mr Martin.
That it that's it thank you Dr
about ice.
We are going to the third.
The first
brought.
Well I might be able your quest.
Mr chair the third judicial
district attorney is agency two
five three page eight in your
packets page thirty two of
thirty nine excuse me in the
following two and we're joined
by T. H. Herrell fires I have
Mister Smith we present the
recommendations.
Mr chair committee members thank
you Mr gray the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund by seven point four percent
well the executive
recommendation increases revenue
by five percent the LFC base
budget is higher than the
recommended executive
recommendation because of the
added compensation of two
percent for staff and for
attorneys and both
recommendations supported the
expansion of an additional
victim witness advocate for the
agency with that I'll pass it on
to the honorable TA buyers.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
name's Gerald fires the district
attorney for the third judicial
district in Los crucis Dona Ana
County and I wanted to say thank
you for your work is legislators
as well as your support for our
budget I would be requesting
respectfully approval of the
letter LFC recommendation I
would echo the concerns that
have been pointed out by I.
Prior colleagues who spoke
previously will labor those
issues we experience them as
well we have initiated
methodologies to secure
attorneys to come into New
Mexico from out of state and we
are also down on the number of
attorneys that we have being
able to handle the cases that we
do have but we still continue to
produce on behalf of the people
so with that I would stand for
questions.
Second.
Questions from committee members
did you go it.
Question from committee members
CNN.
Thank you but let me let me.
Repeat this we know the number
one issue in New Mexico I think
is pay bands are pay levels
right to hire correctly at the
right level so you have
attorneys in your office we have
an eleven.
You know we we just executive
inspo to study this so we could
come with a number and give you
guys some flexibility so we can
get some of these vacancies in
these attorneys hired we don't
know the number looks like we're
trying to do our own incentive
finance to try to help some of
these dust and agencies to hire
more tourney's.
We don't have an accomplished
that yet but we don't know what
the number looks like but I mean
that is don't don't think that
you guys are a lot of this is
that thing affecting the whole
entire system in hiring people
correctly at the right rate and
then gaps a great place to live
but it's it's a hard place to
live if you're young there's not
a lot to do there I mean it's
not like Los crucis or they have
concerts and and you can then el
Paso flat el Paso.
It it's different when you have
young attorneys are young people
coming out a lot of trees they
want a little more flexibility
in a little more free time and I
think we got to learn how to
just sits on.
We're looking at we're also
looking at
like did dust pay I think you
guys are left out of the budget
and so we're looking at and
adding that fixing that problem
so people know that and we know
believe the US committee than
most of the Senate LFC.
All heard that all session.
All summer long as we don't have
the right rate we can't hire
correctly we can fill the
vacancies and even the vacancies
we have that are funded we can
hire those so thank you for your
time today Sir thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
The fourth.
And I'm gonna go the fifth and
six.
Mr chair at the fourth judicial
district attorney's agency two
five four page ten in your
packets Zamora San Miguel
include the counties we're
joined by D. A. Thomas cleaned
have Mr Smithee present
reputation.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by seven
point three percent while the
executive increased revenue by
five percent the LFC you
included the two percent
compensation increase for
attorneys and staff excluding
that piece all of these
recommendations thirty six
thousand dollars higher than the
executive now pass it on to the
honorable district attorney
Clayton.
Good afternoon ladies and
gentleman again my name is Tom
Clayton nine the district
attorney this is my first term
with the district attorney's
office I've been working a work
with district attorney Richard
Florida's for four terms sixteen
years with him so I'm I'm well
versed in in the in our office
and I want to say thank you
thank you to to the to the
committee
for the opportunities you've
provided our office of the
retention and and repayment on
money recruitment rather in the
retention money all has been a
godsend quite honestly it is
helped us keep our seasoned
attorneys and recruit so I want
to say thank you first and
foremost the other thing I I
would be remiss if I don't madam
today is my mother's eighty
seventh birthday and I just
wanted to assure that of you
know and I appreciate the
opportunity to address you early
so I can go home and have dinner
with my with my own mother so
the the one thing that you want
to mention is some of the
initiatives were dealing with
because the black backlog that's
that's coming to fruition we're
looking at with our point here
and our our justice partners
within the district to address
mental health of mental health
point.
On in order to get a counties
particularly Las Vegas we have
the behavior health institute in
behavioural health institute R.
as you as you know we have
individuals that suffer from a
number of disabilities.
Mental health disability and
when they get sent to Las Vegas
Las Vegas there are times that
they remain in our community and
because of that our law
enforcement officers.
On occasion have all of our
times to make contact so we try
to keep them out of the judicial
system the criminal justice
system is not designed to
address with individuals and and
those kind of capacity so we're
doing what we can with our
courts with our justice partners
with the health care providers
within the community to address
that so that's one of the
initiatives we're we're going to
be coming at some point in time
to to you just as our our our
legislators to address but the
that's one of the initiatives so
we've been dealing with in our
community of regarding FTEs I am
blessed to have all most of my
all of my staff are pretty much
filled with the exception of
three FTEs for attorneys that's
correct I'm not in the most drug
dire situation some of my
colleagues and and other
districts but we do face the
same dilemma in recruiting we
look out of state as well we
don't want to poach off or our
sisters and brothers in other
districts who would like to
avoid that in one particular
example I recruited a gentleman
out of the state of Idaho Idaho
who had practiced here in New
Mexico Madam extensive officer
based on some of the funds that
you provided of the previous
year he accepted and within a
week before he was to come he
chose not to it's so we're doing
what we can to bring in new
attorneys L. and so that we can
have the staff necessary to do
our statutory duties but what
that all all stand for any
questions you may have.
Any questions from committee
members about all of your
mother's watching on the World
Wide Web.
But other which are happy thank
you very much appreciated.
Sen Benny thank you Mr chairman
I just also want to give you
kudos my cousin who reached out
to me knowing that you're the
one of the that the directors in
your office I guess one of the
division deputy chief deputy she
just loves working for you by
the way so the whole office just
lights up when you walk in the
morning and you're very
uplifting all the staff so thank
you thank you.
Thank you thank your
presentation was in trouble
thank you.
You're now going to go to the
fifth.
I.
Chairman committee members we're
not presenting agency two five
five to fifty additional
district attorney page eleven in
your packet in page forty two in
the volume to the fifth this
district contains Lee Chavez and
Eddy County and we're joined by
the honourable district attorney
Dan a blue help pass it on to Mr
gray with the LFC to talk about
the recommendations.
Mr chair the only differences
between LFC and exec various
compensation the LFC decreases
general fund slightly by point
zero three percent executive
decreases of five one point
seven percent at with that Mr
chair have IDA loose make your
presentation.
Mr Chairman I never said the
committee a good afternoon I'm I
do have with me today money CFO
I've done the switch or if we
have any specific questions on
our presentation I'm let me
start with talking first about a
little bit about we're talking
about with recruitment retention
of returning so first want to
say thank you to all of you who
supported The New Mexico
sentencing commission retention
and recruitment grant I and give
credit to been Bauer and his
department the losses of public
defenders who submitted a
request for grant jointly for
the fifth district I and we were
awarded and that requests for
the public defenders and for our
office I in January and so you
will be receiving the outward
journeys that are newly hired
based on years of experience
will receive a certain some of.
I it starts at five thousand
dollars for the minimum level
that is something we would ask
you to continue to support and
provide hi we do think that's
critical for helping us I'm I
will let you all know we have I
is what seems to be that broken
record I'm vacancies we have
seven attorney vacancies hi my
County that is has the most
vacancies right now it is a
discount so primarily Carlsbad
in so we've been created I've
heard one attorney full time
that remote he's only remit hi
it is not if you're in pain for
support I have two attorneys
that are only part time they do
do in person port are there in
the office but they only want to
work part time are we are doing
what we can do to fill positions
and cover cases I'm I have been
very our office is very less
than the fact that the Attorney
General and Angela Harris now
and our role torrez I have been
assisting in taking cases from
our office right now I believe
the attorney general's office as
I cases out of the fifth
district that they're handling
on the newly appointed U. S.
attorney's office reached out
and said that they are here to
help and this time they followed
through they have already taken
three cases from the fifth
district and they are assisting
on two other violent crime cases
in our district so how we are
continuing with not enough
bodies because we have twenty
one judges in the fifth we have
twelve district I and nine
magistrates times we don't have
the same the returnees that are
having court we have to ask a
judge to hold the docket and we
present a prosecutor present so
it is a struggle we do
appreciate all that you've done
for our budget I can talk a
little bit about the initiative
the IDA Scott he spoke about
from the national district
attorneys association in the Hey
I'm I sit on that board on
behalf of the New Mexico
district.
Attorney's association it was
the first ever job fair and it
was a I.
Open up to all states to attend
but I can tell you is Texas did
not it can't Texas has attorneys
Texas can fill slots so what I
can tell you is that Colorado is
starting attorneys and they try
to pay them or pay scale on it
so if you look at our
surrounding neighbors were not
getting people from there we're
going to get people from far
away and that's what we're all
doing recruiting I sent one of
my attorneys to that job fair
because if we can get people
that are attending law school in
the DC area to come to New
Mexico are that's what we're
gonna have to fill our positions
but other than that I'm I would
stand for questions thank you
thank you questions from
committee members.
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
have to mention and congratulate
the DA loose on her position so
thirty one years ago Mr chairman
we were chosen out of how many
interns across New Mexico I
think there were six of us we
were part of the governor's
fellowship program and the
summer of nineteen ninety two
and I did not even remember her
so congratulations on your
position and I'm glad that
internship set you up for
success serving our state thank
you for your service thank you
Mr chairman thank you I think
you might see my CENIC share the
same cell or something.
Thank you Representative Senate
Senator The New Mexico
a district which is a COVID so.
I understand that you recently
lost her mother and I just
wanted to express condolences
for the.
So our service condolences thank
you thank you.
On to the six.
Mr chair we now have six tuners
for district attorney this is
agency CO two five six page
twelve in your packets and page
forty three million two this
district contains grant Luna and
Hidalgo counties and we're
joined by TA Michael Renteria
all have miss Bingley present
recommendation.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by two
point two percent for the
sixties office while the
executive recommendation
decreases general fund revenue
by three point seven percent the
LFC recommendation includes a
two percent compensation
increase for attorneys and staff
excluding that piece the LFC
recommendations about hundred
eighteen thousand less than the
executives without a pass it on
to the honorable D. A..
Good afternoon Mister chair the
and members of the committee
thank you very much for this
opportunity to address this
distinguished body the company
me today's my CFO Vanessa
Cardenas in case I have any
technical the questions they get
asked that I might not know I
hope to be able to answer them
but I really appreciate this
opportunity I want to set up by
thanking you all for everything
you've done for us.
A not only back in the past but
surely put you'll you'll
hopefully try and help us with
going forward without your help
it would be impossible to do a
good and that would apply to all
of us district attorneys I'd be
remiss if I didn't this
specially thank of the members
of the legislature say to their
from my area Senator Diamond
Senator Hemphill I really
appreciate how acceptable they
are ready to talk to me never
made me feel like I'm bothering
them I'd like to reciprocate
that anything that they need to
hoping any of the other members
of the committee more than a
more than anything I like being
a team player and help with as
much as I can so I really
appreciate you to very much I'm
very fortunate have really good
legislators out of my district
so I want to start off like
everyone else is basically
starting off the recruitment and
retention I have twelve
prosecutors that that I have
slots for in my district
currently have nine of of those
positions filled the tenth one
attempt position expected to be
filled may March March first of
all the way from Chicago
Illinois of the that's how far
we've gone out just to try to
get someone and look enough to
try and recruit that that tended
to fill one of the spots it
seems like since I've been in
office we've had.
Hovering around two vacancies
three vacancies ever since I
started the difficult to fill
all the spots I know you've
heard all of that but we really
appreciate the fact that you're
helping us not only to recruit
the very qualified and good good
prosecutors with some I'm glad
to see I think I have those but
able to retain a lot of the
families now I think I said this
at other committees before that
they look to live with their
families based on where you can
find a chick fillet I can tell
you for sure in my district
there's no to play it's pretty
rural a lot of the people I
course have in a grant if you
double I worked at triangle is
best I can to make them all feel
is equally important to me but
it's always good to know that
being up here and doing what I
need to do from this and that I
can relax and and not worry
about what I've got back home
taking care of business so I'm
very grateful for that
otherwise I think I have one
staff position open for
secretary we're currently
interviewing to fill that so I
have a few vacancies but not not
as many as is is a I think we
drop a lot more attention from
you all and others in the
legislature we're working real
hard to fill them up I think I
had my staff hand out a two page
report hoping that that that
pretty much summarizes
everything I'd want to tell you
just to make it more bring up I
got voted the most long winded
yesterday's I don't want to be
that today what might.
My buddies in the do that are
dust so I'm going to I gotta
make improvement on that on that
but the shortfalls that we're
experiencing from grants I'm
hoping we can route recoup that
I like to keep people fully
employed it's kind of hard
because focus pulling back now
but I was pulling back up with
the supplement hi they even even
though I've been fortunate
enough to recoup some of those
expenses but that would really
help my general fund so I've
I've asked for that.
One other thing I'd like to ask
for and they did it yesterday as
well based on the numbers of
felonies and and higher in cases
and and no one of the handles it
kind of spells out how our
violent crime is increasing I'm
sure that applies throughout the
state of our roughly thirteen
hundred cases about forty seven
percent almost half are violent
felonies they take a lot of time
to service the victims in up and
then appropriate and proper way
because I work real hard to make
sure that our agency is very
victim oriented and it was
spending a lot of time making
sure that they feel heard that
they feel involved they they
feel up to speed that their
voice matters and so we're
hoping that I can secure one
more spot for a victim I could I
think I could use to but I'd be
really happy with one I have a
supervisor who trains the
Molly's excellent but he's
carrying a case load of like
four hundred cases and the lead
the lead will advocate cares
about two hundred basis and the
rest right around one twenty one
hundred somewhere in that range
depending on what area of I'd
like to take some of that up
load off of my lead person allow
him to train and supervise like
that and and and just.
Accommodate by hand and enough
to a new advocate currently have
a program administrator.
Who was was higher to record
retention and digitize digitize
all of those records I'm using
him as an advocate just to fill
the gap right now it's not his
job that he was hired for but he
loves it we're working that
angle of specialty courts
instead coming the legislature
haven't done that yet we've been
working real hard with my
special programs director to get
grant funding from the Feds and
other entities away from this
body and and and so that we can
get it started in and a lot of
its recurring I'm working to get
us our rules and all of our
schools federal funding but
there might be a day might have
to come to you and ask you for
the help because I believe in
ghosts specialty treatment
courts we we got the funding to
start up a veterans treatment
court we're focusing on getting
that off the ground soon I'd
like a mental health court I'd
like to T. V. court because I
know a lot of that type of
treatment court it it's it's
seems to be the wave of the
future and I think it works
especially if you do it well put
a lot of attention and effort
into it so try not to over
burden mask with you all trying
to find it in other places and
make it work
but any type of help that you
could give us would be more than
appreciated and with that I
stand for any questions that the
committee my questions from
committee members they're not.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Michael for being here today
you're you're district the
proximity to the U. S. Mexico
border brings an entirely unique
set of challenges and also on
the rise are violent crimes are
much higher than normal for
human trafficking cases I want
to thank you for all the times
in addition to the caseload that
I call on you to go through all
my community meetings because
that always seems to be the
topic of conversation anytime
I'm in a dog or Luna County I
know that consumes a lot of your
time and I'm sure you dread I
you know my number on the phone
calling you but I appreciate you
going to these communities and
addressing their concerns on how
we push back against this so
thank you for all the time thank
you for all your office staff
really appreciate it Mr chair
Senator anytime it's my
privilege and pleasure to serve.
Thank you for that.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Mike for being here and being so
accessible and I know you were
voted most long winded last time
but we're gonna vote you the
hardest working AA because we
know what a huge rural area you
have and you cover it extremely
well and we're really grateful
for the work that you do and
whatever you need
course with redistricting
Senator Diamond and I are going
to be swapping a couple of our
county so we're gonna be
covering the same areas so I
look forward to working with you
an even greater capacity thank
you ma'am Senator thank you that
the help I can be for all of you
thank you thank you everyone
knows your your they'll most
long winded we've had you go
right before the state police
everybody else can spend on
that.
I got both the this is is this
the Mr chair I was first up look
at the I'm not seven thirty
today so.
If you want to stay for to
protect your colleagues friends.
Thank you thank you have a safe
trip home thank you we're going
to the night.
I'm just going by the less to
ever again blessed.
Chairman Mr Mr chair committee
members with Representative
agency two five nine the nine to
additional district attorney
page sixteen of packets and page
forty six in your volume to the
ninth district contains curry
and Roosevelt counties we're
joined by the honourable DA
Quentin ray a positive Mr Cray
our numbers Mr chair at the only
difference again in this
district have between the LFC
and executive recommendation is
compensation LFC increases
general fund revenue by one
point nine percent executive
recommendation keeps a flat with
FY twenty three that have to do
a make his presentation.
At thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I have with me
Steve north my chief financial
officer I'm a little overwhelmed
a little shocking on it just a
little dumbstruck I would commit
kit so far get from Grady and
the the only relief I have is Mr
woods and Senator woods also
from Grady and I hear he has
that struggle to sometime.
Maybe just a great let me inform
you you don't want to tell your
sanity as a dust.
You for money.
You know you just don't say your
center and your.
You might want to leave the
table right.
These guys put me up to it so.
No I in all seriousness I really
do I thank you for the the hard
work you're doing I don't think
anybody envisioned this is the
job of what Senator does is sit
around and look at numbers all
day but it's it's hard working
it does pay off last year we got
a substantial increase in our
budget it's a huge help we use
that to give our staff raises to
give our attorneys raises also
to echo IDA loose we we did get
the sentencing commission
requests to give that five
thousand dollar bonus for people
willing to do a two year
contract we.
The bill tell a broken record
but we're in the same boat we've
got six they can see that in our
office for attorneys and that's
what we're working on
we're trying to be financially
prudent with the money again
this last year and so we're
coming in fairly flat I would
ask for that the Senate to adopt
LESC recommendations so that we
can give an increase to our
staff and our attorney that we
do have I would stand for any
questions thank you Sir would
you have any questions.
Thank
you asking about cuts.
I don't see any questions thank
you
I don't know center was gonna
step out called state police.
He wasn't smart that they went
after he's got connections thank
you thank you have a triple.
Of the seven.
Mr chair up now we have the
seventh judicial district
attorney two five seven agency
code page thirteen your packets
this district contains Petrone
Sierra Sapporo and points
counties we're joined by the DA
Clint Welborn and I have Mister
Smith we have present the
recommendation.
Mr chair committee members of
the LFC recommendation for the
seventh DA's office includes a
general fund revenue increase of
seven point nine percent all the
executive increase the general
fund by five point eight percent
excluding the two percent
compensation increase including
the LFC recommendation the LFC
and the executive recommendation
are the same and I will not pass
it on to the honorable DA Clint
longhorn first presentation Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to be here today my name is
Clint will board and the
district attorney for catchments
Year answer coral and towards
counties and I've been the
district attorney for this my
twenty third year and I'd like
to introduce my CFO J. B. weld
and sitting back here this is
twenty seventh here with the
office.
And I would like to echo the
other dust to thank you for the
additional monies we receive it
allowed me in the last two years
I had I attorney vacancies I've
been able to fill all the one of
those I think in large part to
the monies that we received from
the legislature for a rural
attorneys in the increase in pay
and we do have in our quest
were requesting to fill one
position or fund one position
that we have into your County
it's an attorney position which
we have but we do not have we
have the FTE but we do not have
the funding for.
And with that stand for
questions.
Thank you question from
committee members.
Third I'm gonna give you the.
Hi may give you some ginger
money let's talk quick I have a
question when the AG was before
us and in part of their budget
requests they were asking for
additional think of ballistic
get done ballistic imaging kind
of software machines are
machinery and the question was
asked by my chairman to me how
many shootings to you have in in
rural New Mexico I don't know
the answer I guess maybe one or
two a year where am I.
The Mr Chairman Senator Diamond
I'm I'm afraid your way low is
for shootings if you're talking
about homicides at one time we
actually let per capita this is
several years ago about two
thousand sixteen we let per
capita for the state park per
capita murder rate in my
district was higher than
Albuquerque we had twenty seven
murders that we were prosecuting
at what time in in my district
in the various counties right
now we have about five murders I
think that we're prosecuting but
as far shootings we have
shootings happen all the time
there shootings that happen in
probably for the counties may be
at least two or three times a
month all those aren't
necessarily they don't use up
ballistic software choosing
whenever because some of the
shootings don't end up with
somebody being injured you may
have a how shot you may have a
car shop or something like that
but whenever somebody's injured
or there's actually somebody
dies from it that's where they
start using that ballistic
software
typically rely on state police
state police does most of our
murder investigations if not all
of them and even the ones that
the local law enforcement made
this gate for instance the share
C. thanks very the sheriff's
here county or the city of tier
C. they will typically call in
the crime scene and they will
investigate that force and they
have all that software and so
we're not having to have it in
house we do have to have
something to be able to read
their software to be able to be
compatible so that we can find
and discovery but we don't
actually have the software or
the laser scanners that they
have so we rely on them Mr
chairman I think the suggestion
was there was one Albuquerque to
include one Farmington maybe
down in Los crucis but it's
costly so just wondering what
kind of return we get on that
thank you for all the good work
that you do that I hope you know
you're appreciated I think you
do thank you for the good work
you're doing thank you Sir.
The other questions other
questions thank you thank you
we're gonna go to the second but
I think he's he's not here but
is somebody here for in depth.
Thank you for making flower
arrangements or something.
He's probably monitoring that
you know that right.
So you better.
Mr chair committee members were
not present agency two five to
the second judicial district
attorney page six in your packet
in page thirty seven in the
volume to the second district
encompasses all Bernalillo
county and we're joined by Josh
Boone from that office and I
will pass it on to Mr gray for
cell numbers Mr chair the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue for this agency by
two point nine percent executive
by one point one percent the
sole difference between the two
is compensation Mr chairman I
have Mister Boone make his
presentation.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you my name is
Josh one I'm the chief deputy
district attorney Mr Bragman
since his apologies that he is
not able to make it today I can
neither confirm deny any flower
arrangements that are being
current.
but he he did have a prior
family commitment that he
absolutely just could not see
the situation so thank you so
much I appreciate your time
appreciate you work I've been
assured that only Henry Marco
had a suspended driver's license
the rest of us.
I the state police and stay
here.
we are requesting today that the
committee atop the LFC is
recommendation I'm not gonna go
into a kind of detail I think a
lot of the previous district
attorneys have echoed some of
the sentiments that I have as a
committee is aware we've got a
fairly big transition about a
month ago and the second
judicial district we have a new
district attorney we're going to
transition our current Attorney
General took about sixteen
individuals from the DA's office
with him when he left that's
been kind of hard we had to do a
lot of transition out of that
sixteen I believe it was eight
of them were turns out of our
staff that included most of the
administration most of the I. T.
department a lot of our senior
leadership so we have been
working on getting this back
together on the fly.
The force that we're able to
promote within and since that
time about a month ago we have
already recruited and hired nine
new attorneys we anticipate
another for attorneys starting
Monday yeah we should have about
another five to six starting
later in March on on just
determining the final the
finalization of some of the the
request for.
We're currently dealing with the
backlog we have approximately in
our estimation about one
thousand plus cases that are set
for jury trial coming up the
next three to four months
the CMO after being suspended
during the course of the
pandemic is in full fact is
working to be dealing with this
isn't something that's new to us
but it is still something that's
challenging that we will have to
take off doesn't mean that it's
not impossible but it's going to
take a lot of work.
Of.
So without going into too much
other than that our biggest
efforts have been really working
on the recruitment.
Building out of function in
ministration of which we have
now done and getting ready for
the session so this time I will
stand for questions.
Thank you question from
committee members.
I don't see any but may I ask
you this that there's been talk
about the backlog warrants and
all that I mean and more in the
conversation I had with him said
he has to have the money for the
officers I didn't have the
officers to do it thank.
Yeah maybe put you on the spot
and your boss is not here.
I mean what do you think the
dust gonna need to do those
warrants.
So Mr Chairman one of the
conversations that we did have
with the mayor's office about
the difference was instead of
just routing everybody up at
once which seems like a great
idea being smart about its
letting us know who they have
identified as the drivers of
crime because not all war not
all warrants are equal somebody
who was a traffic ticket it's
not the same who's wanted for a
murder charge so what we want to
do is working conjunction with
the mayor's office and that is
the conversations that we've
already had to go after the
drivers specifically so that we
know which cases are coming down
that we can be prepared.
So
if you weren't for those sixteen
people are gone.
The impact of the dust off.
I I would advocate.
Thank you they have to get a
ticket by the state police first
and then we Division.
consistent dollar driver's
licenses right.
Thank you for your time thank
you we're gonna go to the
eleventh amendment is complacent
or under the Agnos going.
We're going to New Mexico.
I just want to get him to walk
move to the front to.
Sixty four.
Seventh and.
Is.
No.
Okay do a.
So she should have district
attorneys.
Mr chair committee members we're
not presenting HSD two six four
administrative office of the
district attorneys in this will
be a separate different she
packet titled AODA and we're
joined by the director of the
IDA Mr Henry Valdez and his
staff hello passive active Mr
great to talk about the
difference Mr chair
as Mr speaker you mentioned this
will be a new different she
packet
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by ten
point five percent the executive
increases by ten percent very
close the one thing I would draw
the ten the committee's
attention to is that special
appropriations this is just for
information only on page four of
that packet that should be just
been handed out you'll see that
differences in the special
appropriation recommendations
the primary one here is LFC
recommendation includes two
million dollars for recruitment
and retention for DA offices
statewide and that's in line I
of that special appropriation
table differences Mr chair I now
have Mister felt as make his
presentation thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I would like to think
of.
The staff of both LFC and DFA
for their hard work and working
with fail DA the New Mexico
Despard Association on the
priorities that both AODA and
the discrimination Association
have I have with me thirty one
mins all as soon as our or chief
financial officer for a would be
a
you'd heard before from vice
president Romo talking about the
replacement of general fund with
general fund monies of the fees
that had been collected from the
pre prosecution diversion and
workforce check acts of the
legislature in two thousand
eighteen remove the specific
authority for pop up for the
districts to charge of
prosecution the version of
participants from paying the fee
that pop that fee went into the
district tourney Fund the
district attorney fund is used
for both operating expenses for
for the administrative office of
district attorneys as well as
for training purposes the other.
Source of funding for the DA
Fund of course is worthless
checks will nobody were Torrez
checks and the inability to to
produce fees from pre
prosecution diversion has really
stopped that fund from being
repopulated an annual basis of
the LFC recommendations saw fit
to to put a hundred ninety three
thousand dollars into that fund
if this committee so if it if
that could be increased on
annual basis part of the reason
in part of operating costs that
we have is not for just a new DA
but for the telecommunications
systems of that they would be a
operates for the entirety of the
district attorney's and so that
includes a band with for
internet speeds which is vitally
important in this era and the
two million dollars that you
will see is much appreciated
I just just keep that in mind
when the percentage that looks
like a would be a got a huge
increase all it really is for
the being distributed to the
district attorney's also want to
thank there is an increase in
the LFC recommendation for more
money for the safe house
programs which are the forensic
interbreeding programs they
increase the budget by that.
Eight thousand dollars which had
been increased in over ten years
so we act as a pass through we
don't keep in administrative fee
we just pass that on to the safe
houses the forensic interviewing
programs and with that I will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much
for your presentation always
you're always ready to step in
in dispelling gaps and do
whatever needs to be done to get
it done thank you hundred and
let me just just the committee
any one else anyone here have
any questions or comments you
know okay and I think that's
that is it gonna be that simple
that quiet wow okay let's do
that.
Thank you yes thank you very
much yes we are this one was and
now the next one's going to be
the eleventh that you we just at
the eleventh so it's gonna be
eight and then the first so here
we are two more is that know we
have we didn't do the eleventh I
don't think Senator also.
Forty eight probably should not
have we have Ted drove there we
go now do with Rick here with
the eleventh we know that so
your next okay thank you yeah.
Okay madam chair I the eleventh
is agency could to six one page
nineteen your packets with FTA
Rick Tetreault
and I'll have Mister smoothly
present reputation.
Chair committee members the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund by five point three percent
while the executive
recommendation increases by five
percent.
The LFC contains the two percent
compensation increase for
attorneys and staff excluding
that number LFC recommendation
is ninety eight point eight
thousand lower than the
executive.
the other C. recommendation
funds expansion request to
transition three term positions
to permit an expansion while the
executive includes that funding
in the base and I will not pass
on to the honorable richtet
drove to get this presentation
thank you I thank you for coming
for all your work always really
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I really
appreciated thank you members of
the committee
it's always a pleasure to see
you guys I I really missed.
I'm glad we're back.
Comment was awful and it's for
all the tire nights is still
always a pleasure to see you and
work with you all
first I just like to introduce
myself I'm retired on the
district attorney in the
eleventh division on which is
San Juan County with me today I
have my CFO
any Lujan
as I said yesterday to the group
and I guess I should say it
again is a reason I went to law
school is because I don't do
math and so what without a needs
help and all this stuff yes
which out of all the numbers you
want she's the one that hears
outside of so
also wanted to really give a
good thank you to both Mario and
Brandon here as a smaller group
or agency we get the newbies and
these two gentlemen have stepped
in in the past.
Three months four months for use
seven months for you they have
shown consideration and interest
in what are agencies do and it's
been a pleasure to work with
them so hopefully they don't
become too good and leave for we
can do from here for awhile but
I really do appreciate their
work they've done for us and and
I owe them
thanks and gratitude thank you
for saying that you know what we
we don't hear that too often and
the soft as we shows really
because we agree I think it's
it's great thank.
I'd also like to give a special
thank you to my Senator who's on
the board center share
you guys may not know this but
we actually get along really
well even though earlier today I
heard you changed parties he's a
donkey.
The.
That Senator sure and I have
over the years really formed a
good relationship working us
call me for anything any
questions I can do the same and
so it's appreciative and it's
always a.
It's always an honor see here
Sir.
I'll be very brief I'm just
gonna tell you two things number
one I would ask this group to
seriously look at helping us
with the unified budget that we
submitted as a group
We did ask that a full time
employee at AODA be fully funded
so that we could look at
projects that we need to get
done and I think one of the
recommendations had about
seventy five percent we would
like to see it up to a hundred
because anything that AODA does
helps all of us at the statewide
level
also the.
The money is we need to do the
trainings I really believe
number one needs to be around
four hundred thousand I think
it's in the shape right now and
it's one time money and one time
money doesn't cut it we need to
look at reoccurring for that and
again that's what goes for
training sits with to everything
that they have to do it's it's
what's building our broadband
statewide now without it we
might as well do dial up and try
to do virtual hearings to dial
up modems I don't know so I
really ask for you to assist us
when it comes time to see what
we can do there
the second thing that I would
like to ask for when when it's
time and I know the budget comes
back over to over to your side
is during the in our we advised
you all that.
Voca I victims of crimes Act
monies are going away statewide.
my office currently has three
full time employees receiving
about a hundred forty thousand
of that a hundred forty thousand
dollars cost
I I'm gonna need to move them
into the general and get them
funded if not I lose on the
victim advocates are very.
Very busy and they are what
provides the everyday contact
with with victims of crimes on
what's going on so well when the
budget makes its way to your
side I would ask them and I love
to talk to you more about it but
what can we do to to give me
some get them moved from the
grant position into a full time
position in our general and with
that Madam speaker thank you all
and I stand for questions.
Chair.
Also in madam chair.
My deepest apologies there.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
first of all he has never been
able to keep me out of the back
please car.
But he's also never put me in
prison so that's good.
The.
And talk to the chief backed.
So one here where sixty seven.
We're talking about sixty seven
employees but you're talking
about three additional.
From the grant proved into this
number here I believe that
number probably and I'm sorry
out madam chair Senator share I
believe sixty seven includes
them in our forecast okay all
right thank you thank you Mr.
Any other questions please okay.
Thank you.
So again my apologies madam
chair.
We're going to go to honor as
judges.
Thank you put the money in the
budget for glasses.
We are going to the eight.
So we're not putting Mr chair
committee members were not
present HSD two five eight these
traditional district attorney
page fourteen year packets in
page forty five in the volume to
the district contains tells you
and Colfax counties and we are
joined by Victoria ran for that
office and I'll pass it on to my
fellow analysts Mr gray for cell
numbers Mr chair the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by eleven point
nine percent the executive
increases it by five point five
percent compensations a primary
difference the LFC
recommendation also includes two
I. T. expansions for about a
hundred fifty thousand Mr
chairman I have agency make her
presentation.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senators my name is Victoria
Bransford I'm the district
office manager inTaos D. A.
Montoya is under the weather
today he did ask me to send his
regards and let you know that he
really appreciates that you make
time for handled
during the session and during
the interim and we thank you for
your leadership and commitment
to the citizens of New Mexico
and most especially house Colfax
and union counties who we
represent thank you also to the
DFA and LFC analysts who have
crafted very thoughtful
recommendations we appreciate
your professionalism and your
work with our staff so thank you
for that I'm today from house I
have with me our chief financial
officer Publicis meadows and our
program administrator Jennifer
to settle and without these two
ladies we could not run the
really effective office that we
have inTaos so I'd like to thank
them both publicly.
we ask our staff to perform
difficult jobs and we often
interact with the citizens of
our district on the worst day of
their lives and so at a minimum
we want to give our staff the
tools and resources that they
need to do that job on behalf of
of our district and so thank you
for your committed for your
commitment to our district in
your investment in our district
we appreciate all the
investments that you've made for
us so thank you very much if you
have any questions we be happy
to answer them Senator Gonzales.
Madam chair.
Sorry.
Even.
Red jacket.
The Trinidad.
Late in the day Mr chairman I
just want to mention the I did
meet with them this summer.
Of the express of the showed me
the whole detail about the I. T.
and how important it is so you
know I hope that all.
The consideration would be with
a high recommendation because
it's really needed and then also
the distance between you know
awful with the three counties so
again thank you for your work
and or committed to a thank you
Mr chairman thank you any other
questions from committee members
etcetera what's this Mr chair as
you can see on the map my
district has three different.
Judicial district Senate.
And all of the dust come by and
visit with me and I appreciate
that I know there's a lot to do
in your offices and I thank you
for the work you do do like you
say it is most of the time the
person's worst day that they'll
ever have.
And hopefully they won't have
another one so thank you for the
work you do with that thank you
Mr.
Thank you for being here.
Sure thank you members of the
committee do the first judicial
district.
Good afternoon.
Mr chair of the first judicial
district attorney is agency two
five one page for in your
packets this contains Los Alamos
recovery of the and Santa Fe
counties and we're joined by D.
A. Mary Carmack all tweets all I
have Mister cynically present
recommendation.
Mr chair committee members the
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by ten
point six percent for the first
days in office all the executive
recommendation increases general
fund by four point seven percent
the LFC recommendation includes
the two percent compensation
increase for attorneys and staff
excluding the compensation the
LFC recommendations two hundred
and sixty thousand dollars
region the executive
recommendation on a pass it on
to the honorable TA merry comic
please.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee I wanted to start by
thanking you all for the hard
work that you all do and
particularly what we got last
year
The world differential that
really affected Rio Arriba
county for us has helped
immensely I stand in front of
you with I'm probably the only
day in the state with one of my
offices the one in Rio ripped
Reba that is actually fully
staffed and in fact we were able
to add a an attorney up there
and what that was able to do for
us was bring average case loads
of over three hundred three
hundred and fifty about down to
in between a hundred and a
hundred and fifty and so I
really think that that is
benefiting the people of Rio
Arriba and and I I very much
thank you for that we were also
the first district in
conjunction with Elapidae to get
the to to put in for the grant
from the sentencing commission I
know a couple of other dust have
mentioned that I thank you for
signing that that has very much
helped with recruitment and
retention
that said when I testified in
November we were fully staffed
in Santa Fe at within the last
two weeks we have gotten three
resignations of attorneys and so
like every other day before me
is it is because they are
getting poached from other state
agencies from from private
businesses and from the feds
because our salaries are just
they're simply not competitive
we can get them we we have a
hard time holding on to our
attorneys the the grant has
helped a great deal but it has
not it has not into the problem
and and so I I don't want to
belabor it but as every other DA
has said we do need help in that
area but I do want to thank you
for the work that you have done
and without all stand for
questions thank you Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman right.
Thank you.
With the reference to Rio
Arriba.
That's of the ones that are in
some of the.
Yes that's correct Mister
chairman Senator yes that is
correct the.
The number so.
Just wanted to know that in a
lot of sacrifice that is because
all.
From everyone that travels
there.
And there the court.
There isn't a single place to
eat there.
People would have to travel to
China or travel or a packed
lunch that you know it's so
quite a journey.
You know and the.
I guess the answer is to.
This is someone to start a
business there but there is
It's quite a commitment.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales you're
absolutely correct for more
Espanola office which is where
Rio Arriba office is located it
is about an hour and a half
drive there are no restaurants
no hotels interior area and so
when we have trials and most of
our trials that have been going
over the last two years have
been violent homicides that
lasts three days four days.
In days a we have to put our
attorneys up and and support
staff witnesses we have to
transport them up there and then
they have to stay and trauma
which is a forty five minute
drive so that's one of the
reasons that rural differential
has really helped because it
helps to soften that blow that
they are commuting on port days
three hours easily per day.
The gentleman on that point
When the tourism agency at a
high level in child.
That makes it hard to and it's
still still
anyway thank you.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon to R. DA
and the staff again just to
thank you once again for your
great work and you know I was
thinking about what one of the
judges district judges first
additional district I know this
is dust at the judges mention
that the district a large
actually goes from I. forty in
the went on and on and and
trying to describe it and I
actually lost them along the way
because it is pretty big and the
geographical area is huge and in
addition to that we were just
thinking about it now the doctor
that Senator on Gonzalez
mentioned the hardship that you
have to go to travel that far
and someone in the winter trauma
interim ideas we all know gets
pretty pretty bad I see in
someone just to have to be there
you don't have a you don't have
a choice pretty much than to and
to take care of business when
when you have to but let me just
one quickly Mr chairman and a
district attorney I do admire
the fact that you're constantly
trying to collect data two
systems that you requested from
the legislature and and also in
not only the collection but you
distribution of the data you
know to be able to collaborate
with law enforcement and other
judicial systems to be able to
be fair and get adequate in full
information before you proceed
with your cases and I just
wanted to say thank you for that
and I'm not going to prolong it
any further but you know that we
appreciate you.
I don't see any other questions
when Senator Gonzales and I
retire we'll probably have
Georgian Bobby's by the state
can fry truck up there.
Mr chairman I we would love that
and we highly recommend that you
do it.
Thank you thank you chairman I
think we're more than ready.
Thank you thank you.
We're gonna go back to the six
way gets everybody time to get
out of state police.
It.
Representative.
This is if you are gonna do a.
The police are.
Public safety don't talk about
states rights.
Makes me so angry.
The.
Thank you for that.
Whether they can.
The state to.
On the worst.
Mr chairman for the work what is
the what's going.
hello.
A simple.
Yes we.
By.
We not eat but we don't know how
to cook.
increases and I'm caring
recycling build.
Clue that we have.
Is.
We.
For example there is.
Are all the national press right
going to ring in the next.
Yeah we better make a
reservation for dinner now.
Alan you're gonna start off and.
Good afternoon Mr president
madam speaker in your honor Mr
president really reinstate.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Ellen or even LFC
fiscal analyst we're here to
discuss the budget for the
department of public safety
that's agency number seven nine
zero I want to take a moment to
recognize that the department
fifty is just a great agency to
work with they are extremely
cooperative and I've seen them
grow in the past few years just
leave the balance when it comes
to performance reporting and
collaboration and so I just
really want to just highlight
how how great it is to work with
that about the specially if this
gentleman to my left the
secretary Jason though we of the
department this is of my right
the eight minutes executive
budget was and we are also
joined by state police chief Tim
Johnson.
All direct you to our volumes of
with regard to this agency and
volume one pages fifty for sixty
seven health policy analysis.
One thirty four to one thirty
six of performance analysis.
William two three seventy five
three eighty four.
had hoped the budget narrative
for the recommendation and
volume three there's one of
graphs and charts on page fifty
one hundred and three and that
disabled would have to actually
memorable page numbers they're
also noted at the top of the who
are in.
I'm gonna briefly quick overview
of the recommendations let's get
it over to Diego offering
comments from the executive and
then the secretary probably will
give his presentation will not
for the committee the agency for
the five yesterday and adopted
the LFC recommendation.
All primarily be referring to
the high level on page three of
your packet will be referencing
the line numbers that you can
see on either side of that
table.
Overall the Executive
recommendation about three
hundred thousand dollars higher.
in the General Fund it's got
just over six hundred thousand
dollars higher.
And it of the at nine more FTP
the legislative recommendations
the executive recommendation
focuses on adding new positions
well provided recommendation
prioritizes targeted
compensation increases to eight
in recruitment and retention for
existing positions.
In the law enforcement program
and that's lines one through
thirteen under high levels for
provided recommendations
provides one point four million
dollars more in general fund
revenue in the executive that
primarily is to support of one
point two million dollars
proposed paid for your for
emergency dispatchers.
They can do the most destructive
increased twenty seven percent
in the past three years despite
the Legislature provided
multiple targeted pay increases
into these positions.
The goal of this large increase
is to reverse that trend I will
know the legislature's also
giving up targeted pay increases
to transportation factors both
ended up being larger and
potentially see if of the
vacancies shrink about twenty
six or twenty seven percent over
the same period of time that
we've seen the dispatcher
vacancy grow so much there's
more information on this in
volume two on page three seventy
eight of the header is
dispatched in commercial motor
vehicle inspections if you'd
like to read more detail about
that.
In a statewide law enforcement
support program this line
fourteen three thirty of your
high level the LA executive
recommendation provides two
point three million dollars more
from the general fund the
legislative recommendation and
this is where half of nine
additional FTE.
Executive recommendations
focused on increasing FTE in the
law enforcement records here
forensic laboratory bureau and
the information technology
division provided
recommendations also partially
supports these extensions but it
also provides funding for
targeted pay increases in those
specific areas to help fill
existing vacant positions and he
people in those positions who
are currently employed the rate
increases are outlined outlined
seventeen through nineteen of
your high levels and the
expenses are on lines twenty
three through twenty five.
Both recommendations that
support stanchions for the law
enforcement certification board
along for in training council
these are new entities created
to oversee law enforcement
certification act this
legislative improved training of
these recreated five twenty
twenties house bill sixty eight
on this private you can see
these expansions online twenty
six and twenty seven hundred
high level.
Additionally the legislative
recommendations by four hundred
and fifty dollars and I do have
I mean big them out the
positions to the agency you'll
see that online twenty and I
think you all just heard a lot
from the district attorney's
about how victim advocates are
extremely important and that
there is of federal funding to
have been available for those
positions is decreasing so it's
even more crucial now.
In the program support online
thirty one through forty five
the legislative recommendation
provide almost three hundred
thousand dollars more to provide
internet compensation increases
for the administrative services
division.
That's online thirty four of the
high level.
Those differences in the
operating budget recommendations
I'm gonna briefly review some
differences in nonrecurring
appropriation recommendations
there's a lot of differences so
just review some of the largest
ones you can see them all on
page twelve includes thirteen of
your packets I'm happy to answer
questions on on any of the
differences but I'll go over to
Google high level ones overall
the executive is providing
eleven point seven million
dollars more nonrecurring
recommendations the legislative
recommendations.
On page twelve line three you'll
see the executive recommendation
provides four million from the
general fund to the peace
officer survivor fund and that's
not including provided
recommendations the peace
officer survivors fund receives
revenue from the law enforcement
protection fund and that fund
has recently seen substantial
reductions in its revenues that
potentially puts the survivors
fund at risk if you'd like more
information on the law
enforcement protection fund
shortfalls the volume to page
three seventy seven of the
header if law enforcement
protection fund.
On page thirteen line fourteen
you'll see that the executive
recommendation provide seven
million dollars more for GPS is
project to modernize public
safety data systems in the and
provided recommendation is like
I said seven million dollars
less provided recommendations
fully funds the expected cost
for the project through FY
twenty five well the executive
recommendation fully funds the
entire expected cost of the
project.
That's all I have ever to DO for
additional comments from the
executive thank you thanks a lot
Mr chair and members of the
committee and covered it all
very well very thoroughly
there's a couple little items I
like to stay in touch on real
quick in the law enforcement
program.
The executive
Madam chair to to recommend for
funding that was requested for
the taser purchase planned and
ammunition others are on lines
five and six hundred hundred
general fund high level
the executive took the approach
that it was critically important
to ensure that officers are able
to train safely do their job
safely and interact with the
public safety committee.
In the.
Statewide law enforcement
support programs as I'll explain
the executive.
Opted to and to recommend more
positions because over the last
couple years and in the near
future this program in
particular has really.
I had gone through but pretty
significant evolution then that
information technology division
for example and the last several
years you'll have appropriated
significant projects to the
Department three six excuse me
section seven percent the
forensic laboratory I'm sure
you're all aware will be opening
at a new.
Building soon and the.
Of course that the.
Law enforcement academy that is.
Separating into the two distinct
entities and July thank you Mr
thank you for making Star Mr
secretary after police deputy
chief could you check Ellen for
warrants the way she was
praising you so much and may
have been there back.
Good Mr secretary Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you very much I appreciate the
opportunity present a budget for
all of you will start off as
recognizing a few introductions
if you don't mind Mr chair of
the seated behind me and the
entire team it is here they're
really the people that are the
consummate DPS and they really
leaned into every challenging
problem that we have a devious
the they're the ones that really
deserve a lot more Kerr than I
ever will never do we get to the
station sometimes set up here or
to take a lectern somewhere and
give a speech but it's those
people that that really
Representative DPS as a whole
they work tirelessly to meet our
goals for public safety across
the all departments of New
Mexico with that old introduces
a few more people as I made the
the lean on them for some of the
additional information needed to
Johnson was ready introduce Ben
Baker deputy cabinet secretary
but also the interim director
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy may house be out some
questions here by S. D. director
Sylvia Cerner Cerner and then
the blue ruby sees my budget
director she refers to herself
as the one filing cabinet I
found that to be true every time
we need something she's very
bright and providing us with the
answer so of the presentations
will be here today is a large
part of the team's effort not
mine I mean they're the ones
that put all the stuff together
and I really do appreciate them
can't introduce everyone I would
recognize as one more person
today and I reckon as of
yesterday but today you
mentioned this is twenty third
year anniversary with the DPS
many more years with state
government but the DPS alone
Irma of auto today this is an M.
and a today so they want to
gloss over the.
with that I want to thank the
the legislative body this
committee we just received a
tremendous amount of support
DPS last year I would've been on
the job about six months but on
this presentation now about a
year and a half and I was really
pleasantly surprised how much
support we receive for public
safety as a whole and then that
has not gone unnoticed I I
didn't know coming to this job
how much more support we receive
a what would be like and I've
been the nothing but encouraged
by the interest and engagement
throughout legislative body and
so I want to thank you for
everyone for that and and we saw
significant progress the last
year and and we thank you for
all of those things of one bank
of my analyst and DFA analysts
to really and he's also a very
strong partner for GPS and we
work very closely together I
appreciate that for the
presentation itself I won't go
over the power for our for for
bait and we remove some slides
the request was to make sure
that we were limited to ten so
some of things that I'll be
referencing you won't have in
front of you the slides really
are they're just kind of a high
level overview we certainly
stand for any questions that you
may have so we'll have we'll go
over each one of our programs we
have course will sort out the
mess the state police all
fortune program we have state
wide law enforcement support and
whatever HSD team and so will
will separate those out of the
one sided with the we did leave
in for you was our vision our
mission our guiding values fills
importance can start out with
that that's really what in
underpins all of our decisions
and our strategic goals as we go
through some of these requests.
So start off of which is quick
more quickly just kind of high
level overview of DPS and I I've
found so important always remind
people of this lot of times we
see the public facing piece of
the PS which is Mexico state
police and they do a wonderful
job there are a lot of people
that work at the PS as well the
the find other options and so I
was going to make sure that a
highlight them as well so we
have people within our forensics
laboratories as you know we have
three of them Santa Fe Los
crucis and harms we have a
grants management bureau they
distribute millions of dollars
in critical law enforcement
funding to dozens of state and
local agencies R. T.
So one twenty four seven thirty
three sixty five basis they
really are working around the
clock to make sure that
everybody in New Mexico has the
support they need for
information technologies hello
for some records bureau expand
on this but it's much larger in
the you can ever imagine it's
much larger than I certainly
ever thought of and we have
three dispatch centers course
across the state and so you've
heard us say before when you
invest in the PS your investing
in New Mexico public safety as a
whole and that can be more
troops with that we'll start
with just a quick overview of
the law enforcement program New
Mexico state police in this
particular case and one thing
that always stands out to me is
how many services that we
generate with New Mexico state
police there are calls for
service for ourselves and how
many more calls for service that
we actually assist other
agencies or other
towns or counties with and so if
you look for example you don't
have the slide in funding that
our tactical team we had eighty
four missions for tactical team
in New Mexico and thirty four
mission separately for other
agencies around the state were
supporting them with with the
those type of situations that
are beyond the capability of of
ritual officers today is an
example of that of New Mexico
state police assisted APD with a
a barricaded subject call and
that were the subject had the
fourteen or filling arrest
warrants out for him I don't
know how you gather fourteen the
only rest words with this
gentleman did so in New Mexico
state please help with a
crash reconstruction we have
failed prices throughout the
state of New Mexico New Mexico
state police goes out and help
help to assist with those with a
seventy five calls for service
for New Mexico state police
thirty six investigations for
other agencies and the same the
offer of all shootings with at
six for New Mexico state police
thirty three for other agencies
and nineteen as part of the task
force and you can see what I'm
trying to demonstrators how much
we do for other agencies and and
the system with
would you will really see is L.
as highlight a couple examples
of of results is a you know
Albuquerque.
Metro area because of those very
often for their assistance
around the time the balloon
fiesta we seven Mexico state
police out there and yet another
operation of the state police
just in the four week period
generated a hundred seventy two
arrests and of those hundred
seventy rest a hundred twenty of
them were for felony offenses
which is remarkable work of
stolen vehicles recovered was
thirty two they seize twenty
four firearms is tremendous
amount of
Substances the the fire that we
had across the state of New
Mexico the state police clocked
fourteen thousand hours man
hours three hundred ten people
the men and women across the New
Mexico assisting with
evacuations and road blocks and
whatever was needed whatever was
called upon this system with
those things so I just wanted to
brag on them for a minute for
some of their efforts and
something those remembers that
it's not just them out there
when we have New Mexico state
police officers across the New
Mexico there's support people
that have to work to process all
of the paperwork all the extra
hours of of overtime and making
sure that they're pretty Ms are
taken care of we have R. S. T.
team working just as hard and
support staff and dispatchers
working just as hard to make
sure that they are.
They need to start with slide
seven for you I'll start just
for a minute just was explained
the formats of the slide you'll
find the requests and the
recommendation at the very top
of our the the middle there will
be a C. justification for those
basing creases or special
appropriation increases and then
they'll be some additional those
at the bottom whether LFC is
recommending something
additional or the executive in
this particular case on slide
seven which you'll find is our
request for DPS was two point
three million dollars the
executive recommended two point
three we'll see in fact
recommended about the same two
point one and that's only
because three hundred thousand
of that the for ammunition they
moved to special appropriation
that is reoccurring admission
cost but hello see can explain
their their strategy for for
doing so one of things that we
are requesting the sticker basis
the compaction pay we are very
appreciative of the races that
are received for the New Mexico
state police has been our goal
to make sure that their highest
rate in the state as they
provide services across the
entire state of New Mexico in
their town on so much as I just
mentioned what it did not do is
fix the compaction issues the
the races in fact further to the
compacted pay disparity and so
we have in some cases officer
starting with New Mexico state
police are making more than
people have been there period
longer as we want to make sure
that we correct that the LFC had
additional base recommendations
was a software maintenance and
for both our missing cat we want
to make sure that we have
maintenance and hosting costs
the recovered as those ended in
June.
Also dispatcher pay LFC
recommended additional salary
study and one point two million
dollars to make sure that we
have competitive pay and
compensation for our dispatchers
to address the challenges in
recruitment that we have in that
space and as you know we can do
this job without a dispatcher
telling us where to go so to
speak
Moving on to page eight which
would be our special
appropriations also for New
Mexico state police
both of the executive an LC
recommended our our request and
so our request was for one point
two million and both these
active LFC concurred on the if
you have any questions
specifically to of ballistic
armor information technologies
or anything like that please let
me know one of things I do want
to highlight real quick if you
look at invests in technology we
talk about like a scanners and
and that type of thing one
there's a return very successful
as and I believe Senator Diamond
I heard you madam the the night
and program as far as the
ability to take a farmer Farm
casing found on the scene and
and develop investigative leads
from that just this last Friday
the night muted we test for the
last five on hand guns that we
cease from the metro operation
that I just mentioned the last
five high hang on for that
operation and we received
multiple nine one eight from one
of those fires and nine
millimeter which with the serial
numbers filed down in those nine
and eight no that tied into a
murder investigation and that
additional shootings and so this
is the second hang in there we
season test fired and enter
cases and I've been at the end
of it's a fingerprint the if you
will on the king of the casing
the markings of the casing are
very then I will and then that
gives us an opportunity to tie
multiple shooting scenes
together and so the program has
been very successful for us and
so we ask that that continues to
be supported.
Also so slide eight you see the
executive recommendation for of
the New Mexico honor guard
distribution program and what
that is really about is that as
you recall for souls pairs and a
helicopter crash earlier last
year in July in one of those was
lieutenant Fred beers of the
Berlin county sheriff's office
and he would often out of his
own pocket to pay for
honor guard type equipment so
that those other people who died
in line of duty could probably
be honored and so the governor
was inspired by the that story
from his late wife.
Transmissions funding there so
that we could find honor guard
equipment to those people that
want to fall honor the fallen
and so the I want to make sure
to highlight and showcase that
additional requests there from
the government.
That concludes the state police
so move on the statewide law
enforcement support you don't
have slides that I have I'll
provide very brief overview of
each one of those services real
quick
the first all star the Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy
sometimes there's people don't
understand the station between
the muscle state police is that
we train and everyone else for
the state private and so we have
the missile state police were
called recruit screen and those
people go to that Academy
specifically for the massive
state police within for the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
train everyone else for every
other county in every other city
that send them our way we're
also response for non satellite
academies across the state and
through the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy in Santa Fe
we trained more police officers
and public safety tell
communicators dispatchers then
the line satellite academies
combined and so I feel it's
important to emphasize that
again because we do provide a
tremendous amount of service
there the other thing that's
changed since we've taken office
and with the leadership of COVID
Baker but if you can secretary
is that we didn't want to be
seen as a place where we just
provide basic training only
there was a period of time I
know when I was with the city
Rio Rancho advance training was
hard to come by from the school
for some academy so we've done
we have increased the level of
of training offered by the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy
and we're offering advanced
training to all of our for Smith
in the state of New Mexico
currently free of cost I hope to
be able to continue to for to do
that and I'll give you some
topics that we've covered for
impartial policing internal
affairs and ethics realistic the
escalation instructor course we
train our our basic a school
resource officers for a active
shooter type threats crisis
intervention in the list goes on
and we continue to we want to
continue to provide that level
of training as you know there's
a lot of scrutiny on law
enforcement and we want to be
part of that solution make sure
that we provide the best
training that we can for all
those officer after building
that we will be reduced
turnaround the vacancy there we
are at a time there when we had
a tremendous amount of vacancies
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy we can get instructors
want to come join.
The increased the salary there
we can we're successful they're
negotiating that we spoke we're
now able to bring instructors in
our instructor cadres of and the
the services they were able to
provide to the school for me is
is a projector you when we we
plan to maintain the.
You on to information
technologies as I just mentioned
of I always like to mention this
if we would ever see a police
car out there running for any
community and they're on their
in car computers that that
information comes from that from
the PS so you know we as for I.
T. DPS we support the entire
public safety community Mexico
local state federal tribal
courts and corrections detention
facilities you name a dispatch
centers they get their
information through our I. T.
center in some shape or form
when you look at the users that
we have to R. T. about twelve
hundred those twelve under those
are internal thirteen of about
twelve thousand of those are
extra so we have more external
people that we serve an internal
someone again when you're
investing in the I. T. space of
these are services that were
provided the entire state New
Mexico if we fail in the I. T.
space you can only imagine
entire criminal justice system
that depends on a fill in that
space as well.
The move will to learn which
refer to the law firm records
bureau this is you don't have
the order to provide those hold
up to you can see it how many
different units we have within
our I'll read off just a couple
of them we have thirty a
separate and distinct units
within our a total of sixty full
time employees are law
enforcement records more than
start out that way we start out
with one or two the repository
for our records but over time
we've had these mandates through
legislative initiatives and then
we put it on our offer some
records bureau we put it in
there and so today we have
thirty separate units within
lower that are providing
services and home in just a few
sex offender registration New
Mexico missing persons automated
fingerprinting action report
request until care units
inspection public records on on
on over funding is really was
kind of a of a trend where the
bills written well intended but
I think it's house with us and
to the point that I would make
the search for this year is that
we're busting at the seams
building wise we can keep
housing these units when you
start having a discussion about
growing the infrastructure for
New Mexico DPS as well and will
continue to provide the services
that is necessary for the state
New Mexico but it's going to
require an additional investment
into the future
moving on to our labs friends
laboratory again I mentioned
three locations that we have
them but I will mention this we
process again more for other
ages in New Mexico state police
serving three hundred agencies
processing almost twenty
thousand pieces of evidence
nineteen six are to be exact in
twenty twenty two that's a
tremendous amount of evidence
being processed for the entire
state of New Mexico through a
laboratory and the list
continues to grow as you're
aware we have a new facility you
can see it on St Francis that is
that is hopefully be occupying
this year will be off by this
year we'll have hopefully not
too need to recruit more
scientist in order so we can
keep up with the demand and the
workload of that the the lab is
currently attached with
we want to make sure that we
invest in in our there are
scientists know little mention
that your minute as I go through
a request.
So for you moving on page
sixteen this statewide law for
support program our base request
eight point eight million was
our request the second
recommended six point eight and
the LFC recommended three point
nine and just to kind of break
that out a little bit a lot of
this have to do with the
expansion positions we requested
sixty six positions the
executive recommended forty four
and the LESC recommended twenty
nine and that's where you see in
large parts of the differences
in the the funding there.
We'll go to the justification of
down below you can see a break
out of kind of the recommended
FTEs in there and the could you
kind of an idea of where that
money is is recommended and
spent one thing I would mention
those request is that the two
request New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy are
statutorily required by HB
Sixtyeight from the last
legislative session and so the
certification board and the
standards and training council
are are legislatively mandated
so just for your calculus is
you're making a decision on what
to fund.
With the slide seventeen special
appropriation for SL yes they
want law enforcement support we
requested one point eight
million the executive
recommended one point eight the
LFC recommended a five hundred
thousand.
The justification there in the
middle of one of things that
stood out to me for the video
surveillance server and storage
is that my CIO indicated that we
are currently buying parts to
maintain that system off of eBay
and I thought well this is gonna
be pretty old if if the if we
can't find support and parts of
any longer that we have to go to
that as a source the second is
you know an idea of why that in
particular is needed otherwise
access point becomes important
as we travel across the state
provide services in every
community when we arrived in
this Los gate locations would
not be going to be able to to
connect those wireless access
additionally this the state
police as in need of course
upload their body worn cameras
they arrive on scene we can't
upload body worn camera data and
an officer can upload and he's
left having to leave that
location to go to the call for
service this could potentially
compromise the integrity of that
up load we can't afford to fill
in that space either and so
that's why you're seeing some of
the of the job task analysis is
for the the new seated law
enforcement if a certification
board in the passionate training
council of to give you a little
bit of an idea that we expand
that as.
Moving on to programs support
are is the as I mentioned as we
have people out there working
their processing all of that we
have fifty seven full time
employees Sir seven departments
and we serve about twelve
hundred eighty DPS employees I
will say that from the time of
our initial budget initiatives
to the executive to LFC we
identified of the need to change
a greater need for us to retain
and recruit so we we want to
make sure that we we worked on
pay disparity and retain retain
some of people that we had and
so that's why I think in part
this is not fun and so page
nineteen our initial request was
five hundred thousand the
executive recognized men funding
it nor did the.
And the I think that is why you
would see the additional LFC
additional base recommendation
there they're recommending an
increase of funding to the base
budget to support the
realignment of existing
positions I just mentioned which
would help decrease the vacancy
rate improve the recruitment and
retention and so we would ask
that that be considered as well
we're going to the last page
page twenty of the HSD roll up
question the overall summary of
of our request.
Again for the agency total we
requested twelve point nine
million the executive
recommended nine or nine two in
the LFC recommended six point
eight and with that stand for
questions Mr chair.
Thank you question from
committee Senator.
First of all.
Volume two says that you had two
hundred fifty four thousand
calls for service last year.
When I read that right the three
seventy six I don't want to get
two hundred fifty four thousand
call for for.
In FY twenty I don't have the
room
for the actor that Mr chair
falls in the that's necessary
to.
Well.
Mr chair Senator share
recruited provided that now
thousand eight hundred today.
Mr chair and senator this is
information that I requested
from the department of public
safety in the fall and I was
completely agency budget
narrative so this was reported
directly to me I think from
deputy chief we for.
And I believe this a lot of
work.
Hundred sixty four traffic stop
why do we still have three
hundred people and forms.
I have my opinions of Mr chair
Senator about the licensing but
I was probably for different
session.
One of the question Mr chair and
that's on page seven the three
hundred.
Face seven of our presentations
are.
Over million.
That's a three are thousands or
millions out this.
What.
The deal is this for local also
is it just the state police Mr
chair Senator analysis when I
saw state police and you'd be
surprised of the the cost of
ammunition was required to think
about all the recruit schools
that we have to train there's a
tremendous amount of volume of
of just to get someone to
actually quite with firearms we
think with recruit schools
lateral schools the people we
have actively out there working
tactical teams I mean there's a
lot of the there's a lot I
mediation that's in the building
for that's not that's an
accurate number I don't find
this to be that unusual compared
to a the even the amount of from
previous experience when I was
at the state very Rancho and
what we would spending in on
ammunitions as a pre regional
number.
Our.
Thank.
Thank you.
Dollars.
Thank you all the.
Thank you for your work.
All.
What age.
What else could I ask you in the
in reference to the helicopter.
That was lost.
It that the long strictly to
Bernalillo county Mr chair
Senator Gonzales yes it is those
of growing county sheriff's
office help.
The the Mr chairman and members
I have all brought that up and I
think the LFC is following up on
it on the to see if there's a
new request on the replacement
four point that because so.
I know that it's need to you
know but.
And the other working on that
the other part that I was just
going to ask it is so.
But we have a work so.
Who does that really fall off
point for small.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales the
pens on of course the where the
words on that and if it's the
same within this policy on a
highway typically does the high
with New Mexico state police we
have jurisdiction of course
everywhere of the sheriff's
department within the county and
certainly enforce there's well
so that's an interstate the
increase of that particular
County could to the Senate for.
Hello Mr chairman and members of
one of the thoughts that I have
always thought because so.
I always had this long
discussions with D. O. T..
And perhaps maybe a small pay
increments was in the Pacific
Ocean always comes to not having
enough funding to then you know
rules areas that are a very
small percentage you know if the
contracts they're let out you
need to have enforcement
because so we owe it to these
people that are working there
you know they're working hard
and you know and then if you
have high speed traffic you know
it's just very dangerous and we
have had accidents you know in
the past on that but I know that
hello on the construction the
state police know just north of
Hispaniola.
I follow the speed of the work
so everyone passes.
Is no and I believe if I'm
correct that one day they did
it.
Enforce it and I think they did
three hundred citations in one
day.
Good number you know so
Again just the safety for
everyone but safety for the
people that work there.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
so.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr secretary in chief and
everyone that's here thank you I
I just to the two questions one
Where to is the state police
rank in terms of the rate versus
all the other is that in here
somewhere if I miss it maybe
versus the other public service
public safety departments within
the state.
They're a ranking that that
you're aware of the document for
now Mr chair.
So
Mr chair Senator I would say
that every time we we give
increases naturally other
agencies to that sometimes
information is dated it really
can sometimes and so on you know
what what time to time you ask a
currently as I'm looking at
C..
So currently for the National
City police is currently at the
top the time of drafting this I
know that other agencies are
pivoting in order to increase
our sellers well as far as on
the lateral side four bonuses a
concern we don't offer that and
so some people do surpasses with
federal transfers the high
salary for laterals is in Los
Alamos and we would rank fifth
with laterals as far as new
recruits for currently number
one of the please.
Police officers.
This is this is the starting
from.
Right so let me defer to this
really.
If you can explain your graph
little better that's the way I
read it.
Mr chair.
You come up to the Mike is being
web cast and then they'll start
Texas the can't hear you thank
you.
Mr chair Senator Padilla and
members of the committee right
now all of I've been with DPS
for twenty three and a half
years in starting pay for
patrolman we now rank first in
the state with the starting
hourly rate of thirty dollars
and fifty five cents per
graduation it has taken us
several years to get to number
one and the secretary bowties
mentioned we've got a lot of
competition from shirts and
local law enforcement agencies
because they are under home rule
they see what we're paying day
care that they need thank you
they can implement increases
quicker than we can as a state
agency our second closest
competitor is the Carlsbad
police department they start at
twenty nine fifty two an hour
that's about a dollar an hour
less but we are now in position
to be in a good place to offer a
competitive starting salary.
In terms of laterals.
are starting rate our maximum
starting pay for a lateral is
thirty seven dollars an hour
right now that is fifth in the
state the highest lateral
starting pay is Los Alamos at
forty one dollars and fifty
eight cents an hour.
among our top competitors we are
one of the few agencies that
does not offer a recruiting
bonuses sign on bonus retention
bonus
you know excluding the law
enforcement retention program
other and other local agencies
offered their own additional
incentives to come and join them
we're one of our for the four
top agencies in the state that
do not do that thank you Mr
chairman and I appreciate the
response I if you wouldn't mind
sharing that data with me I'd
appreciate it and then if you
just had a high level I you know
maybe you'll get this Mr
secretary or chief and send it
to me or something that how does
how do other states do it I mean
two other staff so I I guess it
just kind of never dawned on me
I just always assumed that the
state police for the highest pay
law enforcement the state in
every category it just seems
like that's what you would work
up to much like you're going to
work out from being an entry
level professor to the present
university you're going to work
from whatever to the whatever
right level I was really
surprised to hear that I I just
it just didn't even dawn on me
to even think about it tell I
saw some data but if there's
current I'd like to see it and
and I'm interested in working
with you on something like that
down the road thank you that's
all I have.
Thank you Senator Burt.
What's one make sure.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr very for being here jobs it's
always a pleasure to see you as
I look through this I I think
it's clear that there is an
effort by all three of these
recommendations so place your
person and the appropriate rate
rank and rate right and I whole
heartedly support that I think
ideally we would like to see our
our police officers and all
first responders as really the
top paying career since you
literally put your life on the
line to protect others I think I
could argue that that the value
that you bring could be argued
is a little brighter than you
know I'll attorneys are or
aren't.
Value are doctors but I would
love to see police officers as
one of the top playing concerns
and we we will get there with
that said I do want to follow up
on a little bit of what Senator
Padilla said and as
appropriators there is going to
be some responsibility to make
sure that our that our local
sheriffs and are looking
municipal police officers are
also properly paid a living
wage.
I didn't have personally much
experience or relationships with
police officers before I was let
in my very first term it was a
close capital my very first year
I was called off the floor for
courtesy call from an officer to
tell me that their insurance
just and shut my district before
it could hit the media and I
remember standing in the hall
and it shook me to my core as a
freshman because I don't know
what to do with that information
are really what that meant other
than as a courtesy I will tell
you the aftermath of that it it
because murder has really
defined my service in this role
and how does because I spent a
lot of times home community he
has a lot of family members
there and even to this day it it
almost stops time in Lordsburg
and Deming and it was really
through that experience even
today with relationships with
our county we we continue to
memorials a meeting with the
family to really was really my
first experience is just how
tight knit this band I would say
all office law officers but the
state police it is is a family
and so I can tell you that
regardless of the rate increases
that you sit here and ask for
today you clearly don't work for
the money you officers are
clearly not here
for for the pay but for the
heart and that is on full
display in my community with
thank you for your service thank
you for mentioning how we on our
for our fallen officers because
it really has to find a
community and I'm sure it will
for many years to come on that
note I also want to compliment
another officer down there
officer Trey reed so I got to
know since my time of service
really models what it is to be a
good citizen and his
professionalism down there and
I'm sure you can say the same
for a number of officers that
you have here but I want to
compliment you the impact they
have on our use their I think
regardless of what you may hear
in the media the sentiment in
the opinion of my police off.
This is including state police
down there is very high and it
is because of behaviors like
officer read hope to see if
you're in the capitol and many
other offices for my district
and so on compliment on them
quite often and I I hope you
hear this compliments as well I
also wanted to thank you for
your assistance to my sheriff's
department on any given weekend
elephant Butte our population
goes from very few to over a
hundred thousand and even
especially passes last at this
last summer there's a large
state police presence there
especially on holiday weekends
to assist our sheriffs often
there's maybe no more than two
officers on duty and there's you
know with the with the boating
in the drinking the driving
there's a large state police
presence and I want to thank you
guys for that for being there so
more than anything just thank
you for your service I I hope
you feel supported from at least
the constituents in my area I
can assure you that is an
appropriate you will be from me
as well so thank you all thank
you.
Sen Ron Griggs thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon
Secretary Boeing and of course
our.
And staff thank you never enough
words to be empty sometimes when
we generally want to thank you
deeply for what you do but I
think that while money doesn't
do everything they say money
isn't everything sure is a big
thing because it helps you make
your decisions where you can
live and how you can live and
how much you can provide for
your families that's huge when
you when you look at your
paycheck and so I'm like Senator
Padilla Mr chairman I I guess I
knew you were underpaid but I
never knew it was this under
rate when you do it you see it
in comparison and
I I have one question with that
in mind may be you can help me
here from LFC Ellen is the the
the racist right now for the
department of public safety this
isolate them for a minute
because I think they fall within
the category of like traditional
and dust and public safety is on
there's a category there that
are getting fairly the same
amount with the targeted
increases above the five percent
is that the case for public
safety or they get to be able to
get more.
Mr chair and Senator Rodriguez I
believe that the.
I believe they fall under the
same category as most state
employees and and I'm sorry that
I'm not sure what.
Recommendations Micaela can you.
Yes it is at five percent
additionally as you'll see in
line three of the high level
there is a recommendation in
both the executive and LFC
recommendations ought to write
about two point one million
dollars of for officer pay that
is about a three percent
increase but importantly the
department is not the
necessarily distribute that as
you know an additional three
percent to each officer across
the board the to use that to
address the compaction concerns
that the secretary mentioned
earlier I see so it Mr chairman
the L. so it's conceivable then
that the additional we thought
it would be an average two
percent roughly four seventy
five percent plus average two
percent for targeted increases
but it's conceivable that that
they won't get the full to it
could be one or it could be
three little in that range Mr
time.
Mr Mr chair and senator yes it's
it's conceivable it could range
a bit the the purpose of this
recommendation is to allow them
to address the compaction issue
and make sure that officers are
placed in the correct staff.
I see okay so so basically while
it may seem to address the
compaction issue it's not going
to increase their their the
intent the intended purpose that
the legislature would want to us
to find increases to see their
salaries go up basically from
what they are today in general
and so I guess one of the things
that crossed my mind is that you
know on one hand we see an
enormous number of retirees from
the department of public safety
we had a forty six percent give
me a second not a percent we
have forty six officers
retiring last didn't twenty two
and that is more than double the
amount of officers that retired
the year before at one point we
could blame it on COVID and all
this extra stuff that officers
had to do and so on we could say
whatever we want to say but the
fact of the matter is that this
is been going on since two
thousand sixteen to twenty one
as far back as we see the
numbers there's been lots of
retirements in so a hundred
forty percent increase that's
huge and the reason I mention
mention that you're preaching to
the choir here because we all
have those data but the reason I
mention this is because.
You know we can't expect
officers with this type of
responsibility and this level of
responsibility to stay on the
job and not retire as soon as
they can if they're not getting
paid to do this and it it's.
Creasing crime and the level of
crimes that are happening now
with additional guns and the
weapons of different kinds and
just I added on crimes and so on
you know to to just
basically give them a five
percent released what I see now
because we could we don't
guarantee that they're all going
to get the a different the
additional two percent then
other than to bring him to that
compaction issue that that
concerns me it's this we need to
do something that's much more
meaningful than what we have
today but tell me I think Ellen
wants to respond thank you for
all your work to the thank you
Mr chair Senator the state
police received a sixteen
percent pay increase starting in
FY twenty three that was
approved during the last
legislative session I believe
that's why the department did
not request a significant pay
package for this year I think
that there in fact of they felt
relatively good about where
they're officer pay was and
began primarily wanted to focus
on addressing the compaction
issue as well as looking at
areas with regard to the
statewide law enforcement
support of those with the
agency's priorities and I would
defer to secretary but we to
speak more on on that
participation thank thank you
Secretary can you you wanna say
something Mr chair Senator this
that is correct in part I mean
we've he is very generous race
last time around and actually
in the well it you know we do
want to recoup mailer could
point New Mexico state police
and particularly we haven't been
as successful in the spaces we
would like to be were running
recruit school right now we
start with thirteen or down the
ten and just the just in two
weeks so this next record school
over running to be graduating
you know ten or less of food the
ten that are there now remain so
we do we do want to make sure
that we're most competitive for
the New Mexico state and then in
the state of New Mexico make
sure that we can recruit people
messed state police but in part
it was you know when it was a
very generous increasingly want
to seem greeting that's.
Yes we need to fix the
compaction issues well we had
other needs within the
department that we want to ask
for so in part it was being a
little conservative and you know
not going back and ask you for
another tremendous increase and
so she sees correct in part that
we were being just considered in
a way that doesn't change the
need I mean I like I said the
need at the end of the day is to
make sure that we can our our
competitive that we continue to
to and get people to join state
police so expenses for anymore
what I meant by the other
agencies can pivot easier when
we were with and with this
policy for you Rancho you know
you just got to go through the
council and if there's funding
there and pretty quickly you can
make an adjustment for salaries
as soon as you pay the the state
New Mexico state police more
pretty quickly to respond as a
city and make sure that your
officers pay bump up in
Albuquerque please this is very
regularly for us it's a much
lengthier process and we're
sitting at right now to make
sure that we can ask for the
funding so pretty quickly as
soon as we increase pretty
quickly people pay that and and
and then surpass us again that's
that happens pretty continuously
I will say that the smaller
agencies sometimes struggle in
this area that's what we provide
so much support to the smaller
jurisdictions on those you
mentioned of the concerns that
we have for all the other
jurisdictions and and we do we
try to provide the best service
that we can to every
jurisdiction in New Mexico but
the ones that cannot compete in
that space.
Thank you think chairman thank
you Secretary Boeing for that
inviolate I know that you're
trying your very best to to do
with real rate was realistic and
and do a full for your officers
thank you for that do you know
what I look back in sixteen
percent merrily covers what not
not even part but so tiny here
of what we are behind on for
years the state police have been
underpaid and sixteen percent
basically brings I'm not even to
the level that I we foresee
anyway I I initialized quite a
bit more to tell you the truth
but the thing is that insurance
rates go up cost of living goes
up so the sixteen percent
disappears pretty soon all these
additional deductions in your
paycheck to help you I mean get
you home with one or two dollars
more per paycheck yes Mr
chairman secretary about.
Mister chair Mister chairman
Senator Rodriguez more thing to
consider and I agree
wholeheartedly what you're
saying is that we have always
been struggling to recruit from
out of state because we're not
competitive with out of state
right and so when you look at
surrounding states they always
pay more and so we can be
competitive in that space we
could certainly and probably
bring people from out of state
one of the challenges that we
see that we continuously called
steal from each other right
we're taking people from one
agency and then they're going
recruit somewhere else because
they pay more and and I really
in some ways kind of
disappointed in it's gonna seen
some of the lack of loyalty that
seniors prospect I spent my
entire twenty seven years in law
enforcement one agency that
that's not true these days
anymore people spent three or
four here somewhere the bounce
around the river over or they
can and that inconsistency has
several concerns ready for one
of the liability side in the
training in order car of our
police officers but you know
it's it's it's gotten to a point
where everybody is rooting for
law enforcement officers and if
we don't stop taking from each
other within state within state
and start looking at strategies
to recruit from out of state of
particularly in places that are
not very supportive of the place
like we look like we are here in
New Mexico we can do a better
job recruited from the state but
we have to be competitive in
that area thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that Mr chairman
Ellen you would say something.
Senator I did just want to add
as well that of looking at.
The pay is not the only strategy
to try and increase for strength
so for example last year the
state police requesting the lot
of funding to increase the
number of five of their lateral
schools failed to the thank you
very more people in training
more officers that's projected
to help their fourth straight
additionally the rebel you some
of their preconceived savings to
offer a one time retention of
payments to some of their
existing officers as well as
last year the law enforcement
attention fund was established
will also provide some retention
payments to state police
officers additionally LFC is
recommendation
for nonrecurring funding
includes I think twenty six
million dollars for the up for a
law enforcement workforce
capacity building fund that's
intended to work with the state
police and other law enforcement
agencies to support innovative
ways of increasing the law
enforcement workforce that is to
say US strategies are aimed not
at recruiting from other
agencies with in New Mexico but
it increasing the pool they're
drawing from by their convincing
our new people who were are not
currently in law enforcement to
pursue that as a career are
persuading current law
enforcement officers from out of
state to move to New Mexico
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Ellen and and that's great to
know that we're looking at
different incentives to do this
and and I really appreciate that
that you're doing that but
there's one thing missing here
and that is that at the very
core of all these incentives
that we we are putting together
to recruit more people it's it's
salaries that without a good
salary and budget you know it
didn't matter how many other
things we do take for example
Santa Fe it's quite expensive as
we all know to live here and a
lot of our officers have to be
here especially even now during
the sessions so on.
it's just very expensive and and
hard for them to remain here but
one thing that I noticed on the
presentation is that.
Secretary bow you have six
hundred roughly on average six
hundred thirty five officers on
an average okay for the whole
state I guess for the whole
state here like in fiscal year
twenty to yeah okay was more
okay but you're going to end.
This year fiscal year twenty two
was six are and I it's only
twenty more officers.
That worries me because when you
have forty six officers retiring
but you only have twenty new
officers and this happens on
going all the time this ripple
effect you're just getting
lesser and lesser staff in the
vacancy rates although we're
only twelve point one percent
overall when you look at the
whole spectrum.
It's you're falling behind more
and more and so we're getting
less and less and less officers
from more and more crime it just
doesn't make sense to me but
anyway I just wanted to bring
that up I could go on and talk
about this issue I may just
offer clarifying where did I do
want to be very clear that I am
not in any way saying that the
state police do not deserve to
refit I just want to highlight
the other strategies that are
being pursued to try and solve
this problem but with regard to
the net number of officers so
mother maybe forty retirements
there if they're ending twenty
officers up that because they
lost forty officers but again
sixty.
So so the net increase forty six
officers retirement twenty two
but that's more than double the
retirement to twenty one it says
here right but of one hundred
forty percent more than the
average so yes so but but but
the point being that their
projects that it includes that
and so they projection is that
they will they will
Gain about twenty more officers
then they lose which means
however if they're losing thirty
officers they're projecting
their gonna came for.
Okay all right and to me that's
the I thank you for explaining
that that makes some sense but
it's still short of what they
workforce really needs to be
that is absolutely look at one
elected I promise Mr chairman
that I notice that dispatchers
you know it's all one system
right you need dispatchers to do
your work and so on to protect
people in let me just say this
twenty seven percent decrease in
dispatchers around the state you
know it makes me wonder how are
we going to send.
How are we going to communicate
here without dispatchers the the
sufficient amount there's a
twenty seven percent the yeah
they can see so it's a vacancy
twenty seven percent the last
three years for dispatchers the
M. S. us pretty big Senator I
believe the vacancies actually
increased twenty seven percent
increase okay over the past
three years yeah they're very
very high as you can see rates
there they are growing and that
is the rationale for the LFC is
large recommendation targeted
for dispatcher rate increases.
Are at well thank you Mr
chairman I don't want to prolong
anything's anymore but we
appreciate all that you do thank
you to you and our officers so
appreciate you six hundred thank
you Mr speaker did you get any
the recruitment and retention
money that we had in the state
the fifty million that the
government governor was not for
state agencies not was not was
not for state into agencies or
universities so we did not and
then I mean we want to go to
some things of the legislature
do when we pass bills that harms
police officers and input their
livelihood at risk with the
civil rights right that puts a
lot of figures lives at risk and
their families at risk for them
losing anything from mistake
that happened so you know we're
part of the blame that I don't
think I voted for but but what
part of the blame for what's
happening in the retirement
field people get close to
retirement and and you can't
risk that.
For the years you worked in the
and then end up getting sued and
losing everything that you have
in doing that so the legislature
for that what I'm hearing from
my committee is is we're going
to have you back with house bill
two crosses.
But here's what I want from you.
If we can make this the best
enforcement law enforcement
agency in the U. S. how do we do
that and that we target
everything that you need to
recruit from out of state right.
And how do we stop the accordion
from we have we raise ours we
are ready to raise there's help
raise theirs and and we're
playing this according affect
throughout the state and how do
we do that I wish to give you
bonuses but the prior a state
auditor told us that bonuses
were legal.
and so we can't give bonuses to
state employees of and so that
becomes another issue that we
got to figure out but I mean if
you're gonna come back to us
when house bill two comes.
Tell us tell us what we don't
need we need to be the best in
the nation.
Nothing wrong with being number
one we provide you correctly do
the right things and you
implement them they should work
I want to come back to that
laundry list of what you think
not LESC not what the exact
things we don't care about them
we care about what happens in
your department
LFC is not elected to to take
votes in to make a
determination of what you need I
think this is one of the
agencies that we should
completely build up
As we move forward.
And the second say anything she
wants but there's certain things
that the legislature that I'm
hearing from my committee.
That we want to have you back
because I had a lot of things
are happening and how do we make
that happen for you and so be
prepared for that I'm gonna give
you a chance.
The prepare for that but but I
mean that's what I'm hearing as
we move forward right issues we
deal with the pay
I just don't know how to in the
court effect because if we go up
just like you said they'll go up
in April.
And.
And then where we gain nothing
other than.
Raising the cost of a police
officer across the state
somehow we're gonna have to
figure that out with local
naming it the agency fully
getting at the same time and
have a hearing on.
Hello how we how we not rob from
each other but how we retain and
recruit from out of state
that's what the money was given
for local governments I guess
the state agency was allowed to
get it in so.
Will maybe audit their
recruitment and retention money
and see if they did any
recruitment.
as we move forward if they were
would also retain for six month
period and then move off to
another agency that was paying
more those are some the
structure I think we need to dig
deep into so Mr secretary.
The committee thank you I
appreciate the question I really
do and so not questions
statement statement yes Sir.
I I'll try to answer the some of
what I think maybe if you're
looking for we can have you back
one the formal structural
briefly I just make a statement
return to work is something that
we absolutely need we're losing
experience right about the time
that's eligible and part that
might be for the reasons you
just mention as far as maybe
lack of support but we don't
have a return to work currently
there are a lot of law
enforcement officers that have
capabilities are willing to this
job that want to make a
difference in communities that
want to suppress crime wherever
it might be where every
community that they want to
serve and we're losing that
experience we're not investing
back into those people they're
going across to other states in
order to be law enforcement
officer there if we had a return
to work if you had a small
community that might benefit
from a retirement was
advertising deputy for the city
of Rio Rancho and I might be
willing to serve in Raton New
Mexico as a as a captain or
whatever of those those things
are now no longer possible I can
go to grants or for Gallup and
and get another job within law
enforcement because the the pair
does allow for the increasing
appear to have a percent we
talked about that some people
stay longer no for the Santa by
them to stay within the program
and so that investment they
becomes very important we lose
people within the state of New
Mexico to go elsewhere it's not
just a law enforcement officer
that would lose theirs of the
whole family and is a leading
that are determined to.
The gross receipts of the tax
base budget is something that I
heard Senator Rodriguez mention
of I was really surprised when I
went from this pull agency of
both my of my wife and I have
options for health care plans
within either a PED or receiving
Rancho we paid half for in those
cities that we do here with the
state when I can state health
care double house I was
surprised I was thinking the
state has so many more employees
certainly would be a better
program would pay more now my
wife's a since retired and so I
pay more for being a state
employee health care than I do
within this policy which I
thought was it was really crazy
pension transfer from out of
state I mean we ought to
consider with para then we have
people that have ten years
experience else for me people
don't want to come workers at
the start of zero.
I will have to start all over in
a pension program we can figure
out a way to bring people's
attention over give a certain
amount of credit to help those
lateral office come over it's
beyond my pay grade but I think
at the end of the day if that
could be considered the strong
and I'll just leave this last
thought real quick
it's just support in general I
think we as you just mentioned
when when people don't feel
supporting the job that they do
and it starts becoming a burden
to do the job just for being
coming worried about their own
livelihood there there is an
option maybe like I can I can
retire and do something
different take this burden and
the stress off of me and so I
always I feel the support here
really do in this room and I and
like I said when I first came
here in a year and a half ago I
was pleasantly surprised in a
way but it was not my opinion
when I came here from C. ranchos
really worried about the way
things might be in the support
the law enforcement agency the
perception of it and so I would
just ask that when an officer or
officers make mistakes in other
states that we don't have that
that almost emotional reaction
and and I it bothers me too and
I always tell people when we see
things like that happen it does
frustrate law enforcement
leadership and boots on the
ground the same probably more
than it does the general public
because at the end the day we
know what it takes and how much
work it takes to build trust and
community it's it's painstaking
it takes a lot of work rose
overnight because someone in
Memphis can keep control of
their of their school water the
people and so we are equally as
this point probably more so than
the general public health state
and so I would just of the
support in our state is a strong
of you know through the tough
times like does that well and we
we stand with our police officer
that's just a couple notes on
the top of my head as you were
talking I certainly love more
dialogue about space.
For more dialogue and and give
us numbers that that that you
need to do those things and
let's have a full conversation
about.
Look at the pension bills are
out there I think there's a
return to work for a state
employees and state police I
don't know where it sat on have
to look at the.
In the house so we might have to
show that a little bit that
that's part of the for this call
the state please type that we
want C. push through and and go
from there
one point seven center one thing
I I do want curves to our body
do is I think last week I think
we had a good visit to school
about lunches.
And maybe a comedy this of
legislators would want to do
that is right along with a
police officer for an hour.
Just go on the interstate or
whatever you guys do I think
that gives us a good perspective
of of daily what happens in an
officer's life and you know.
The if I'm gonna for something
on you I should learn what your
jobs about it and how you handle
each and every day I think
that's very important to me as a
person right identity don't ask
somebody else to do something
that you would do for yourself
right and if you don't want to
do that and you don't want to
know when someone comes and says
well I don't like state police
well you know when Rovers Verde
and this is what it was like and
then it changes our perspective
a little bit we can help you
with some that publicity when we
can defend your actions will not
help.
but I think that's that's very
important to me no chief Johnson
My eyes to what's in a.
And and what risk is out there
for officers center Billy
adequate question.
Madam thank you Mr chair thank
you so much for advocating for
your officers and I'm grateful
for the chairs supportive
comments as well back in October
twenty eighth I had two of our
very best friends died in a
fatal car crash on the way to
hatch they were on their way
actually two of the mountain
bike race the last of the season
and Albuquerque New and their
son was driving my son's best
friend and I spoke with officer
Ricky have at a later that
evening who had responded to the
crash and he informed me that
they were in fact for fatal
accidents that he and other
officers had to respond to he
had just responded to another
fatal accident prior to that one
and we had just an incredible
conversation because I could
hear the motion in his voice
that that had taken such a toll
and he said he's holding his
kids extra tight that line as
was I and it was that moment
that I really realize just the
impact of everything that just a
small piece actually of what our
officers deal with on a daily
basis across New Mexico so I'm
really grateful to see and hear
the incredible supports that
you'll have and I do feel like
we need to build the best state
police department department of
public safety in the country and
so whatever we could do to help
support you in you can continue
to do the good work that you to
you know we have to you have our
support thank you Mr chair.
from members of the committee of
simply really related to your
suggestion of ride alongs that I
thought I might suggest to
committee members something that
I did during the interim as I've
tried specially in areas where
LESC is having a one of their
interim committee meetings to
visit them much of the nearest
at state police station or
substation speak with the
officers there so that's always
I really I opening in lightning
experience and I might suggest
that if you all haven't done
that with the the state police
office in your area that that
might be something that
interested in doing thank you
and Senator Gonzales all of your
to work with the construction
of.
There you go
I'm sorry center the what strict
constructionism okay.
They start at six AM tomorrow
Senator Gonzales.
We'll get you in order safety
vests and some still produce.
thank you for presentation I
think everybody have a
relationship with their district
officers right in their chiefs I
know I do with mine right I rode
along with the funeral he told
me about the threats that were
happening today and it was for
someone that was
the congressional medal of honor
winner that people that sent in
some to police officers and it
was in Gallup and they were
monitoring it in and what was
happening on the day of the
funeral of one of the most
fallen heroes in America right
very few congressional water
years so I appreciate those guys
I try to have send the pizza
once in a while our donut shop
is not that good so.
But I do think that I mean
sometimes just don't mind thank
you.
And and when they passion if you
just get behind in your in safer
but.
I appreciate that and and SO ARE
Committee precept so plan on
coming back to South Bill two
crosses we're gonna make sure
something happens that we see
that you see fit are we see fit
as a legislature something that
you can accomplish something do
contain your goals and something
when the.
When the chief deputy chief
retired and retiring state no I
left that place in the best
place that I could possibly do
it and that's a leadership so
thank you for your time today Mr
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
