Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee before you have Senate
bill three forty six which would
appropriate forty million from
the general fund to the key
piece of evidence seeing your
dignity fund for the purpose of
the fund and with me of course
is my experts a letter
identifier so often and from
there she can give a brief
explanation in terms of of what
this bill would do of course and
the full need for the resources
that we're seeing thank you very
much Mr chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Katrina
Houchin Lopez in the cabinet
secretary for aging and long
term services I just want to
thank the the sponsor for
sending the state for putting
this bill forward I think he's a
major fund is a one time that
sort of infusion fund where we
need to start implementing
services that have not been
implemented across New Mexico
for time seniors and that would
be anything from more in home
care services to building ramps
to one time projects that
infuses the system so that we
can create a system of care for
the community and into long term
care facilities so the first
year that the that the key piece
of Bajor fund was enacted we did
not have the language to draw
down on that so we're a little
slow on on doing those things
but we've expended things such
as ramp projects adult daycare
centers we're working on adult
days in tribes and tribes and
pueblos and of course a senior
activities and then you know
volunteer sort of infusions were
and we actually would pay a
stipend for our seniors to
volunteer into the activities
they've done because the cost of
living has gone up so high and
so we expect to do more
expansions like this an
innovative pieces like this so
that we can really infuse our
seniors with getting back to
socialization keeping them in
the community of their choice
and keeping them out of
hospitals and nursing facilities
which are very cost so with that
stand for questions.
In the audience support.
Opposition.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee my name is Mike
Allen can you hear me.
Yes.
But.
I'm calling from Silver City and
on behalf of the New Mexico
athletic trainers association we
stand and support.
Of this.
Representative Kiki so there was
a true friend of athletic
trainers throughout.
New Mexico in particular one of
my mentors sodium.
And so anything to honor
Representative Kiki so data.
we stand in full support thank
you.
Thank you.
Questions from committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
have any questions I truly want
to think Senator Campos and of
course our cabinet secretary for
bringing this forth you know the
person on zoom just mentioned in
honor of Kiki surveyed
representatives of a drug you
know what this really does what
he would've wanted us to do and
that is continue to perpetuate
the services that are so needed
for seniors disabled senior
citizens and others so I'm happy
to support this not only now but
in the future thank you thank
you have a yes the past Mr
chairman for the past places.
Senator.
Of all the.
Senator Burt yes.
Yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share this yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes
do past ten zero Mr chairman of
the Senate finance committee
thank you very much for your
consideration thank you.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino for two or
three is amended.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the.
Senate finance committee of.
Last year we brought the bill
forward that attempted to
guarantee that any increase in
the reimbursement rate for
developmental disabilities
services would be passed on to
the workers who actually
provided direct service.
That was somewhat controversial
met some opposition from some of
the agencies who pointed out
that they had a lot of other
considerations besides labor
costs.
And and so over the summer the
the of the of the very robust.
I would say reverse that would
be the right word
protracted of the discussion
going on between the agencies
and the people of who were
speaking on behalf of the direct
care person in the in these
agencies and put that what
resulted from that is this bill
and it was
protested the discussions were
participated in by the
developmental disability
division person from from the
the department of health and
what you have before you that is
the is the as a result of that
and what it asked for there's no
appropriation in here it simply
says what we would like to see
done if this bill were to pass
is that there would be every two
years.
an annual.
The study the the the right
study every two years every two
years a rate study done of of of
how much does it cost to
actually attract training.
And and supervise and and
remembers the direct service
staff so that we have an
adequate supply in your FIR
you'll see a little chart on
page three.
That that really describes the
situation this is one of the
professions this is one of the
occupations that we are going to
need a tremendous number in the
future.
You see the numbers there and
already we know we have a
terrific shortage is very
difficult to provide direct
service person so the whole
point of this bill is to make
sure that we are able to
adequately staff.
The developmental disability and
other home health care programs
in the state as the need comes
up for them and I have with me a
couple of expert witnesses I'd
like to have them say a few
words first Adrienne Smith.
Yes Adrian thank you thank you
Mr chair thank you madam chair
my name is Adrienne Smith on the
president and CEO of the New
Mexico caregivers coalition born
here in New Mexico I want to
thank our sponsor for bringing
this bill forward I want to
thank the co sponsors for this
bill and I want to thank the
members of this committee who
actually help start the
coalition we came to your
communities and you listen to
your caregiver constituents in
your districts
The New Mexico caregivers
coalition is focused on
workforce development.
we advocate for and training the
sixty two thousand paid
professional caregivers in our
state we also advocate for the
two hundred eighty seven
thousand unpaid family
caregivers in our state.
Every one of you know one and
maybe more of those kind of
people care givers we call them
of we call them all care givers
for organization but there by
law or by occupational
classification and department of
labor they're known by a lot of
different names this bill goes
to the heart of one of those
categories of workers the direct
support professional the direct
support professional is a care
giver who works for the
developmental disabilities
waiver system and this bill
focuses on that system that
employs that one group of care
givers the direct support
professional so I'd like also
are calling to the stand for to
talk to you about the components
of the bill.
Okay thank you hi Pam.
Mr Chairman.
Is that they walk in with house
bill two years.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this bill is about
direct support professionals
it's also about making sure that
legislators have the information
they need in order to make good
decisions and so here's an
example is a currently have a
house bill two with ten million
dollars to increase rates for
providers providers wanted an
additional seven point six how
do you make that decision this
bill is about helping you to get
that information it asks for a
data collection of the work
force every year so that you so
that we can judge whether or not
we have fifty percent but I can
see this is like getting worse
is it getting better currently
we know vacancy rates are up to
fifty percent in nineteen
counties across the state there
is no HSD ASAP being new
individuals and the service as
we are limiting the wait list
for services.
It in your packet you have
something from in C. I. national
core indicators which
demonstrates the type of data
that can be collected that
twenty nine other states are
collecting and that would serve
in a way is a type of of of
report card about the vacancy
rates the second thing is the
right study which would put the
value of direct support
professionals at a hundred and
fifty percent of minimum wage
that would be the recommended
range you guys would know how
much it would cost to fully fund
there's no appropriation because
there's a rate study under
in effect the mail that is is
the results will be out in
September and that's already
fully funded so we don't need an
appropriation for this year.
We'll go to the audience anybody
in support.
this.
I think.
We we have to put aside.
Welcome to this.
Transition
person.
That's correct thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
Ellen pines representing the
disability coalition we stand in
support of the bill this bill
has two goals one is to
recognize the importance of
these direct support
professionals who are absolutely
essential to services for people
with developmental disabilities
and the other is to help ensure
an adequate workforce of those
workers because we've all been
extremely pleased about the
super allocation that is
eliminating the wait list for
the EDD waiver but without
workers those people can't move
into services this put bill will
provide data that you can use to
make good decisions and we are
just part of the bill thank you
Mr chair.
Sir.
Mr chair members the committee.
Senator.
Thank you for allowing me to
testify in support of this I
speak on two point one.
I am the parent of a disabled
child who's now been in the
developmental disabilities
waiver in group homes since she
was twenty one now forty three
and it's been a wonderful thing
for her but through with COVID
we've seen the cutbacks
unfortunately people having to
cut back their lives and loss of
staff in the homes of it has
affected my daughter greatly so
receive a big turnover which
affects her well being and then
just as you may imagine the
other point I want to make this
is a family physician and ball
land from the training school
closed in the nineties I got
more do developmental
disabilities patients than
anyone in the state in my clinic
and I've taken care those people
over these many years sense and
I have a feeling for what
happens in group homes from that
perspective as well this bill
would be a great help in getting
a remedy for the problem with
the work force thank you.
We have we have two options to
on.
Okay good well let.
Stephanie on.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Stephanie wells I'm an attorney
for the New Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty Senator supports
this bill because the people
doing this important care giving
work deserve to be paid a fair
wage.
Yes the weight is too many of
these workers receive do not
match the importance of their
work.
The difficulty of the work for
this health and safety risks
they face the state funding
right now actually can work to
suppress wages by setting the
amounts paid to providers.
Low wages unfortunately are
consistent with the systemic
historical undervaluing of care
and undervaluing of care
workers.
Most direct support
professionals are women most are
people of color.
They provide for others in their
activities of daily living yet
too often are not compensated
enough to know that they can
provide for their own family.
The bill addresses this by
generating data about wages and
working conditions and
supporting future reimbursement
rates sufficient to patients
caregivers ways that are more
fair more competitive.
And as folks have said the
reporting requirements in this
bill would help states develop
sound policy to ensure the
workforce is adequately
supported to provide these
important services thank you and
we are committed to pass this
bill.
Nikki Mexico.
You're next.
Thank you I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you I
am now retired but I worked for
more than twenty years managing
a home health agency in Las
Vegas area serving the whole
northeast community and I can
attest to the difficulty
Staffing.
With the
inadequate reimbursement that
has been prevalent I can also.
Attest to the fact that
collecting the data that this
bill calls for is not unduly
onerous I could have pulled that
kind of information out of my
Personnel records.
In very little time I actively
support.
The bill and request please that
you
pass it thank you.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
question from committee members
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward I know how important it
is my question is how has he be
the the EDD system impacted the
vacancy rates for providers.
Is there any data that's been
collected on that I know that
that was really complicating the
hourly alright signing in and
signing out especially for care
givers who are in the home with
the client Mr chairman I'd like
to the staff for to respond to
that she knows the DV DV system
very well.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
the question
EDP has been a concern and
issues and and both personal
care systems and in those
programs which are having to use
that under the the the system I
don't think at this point that's
the primary concern though about
they can see right it really is
more around the competition to
be able to go to target and get
twenty two dollars an hour and
not have to put your life on the
the line because of COVID and
take that back to your family
thank you Mr chairman and what
are the current rates for a
respite provider for example.
It's part of Mister chairman
Senator part of the concern is
that we don't have the data that
really demonstrates that we know
that with the move with the art
of funding that DSPs are
averaging currently about
fifteen dollars an hour but most
agencies are doing that with
with the a separate
harassment pay type of of line
item because they know that once
the R. the money is gone they
will have to go back to
Into what was in two thousand
and nineteen eleven dollars an
hour if they can't go back to
that they have to go at least a
minimum wage but that's that is
the reason why there is this
hype I can see right okay thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that information my
son has been on the waiver since
he was sixteen and healthy
twenty eight the Saturdays so
it's been really challenging to
find providers and rural
communities especially and I
hear that from a lot of parents
across New Mexico so I hope that
this helps municipalities across
New Mexico be able to find on
the care that their their
children.
Need and deserve so thank you Mr
chairman center on thank you Mr
chairman and thank you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino for your continued
truly incessant works as I
remember you've been working on
these issues and the for such
good Costas Preciado that of
course here working on these two
thank you I just wanted to maybe
just elaborate a little bit not
even ask a question because I
have served in the health
committee as we know in the
interim committee for many years
and even chaired and co chaired
the committee on disability said
the sub committee and we used to
hear the need for this data all
the time we were making
decisions in a vacuum in the
dark not knowing where they were
more needed what type of
services were needed and where
the where we should target those
resources to more accurately
reflect the the needs and and
the fact that we are doing
something about it that's
meaningful so this is not only
about the vacancy rates and
provider rate increases with
which are so bad as it is but it
is about the accurate data to
get the right resources to
people who need it the most in
those areas that have various
forms of impairments that we can
just targeted directly to to
make a bigger difference so I
thank you for that Senator never
to all I have Mister chairman.
Thank you thanks one second
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman I move
forward with us.
Okay hold on one second.
Ask you something I I I agree
with increasing the rates then
it says that if there's a
reduction.
General fund.
You guys to make those cuts.
Change the language a little
bit.
Where it says.
For a loan program local.
The the however the new language
ads for provider rate reductions
to deal with budget for
shortfalls if approved by the
feds so if the feds if we come
in and use that instead of in
the Feds come back in may
shortfall the met this is the
Medicaid system and we're gonna
have to come back and find a
rate increases correct.
Students that would serve it
again Mr chairman let me step
into the.
Thank you senator it in the past
there has been years in which
the provider rates have been
decreased two thousand and eight
through two thousand and twelve
for very lean years and at that
time there were a five percent
reduction across the board for
all services under the DD waiver
that has never fully been
refunded
and so that's part of the reason
why the situation is is so dire
today and so it's it would be in
that type I I would hope it
would be in that type of extreme
circumstance
Which I'm I'm sure you you
remember those years that would
result in a decrease in in
rates.
And my concern is right and if
we say okay you the study comes
back and says the chart I'm
shown is average pays twenty
thousand if we increase that
what is our our ratio to
Medicaid is like one dollar gets
a seventy one what that that
ratio is for the waivers it is
the same it's it's the regular
federal reimbursement rates I
don't know what that was seventy
two percent right now I think
that twenty percent so for every
thirty cents and get seventy
two.
That's the only caution I'm kind
of worried about is that the
Feds come back and we say okay
we're gonna move our provider
rates up with that which I agree
with right but then the Feds
come back and say we're going to
do so ours that's happened
before they're going to use
their portion then or kind of
set people up and it's hard to
decrease wages tell people we're
gonna section at this rate and
this is what we think is a good
rate for providers and then also
the feds cut come in the state
well they're cutting us back so
if you're gonna have to get cut
back that's the hardest thing to
do with it's almost impossible
to do with an employee because
then they think they're
appreciated they don't think
that the services were well used
and it's not our fault and it's
it's actually the Feds fault
that you may have to deal with
that's the only caution I see
here for me is is we set rates
and frame get the fed money the
fed says we're gonna do some
rates and then kind of puts us
in a box of how we how we handle
that forty four so I think we
have to pass a motion from.
Senator Gonzales I would have
expected from Senate Bill we
call.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share so.
Senator starboard yeah.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
That number yes yes ten to one.
Senator thanks very much Senator
Griggs are you hear him
somewhere.
for.
That that court magician.
That we switch back let's go
Senator a video for Special
Olympics on to that.
Or sixty seven.
It is in the building.
She is she's the building of the
piece here but I can.
The.
I just saw her in the elevator
she was here.
Senator Hickey is not in the
room.
But we will get the file.
To build something.
well we do this we we did I did
schedule bills for today and
we're kicking out of
supplemental calendar Senate
bill three thirty six Senator DS
you want to do that one right
now and so do we have that in
our packets or can get caught.
The man was delivered to your
office yesterday for around we
have an amendment we have an
amendment on the.
So I'm sorry but I just caught
that this morning and.
Early.
At the center of the dealers Act
anybody against this bill and
any other committees we didn't
hear a single opposition in I
did bring the breeders the our
racinos together on this it took
a while to get us there but
we're in good shape I need to
clarify something and that's
what the amendment is about
we did clean up the the bill in
tax business and transportation
went over to judiciary did the
same thing and we're in very
good shape with the legislation
calling for
two very important things that
happen in the industry Mr
chairman his so which is a
federal compliance issue that we
as the racing industry need to
ensure that that we're hearing
to and then also the
jockey insurance which had
become quite the burden on the
on whether the industry was
going to continue to do all the
work that they do what we did is
we took and did not raise a
single penny in tax we simply
repurposed how the twenty six
percent gaming tax will be
allocated and essentially what
we're doing is the amendment.
The state finance committee
amendment and it strikes twenty
four and eight percents I'm
sorry twenty one in four tents
and inserts twenty four any
tents which corrects the a
percentage we thought we needed
to ensure that both of these
items were funded and if we put
in lieu thereof we strive for
and six tents on page three line
six and insert one into ten so
basically cut seventy five
percent off of what we thought
we were gonna need their and and
it comes to propose in the
neighborhood of one point two to
one point seven million a year
to ensure that our his attacks
is requirement or fees are paid
and that the jockey Texas your
jockey fees are paid as well a
drug insurance excuse me so
that's what the amendment does
and our production from the
amendment so more special
purposes we have a motion by
Senator dollars a second.
use your explained amendment
Senator any questions on the
amendment.
Senator share.
My math teacher would be upset
why is it.
Eight tents instead of four
fifths sort.
Three fifths one thing that my
math teacher would not be
offended by well if you put the
twenty four and eight tenths
together with the one in the in
in item number one with the one
into tents and item number two
that brings you to twenty six
percent which is what the taxes
today that's a total amount we
don't increase it we just
reapportioned what we originally
thought we needed here.
This commenting on four tenths
equals.
Two fifths.
The what what we we strike that
that whole twenty four and one
tents if you put twenty four and
for tenants together with
foreign six tenths that comes up
twenty six percent were striking
all of that and we're correcting
ourselves and saying that really
we reduce that might put seventy
five or so percent to twenty
four and eight tents put that
together with the one into tents
and that gets us back to twenty
six percent.
Both items are twenty six
percent just simply how we're
allocating.
And we reduced the allocation
for purposes of the legislature.
Senator who did the math.
Well I did several of us but I
looked it over.
The good way to put it on that's
the main question one abilities
intends to make a quarter of
common sense make a.
And we're sure the math is
correct on this because yes
there was a problem Judiciary
with the math they can do math
over there.
And and so Senator want this I
hope he's listening to I will
have the new address is ability
to do math in Judiciary maybe
the right language in the bill
but as masked meals are kinda
lacking maybe you could get a
lesson from then it is the or
something this is the first time
in eleven years chairman well
take that back this maybe the
third time eleven years I've had
three committee assignments and
so but it made sense for it to
come here because it is a
reapportionment of how taxes are
being utilized.
First on the system.
She's not just a dream come
double check the math real
quick.
Adrian was a advanced math
teacher so it will be six and
twenty six Mr chairman it just
simply how we apportion.
But.
center share any questions on
the amendment.
We're going to double check the
math to make sure that.
It'll be harder to fix it on the
floor.
Because you're not gonna be able
to point eight tenths of one
tens of us want to that whole
group of specially at this time
of the session and hold ground
under someone to supply pull out
his hair.
Thank you Senator.
Senator what's.
One question.
Not quite sure commission chair
and senator.
Who is the exact agency that
will carry this insurance for
these thank you Mr chairman I
did have the racing commission
here all along as we did all of
our presentations on the bill
for a hundred percent sure if we
were gonna be up today but state
racing commission okay Mr
Blanchard's back anyone come up
and.
But that's my only question I
just wanted to the agency was it
would Mr chair is one of
multiple racinos that are part
of again welcome to
we need to you want to.
Sen millions of Senator the
there's only one right now
agency that covers shock is
insurance and so it's a pretty
is pretty specialized insurance
policy and that covers all
racetracks in the state what
covers all the jockey sessions
state.
But I would just ask you Mr
agency which is the reason it is
the exact agency that was going
to hold the policy and pay the
policy premiums.
And that would be the state
gaming commission state racing
commission by race.
And that's all I have if the
return.
So what we're waiting on this
let me ask you the this is the
the gaming commission says means
in FTE for four years to
administer this it is that still
correct and is that money in the
in the math that we're doing for
that FTE thank you Mr chairman
yes it is and the director
executive director the racing
commission got that question
previously and he did
acknowledge that the staff
that's there would just it's
outlined would would be prepared
to do that work this is a gaming
control board.
M. F. R. X. is required
additional FTE for four years in
the gaming control board.
That's a good question came a
previous math Mr chairman energy
that seven times or more for
gonna give you a B. plus in math
or maybe a C. minus because you
didn't get it done in Judiciary
and so we have to do the math
over here it's a real commitment
net zero someone gives you my
cell number back on the
amendment can have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
Second a motion by Senator
second by Senator Gonzales.
Any objection to the amendment.
C. line you have amended bill
back on the bill to questions
from committee members in the
bill.
The motion for the past Senator
Gonzales second by Senator yes
Legislation center you do have a
C. plus math now can I just say
Mr chairman this first time we
brought the breeders the
horsemen of the Recinos together
I think they have a great future
together thank you.
I'm sorry to take up.
That we do a roll call please.
Yes is there well I don't we
asked if there was any
opposition there any opposition
to this bill.
Anybody in support.
Nobody.
Right we covered all the bases.
Senator Burt yeah.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes
eleven zero will make a
recommendation on the floor for
fourth.
Okay
Senator Lopez.
For a Senate bill four sixties
that.
I I do apologize for that
because I told Center for the I
would put that bill on and last
night when we were so busy doing
stuff.
I I told them and it just didn't
get done so I do apologize for
that we.
I do apologize not trying to
hide anything Senator Lopez on
Senate bill four sixty seven
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I induction maker
Sanchez Senator Padilla.
Yes I we're here front of you
with regards to funding of
Special Olympics we're asking
for an additional two hundred
thousand dollars which should be
recurring money to fund the New
Mexico tourism which monies we
go to New Mexico tourism
department for the purposes of
sponsoring Special Olympics here
in the state of New Mexico.
Mr chair we know that there has
been
some additional moneys putting
of course our junior bill but
we've been doing that over the
past five years Mr chair
specially since there have been
a lack of state support for the
program a few years back and I
know we're rebuilding it Special
Olympics is very sick important
for the state of New Mexico and
we're very grateful that we're
at the department terms of so
I'll give it over to a co
sponsor thank you Mr chairman
members I I really Senator Lopez
said it well and I think we all
know that several years ago for
some really unfortunate reason
Special Olympics was cut out of
the state budget from one year
to the next and several of us I
think including you Mr chairman
a few others and Senator Lopez
and Rodriguez center Lopez and I
former pro foundation and
Senator Wirth got a put back in
the very next year we just
continue to try to get it back
to its original level of funding
and as times have changed yeah
and and increase the cost to
move them forward but it's
Center Lopez said myself and
several others I think we've
we've made up the lion's share
with Special Olympics New Mexico
needs through our junior money
attempting to move as quickly as
possible and to recurring and
this I think meets the exact gap
this two hundred thousand
dollars thank you Mr chairman
thank you anybody in the
audience and support.
Anybody have opposition member
the on soon the the future.
I don't know why everybody's in
this room today if they're not
here for bills.
I wonder why that would be Mr
chairman maybe another bill
we're gonna discuss.
I think I think there's a trough
in here somewhere that they're
trying to get to you and and see
what happens in the trough
question from committee members.
Chairman I don't have any
questions if there's no one else
would work so much and trying to
get funding for this I'm gonna
move it to pass.
The motion for do passed by
Senator Rodriguez second option
here we call the roll please.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yeah.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes
eleven zero.
Thank you very you Senator
Griggs built rigs in the room.
Chris.
No.
In.
Thank you Mr chairman
this is the Senate bill three
seventy four basically creates a
emergency fund for courts to do
emergency repairs on facilities
A when the county for the local
court system does not have the
money to accommodate the system
may be seen of a budget here
they have held damage after
prior approval for something
like that so basically that is
it in a nut shell it would
create the fund that would help
all courts especially their
security issues that might
happen and I have my experts
here today let me introduce some
so.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name Susan
Clark with the administrative
office of the courts and yes
Senator services a bill to
create an emergency reserve fund
for courthouse repairs
this is for court owned
facilities so for all those on
foreseen repair costs that the
courts have throughout the year.
Thank you anybody in the
audience and support.
The shares for House Bill to the
funding and.
But in opposition.
The committee on some questions
from committee members.
So this doesn't cover the of the
courts that the counties are
supposed to provide a magistrate
courts and.
District Court that's the only
things that.
Directly owned by.
Mr chair Senator yes that's
correct these are for the
buildings that are owned by the
judiciary is that would be the
Supreme Court court of appeals
in metropolitan court at this
time there is a currently
another appropriation and house
bill two in the capitol bill
right now for to help us with
the the county owned facilities
but this is this is separate.
No other questions gonna have a
motion hello a motion by Senator
Gonzales second by binding we
call the roll.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos.
Is excuse Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yeah.
Senator Padilla
yes Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn.
Fixed used Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
menulis yes nine zero.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and committee members.
I don't see Senator Hickey here
and then I think we just have.
So once is not here either so I
guess David are we ready.
I don't mean.
We.
When the copies okay then let's
do a.
Senator you in the chair right.
and bring it down I twenty one
for.
And.
Good morning madam chair of the
new Senate bill five twenty one
which we have a committee set up
and then we have an amendment on
we have to the committee set up
because it was a done on a dummy
bill with a collar emergency
bill an emergency bills we have
to substitute that here.
Do not pass on to the.
I.
Thank you I'll second that for
discussion.
Thank you.
Then we have a service to bill
now we have we'll explain the
substitute the substitute was
burdens bill that now is a
substitute bill and what the
Serbs to bill is it as an
additional one percent across
the board for everybody for
increases
we know we have a five percent
increase for state employees
across the board thank in the
budget we had conversations with
the executive about how we
handle health insurance and
rising premiums and to be fair
throughout the state with rising
premiums we figured the best way
to add additional
because sure that we're our
share is to add an additional
one percent across the board
mainly for health care costs but
will come in the form of their
payroll with that will stand for
questions we still need them in
the substantive.
Thank.
let me I think what we'll do is
we'll work on the amendment
first and then we'll public for
comments so
let's see what do we have a
motion for it to entertain the
amendment at least for
discussion at this point thank
you there's a motion Senator
quite a Hemphill and there's a
second by Senator Padilla okay
so I think you've already
explained.
I think we have one already yeah
yeah there's one here but you
don't have one there were.
Yes so madam chair according to
according to my
Expert witness the minutes
strikes appropriation language
because the Appropration is
already in house bill two.
All right so any questions to
the committee on the amendment
so we can get moving with the
bail them no okay what are the
wishes can we have to pass for
the amendment because we just
did for discussion.
There's a motion and Senator
Campos a second anyone opposed
to the amendment all right thank
you just remove the
appropriation so you can
continue on the bill Senator
thank you I think we explained
the substitute this is what an
additional one percent on top of
the I and it's mainly the gives
everybody across the board from
teachers to DOT workers a one
percent increase to help offset.
The health care costs.
That will stand for questions.
Thank you senator share Senator
Woods Senator Padilla next to
wholesaler Sheria next who
Madam chair.
One percent you're a great.
But again taxpayers for paying
for this taxpayers out there are
just losing money because of
inflation.
And we're gonna take another
forty seven million dollars from
them and give it to state
employees well we've nor them.
Their insurance rates are going
up.
It's not that I am problem with
the state employees but there's
other people in the state
decides the state employees.
And so we've already put in
a ninety five million dollars
for.
Races and seventeen million
dollars for health insurance.
would increase to additional
salaries pretty significantly.
We've just we've done a lot
here.
You are at all these up.
Klay but it's two hundred
million three hundred million
dollars we've put into state
employees and some matter.
Yes this year we have the money
thanks to oil and gas forward on
the floor.
But it's all those folks outside
this building they're paying the
bills next to start trouble me I
understand we want to.
Gonna have.
Good employees I get that so
does everybody else.
Now we're competing vigorously.
With the people that pay the
bills.
I.
Not sure that I like this thank
you madam chair thank you
senator all right we've got
Senator what's next thank you
madam chair thank you for the
opportunity Senator of.
Why would we just put this into
rebates instead of of to the to
our employees
We've we've given them quite a
bit of money as senator Here
says I would rather have this
money flow straight to the
people all together and and just
we're going to work there's a
tax bill coming through that
we're talking about doing
rebates and in my opinion I'd
rather give it to add it on to
rebates instead of sour madam
chair Senator would you like to
comment on that.
Senator that gets really
convoluted with me when we try
to add two million population
turned insurers increased cost
and so I don't know.
I would have to get Senator
Padilla to do the math but I
don't know how we we would
calculate that and get that done
in a rebate Bill.
You know we we have this
conversation with with teachers
to and their insurance costs or
higher then so then P. R. A.
employees and so inside house
bill two we brought them with
parity for about thirty two
million with the P. R. A.
employees or other state
employees and then the executive
been talking about fully funding
teacher insurance well we're
gonna create a war in the state
of who's got full insurance
hooting get full insurance and
so in talking with the exact we
came to this conclusion that
adding additional one percent to
everyone to include everyone in
that cost is a fair way to do
that because we brought the
parity issue up and we fix that
problem and now how do we hold
off health care costs we do have
another problem in the state and
that is in GST we have not had a
rate increase on state employees
in their insurance over the last
three years which is about
ninety five million dollar hit
to the budget but in that we are
also paying for municipal cities
counties additional insurance
that we're subsidizing cities
and counties on that's an issue
we need to reconcile and fix in
our state budget because they're
on the state plan and when we
don't increase those insurance
rates on the state plan and we
don't.
Increases on anybody we're
picking up the tab for those
cities and counties one is a
bowl weevil guy somewhere of the
there's jail Younis ominous
pulls all over that we're
picking up the tab on so cities
and counties say we need more
money will remind them that
we're picking up the cost of
their health insurance the tune
of about six percent
annually on those employees and
I can get you the list of state
employees this is the fairest
way to treat people equally and
not create a war of I want for
health insurance I understand
health insurance costs
but we have to treat everybody
equally so I think this is the
first waited.
Hello one talking madam chair
and senator I want talking about
getting two million people.
A percentage increase but I was
talking about spending forty
seven million five hundred
thousand dollars on rebates to
the general populace instead of
giving it to a particular set of
employees act will given pretty
generous raises already and yes
I agree a hundred percent with
you we have got a self.
Insurance coverage that the
state of New Mexico is
administrating and they're doing
such a poor job of the ministry
and that insurance policy that
we are lose an ID five million a
year on it.
And I have commented to the
General Services Department
maybe we should let that be
contracted out to an actual
insurance company so that they
can actually set the premiums
the to the benefit but as you
know not go madam chairman this
is a little political comment
not both judge for this but if
there's not the political will
to fix that.
At all.
It would be catastrophic they
tell me if we actually charge
someone the premiums for their
health insurance I agree with
you a hundred percent on what
you're trying to do here is
insurance is escalating and with
that thought the amount we're
going to pick up next year on
our self.
Insurance is going to be even
more than ninety five million
especially if we ever come up to
full employment.
In our state.
Improve.
But madam chair no more comments
no more political rhetoric I
apologize thank you very much
apologize Senator here always
very kind thank you our ID we've
got any let's see Senator
Padilla you are next.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
chair.
So it so make sure I understand
on the analysis that we received
the sector on the backside there
so this one percent really isn't
even it's really a quarter of
what the increase was last
year's that sacrifices a four
percent increase in insurance
costs last year so we're simply
making it just part of that gap
we're not making up the whole.
The increase that they the
employees experienced.
Center well the two
classifications teachers
insurance right in the
retirement or through the state
but teachers in schools and
institutions L. Albuquerque has
a phone system of of insurance
Gallup I know because my wife
was a teacher was to Blue Cross
blue shield right and so then
you have pera which is run
through GST which is a
completely separate insurance
pool and so how do you really
manage those all those different
polls rate in wall four percent
increase in the cost and we're
doing a one percent increase is
just to help bring it up a
little bit with their five
percent pay increase I mean that
their pay increase of five
percent they're gonna get more
deductions on the health care
costs in that but if you look to
pair up and in amending parent
teacher.
Pera has not received an
increase of the state employees
compare not received an increase
at all over a three year period
that's very dangerous to people
and so while we've we've talked
about the ninety five million
hole we have in para of the
teachers are completely separate
given taken that out of their
pay rate at a higher cost
because we didn't have parity in
now on house bill two we have
parity and so now that that's
going to bring them up.
With thirty two million and the
one percent should offset that I
don't know the difference in the
parity numbers maybe Adrian
mathematician is a difference in
parity if that gives them enough
of a four percent to offset the
total cost increase.
So madam chair center million
let's look at a level one
teacher makes fifty thousand.
Right a year a one percent
increase on that's five hundred
dollars.
Right their share of health
care.
so when I was little and teacher
was about a hundred Bucks every
month you know every paycheck so
let's say that's about two
thousand four hundred total in a
year.
So five hundred on that is a
huge chunk compare just four
percent on that two thousand
four hundred so this is actually
giving them more money and it's
helping the entire pool instead
of just one group so Mister
chairman chair Mister when we
say four percent and then nine
percent in twenty three do we
mean of the cost of the
insurance or forces the entire
salary.
And madam chair the the
insurance so that could actually
make up portion of the gap so I
guess the only I mean I fully
support what we're doing here I
guess for the long game I'm a
bit concerned because than this
one percent isn't in their
pocket next year and then
suddenly they're dealing with
that and then a nine percent on
top of that I would have
preferred that we put this in
the salary so that we're right
sizing state the cost of state
government.
For the long haul rather than
piece Mealing in my opinion
every year what if we don't have
the.
But we do budgeting it that way
if it were in salaries I I'm I'm
concerned and I know that a one
percent is not going to you have
to give like a one point four
percent in order to make the one
percent after taxes all that I
understand I'm a business owner
I understand all that works but
I would prefer that we look to
the long game rather than just
the here the now this is a long
game center Senator is going in
their base salary is an
additional one percent so if we
just put it so Crowder in the
total of six percent increase
across the board and it's
recurring your current okay well
then great thank you for but you
did have a point and I think
that this committee and and we
need to look at is when you're
DOT and can use deal to use any
agency or any person when you
see a non increasing your
premium because the state has
been picking up that portion and
you get down the road three
years later and something
happens and we say all right
we're gonna have to increase
premiums in just this issues of
three year averages six percent
hello eighteen percent of
increases on insurance and also
and they get to the new new
policy and that's an additional
six percent or twenty four
percent increase they're gonna
have sticker shock.
I don't think it's fair to those
employees to to say we're not
doing something and hide it from
the nose and down the road some
happens is have now increased
premiums here's what we back
building you gonna twenty four
percent increase that that is a
word of caution been preaching
for years for two years now that
that we don't seem to want to
fix in the executive has to be
on board with us to fix.
There are I just hope that for
the bigger ticket items Mr
chairman that we're thinking of
the long game and and the
recurring because otherwise you
know I don't think our revenue
that guy sure that we're seeing
right now is going to continue
maybe three five years and now
we're going to really be in a
world of hurt so we need to be
budgeting that way since now so
thank you.
Thank you do we I don't have
anyone else on my list here is
all Senator Burt.
Just not necessarily question
the comment because we'll get
some of that in analysis I think
this tracks with what Senator
Woods was saying when large
providers the average increase
on the silver plan which I think
is the the.
The biggest.
Land that most people use was
only a four percent increase
from twenty two to twenty three
were the building in a five
percent.
Into the budget but this bill
would increase yet another one
percent so.
No respect to Senator Padilla
but the numbers you know the
math doesn't seem to match up
for me on this thing so I'm just
not
I don't know what we're doing
the X. from one person I just
don't.
See the use for that according
to some of the houses we have
that's all I have just a comment
madam chair than explained that
when the exact and said that
they wanted to fully fund
teacher health insurance.
That cost to the state alone was
sixty three million just for the
teacher portion all then we know
we would have created an issue
with every other state employee
saying that are fully paying for
insurance for teachers but we're
not paying for them and we don't
want to get into that war
between agencies departments and
say so how do we treat everybody
fairly that's that's the
question that's really being
answered here how do we treat
everybody fairly in the fairest
way to do that is to give an
additional one percent to say
here's the cost of insurance a
call cost of insurance call it
an additional pay from your
state from twenty two from
twenty to twenty two you saw
four percent increase I don't
know those.
Just because I do have we're
insurers through my wife's E. R.
B. plan and and I know we've
seen a six percent increase in
that almost annually as we move
forward and so
I don't know million in state
that force not right in the
state when I write my check it's
a different number that I have
to write in and madam chair and
senator I appreciate that are
you and that's just an example
from one company so it's just
using that as a benchmark I'm
not saying it's right or wrong
but it it just appears that.
Where you have five percent in
HB tune ration for another one
percent.
And.
Again and now the same four
percent as all that we need.
I know there may be some
additional into that but
I am again the numbers are not
adding up for me so
but I appreciate that thank you.
Thank you senator Byrd all right
I don't have anyone right here
but I'm gonna go to public
comment anyone in support of
this bill in okay anyone opposed
to this bill so we can see how
many we have all right so those
to support briefly can you come
up state your names only three
of the right and they were gonna
go to zoom in a minute so Carter
you full name and you are even
though we know you thank you
madam chair members of the
committee Carter bonding with
asked me we want to thank
sponsors for bringing this
we just had two days ago a
lengthy discussion about
recruiting and retention
problems that are dire at the
state level in cities and
counties for that matter
this is a gift to state
employees this isn't something
that we're taking from taxpayers
because we don't like them we
like St employees or K. twelve
for university these people put
their lives on the line every
day to come take care of our
houses we people break and they
can take care of us in our
correctional facilities to make
sure that we stay safe from
violent criminals Fe power roads
when we have big snowstorms
these people earn this money and
right now we're looking at
twenty thirty percent vacancy
rate so this is a good step in
the right direction we're
grateful to the sponsor we thank
all of you for your
consideration of supporting this
I would also submit that we're
actually running below inflation
with this so I know we're
going to close the and I don't
expect a lot more this year.
But certainly in the coming
years and maybe at the end of
this session anything more you
can do to make us more
competitive with other employers
would be terrific one of the
things that of the Republican
governor of Nevada is doing is
quarterly five hundred dollar
retention bonuses and that's one
time money to leave again maybe
concerns around recurring funds
so that's something that maybe
at the end we can think about if
a good Republican governor and
democratic legislature Nevada
can do it I hope we can do that
too because we are in a very
competitive market place thank
you thank you Carter all right
next person please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor firm many of the
reasons that our colleague my
colleague Mister Bundy stated
especially looking at the
inflation reasoning as well
again I. E. eight and and the
legislature's been very generous
and an increase in pay for
public workers and this extra
one percent will certainly go a
long way by looking at how how
salaries have raised across the
board in the private sector as
well we are just really trying
to to kind of catch up and and
have parity with the private
sector of course we believe that
all workers should have higher
wages but certainly if we want
to attract more workers and
specially the best workers this
will go a long way so thank you
very much thank you very much
next person Ellen.
coming up you know our party to
remember yes the name is Allen
Tway I am executive secretary of
communication workers of America
local seventy seventy six I want
to thank the committee for its
openness and and availability to
those of us
our members are reporting
failures due to insufficient
staffing levels this includes
the management ranks as well
experience workers some of them
are fast workers are leaving
state employment for Landel
private industry.
And better pay for better pay
and telework flannel is going to
boom with new research money
it's going to the pressure on
our employees is going to
continue they don't have to do
high math to know that they're
falling behind they feel left
behind I would urge the
committee to amend this to three
percent and the reason is to
send a clear message to
employees that they are valued
and we want them to stay thank
you very much thank you Alan all
right mark one more and.
And they're gonna go to assume.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee marks another
through Mexico councilmembers
presidents representing our for
universities our employees are
faxing staff it truly appreciate
the support of the committee the
sponsor the LFC I'm for bringing
this legislation forward I'm
just keep in mind over the years
we went about volumes tenure we
continue creases in state
government because we have are
facing cuts and recession and
and so on so this is getting us
back up there and in times where
you're seeing inflation he went
up and down this is really
critical and them also because
it's in the bill budget
implications and so even though
sometimes we may not get a
compensation we use increase in
our budget and those other
hidden costs are out there in
state government also the
private sector as well so we
really appreciate the support of
the Sanchez the committee and I
stands for this bill thank you
madam chair members the
committee thank you mark all
right anyone on zoom.
One person okay who it's an
name of Dante Dan secrets are
you there.
Yes we go every yes we can hear
you down.
Hello are you my name is deb
Secrest I am the president of CW
a local seventy seventy six and
madam chairman
Senator is thank you for this
opportunity thank you to the
sponsor for bringing this bill
I wanted to just kind of remind
everybody that between two
thousand nine twenty nineteen
over eight thousand full time
positions were eliminated from
the executive branch well pay
remained stagnant.
Workloads are steadily
increased.
today the staffing levels have
not been restored workloads in
our two officers simply energy
level today's high vacancy rates
exist on top of this creating a
feedback loop that fuels costly
turnover.
Most new hires faced with low
pay and unsustainable demands
leave before completing their
second year more experienced
workers especially the high
achievers simply brought out.
We need a long and short term
solutions.
Funding for comprehensive study
is moving forward HB to.
But we need a more substantial
pay raise now just to help stop
the bleeding so we ask that this
committee consider
increasing his appropriation
this three percent which would
bring the total pay raise to
eight percent which is
imperative was what is being
offered by the federal
government subsidy and municipal
governments much as a private
sector and even social security
thank you.
Thank you Dan okay we have no
one else up for public comment
so we have committee members in
can do you have anything else to
add.
Okay fine and we have a Senator
Campos thank you very much madam
chair I move for adoption of
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty one is once amended
second there's a motion Senator
Campos second from Senator
Padilla and tell committee call
the roll.
Senator Burt as amended reg.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales you're.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz yes seven two forced to
pass over the past Senator all
right.
Okay room Kelly now to Senator
Hickey.
In that that is public this
committee substitute for Senate
bill four fifty three publicly
funded health agency purchasing
Senator Hickey thank you for
your patience in waiting.
Morning madam chair and
senators.
Of the bill I bring before you
actually does not have an
appropriation to you but
probably ironic it really fits
into the last bill that you were
discuss.
And what this bill does it
initiates the process of quote
unquote reforming the I back the
inter agency budget Advisory
Council which is the teachers in
Albuquerque NMCA outside the
state employees and retirees
that bill regionally was started
in seventy eight it was amended
to create the I. back in ninety
seven to purchase insurance is
one large pool that never really
happened and unfortunately
because of of of the games that
are played in the health care
industry between insurers
hospitals and so forth
rates have been going up at at
this kind of six twelve ten
percent which is unsustainable.
the the the goal of this bill
starting this process to reform
so that we're not having such
large increases is to follow
what Massachusetts Oregon
Connecticut Washington now
California and they all have an
approach to health benefit
annual increases are and are
basically health care cost
increases in those states not
just for employees of government
of one sort or another but also
commercial Medicare and Medicaid
in Massachusetts in the last
four years has succeeded in
holding their annual increases
in costs all across the board
two three percent there is we
know that and this is been
followed by
The or again who will Institute
is firmly in twenty seven we do
have the former head of the
Oregon health care it's already
coming and who knows how to make
this progress moving forward so
as was noted by Senator Padilla
earlier you know we're we we
have a you know we've we've got
funds now but the future is
going to run out and the answer
really is to keep our health
care costs at three percent and
this is by noon in no way in no
way reducing the budget and a
matter of fact it improves
health outcomes it just drives
the industry to be efficient the
industry both on the insurance
side and on the hospital system
side is very inefficient and to
some some systems in the state
are are average and and this
isn't a rand study just released
are averaging five to eight
hundred percent of Medicare
average per diagnostic
hospitalization or outpatient
which is pretty incredible it
does not have to be that way so
what does this bill do it the I.
back as it currently exists is
up for a four year contract be
renewed and we want to hold that
to one year while the health
care sorority is being put
together by the governor which
will bring in not only the I.
back entities but hopefully the
university's that then creates
what we call an opportunity for
the law of large numbers to
operate that is another
efficiency mechanism that's how
insurance works the more people
participating the lower the cost
to the individual in in the pool
so we could get to a pool that
has very strong negotiating
capabilities to get the
efficiencies and again this is
efficiencies this is not cutting
health care access to health
care in fact actually improves
at but to bring those
efficiencies so what it does is
is holds and.
To a one year contract at this
renewal time while we're putting
all this together to the health
care thirty and it also prepares
a hospital to hospital to
contract and what's called full
bill charges and I could anyone
who wants to understand that a
percentage of full bill charges
a hospital can raise their rates
anytime they want during the
year and that's where that extra
money's been going that chair
reference keeps it into a
standard and and brings it down
more around one to two hundred
percent it creates a joint
powers agreement and therefore
the it also allows large group
claims that have been an edited
to be recovered from the systems
so with that I just present the
bill there's no appropriation
and it it just really starts the
process so it can move forwards
more smoothly and with that I
hold thank you anybody in
support anybody in opposition
anybody on this is there some
folks in opposition.
Once you come up with anybody
and.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity I'm a new keeper and
executive director for the
retiree health care thirty I'm
also speaking about for agency
but also some of the concerns
that are poor does have some of
the concerns are is looking at
some of the perfect statements
as far as of the bill in regards
to the open enrollment context
we some of the administration
that was put in place in our
statute for board have the
administration they take into
consideration very closely the
open enrollment we actually put
that into of rule that we would
actually do every two years
because the fishery and and an
adverse selection that could
come with it we also offer
dental and vision that also have
a little bit longer periods and
that's to protect agency and the
funded status which our board
has done really good to try and
keep that okay building on that
on funded status as far as
increasing it other thing is in
this doesn't really clarify as
far as which contracts of health
care benefits we would be having
to take on we have if it's as
health care benefits like I
could assume you know based on
the writings kind general
medical dental vision and
Medicare
it be nicer to me clarified
maybe specifically pre Medicare
or maybe the intention is for
all of them but that would be in
addition to all the different
art piece that we would have to
conduct and procurement.
Especially with the chair which
is a there has many federal
guidelines we action to follow
which one would we work with
short of our membership is in
the chair about forty one
thousand verses are pretty chair
which is about twenty one
I note also there there was a
study done we we definitely
knowledge the study and that the
study you know it's good
information and we agree there's
got to be a multi pronged
approach to fixing health care
of the one of the things that
was stated on page twenty one of
the system as a retiree health
care was not included in the
assessment we just like maybe
more opted to have that
discussion
you know to kind of figure out
some of these little details and
as far as the other thing is a
relates to
Looking at as far as what we
doing guys do we have to follow
a lot of I mean without the with
a lot of guys being opened
another restrictions we just
wanna make sure all that's been
taken to count we want to make
sure that we can to protect our
our trust fund and that fund it
status that we've been growing
every year and the great work
that our board and on our
legislators have done insuring
that thank you.
Thank you there's nobody on
zoom.
Let me ask Senator Hickey is
there a way to fix I mean that's
that's a lot of issues you
brought up in a retiree health
care system yes their way to
clarify that and the build up
with within the bill itself it
puts together joint powers
agreement all those issues can
be addressed in the joint powers
agreement visit with the it in
their joint powers agreement all
the exceptions that they want to
have and we at recognize the
chair or or gonna have insert
next because I think we need to
figure this out so we don't have
any damages to retiree health
care.
You Mr chair members were I
guess the only question I would
have not being an attorney or
knowing the process I understand
the GPA my understanding of the
bills passed this is what would
be put into law so I believe we
would have to follow what the
bill states I don't know that if
the GPA would take precedence
over this I would maybe leave
that to turn your somebody else
but that would be our concern is
the unintended consequences that
it could have on the agency with
some is components we just want
to make sure that that we're
doing our part so can I ask one
thing Senator Hickey you guys
sit down and go to council and
work that out because we don't
want to cause a problem with
retiree health care that's
unintended and then us find out
you can do by the joint powers
agreement we can do it by rule
and then we we got a problem
page you guys the council is
that alright with Senator key to
to figure and I will bring you
back I wouldn't be here in house
bill to come back and say yeah
we can we got the answers and we
can probably hear this and then
from that but if we got to do an
amendment or substitute we just
need to figure that out so we
don't have a problem later on
yes I'm gonna send them out in
the other quick question for
that is going to draft
amendment.
Go ahead Senator.
What is the district and then
the effect of thank you session.
Mister chairman Senator just a
few questions
to directly deal with the issue
for retirees or you you said one
comment that kind of poverty
which is that for some of your
budget you procure for longer
than a year.
They hear you say that right for
dental or some benefits that you
prepare for longer than a year
Mr chair Senator Steinborn yes
for some of our budget we do
actually go into a multi year
procurement now we do have
language and all of our
contracts that we renew it on a
yearly basis so the first year
we do but the contract in place
and then we have three years we
can renew it we also have the
ability not to renew it with all
of our vendors but that is
correct we do a multi year for
pharmacy our medical our
Medicare as well as dental
vision now with our Medicare to
we also follow the time frame as
far as getting those approved as
to CMS who after where those two
are health plans and so usually
those run on a more of a
calendar year basis which most
of our contracts are fiscal
year.
So I wonder Mr chair Senator
Hickey if that you know with
your one year procurement limit
if there is a copy out there
for.
You know if it's important to
prepare for multiple years to
get a better deal but the you
have a one year recision managed
by the overall I don't know how
you square that but if you have
any thoughts on that yes thank
you Senator in Mr chairman
up the do you necessarily get a
better deal for a longer period
of time nope that's that's not
it but you do get is a much
better deal when you stop the
each agency to going out and
doing its own deal because in
your in the loft large of small
numbers which is which is more
cost so you know certainly
basically
we we want again we want to get
to this three to four to five
hundred thousand people we can
get into the state which is
incredibly powerful now in there
it up I will have to look again
I'll be happy to come back with
an amendment excluding the
Medicare portion of this because
it is definitely different but
the the if there's about fifteen
thousand pre chair
Mr chair and the second we have
about twelve thousand six
hundred so okay so with those
they should be part of the the
full contracting politic for the
law of large numbers to impact
but we can definitely come back
with an amendment addressing
those concerns but we really do
want to keep it to a one year we
and also during that year so it
actually goes out until twenty
five so we have plenty of time
for the JPA to get organized and
to really build this individual
pool thank and just two quick
questions this chair Senator
Public the built into our
publicly funded healthcare
agencies is that in order to
provide in the bill is that the
funding law because I think
about Department corrections I
think about some agencies for
paying for publicly funded
health care with you saying that
bill just deals with I've act
this publicly funded healthcare
agencies only include I back.
Agencies.
that's a good pick up I'll have
to go back and check on that to
be sure that we're clear that
that's to find elsewhere in the
bill okay and anyway you know I
mean we've worked together yeah
I'm a big proponent of cost
containment increase both
purchasing and all that so I
totally support the intent
and then finally is this merry
up with the governor's health
authority.
Yes it's a first step to the
governor's health the authority
where all of this will be the M.
and that again all has to come
back and be passed by committees
in in the light and and both
chambers there will come back
but it allows them with to put
together a plan but again the
advantage we have other states
who have done this before so we
don't invent a square wheeling
in which is what we do
traditionally it gets us allows
us to use the oil from Oregon
where the director of health
will participate in this process
of putting the Senator together
and again but I really want to
emphasize is and and this is for
their benefit as much as anybody
else's we can get down to an
annual three percent cost
increase in health care which
everyone in the state budget
from.
Okay thank.
yes there make sure we're not
gonna damage retiree health care
make sure that we we got it
cleared you need to have
something Mr chair and took to
Mr Senator Steinborn question
that there actually are some
provisions in our contracts
actually through the multi year
do have caps so particularly
like on our dental vision we do
have for your guarantees that
they can increase the rate
provision on dental there is two
years and then they have a
certain percentage that they can
increase it so there is some
multi year that actually does
happen on the medical I do agree
as far as on the clean side
there's definitely work that we
need to work together but there
is some administrative
components as well we do have
some of that and we are I think
pulling chair out would work at
to help summary as we know
through providers though they do
tend to agree to Medicare
assignment so there is some
there that we you know we wanna
make sure that there's access to
providers and we approach this
very cautiously because I think
the last thing we want to do is
lose providers to this process
right and it this is not going
to affect provide physician
providers is going to affect the
the large hospital systems that
have very incredible fund
balances going out of state as
well as in state except for the
small critical access hospital
thank you and then just see what
we get worked out make sure what
we're not gonna damage our
retiree health care site so that
was room for some thank you for
your time thank you and if we
can't get the fact on Friday or
whenever we get this worked out
today everyday so if you can
work out we may come back this
afternoon to start I love Google
built the okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you we're gonna
do house bill two of our staff
David I think Adrian's gonna sit
with you out there Charles us as
we do this they're gonna pass
out three sheets.
one is the language we adopted
on.
Much of Monday member what they.
The six things language items so
you'll see that she right that's
this.
Is this bill to technical.
So that is a language that we
adopted in mission on Friday
then you're going to see the
scenario that we saw a lot
yesterday evening with some
language corrections when we
have.
Some staff doubled up in so that
you'll see and then the next one
you're going to see is the
language that was submitted by
members and new submitted it can
it's already funded in house
bill two already and then we can
discuss some of that language
stuff
investing in this area not
including the scenario and how
we would go from there.
I guess.
Eight dot and this is Senator
this language and other
technical adjustments on house
bill two.
This is the stuff we did what
dated Monday.
At.
We went through on Saturday so
can I have a motion to is any
questions on this.
Look at that hi this is this is
the language we adopt on
Saturday.
Reductions to chairman Mr
Chairman excuse me for sex
second for discussion but tell
me this is what we already
approved on Saturday yes why are
we approving it again today.
Because we're gonna adopted and
house bill Texas we can do it
all with one motion right.
You got this in the house bill
two Mr chairman you had it a
couple of spreadsheets that
you're looking at on Saturday
when you made adopted a couple
of specific language changes
that have been incorporated into
this document and are they
showing where Charles they're
the ones click the game in
fishing Human Services
Department.
Thank this and then you end up
you have a scenario for adding
money to the law enforcement and
there's language to do that on
pages ten and eleven.
I of course Mr chair of course
again the fish Charles thank you
for explanation page and page
one in line seventeen okay.
You had adopted another language
amendment on a game and fish
appropriation that in your.
Non recurring scenario you're
getting rid of the appropriation
so there's no need for any
language change on that I see
okay thank you.
Any questions on that.
For doctor I guess with all with
one motion
the next she's we're gonna go to
raise we reviewed yesterday.
Our children to go to the exact
there's no changes from there
there was an error yesterday
and.
The there is a double counting.
The funding.
You can see on page six line
seventy eight what we're looking
at.
The documents that starting
recurring at the height of the
time.
If you turn the page six line
seventy eight.
The scenarios just for the
additional forty million for the
rural health care plus the
twenty million in other state
funds that was being shown in
another row on top of this one
it was only which should have
been shown once the other change
Mr chairman.
Is.
Page four line thirty.
Fifteen million.
For payments contingent on the
tax package having rebates.
This would be for other
lowincome New Mexicans that
don't qualify for rebates under
that tax package that's being
considered that was supposed to
be in the hospital line and it
was not yesterday.
Mr chairman I think this is what
we did already in the past you
know the rebates anyway because
we had was that was a mechanism
by which those individuals who
don't qualify under the system
we have would be eligible thank
you and to make and we caught
that and the tax package it can
be added in the tax bracket so
we have to have a.
On our side
the non per.
Those are the only two changes
correct yes Sir Mr chairman so
you're spending.
For recurring is up on page two
hundred thirty five point two
million.
The spending on non recurring.
Including all the executive
budget is three hundred and
three point eight million on
page seven line ninety five.
Two hundred fifty three of that
will be in section five of the
bill and another fifty will be
in section nine for the
airports.
Then you have those other
subsidiary sheets.
the Arnold to a language the
the language for spreading the
fifty million dollars for
economic development projects
the rearrange that the
environment department had
requested.
The detail on the appropriate
how the appropriations will
distribute the tech enhancement
funding to the reserves
institutions and in your public
schools support rearrange to
help pay for that one percent
increase that can just
discussed.
For all public employees.
Thank.
Some of these on they're not
page after page.
Seven.
This was language sent down from
the the exact and from
Judiciary.
But the access to the opt.
The other language on the
following page
was language that the house
requests.
Up to.
The firm
right.
This is the language that the
house had been requesting to and
working with the executive to
rearrange have fifty million
would be allocated and then the
language for the environment
department.
the house agreed with the with
the secretary of the EMNRD on
rearranging what he wanted.
And so that's the language that
they agreed upon with the it
with the environment and the
secretary but environment
secretary Kenny on the re
shuffle and that's that's that
language and then what's the
next.
energy and natural minerals
right that has come through the
exact to the one point five.
the five hundred thousand for
the San Juan generating station
right.
That is executive language to
correct.
Not following where you're at
right time on the
Of fourth aircraft down this is
the general fund appropriation
yes that whole spread of the
fifty million dollars was worked
on between the house your staff
and the executive thank.
The full sorry when you're done.
Let's ask questions right there
so we know we're at thank you
just wanted to to get some
clarification Charles
yesterday's on the nonrecurring
yesterday evening's chart or the
information we got we had three
hundred twenty eight million
roughly in non recurring but I
noticed my look at the right
number here because this other
one the one we got today's three
hundred and three million course
a difference again there was a
double counting of the rural
hospitals that one okay and that
is a great one thank you that
explains it thank you that's all
I have Mister chairman.
Any questions on this the
section in the language.
Senator Steinborn.
Yeah it is there
We have a contingency language I
was against it
to the email against that but we
have a contingency language on
Million dollar for threatened
basis of preparation eight and
rather than reflecting that as a
language change we actually just
the contracted all together.
Rather than having it as a
contingency.
So I can totally post all of it
but but we do what we do agree
to do with this Representative
has a contingency and instead of
just a budget subtraction
altogether which is what how we
handle with.
I don't think.
Who.
Mr Chairman there was discussion
over language amendment for an
item that was being removed from
the bill and so that language
amendment is no longer necessary
if remove the item from the bill
it wasn't are made of the
respect Mr chair trials it
wasn't we wouldn't discuss
removing if we yes the emotional
is to have contingency language
on a bill passed.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
but in the spending scenario it
was being removed.
Have you remove it and
especially since the contingency
language is gone so now even if
the bill passes the money's
gone.
The house that.
How's that making good on the
amendment that it's at least
contention Mister chairman
Senator you have to conflicting
amendments that you're looking
at one is to remove it all
together if you choose to keep
it then that other amendment
that you adopted making it
contingent would come into play.
I guess I don't remember the
amendment where we remove it all
together so that's what was in
front of you yesterday.
The remember that part that's
what happens when you get
documents in New Mexico
thousands later but anyway.
Thank you.
Okay.
So we're up for.
Was.
The project for this hello.
The.
We that's correct Mister
chairman Senator if you're
marking the fifty million for
those specified purposes.
Correct as opposed to would have
came over from the house which
is very broad they could figure
out what they need to do and the
House executive Andrew worked
with Senate finance to add more
specificity to how that money
should be spent and.
Your.
That's my understanding there's
a couple of broad purposes for
the use of the money including
border planning and
infrastructure projects advanced
energy projects economic
transition initiatives and then
the program administration and
staff.
At the.
Right to use Senator.
Mr chairman Senator that's
correct for each agency.
On that portion to for the
grants and loans on the border
is is a loan constitutional.
Economic development I mean are
they did you would earn agency
that I don't know creates loans
Mister chairman Senator they
would send it to the NMFA and
NMFA were to the loan under what
portion of the NMFA there
General thirty with whatever
amount they take it but economic
development would not be in the
business of making loans I did
clarify that with them and get
but they do currently do
requests right now.
They do requests yes Sir Mr
chairman.
This will be one to monitor
during the interim if it
survives the process
and then.
The following page with the
yellow lines.
This one right here.
That we're the environment
department proposed to rearrange
the special appropriations that
were in house bill two of the
highlighted cells will be the
new numbers for each of those
line items or in the case of
line six that will be removed
from the bill.
And it's revenue neutral so the
spending on that.
In the next page is the that
score that we reviewed yesterday
correct and then the following
is the P. line items.
Correct.
Thank.
Any questions.
Thank you Tom that I mean.
Not many big rush wouldn't spend
a lot of time online which I
think.
I think so you sure.
Senator Gonzales has a question
I don't want to leave here
without with that because I
can't answer and I'm not sure
anyone can hear but he has to do
with the request that was made
in the I'll let you explain it
would just you just want to know
if it's in there or not so he's
been had to be out with the
situation COVID now we're glad
to have it.
Will provided by Mr Chairman
representative Regis the.
Conroy Chino.
Is going to help them establish
a Corman.
Well so Mr chairman center wants
a list the request that was
given by Congress you know is
reflected in this spreadsheet
right which is the collection of
every single one of the requests
so until we get direction as to
what you all want to do with any
of these items it's on this one
it's not on the actual scenario
because those have been adopted
recently the language requests
scenario from LFC for Senate
finance that was something that
was done on Saturday.
The.
We do have Mister Regis the
course here automotive who wants
to.
To allow to say few words.
We just do also some.
In every sense Gonzales.
The request and just to make
sure that we're understanding
of.
In requests from Conway right
for the they were together
regions.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Senator Gonzales thank
you the request comes from
chairman let's say with regard
to how we make more efficient
and effective the use of the
Indian Education Act funds I
think there is a consensus over
the last several years by
various assessments and
evaluation that the language
changes proposed in this request
to the amendment want to treat
the disbursement of funds there
is a governmental agreements to
to provide for fifty percent of
the allocation of the fund to
tribes.
And three.
Yes LFC has previously
recommended that I should be
treated like alley As to have
the opportunity that the funding
is to
resources at the end of the
fiscal year do not revert but B.
have the opportunity and the
authority to carry over those
funds Mr Chairman thank you
Senator Gonzales thank you.
What long we're gonna get to
language in a minute so
workforce.
Consumers finishing the issue
right here sports number of the
language.
This is spending scenario that
we've been built that
conversations with with the
house this morning
they are pushing back on on some
of this on the spending levels
so
they think that
are spending level is too high
but if we look at our
reoccurring spending the three
biggest supporters are
reoccurring spending is
opportunity.
Which in the next is food for
schools and then the five
million for New Mexico air on
those are the three biggest
spending questions if we did
not.
Include some of the executives
request I think we would be
either in
the special session or may still
be in a conference committee on
some of this and so
If if we didn't if we include
what we sent over which is
eleven point eight or eleven
point nine million right.
We're under the number that they
sent over in our spending on non
returning with the Senate as the
executive ads which is under the
goal line is is that
questionable issue with the
house on the spin.
And then same thing with
nonrecurring but
in nonrecurring we had account
for the cap can canyon fire
which they they did not add on
their side that was a hundred
million
the sixty million and for rural
health care.
Of the forty million I'm sorry
the sixty million is for the law
enforcement protection fund.
Recruitment and retention and
then the forty million is for
The rural health care and so
those are the biggest spending
questions if you look back when
we switched opportunity to
reoccurring and from
non recurring that we do that
deduction and then we had a more
money to roads because our
members are pushing for roads
and D. O. T..
And so
Some of this most of the
majority of this larger spending
it is because of some of the
execs stuff was not fully funded
to make it viable and so as we
as we look at that that's that's
a big question from the house
that we've been talking through.
So any more questions upon
Senator but Senator Hemphill on
the sheet right here before we
go to language
so Mister chairman I was just
wondering at about the health
care affordability fund and yeah
I know in the house the
recommendation was ten million
dollars to spend on Medicaid
David do you know what the LFC
recommendation is.
LFC or HFC.
The LFC rack C. recommendation
had about thirty million from
the affordability fund thirty
four thirty four and then the
house lowered it to about eleven
ten ten thank go ahead misli I'm
close you're close to us.
And then that was used to expo
to pay for the Medicaid
expansion population just to
clarify in the center they have
here there's the proposal to use
eleven point eleven million from
the health and four ability for
the Medicaid expansion
population freeing up money for
you to spend on the executive
priorities within Medicaid.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
Charles and is there still a
half million dollar special
appropriation for Medicaid study
for HSD yes that's the lead in
the bill that still tensions
Senator thank thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank other questions on those
sheets let's to language and let
me remind everybody that.
In the language that we're gonna
look at that one to the first
look at all your far right hand
side it's already included in
this scenario.
So make sure on the far right
hand side you're seeing what's
already included in this
scenario.
I left to add
I mean of.
All the everything is included
in this scenario is already
built in there so those we
should we're probably gonna skip
over sincerity polluted.
And then we can go to questions
on each individual item just
remember that.
having money right now is going
to send this into a spiral in
the house and language changes
that.
Change money or move money
around in any way shape or form
of could get vetoed by the
executive.
And so we need to be very
cautious so let's go to the
first page and those center
party is not here that goes to
Council services I think we gave
Council services.
Missional Bruce this year so
they should be in pretty good
shape.
Questions on page one.
To page two.
Mr chairman I do have a question
I don't know general's well I
don't know where it's at that's
why I thought I'd ask if it
isn't here yes I'm seeing the
page number Senator but I can't
there's too many things at once
and maybe you can answer a
question if it's not on this
page and either on the situation
the Senator Steinborn brought up
with respect to the species the
language contingency language is
that anymore in here if it was
the language that was submitted
I just.
And if not so I'm not looking
specifically because we don't
have time right now to be
looking each to each item so
where was that language Charles
mask or David.
Limits noting because.
I don't know if that was
submitted as a separate.
item in the sheet Senator did
you submit that on the sheet so
we
taken we haven't taken action on
yeah.
I say that I thought we were
transferring into the sheet what
we had already language we had
already worked on so I that's
why I thought maybe I should be
in here language that you have
already adopted is been
transferred into these documents
okay all right that was my
question because you're getting
rid of the appropriation of art
this much you know that thank
you.
No questions to.
We moved to.
Senator punch to rampage too so
stay on the pages so that we can
rotate them correctly.
Channel question thanks to page
three.
which is there's a couple
funding items.
That are also in legislation
we're working on.
That I requested some tweaks on
online page start on thirty
eight and forty three.
The.
Keep up the.
Center I mean are you a sponsor
on the.
Bill for.
Creative industries yes so why
don't you amend the bill to to
change that language in the bill
and then appropriate to the bill
and not through language in
house bill two.
Bill is I think that bill is
here in committee.
That there's two million already
in the budget for this I'm just
send me an additional one sits
at three so if you want to
change the language in the bill
what you're appropriate for that
would be a better way to do it
and to do it in house bill two
reminding you that that the
executive can line item stuff in
language.
If you want to I'm I'm offering
you protection method here and
and so if you wanna amended in
the bill your bills in our
committee.
It amended in the bill and do it
in the bill and then the bill
goes up if you leave it in house
bill two you're leaving the
Four
a little yet that that I really
wasn't offering the.
Appropriate this this was kind
of a money after that if if that
how we change the money that is
in a budget and make some of it
recurring I wasn't suggesting
that the language.
So I mean you will of the the
things that the staffing how we
apportion this so we can are you
and we took the appropriation of
the bill of course in the house
to house bill so what is it you
can if you can change the
language in the bill part ten
appropriations to appropriate
the money the change languages
saying I don't know what you're
using it for economic losses on
you change the language in the
bill so that a certain
percentage would be used for for
that in the bill without doing
would language which is a state
for me.
Okay so.
That we don't work together on
that one at the gap kind of
thing and then thirty eight its
Gallup conveniences it's a
budget thing rumors thank okay
it helps all of us district one
and a half but it's a then on on
thirty eight that's again also
has another bill and a it's not
a language thing but if.
Would be good if the.
A major recognize problem if we
can give a little money for the.
I think DOT has ten million
dollars in an anti littering
campaign that I don't know where
it's at if they're using it what
they're not using it so maybe
I'd have that conversation with
the O. T. make a transfer to the
agency.
Well Mr chair and.
I think that the committee wants
to take half million of that
zero two eight
how would be okay with that for
this purpose but that would that
be a language thing the federal.
The change the purpose of the
original a ten million dollars
appropriation would be a
language change that would have
a fiscal impact.
So you basically go back to that
appropriation from house bill
two last year and open it up and
re appropriate part of it for a
different purpose.
Well.
That stuff in the fair that the
committee would entertain.
Etcetera you know if we add
anything we start adding at this
point I think that it stinks
what is the agency have for her
that that litter control in
their budget right now and you
know trials there was a ten
million dollars appropriation
made to the to the tourism
department to transportation
department for little litter
control finally beautification
this money would go to.
Statewide department of tourism.
And then we gave them
advertising money that they
could use for an anti litter
campaign.
they've got a flexible part of
money for and for advertising
and marketing is so Mister
chair.
You are adding to that in your
spending scenario we add another
additional two million to
tourism for for additional
spending.
The fair we can the app whatever
the preferences I mean there's
an appropriate money from Ph.D
also there's this money to our
system and we can make part of
echo forces purpose.
Senator without spending fifth.
We could Celeste will we'll look
at that and maybe somebody that
maybe the term secretaries
listening or she's in the room.
Then she can have that
conversation with you.
So let's move let's see what
will come back to it let's move
on to page three but.
The money is very.
Any questions on page three.
Or.
I mean I I just want to make
sure that from the cover that
school K. house near that we
added money to that those that
was a big issue for members on
school based.
Health and and we rearrange that
so that it didn't come out of
the trust fund it came out of
the direct reoccurring
appropriate recurring trials in
current appropriation for those
school based health centers in
the.
We don't have any questions on
page four.
The page I.
Mr chairman let let me just I
just noticed one real quick
you're never running late of
time here but on the
give me a second where one side
to start somewhere in here my
goodness yes on the domestic
violence Center I'm sorry page
five sorry I
yeah and it will and it has
December on domestic violence
but just say percent or
Steinborn I think one oh one did
we they were losing their
Bounkeua dollars there's no
requests anymore because our
federal and I understand it's
going to be a big impact for
domestic violence in down sexual
assault and other domestic
violence situations can you tell
me is that not gonna materialize
the way we've been we've heard
and seen and if that's the case
in the come up with zero because
there's no funding for domestic
violence
Program received a large
increase in this year's budget
that you passed last session
already and then there are very
substantial increases in both
house bill two and the junior
bill for crime victims
reparation.
For sexual assault services as
many from provide the domestic
violence services as well okay
so there's enough in the in
junior we haven't seen the total
so okay in here there was a
substantial amount okay thank
you.
Since then one of page five yeah
one nine nineteen sure you have
an item here for H. five right.
Of that money to the third one
one nineteen you have an item
here for the for free or nursing
program in Gallup then there's a
question mark.
No number at all that.
Senator at that the code in our
area.
Senator last year we included
nursing programs for years in
the every San Juan eastern
western for four Year full
motion program we didn't add
Gallup in Gallup is at capacity
and can have said this before
two young ladies that worked for
me in my office just their book
costs alone were twelve hundred
dollars and and so we see the
nerve the need for nursing
money.
That that deals so I I I I did
add that as as a scenario
because our community in Gallup
was one of the ones that I
didn't add last year with the
added other committees like San
Juan eastern Silvercity in one
other university that we added
last year
eastern and one other that we
funded them fully completely so.
So Mr chair.
But there's a question mark for
the.
There's no number describe to
this so Mr chair Senator
Steinborn if you look at the
general fund recurring
appropriation scenario on page
two.
Line twenty six it's three
hundred thousand is the amount
so when we when center we just
initially put his request and he
wasn't sure of the amount that's
why the question mark is there
so that's a staff there is to
that and actually update the
amount but the amount is
actually three hundred thousand
commission I'm just curious to
we give anybody to and I'm just
here to ACC for that
scholarship.
Thank.
I don't know the answer there's
mentioned they do get money and
there's extra money in the
budget for endowed faculty
positions it done in a committee
for example.
The service scholarship for the
state.
With the set.
That specific program what does
a pilot program in a couple of
the new wire free nursing
program in Gallup.
Yeah all right so
Saying it is three hundred
thousand dollars.
The fiscal impact of that okay I
do have a question about that
the health care affordability
fund Mr chair and I cannot
offices probably not on page but
yet I Mr chairman number six but
it should for NMSU I think that
was the question and it was went
from eight forty six this year
to almost two million next year
so there's a significant amount
one point one million for nurse
expansion at an emotional.
Thank you.
Bill as a came up from the house
and the LESC.
That for the same purpose.
Dollars that sort of National
Commission plaster the
legislature made major
investments in expanding funding
for nursing programs and H. E.
D. allocated money that was
recurring and then there was a
need to backfill the non
recurring money so this one
point one million percent full
at NMSU representative back
billing the nonrecurring start
of that money for the current
fiscal year thank you yeah I
just remember that when we did
that I think we only selected
certain universities I don't
know that we are included at the
time I just wanna make sure
we're comparing apples to apples
on the program that you're
referencing that I see here so
thanks can I ask a question
about the health care
affordability fund out of the
from the state or not but.
Well wait until the right to
let's let's finish a blank.
I think we we did some health
care for.
Question on the.
I.
In
this.
Mr chairman of the.
For line one seventeen.
So that's still can that happen.
To.
Thank I guess Adrian as in.
How does anybody talk to the
agency about switching money
around and moving money.
I have not been part of those
conversations Mr chairman but
what this amendment would do is
here mark of the twenty million
dollars that goes out of school
districts and to tribal
education departments it would
earmarked in specifically for
tribal education departments
tribal libraries and tribal
native language programs just a.
Quick right it would also.
Permit those entities to not
revert money that wasn't spent
in carried over.
So in a long standing problem Mr
chairman of the
public education department is
slow to issue its grant of
course and then the tribal
departments of education get
money and say November sometimes
December and struggle to fully
expand that we suggested to the
Department on multiple occasions
that they enter into inter
governmental agreements and
start the flow those requests
starting July first that to me
is an administrative issue and
then you would need this
language for nonrecurring.
Senator Gonzales that something.
I kind of rituals of in the PED
department is late to give them
the grants right how do we
resolve that issue for.
Issue the numbers of because of
if they're getting them in
December and the only have six
months in the budget here to get
those out to the school
districts and probably the
busiest time of year.
I I think there's some items
that we need to to flush out a
little bit on some of these
questions the.
in my part high at the now to
you know so that was hard.
The this was brought to be very
strong.
And the concern is addressing
the Martinez Yazzie on the
remedies that need to be done by
the state with the public
education department and
everyone so I'm just trying to
with this help with this delay
you know on our remedies Mr
Chairman my only concern at
first blush is that
why school districts need half
the money and why more shouldn't
go to the tribal departments of
education and.
You know trying to make that
decision over the split on the
fly without consulting the
department could be a little bit
concerning.
I wouldn't want to short their
ability to get more money if PED
put together a good program and
collaboration with them versus
what the school districts make
it.
Thank you Mr chairman there are
two similar amendments and the
first one on the same page
doesn't make the same split and
in general LFC number the
executive it's four of it's an
executive proposal equipment for
above the one that makes a split
and in the interest of trying to
fund a.
Kind of a address the concerns
maybe the first amendment which
doesn't make the split but
leaves the description head but
provides non reverting might be
an option I think rules the
staff level familiar with
concerns about getting the money
out the door quickly which is
why they want they haven't had
it up quickly and that's why
they want non reverting language
in the long run as you probably
know LFC tries to propose non
reverting languages money will
pile up and agencies because
this is a new program there
might be merit to adopting that
first amendment.
Providing for number of
reverting.
From the Indian education fund
for twenty four and till they
can get this new program better
off the ground this would be an
option to consider Mr Chairman.
Senator Gonzales.
I'm I'm still
Mr chairman that the line one
thirteen I'm looking to hire
okay.
Both the United one thirteen one
thirteen.
So the executive brought the
request for that same line item
in the bill and that's the one
thirteen and then the one you
brought up centered on Silas is
one seventeen yes.
And so Adrian us meeting this
small tax can you get to the
differences between the two
languages other than under the
the only other difference is
saying of the twenty ten million
would go to
Tribal libraries and language
programs versus.
It's it's you're marking the
twenty.
There's the difference compared
to the first one which makes it
generally available for the
department to allocate.
Gentleman.
So David you're recommending
that we would.
We would follow one thirteen I
am just a way to address this
does relate to Martinez Yazzie
the spending is very important
and you've heard the testimony
that that I think that would
help a lot of and if if they
need to continue to research the
the earmarking that could
continue with the at a later
point in the budget process but
it's not reverting would be a
good step forward probably
address the concerns yes I'm
recommending that Mr Chairman.
Let me ask you this if we added
language said must be sent to
them by September one to get the
grants are I don't know what to
good date would be to get that
prior so PED doesn't drag their
feet to December which seems to
be the root of the problem for
version so.
I see Regis shaking his head at
the their versions right.
If we added and it additional
language to.
We just maybe you can tell us
the date that would work in that
time line on that language
section if we're working off one
thirteen David.
Show that to you just so you can
see it visually here Mr chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for that consideration
I'll give you the reality of the
current circumstance of the
thirteen point three million
from the last of the current
fiscal year.
Their outstanding balances of
almost that hundred percent of
that thirteen point three
million because of that internal
problem we're almost going to be
ending the third quarter
and the remaining quarter
they're going to be expected to
expand what is due them that's
not effective or efficient and
so the the discussions over the
intercom has been with the LFC
about how do we create for a
better framework to be more
efficient and effective and and
that's where the articulation of
the amendments but you come from
with collaboration and
consideration with the staff in
fact so the low from LFC help to
articulate.
The wording in the language
before you.
And let me ask one question why
what we have tried to fix this
with legislation.
In some of that we would codify
in law for good because you know
language is a dangerous game
into in house bill two.
And so what I would wait for you
know the reason why we don't
codified that legislation Mr
chairman thank you for that
question at the very important
question possibly one forty
seven is now on the house floor
and given the the time left in
this session we wanted to
consider this as an option with
the intent that we will continue
to work through the interim and
reintroduce house bill one forty
seven to actually put it in
statute so that we don't have
this reoccurring problems too
thank you for that Mr.
So when the mass one reason so
house bill one forty seven does
it match to line one seventeen
the language that you sent to us
Senator Gonzales is that the
language of matches and one
forty this chairman members of
the committee yes.
So Mr chairman I would propose
to to address this to adopt the
first with the I think it's one
thirteen and Addison's head show
distribute the funding no later
than September first and it
would include the non reverting
language course.
I think that's.
That's agreeable I think that
helps a situation that that
they're if it does adding a
date.
So that what date would be at.
Mr chairman members of the
committee what we hope to do as
we're moving forward in building
the foundation and the framework
and the the whole articulation
as recommended previously by LFC
in training tribes like Kelly K.
but when these become recurring
July one would be the target
date annually so that like
school districts the kind of
effective planning can take
place at the tribal level to
complement what happens to to L.
the A. so that there's a more
effective collaborating
construct to have the kind of
maximum impact from the tribal
level complementing what schools
do so July one is really the
target because anything beyond
that you're you're really
pushing to to perpetuate kind of
the underpinnings of what has
been concluded from numerous
assessments and evaluations Mr
chairman thank you for that
question and and so and the new
paint secretary walked in and I
I don't want to put him on the
spot but but in and of every
secretary of state yeah we'll do
it we'll do it but then it does
get done we know that and we I
think we've been through what
for PED's secretaries and sixty
days or.
thirty days or something and so
they always make the promise but
it never comes through so
up I guess we could have a
motion to adopt the language but
my main question would be
adopting the language with
setting a date that would
require paid to do that.
That distribution that.
Grant agreement by a certain
date would.
Clear up a whole lot.
And and we just shaking his head
so
Thank all is also we want to
make that motion but I I the
only thing I would say is it
will we say July one but you
know what happens and we get
state by July thirtieth there
this first which gives them a
thirty days rights.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for that
consideration and I think that
there is a lot of work to do to
to set in motion the timeliness
timeliness to make that kind of
an effective date moving forward
so thank you for the
consideration.
Thank you I have a question
thank you again Regis for this
If we did this it I would we
just wanna make sure it's not
going to hurt the integrity of
house bill one forty seven right
because if we add language here
and is contradictory or in
addition to one forty seven now
is that not wouldn't be a
problem here David he's nodding
like elsewhere okay Mister
chairman Senator no because if
if the bill passed and there was
a conflict this language could
be vetoed and in any event the
statute would trump the language
of the General Appropration Act.
Okay so then that would be
because we can't we won't be
able to count on the detail but
we would this was trump itself
okay yeah you know whatever is
good I I just have to to say
that you know if we don't put
something in writing that is
mandating we're going to go back
to the same thing would be and
that for many years we have to
follow up with the intent of the
Education Act and the funds
legislature intended because I
agree it's been here so we just
don't see the intent being
followed he tends to go a
different direction thank you Mr
thank you senator Mr Chairman
you're asking for a motion of no
moral motion to include all.
The language that has one
thirteen with the starting date
telephone.
September first.
okay Representative if you have
questions on this.
Okay so.
the thing September works first
works.
Mr chairman I think if we all
work hard that would be
We have a motion by Senator
Gonzales to adopt a language a
second promotion
I guess we need to call the roll
on the motion.
We are adopting line one
thirteen with changing the
language too is adding
additional language to September
first.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yeah.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn Jeff Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
yes yes eleven to their.
So that thank.
That chairman members of thank
you very much.
That concludes.
I look at the page six of the
question okay.
I was waiting for the call so
just want to make sure that it's
not a dollar change or anything
it's item number one oh nine
the Landel foundation supports
the you know but then the the
head of language change to
It'd that that law page two
eleven lines six through eight
should read for career technical
education innovation zones and
work based learning initiatives
equipment and technical support
the other state funds
appropriated is for so they
wanted that language in there so
that there was a very defined
direction where that that I
think it's twenty million
dollars were how would be used.
Mr chairman that doesn't
conflict with I think with the
intent of the appropriation is
it doesn't.
I would move the.
Move the line one of ninety
except that you are you doing
that Fund exist because of the
money's already in the.
Forty.
That's how the department using
the money now Mr chairman and
this is an additional amount.
An additional amount.
On top of what you already
appropriated last session
appropriating even more money
for career technical additional
twenty million funding these
innovations some work based
learning initiatives as part of
the career technical Education
approach.
So that's not in conflict with
what they're doing it with the
executive is doing now so.
The language other than.
I would assume that they would
continue that same approach this
would more directly insure that
they continue that is from I
think the reason thank you
Charles the reason I think they
wanted the language in there was
this
Process is continuing to expand
and they don't want it to be the
on the go off into some other
direction so it doesn't hurt
anything.
I know etcetera but you know
okay let me just explain
something every time of the
language is the hardest thing in
economic in the water is worse
than anything we've ever seen so
that's why I keep going back to
like we want to clean up
language that's in in in funds
and bills you should run bills
to do that so we can clean it up
the most important because.
Languages like capital it's a
worst thing that we can possibly
do because it one more can
change in appropriation the
executive can strike.
Line item strike workers in
change completely change
appropriation so it's it's a
very.
Billion hello territory I mean
that this like Mr chairman I
hear you but we amend bills all
the time in here and so that's
this is a piece of legislation
that's why they wanted to ask
you to bring this to and as the
program for CTE and stuff gross
they want to make sure that it
stays in its win win that's
really all this production.
All
right well I'd like to move that
we adopt I already did Sen.
And then the second.
A second.
Call the roll.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yeah Senator
Padilla yes Senator share.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
No.
Senator Judy yes yes centerman
yes.
Nine two two thank you Mr chair
Senator Hemphill.
Mr chairman and I I don't know
if this is the right time to I
just noticed a clue what I think
is a clear.
On the no okay.
Eight six of language.
Mr.
Yeah.
The government losses thank you
Mr chair and so Senator Gonzales
and I and and several others I
think center opening is as well
were approached and item number
one twenty seven V. A. U. N. M.
Chicana and Chicano studies
program they continue to expand
this program very successfully
at the University of New Mexico.
I know that they're looking to
maybe other state institutions
as well what they want to make
sure that the the the program at
UNM gross appropriately they
were looking for a six million
dollar expansion to the
university there within the
university and
the initiatives you know they
settle on half of that three
million dollars it would take
them from approximately I
believe there funded about one
point seven right now that takes
them up about one point three
continues the growth of the
program and so I just wanted to
put that on the table somewhat
like siesta drive and I know
Senator Gonzales actually state
some stuff as well.
Thank you junior and am much
they haven't I think they're in
our PS piece to that is in this
Mr chan it's about four hundred
thousand and junior and one of
well tell you exactly.
The base.
The basis
Five eighty eight point four
they got about four hundred and
two.
Misspoke the one nine hundred
thousand.
So they have that additional
bump in the junior.
Your funding and so.
What we're trying to hold
capacity where we're at we got
issues we know they are a
junior.
A portion that doesn't include
the house correct we don't know
what that would be everyone
else's.
So.
Senator chairman as we're
starting to go ahead and adopt
outside of what we're
considering are we to to go
ahead and possibly take on
another amendment.
And only bring this up because I
thought that we have pretty much
agreed to something before and
now we're going and we're gonna
start to consider some of the
other amendments Senator
that that was our goal in the
committee sometimes catches
something.
the tribal issue at I see well
am clear in my area that I mean
adopting money at this point is
is not going to be a well taken
in because of where we're at in
in the budget so services for.
Chair and and so just a follow
up to that so what what one of
the things I asked about
yesterday was when we go through
this list can we also have what
is the actual available capacity
at the moment that we go through
this document because many of us
have different things and I'm
not even bringing up half of
what I submitted I'm just simply
going to the ones I think we
absolutely need to take a look
at.
Mentioned that this chamber.
But we're excuse J. I did excuse
all of us when I went to well
the majority members Senator my
conversation with the house this
morning was that they think that
we've overspent the budget.
In specials and supplementals
and that
They think that.
We spent too much money in and
drop reserves but part of those
issues are and your bills is
food.
Was thirty million dollars in in
the occurring and so those are
conversations we had so we keep
adding more they're just going
to get more frustrated more
frustrated and more frustrated
and so
we've had nine hundred thousand
dollars apiece junior.
Four million in capital in and
you weren't here but I think
there's four of us that may I us
maybe in here when we didn't
have capital.
And there was no such thing as
junior and there is no such
thing is as adding things in the
budget and and so I I think we
flashed nine million dollars out
pretty well plus a billion
dollars in capital spending plus
a billion dollars in in tax
packages and and we were at the
point where.
We're.
Full everywhere so.
Mr having Mr Chairman I found
five hundred and fifty in junior
which is about their current
recurring appropriation level.
Any other questions on page six.
The items on the seven.
Question.
Yeah I know you want to go back
to page one line.
Yes Mr chairman I I.
Senator just previous
conversation I was looking to
they had two fifty two and fifty
to the Legislative Council
budget there for a study on to
hire a consultant to analyze the
fiscal viability of the Medicaid
managed care structure develop
methods to make the managed care
system more transparent and so
one of the first ones I
submitted there but we just have
that conversation I.
I move that we adopt that but
based on what you just said so
I'm not quite sure we even I'm
going through all all of them if
we don't have any money left I'm
surprised because I ask what our
capacity was and I'm being told
there is no capacity.
Mr Chairman DHHS subcommittee
Legislative Health and Human
Services received several
hundred thousand also in junior
to supplement the budget of the
council service which.
Pretty good increases in
committee staff so there's a
possibility is.
In the valuation of the unit and
LFC does have Medicaid on its
work plan for the committee
report this.
Look at manage.
Any other questions on the
Senator Steinborn well.
Right now I have a more
questions on the.
More questions on language.
Senator Hemphill.
But
the yes thank you Mr chairman
Fund age sex.
Line sixty one I believe the
department should be DFA.
Senator sees me are you on the
Senator on the house.
Yes but are you on the recovery
this one yep got that all right
thank the title on the front
pages General Fund high level
reoccurring appropriation
scenario on page six line sixty
one instead of the
transportation department I
believe that should be DFA and
the language should be to the
permanent fund the costs for the
conservation legacy permanent
fund.
Spendable fund the land of
enchantment legacy Fund
it is the answer.
Mr chairman centre have built so
in terms of laci conservation
fund House Bill two already has
a hundred million allocated
towards it but it was all going
into the permanent fund so what
this is doing land sixty two and
sixty three is basically putting
half that into the program funds
which makes it accessible and
can actually be used by the
agencies and the other half into
the permanent fund that's taking
the current hundred and putting
it into the two pieces and
senator Wirth brought that to us
that was his fix on that bill I
see okay thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Senator Steinborn.
Mr chair I do have another
question Center were were I just
wrapped up with well I think
you're going back and forth back
and forth but with all due
respect there's some I brought
up earlier that we were going to
work on it now I just had a side
bar that there's progress on it
so and then there's yeah we've
got we're doing the best we can
to keep up Mr chair so but I'll
start with this.
With this I want to ask about
the health care affordability
fund
Mr chair and David and Charles
and you know there's a question
as to whether or not we are
taking an additional on line
fourteen on this page.
Whether we're taking an
additional eleven million
dollars from the health care
affordability funds above and
beyond what the house did.
Is that what this is proposed
yes Mister chairman Senator that
that's a huge concern Mr
chairman that we are basically
rating health care affordability
fund.
and so.
So I and as the problem with
that what's that.
As Mister chairman Senator the
fund would has a projected
balance of a hundred twenty five
million in it as it came as the
house bill two came over from
the house.
Mr chair you know we're the I
mean that's good thank the fund
is the fund is there to to.
Provide health care
affordability folks so.
Not to be using it to for
Medicaid so I.
Representative explained I I
love the love to hear from yep
the state engineer advocates
like we've heard from other
African to work on this issue to
explain why that's a problem
with the.
Mr chairman of the LESC
conducted an audit on access and
services from Medicaid and they
did a secret shopper study and
it found out that only fifteen
percent of the Medicaid clients
were able to obtain an
appointment.
on on making a call and so that
report heavily influence the LFC
and trying to emphasize
Rate increases for doctors and
other providers to improve
access so that was part of the
thinking of
using that health care
affordability fund to provide
access for the expansion
population particularly Mr
Chairman thank you David I
understand the HSD is projecting
about a twelve percent decrease
in Medicaid expansion population
spending twenty four so why are
we taking money from the health
care affordability for.
To help pay for the larger costs
for the expansion population Mr
chairman.
Who are as a result of these
appropriations would be getting
free access to health insurance
otherwise they would be
uninsured.
Well Mr Chairman
I personally would love that's a
budget item and I said we're not
going to vote to approve the
stuff since we just order all
right now right will at least a
few hours to get some some
caressing this yesterday.
And so this was in yesterday
scenario.
And so we have to have LOC begin
the drafting purposes today and
so what we're gonna vote on this
today.
There will be some catch up
clean up.
Later on that as a drafted to
make sure we got stuff correct
so we are voting on this today
as they need to do need to start
today the house is.
I said oh we sent the budget
over early years setting it over
late
and so we have to get this done
but we had to know what the tax
package.
Was and and we can just rely on
one million dollars so we're
gonna vote on this year.
What do you have any more
questions about this.
Are you saying we're gonna vote
on right now
yeah okay we have to end this at
some point the lead like to I'd
like to I do have a number of
items so I'd like to make a
motion that we that we remove
this item from the health care
affordability fund.
And Mr Chairman just to clarify
a would you still reduce
Medicaid by the eleven million.
Mission if the answer is no.
So but I I would I would I would
say to that we have other
adjustments we can make in the
budget not that we've been
afforded that opportunity but
there's offsets in the budget
elsewhere I can point to we want
to get into the weekend.
Rafting instructions Mr
chairman.
Rafting instruction is not to
reduce Medicaid Jen.
Then you're spending eleven
million more general fund
workers.
Right using the federal funds
senator from a drafting
instructions standpoint we need
to know how to do.
Mr chair again.
Complex matter of love with more
time to work on this I mean
health care affordability fund
was set up to obviously provide
health insurance of honorable
people so if we take money out
of that I appreciate what will
be done with it but I I just
Rather make those investments
from other places so.
Maybe maybe we'll get some with
some here from the audience what
we keep talking about some of
the questions I want to ask real
quick the flower doing that
about the Energy.
Advanced energy page here.
The fifty million dollars.
So as I look at that was a lot
of yourself on that list.
But also the only adds up to
about twenty million dollars so
there's about thirty million not
on this list and at the top of
it it says for projects
including.
So what about the thirty million
dollars in who gets to decide
how to spend that the the Watson
off itemized here this to fix
this and that and for what I'm
so sorry and this is spend that
and pull up Mister chairman
Senator that appropriation and
that those amounts would be to
the Economic Development
Department for those purposes in
the in the first paragraph.
So what is an advance energy
project is to provide a Mr
Chairman Senator I think some of
the thinking was to use these as
possible matching funds for some
of the new federal grants that
are going to be coming out
around energy types of projects.
But it you're correct it's not
defined in this from this clause
right so what we're doing here
for we're yeah and I love the
step that this itemized but it's
that thirty million dollars on
identified.
Vague stuff I still haven't got
the definition for advanced
energy what that means
seven hydrogen that means.
The.
That came over from the house
that when I understand and
that's you have to ask them what
their definition is thank you Mr
and I have the just still
waiting on answers but you know
here that you Mr chair the other
day committee about adding some
language have an issue with your
brackish water stuff is that
somehow tied into this would
that be allowed for any of the
staff and there's no brackish
water language in there.
Okay I just didn't know if that
would be kind of covered under
this big umbrella.
That we have here.
That's
language directly from the house
that was.
so it's your attention to try to
do language could connected that
you just suggested the other day
so I'm just following up with it
not anymore.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair with with
your indulgence after another
really important question about
the language
just so we can.
This is the last question though
because we're gonna we're gonna
move on that I have one final
two part question.
so this hi NMSU has asked that
the there funding that we
created in your involved in that
spearheaded by Senator Hickey
for this public.
With the public health school we
gave NMSC five million dollars
so they have some language that
we've advance that allow them to
use it for.
I think for me.
Mr chair and they had some they
have some the language NMSU has
that for this it's in the
language packet Mr chairman.
It's on page two.
I am twenty five.
I don't
twenty five.
Packet it's in their language
back from Saturday.
But this this is
other technical just.
Expanding authorise used at
twenty three twenty four
appropriations for public health
programs at NMSU and UNM for
doubt faculty teaching
positions.
So I see that and thank you that
includes one is the fine print
that allows them to do what
they're asking for this is yes
this does allow them to do what
they're asking for Mister
chairman Senator.
This year's appropriation and
last year's appropriation.
At the and then the commission
for the blind language Adrian
you said that got fixed.
But that I.
The Mister chairman Senator I'm
going to line twenty one.
Is through the division of
acacia rehabilitation that's
what that email that you sent
over that's that language that
that's what's being referred to
on the language in other
technical adjustments line
twenty one on thank.
We're on forth we're fifteen
Services Department Division of
additional rehabilitation Hey.
First page line twenty one.
It is it is a vision of
occasional rehabilitation that's
the HSD sending the money to the
commission for the blind.
Okay it is just the bar language
the way that they requested.
Right thank you senator.
Yes we need a motion to adopt.
spreadsheets and your two
additional language Dr language
technical cleanup.
The general all the all that we
discussed the general recurring
appropriation scenario and the
amendments on the language Mr
Campos we have a motion to
adopt.
The second by Senator Gonzales
we call will.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Madam chair yes.
Senator Steinborn you have to
explain my vote.
Senator Woods yes.
The better Roger yes yes.
Senator many of us yes Senator
Burt yes.
Zero Senator Steinborn thank you
Mr chair couple things number
one we had talked about when I
brought up the issue about the
litter issue where to get funds
we said we'll work on it there
is progress on that front and.
Yeah that would have been nice
to work it out before this vote
but otherwise I'd like to add it
if we work it out we come back
this afternoon
And what your thoughts are on
that because that's what we
talked about the centre all all
get with agencies and we'll get
with the O. T. and we'll see if
we can get you an answer without
we're not opening up House Bill
to again to adjust numbers of we
have to get it done relate so
we're that point will we'll
figure out with agencies all
help you figure that out with
the to the future that money be
transferred from one agency to
another without it being
language in this bill.
And you need specific authority
to act.
If you're talking about the ten
million dollars we are working
you need to do that to house
bill two okay so you know we can
always do.
Mehmet
Just when it is and then I mean
that's something we've been
talking about explain your
voting ask questions yeah I know
