Just for the audience, so.
Uh, two of our members are
presenting bills and from here
on, that's the way it goes, you
know.
All in and out, but we'll go
ahead and we'll start and
And uh thank you for being here.
Go ahead.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
My name is Sonny Liu. I'm the
LFC analyst for public schools,
uh, and join with me today is
Mr. Minor.
The director state budget
division director at DFA and
also our secretary designate for
the public education department,
Mariana Padilla.
We're gonna be speaking first to
this high level packet says
public school support and public
education department.
I'll be going over some of the
major differences between the
recommendations, um, and before
that, sorry, I also need to
mention that.
John Senna, the director from
ESC is also here.
If you have any questions.
We'll be talking about
differences in the high level
and then I'll turn over to my
colleagues to make comments at
this one, right?
Yes, Mr. Chair, that, that is
correct.
All right.
Go ahead.
All right, if you turn to the
2nd page. This is your high
level summary of the differences
between the executive LESC and
LFC budget recommendations for
public school support.
And then further on the packet
there will be some information
related to differences in the
public education department's
operating budget.
Just as a very high level
overview of the differences,
you'll see a few major
differences in the recurring
section.
Which you'll find onlines 4
through 10.
That's 76 million in differences
for funding formula changes
between the LFC and LESC
recommendations.
You'll see also a lot of
differences lines 11 through 14.
That's for net program unit
changes that are anticipated for
both the current fiscal year and
then the LFC recommendation for
the following fiscal year.
Another differential notices
online 16 and 35 are salary
increases with the executive and
LESC recommendations
recommending 3%.
Salary increases for personnel,
while the LFC recommendation.
Recommends 4%.
And then the last major
difference I want to highlight
for recurring is for a universal
school meals is about a $13.5
million dollar difference
between the recommendations.
You'll see also non-recurring
recommendations for this line is
4761 9697 and 98.
Turning over to page.
4
This will be the beginning of
your non-recurring section.
Both of all of the
recommendations generally
support some key legislative
priorities, including career
technical education programming.
Initiatives related to the
science of reading.
Most of the differences
primarily focus on new proposals
or differences in where funding
sources are used.
An example is online 92.
In '93,
You have the executive
recommending 90 million for the
Indian education fund.
See separate recommendations for
that.
Uh online with 93 from LESC of 5
million and from LFC online 140.
Other differences would relate
to
school safety and wellness,
about 49.2 million in
differences.
You'll see an executive
recommendation both in the
recurring.
And non-recurring sections.
Uh, for the LFC and LESC on
that. The major one being 5
million in recurring for the
executive online 66.
And 50 million in distributions
from the capital outlay fund in
the LFC and LESC
recommendations.
Another difference you'll see is
online 100.
Both the executive and LESC
recommendations include 20
million for educator fellows of
the LFC recommendation includes
15 million.
CTE is also spread across
several different lines. I'll
just name them here, but the
overall difference is only about
5.5 million on these
recommendations.
There'll be lines 101.
108109.
129
134
And 154.
Last but not least,
There's major differences in
proposals for multi-year
programs, about $102.7 million
between the recommendations, the
LESC and LFC recommendations are
all based within the public
education reform Fund and
include a $150 million transfer
for those appropriations, the
executive recommendations simply
request general fund for these
3-year pilots through the
government and results and
opportunity fund, you'll see a
lot of a.
agreement between three of the
specific requests and those
relate to
Math
School improvement.
And attendance.
Uh, Mr. Chair, the last thing
I'll point out is just
differences in the PD operating
budget, which is a $3 million
recommendation online 72 from
the executive and LESC, mostly
to expand the office of special
education, the LFC
recommendation recommends fewer
FDE and uses other funding
sources, but also supports some
expansion of that office. And
with that, it was a lot. We can
go into more detail, but I'll
turn it over to
Director Minor, uh, for any
further comments. Thank you,
Sonny and good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. Uh, I would just like
to reiterate a few of the key
differences uh in the public
school support recommendations,
uh, first, uh, Sonny mentioned a
lot of these, but I just want to
just reiterate them here very
briefly, uh, universal school
meals in recurring the executive
provides 50.7 million in line
with current cost projections,
uh, the LFC was at 42.2 million
in the executive also supports
the 5 million.
dollar non-recurring
appropriation, uh, for potential
cost overruns.
Second, New Mexico grown, uh,
the executive and the LESC uh
recommend 2.3 million recurring
for the New Mexico grown
program, uh, the LFC did not
include a recommendation there.
School safety, the executive
recommends $5 million recurring,
which includes 1.5 million for
panic buttons and 3.5 million
for mass emergency notifications
and alerting technology
platforms, uh, whereas the LFC
and the LSC LESC recommend $1
million non-recurring for panic
buttons.
Indian education funds, Sunny uh
mentioned this one, but the
executive and the LFC both have
uh 20 million recurring.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Uh, see, Sony, can you help me
out here?
For school safety.
Safety is
So school safety was online uh
66, yeah, 66.
Uh, then Indian education is 92,
so, uh, here you see that 90
million uh investment from the
executive, so that's on top of
the 20 million that's in the
recurring base for the both the
executive and the LFC so that 90
million spread over 3 years on
top of the 20 million uh
indicates the $50 million total
$50 million investment for the
executive, uh, over 3 years.
Um, special education
initiatives,
um, when is that 886.
Line 86, uh, the executive and
the LFC excuse me, L E SC
recommend $4 million
non-recurring uh while the LFC
did not include a
recommendation.
And then last, uh, educator
fellows, which Sunny also
mentioned that was uh line 1100.
Yeah, so that's executive and
LESC are at 20 million, which is
flat with FY 25 and the LFC
recommends 15 million.
And then last with regards to
the agency budget for the public
education department. Again,
just to point out that the
executive recommended a $3
million general fund increase
which is about 12%, uh, $1
million of this increased funds
approximately 8 FTE for the
Office of Special Education, uh,
which is currently funded
exclusively through federal
funds. So that will, uh, the
general fund recommendation will
ensure continued support for the
office and
In the executive recommendation
also provides 1.75 million in
general fund to fully fund the
agencies's currently filled
positions. Uh, so that concludes
my comments, so I will turn over
to Secretary Designet Padilla.
Um,
I'm just going to give a little
bit of additional information
regarding the implications of
the differences between the LFC
budget.
And the executive budget.
Um
Couple of things the LFC has a
reduction, um, to the SCG of
$35.2 million.
Due to student enrollment
declines.
Um, as we, uh, agree that we
need to look at reductions based
on um uh enrollment decline, we
think that we need to really
look at that, be thoughtful to
make sure that as we're adding,
as you all are considering
adding additional funding to the
SCG that we are not basically
canceling out that addition I uh
removing 35.2 million from um
due to enrollment decline.
Um, I will highlight regarding
universal free meals, the
difference of 13.5 million
between the LFC.
And the executive in LESC is a
problem in that we continue to
see more students every year
take up free breakfast and
lunch, meals at school.
This year so far, um, based on
all of our claims that we've
received from the schools up
until February. There's been
about a 14% increase in
participation in that program,
so that would be uh problematic
for us if we uh do not receive
the full funding.
Um, I will mention that the New
Mexico grown program, which is
also not in the executive budget
is really key for, I'm sorry, in
the LFC budget.
Um, it is really key for
improving meal quality. Um, one
of the top issues that we
consistently hear from students
as we travel around the state
and meet with them. Our concerns
related to meal quality.
This program really helps us,
um, support locally sourced food
products to be purchased and
served in meals, they help
support the overall quality of
those meals.
Um, the LFC and LESC budget both
do not have funding for the
family income index. This
program is really critical in
that it provides funding at the
school level. It allows that,
that school level, um, autonomy
and ability to direct funding to
support their students and their
families, and so without this
funding that program would no
would go away.
Um, the school safety funds, um,
There's a difference of 3.8.
million dollars. Um, what is
really key in that line item.
is our ability to address the
interoperability of the
communication systems in
schools, we, um.
Have many conversations with our
school leaders around the state.
They have many concerns related
to school safety for our rural
communities without having um a
statewide communication system
that allows them to communicate
with law enforcement. They
really are experiencing um
extended response times which um
causes problems for them at the
local level. So we would like to
see some additional funding in
that line item to allow us to
ident
ify a statewide solution?
Um, the $4 million for special
education, um, allows us to
continue to do.
Um, many of the professional
developments.
The events
And other programming that we
support for our students with
disabilities. This includes the
regional trainings, professional
development trainings that
happen for educators and school
administrators, staff has been
traveling the state over the
last year and a half to provide
these trainings locally, um, and
have received really great
attendance. We do the same in
meeting and supporting uh
parents with students with
disabilities to make sure that
they're also receiving support.
We're able to support programs
like Best buddies.
As well as um expand a program
called Stay in school
Initiative.
Which supports our high school
students in special education,
um, they receive academic
supports, um, and other
counseling, um, and
interventions to make sure that
they graduate our high schools
that have piloted this program
have seen huge improvements in
graduation rates. Our students
with disabilities have the
lowest graduation rates of all
student groups in the state and
so having funding that supports
them, that really helps improve
their graduation.
it is critical.
Um
Let's see the LFC budget also
does not have funding for the
Education Acts. This includes
the Hispanic Education Act, uh,
bilingual multicultural act.
Um, and the blackation Act and
so these through these acts,
there there's the funding is
utilized um in schools. It's
granted out through the
department to schools and allows
them to support language and
culture, as well as our advisory
councils, uh, for these, uh, the
Indian education funding
increase is really about
allowing the department to not
only continue to support the
Indian education programming in
our school districts.
charter schools, but to also
increase funding that would go
directly to uh our tribes
pueblos and nations as well as
tribally controlled schools.
This allows them to um identify
program, educational programming
and supports for students for
Native American students around
the state.
We've been working on this
effort with our tribal leaders
and our tribal education
departments for many years. And
so, um.
This funding um is important to
support that effort.
Um,
We have some differences related
to our data projects, um, 1.6
million that supports um access
to our data dashboards, um, as
well as would allow us to
collect student data directly
from vendors which would uh very
much improve the data quality
that we received from schools.
We, uh, additional $1.5 million
to support um our software
subscriptions uh for open books,
which is our financial
transparency website or um
dashboard for the schools as
well as our attendance, um,
dashboard.
Um, we also are able to provide
technical assistance to uh
school districts and charters.
There's a difference of $5
million for educator fellows,
this is a a grow your own
educator pipeline program, um,
that has, uh, over 520 fellows
currently in the program. This
program is currently supported
both with federal money and
state money. That federal money
is going away as of this year,
um, and so with the
of the federal money, we're
losing 113 fellows.
Um, and with the state funding,
if we did not receive the 5
million, it would be another
reduction of 102.
Fellows.
Mr. Chair, is, is that on 158
line 158.
I'm sorry.
It's on 100.
Our percenters so it's hard for
us to follow if you don't give
us the.
You know, the.
What line is educated.
It's on line 100.
So Mr. Chair.
Um, really investing in our
educator, um, pipeline is
critical, as you all know, we
have.
Approximately 700 educator
vacancies around the state, so
we need to continue to invest in
um ensuring that we're building
that educator pipeline programs
like educators, teachers in the
communities in which they live,
and so again, it's a critical
program, and then I will
highlight that we have a
difference of $2 million in the
agency budget, this funding is
really about supporting the
agency's staffing needs both in
the Office of Special Education,
but throughout the, the
department, um, the agency is
responsible for significant
amount of funding to support our
schools around the state as well
as programming.
Um, and so it's important that
we're properly staffed to do
that work effectively with that,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I will.
And there
Very well, thank you.
We go to our committee Senator
trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Oh,
that's loud this morning. Sorry.
um, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you secretary. It's great
to see you here. Um, I have a
couple of questions in regards
to things that we know are
working and
I'm, I think I might have missed
Mr. Chairman. Which budget did
the
Um
I
Approve
Did they approve the LFC or the
executive?
You see, OK, good. All right,
that's good. Thank you. That
helps me. Um, so, uh, under 8.
On page
2.
I noticed that we're, we're not
increasing.
So the LESC met.
And the LSC met with
LFC staff, they met with my
understanding is they met with
much of this committee, um, they
met with PED. They met with,
there was a whole group working
on it. I was not part of that
group because it wasn't here.
But it's my understanding that
this increasing the 6th grade.
Factor was a critical piece of
what
That group wanted and I'm
concerned that
The LFC recommendation is 15
million, whereas the
Group recommendation that's
listed under the LESC is $40
million.
And can someone explain what's
happening with that because that
seems like a really important
aspect of this budget.
Sure, Mr. Chair and senator.
I can go ahead and make a few
comments on the LFC
recommendation and I don't know
if you want.
John Senna from LESC to also
make some comments related to
the task force.
Um, the task force met for over
the course of 2 years.
Uh, the first year was just the
study of the formula and whether
it's components are working.
As you're correct, there are a
lot of stakeholder groups
including LFC and LESC
membership on that committee.
Um, both recommendations.
Um, that came out of this year's
task force for adding the family
income index and
Adding a standalone English
learner factor were approved, as
you can see in lines 4 through
64 through 7.
Uh, there were concerns very
early on from LFC about raising
the secondary weight.
Um, my understanding from the
task force was that the original
recommendation was just to raise
7 through 12.
Um, the LESC included 6th grade
as a part of their.
Middle school task force
findings, um, and then LFC also.
Partially increased 6th grade
membership, acknowledging that
there are a lot of issues in
middle school that we need to
work through.
I think it's concerning to the
LLC that we have declining
student enrollment, and these
membership weights are tied to
those students, so while it
might be a temporary increase.
In the next few years, it'll
start resulting in fewer units
generated in the long run, so I
think there's concerns about the
effects that we have in the long
term and
Um, I think the LFC would
recommend looking into this
issue further and developing a
more robust recommendation for
secondary.
Thank you. Um, I will just say
that um middle school.
Typically, at least here in
Santa Fe, includes 6th grade.
And that was a conscious
decision that we made as a
district to
Move that to reduce the
Um
Population in our, our
elementary schools and give 6th
graders more opportunity. Um, so
I, Mr. Chairman, I hope that we
look at that because it seems
and I defer to you because of
your experience, but that seems
like a really important
Aspect, um, I move on to the
next page, page 3.
And I'm seeing that line 40.
47 for universal meals and then
line 61. They seem to have been
put on different lines. I'm not
sure why that is, but
nonetheless, it does seem like
the LS LESC and what I'm hearing
from the secretary also is that
that universal meals, um, uh, uh
13 million difference in that
might be harmful for our, our
meals.
So I, I think again, that's
something that I think we need
to look at.
As Mr. Chair, Senator, I'll I'll
make a few comments and the
secretary would like to follow
up on that, that's great. I
think at the time that the LFC
recommendation was constructed.
School meal participation rates
were only growing by about 2 to
3%.
Uh, you can also see him
following page.
Onlines 96 and 97.
These are deficiency and
supplemental appropriations or
Has from the school meals
programs that have already been
incurred, but are shortfalls.
Um, the LFC recommendation does
include funding for these
acknowledging that.
Yes, we do need to shore up um
for actual expenses incurred.
But because there's just so much
uncertainty about how fast this
program is going to grow, uh,
the recommendation simply says
let's grow the recurring base
slightly and cover our
shortfalls as they are being
realized. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Did you have a
Um, this
Does that include a federal
money. Mr. Chair, uh, 61. This
is the state program, uh schools
already generate uh federal
funding for school meals through
the uh.
USDA programs.
This is from the universal
school meals program that is a
legislation as we see an
increase, you mentioned that
there was an increase on meals.
Was that increase also on the
federal part um it has to.
Mr. Chair, we received the same
reimbursement from USDA based on
our student meal counts, right?
But in New Mexico, we've we've
prioritized ensuring that every
student has access to the free
and healthy meal, and so that's
why we have additional costs at
the state level to be able to
cover whatever costs would be
passed on to a student and their
family.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that explanation.
I just will point out that if
you go down to line 63, the LESC
recommendation of the task
force. I'm not sure which it is
now, Recommendation was 2.3
million for New Mexico grown
fruits and vegetables and the
LFC recommendation doesn't have
anything, I will say that I've
heard really positive things
from our schools and even from
our students and our families
that the
food is turning for the better,
and part of it is um being
attributed to New Mexico fruits
and vegetables and kids getting
food that we actually eat when
they're at home too. So I will
just point that out that
there's, there's quite a bit of
a deficit there and then you add
that part in. Um,
Mr. yes.
Sectaria
You had mentioned um.
Um, that there was a concern on
the quality.
So is it the quality or is it
the menu?
Um, Mr. Chair,
it
it's, I think it's both, but we
don't have scratch cooking.
In all of our schools, right? So
we have different approaches.
I'll give you, for example,
Albuquerque Public Schools has a
centralized kitchen.
The meals are, are all prepared
in their centralized kitchen and
then they transport it to
schools. With that comes
limitations about the types of
menu items and things that they
can prepare.
uh schools
with school districts and
charter schools to um move more
towards equipping their school
kitchen so that they're able to
prepare meals on site and it
totally changes the uh menu
options for students and so when
students are eating food that is
not necessarily prepared at
school, um, they tend to, uh,
feel like it is not.
eat and so I have 2 kids in
middle school, 1 in high school,
and I can tell you, um, I hear
it from them as well, and so
some things, um, some menu items
are are liked more than others,
but the intent of the department
is to really move schools
towards preparing meals from
scratch on site to improve not
only that they taste better, but
they're uh more nutritious for
the students as well.
I support your thought 100%.
I think it's a lot better when
it's done right there. Thank
you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I will just add
when I was in elementary school,
I don't know who noticed it, but
someone in the school noticed
that maybe meals were a good
thing for me, and they, um,
pulled me out of class and I
thought it was a quite an honor
to be honest with you, and I get
to go into the kitchen and I got
to help with the meals, and what
I ended up doing, uh, you know,
as the lunch carried on with
scraping plates and putting them
through the dishwasher, but I
always felt like I was really
getting to do something very.
Special, and as a result of
that, I would get free meals and
um it was a really, it was a
positive experience in my life
and so I really support the idea
of us going back to having our
meals cooked at the schools. I
know there's an expense in that,
but thank you for bringing that
up.
Um, lines 100 and 101, so.
Um, there's 20 million in the
LESD recommendation and then 15
million and 5 million, so it
equals the same is the idea that
the educator fellows.
In the summer enrichment
internships are kind of
Um, capsulated in that 20
million.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, no,
those are very different
programs, uh, the summer
enrichment, internships are
mostly for high school students.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that. Um, and I just
have a couple more ques
questions on line 108, um, thank
you, thank you, thank you for
making the career and technical
education, $40 million instead
of the $30 million that was
recommended by the LESC, I think
are um career and technical.
education programs are
incredibly important for our
kids, um,
and then Senator if I could just
interject, um.
This is where it gets a little
complicated, and I just want to
make sure you're understanding
this, so the LESC recommendation
has 30 million here on line 108
for section 5.
But if you go down the line 134.
They're recommending 45 million
over the course of three years,
so 15 a year.
For innovation zones, which has
been paid out of 108
traditionally. So if you add the
15 to the 30.
That would be 45. I just want to
make sure you understood that
correctly, Mr. Chairman, thank
you for pointing that out. I
appreciate that.
Um, and then the last thing that
I just wanna
Make note of was something that
came up this weekend that I'm
having great pause for, and I
hope that
We're recognizing that we need
to pay attention to.
There was a dear colleague
letter that came out on Friday.
And it seems to me that it would
Try to help or try to not help,
it would try to hinder the work
that we're doing here in the
Mexico, which is looking at who
are the populations that
Of its historically been the
least served and historically
have not performed well in our
schools and saying that if we
dedicate money to those groups,
i.e., lines 90.
Black education, 91, Hispanic
education, 92 Indian Education,
93, Indian education initiatives
94, Navajo Nation and Zuni
Pueblo, and I think there's some
other places that that's noted.
That if we fund those,
We're risking federal funding.
That is appalling to me, and I
hope that we're gonna keep a
close eye on that and that our
attorney General will take note
of it and take some action.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. I hope you guys
had a good weekend. Daytona 500.
That's a 4 corners.
Um
So, I'm gonna slow you down
cause you guys really went fast
today. We were really struggling
up here trying to stay with you.
Um,
on 216.
Um, the salary increases.
And then line 35 salary
increases, so 35 is just
transportation, correct? Mr.
Chair, yes.
And then the salary increases,
um, 135 million.
And that is.
K through 12.
Mr. Cheerio.
His personal. I just, I want to
make sure.
Um
And on page 3.
Um, line 56, Mr. Chair.
Early literacy and reading
support. Can you?
Like explain that to me just a
little bit. It doesn't have to
be long, just.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
um.
In New Mexico, we have been um.
Supporting something called
structured literacy, which is
rooted in um
Uh, science-based research
regarding how the brain learns
to read.
And so we have been um training
our elementary school teachers
to learn how to teach reading,
utilizing structured literacy
and so we have been doing that
for our pre-K through 5th grade
teachers.
This year we're um doing uh a
rollout with early adopters in
middle school, so our students,
um, proficiency rates are um
around 33% statewide.
And so we have been focused on
training our educators to make
sure that there is as effective
as they can be in teaching
reading with this funding, we're
also hiring literacy
instructional coaches that get
to go in and make sure that
they're supporting teachers in
the classroom so that they, um.
are getting that support in
their instruction.
We are also have created what's
called literacy support and
model schools. So these are
schools that have like a
comprehensive full school
approach to structured literacy,
um, as a full school or
district.
Um, we have seen in our literacy
model schools, a significant
growth year over year in
literacy rates, so this is
really our effort.
To, um, make sure that we are
focused on literacy. This
follows what many other states
have done in are currently
doing, including in Mississippi.
You may have heard that they
have seen uh really incredible
improvements in their literacy
rates and so they are have done
um and are ahead of us in doing
the same things that we're doing
related to structured literacy,
um, and then I'll just add
because um we have uh a bill.
That is addressing our educator
prep program. So we're going
upstream, making sure that our
teachers that are in our
colleges and universities around
the state are getting that same
structured literacy, um.
Instruction before they graduate
and become a teacher in the with
that with that,
that's a good explanation. Thank
you.
So
Is this a requirement?
For all teachers that they, they
have to go through this, those
statewide, every single teacher
has to go through that.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, all
teachers don't necessarily have
to utilize the training that the
state pays for through this
appropriation called the letters
is the name of the training.
They may, um, there's only uh a
few, a handful that are using
their own training, but it's
still structured literacy. It's
not letters, but it, it's still
structured literacy.
And Mr. Chair, so would that
include like
Where you, you pull a kid out of
the class and give him
intensified.
Training for her.
Would that be underneath. So,
um, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
so in addition to what we're
doing to support our educators
and our administrators in
structured literacy. We've also
invested in high impact tutoring
for our students in literacy.
Uh, we've done that and we're
doing it during the academic
year.
Um, but we also are funding a
summer reading program. So this
last summer, we hosted our first
year of uh this high impact
tutoring over the summer.
Um, we received funding last
legislative session.
Um, we, uh, we're aiming to
serve 10,000 students statewide
so we made this available to
every single school district and
charter school.
Um, that program was meant to be
4 weeks, at least 4 weeks, 4
hours a day.
Different districts had other
summer programming, so some of
them did not quite reach that
model.
But this programming or or
interventions are for students
in small groups for students to
1 instructor. We saw 5% growth
in literacy over the course of
summer, that was the average
growth for students that
participated. That in comparison
to their peers that did not
participate or participate in
any other similar program. They
saw a 60.
6% decline.
In their literacy rates, so it's
really, uh, this is just a good
example of why it's important to
continue to provide these types
of programming, uh, year round.
All right. So that was a long
winded, but
it,
it did help.
So that it, it does kind of
bring up another question
though, Mr. Chair. So,
That's your summer program, and
I've seen that on there and I
think that's fantastic.
What do you have in place during
the school year. So let, for
example, let's take in, and we
haven't even got to the math
part of it. If you, if you just
concentrate on math and reading.
But
What kind of, what kind of
program do you have in school
for those.
That aren't up to reading level
or up to math standards.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Lanier, we have similar sort of
supports in schools, but that we
that we fund at the state level.
We funded with our federal, um,
relief funds, which are um
expiring now.
And we have funded with state
funding.
Um, and so that can happen
during the school day. It can
happen in small group within the
classroom, um, as students, as
teachers can kind of create
different groups within within
the classroom, it can also be a
pullout uh program during the
school day as well.
I really like the, the pullout
program during the school day
cause
And I'm retired school teacher.
So if you've got a kid in class.
And they're not, they're not up
to standard. How much farther
are they getting behind by you
leaving them in that class and
then just not, not absorbing it.
So I really like the idea of
pulling.
pulling them out and, you know,
let's intensify that.
But you called it something.
Um, high, high impact,
high impact, so that's, that's
perfect. OK, so then, thank you
very much for that. I just
wanted to skip down to 66 on
page 3.
And so that's the school safety
part.
So what are we doing now?
That's different than we did say
5 years ago for school safety.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
Lanier, so.
Well, I, I think it would be
good for Sunny to talk about the
LFA have a line item.
Or capital specifically capital
improvements for safety for CTE
and for general facility
maintenance, and that money
would go to the public school
facility authority.
For the uh public school capital
outlay Council to determine how
that money.
Moves. Right, so Mr. Chair.
I, I understand the numbers and
I, I get that part of it, but.
Are, are you having to tell
school districts exactly what
they need to do.
You know, so for example, the
door locks.
What are we, the panic button I
think was another one in here.
So how are we how are we, um,
Give me that to schools to
implement.
What we want, not just
You know, we'll let you buy door
blocks and block the door from
the inside.
Actual things that are making
safety.
Safer.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
I'm sure you're also aware in
2017, about the high school
shooting at Aztec. I think that
what came out of our study of
that incident was.
Um, communication and
coordination amongst first
responders was key.
And as well as some of those
simpler capital improvements
such as locking doors and having
specific protocols. You saw that
in Evaldi as well as as a
particular issue.
Um
I think that that has resulted
in multiple things, mostly from
capital improvements.
Uh, every school district is
required to submit a school
safety plan to the department
and those need to be updated
regularly. I think some of the
challenges that we're seeing and
as you're probably well aware
of, um, in, in your district.
I
The response time of law
enforcement, particularly in
very rural areas, so I think
that remains a challenge, um,
but currently the state's
approach has been.
To increase communication
apparatus and do capital
improvements in the last 5
years.
Thank you. Mr. Chair, Senator,
and I'll just say that the panic
button.
Which the state pays for uh
school districts and charter
schools are able to opt in, they
choose if they would like to
utilize it. And so it is being
utilized around the state, um,
uh, NISA, which is our, our
school insurance authority has
another option.
Um, available, uh, that, uh,
school districts and charter
schools can utilize, so I just
wanted to, you mentioned uh
panic button, so I did wanna
yeah, and I, I had just seen
that on there cause um I'm Mr.
Chair, I'm sure you guys are
well aware. That was my
classroom.
It was shot up.
So I, I have uh
Firsthand experience of of how
to deal with that, the
communication is very important.
And that that was my concern,
uh, about a
panic button, you know, there's
some things like putting a block
in the door, all the stuff that
we were coming and I was in, I
was part of the brainstorming on
how we could, could prevent some
of this.
In my classroom, things were
happening so fast and we were
taking fire through the walls,
so, so fast that I would have
never got to a panic button. I
couldn't get to my phone. I
couldn't get to my school radio,
you know, we were.
Laying on the ground, there,
there's not a lot of movement.
Going on. So that, that's my
point is, I want to make sure
that we don't build so much into
this that we're actually putting
people at risk.
By trying to get somewhere in
the room to take care of stuff.
You know, we just kind of had to
let it play out.
And and protect ourselves as
much as we could.
And then
You know, you get the radio, you
get your cell phones.
And stuff like that. So, so
that's one of my concerns with
the, the panic button, that's
the only reason I brought that
up because then you're gonna go
through, where do we keep it? Do
you keep it at teacher desk, you
keep it in their office.
You know
It's just kind of one of those
deals, but I appreciate you
bringing that up. Thank you.
Right, um,
And I'm almost done, I promise.
The grow your own teacher fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
I, I'm just curious.
It
Exactly what does that entail?
Cause I know that's a big one,
so.
You don't have to make it along
with.
Do you want to answer, Mr.
Chair, uh, senator, grow your
own is a type of program in
which you take existing
personnel at a school and build
a pathway for them to become a
teacher, you see primarily
educational or instructional
assistance.
Um, leveraging this. The grow
your own program was a
scholarship created at higher ed
department to do.
That tuition support for these
individuals.
There's been about 300,000 that
has been sitting in that fund
that hasn't been used, so in the
LLC recommendation this being
appropriated out of that fund to
pay for grow your own
scholarships. Um, educator
fellows, which you see on line
100 is a variation of that where
the state is also in addition to
paying for tuition fees, also
providing some stipends, also
establishing more requirements
on how much leave time these
individuals can get to leave
school and go do their college
coursework.
Um
And that is a much larger
appropriation in the um.
Recommendations compared to the
grow your own scholarship.
Thank you,
if I could just elaborate, I, I
called, um, educator fellows, a
grow your own program, so I'm
sorry if I, if I confuse that
for you a bit.
Really the references is that
these are, these are individuals
that often already work at a
school.
Um, they may be an educational
assistant or some other staff
person. The way this, this works
is we pay their salary to work
in a classroom with a licensed
teacher so that they are
learning alongside a licensed
teacher, but also serving as an
educator in the classroom, which
benefits the entire students in
that classroom and so it very
much those educators as they
graduate, they stay in the
communities and often in the
schools in which they were
working to begin with, so.
That's why I referred to it as a
grow your own program. And, and
I think it's a great program. I
Teaching all those years, we, we
had some great people and there
was no, no place.
For them to move up the ladder
or
You know, to become a
A licensed teacher or something
like that. So I think that's
important, especially with our
shortages and everything.
So, and then the last one,
Mr. Chair is, I didn't see
anything in here for paid family
leave. If paid family leave.
is adopted for
What kind of money is that going
to
To take from you.
This chair Senator, um, our
understanding of the proposals
for the family leave acts, uh,
would.
Apply the provisions for the
next fiscal year, the following
one, so if those were to be
enacted, staff would be directed
to account for those costs in
the next budget cycle.
Um, the cost would be
substantial to my understanding,
but I would need to come back
and get you numbers on that.
So you, you haven't come up with
numbers yet.
Uh, I believe the FIR has the
estimates for public schools. I
just um it's escape that's OK.
That's right.
We'll, we'll find them.
And I have a ton of other
questions, but
I'll get with you later and, and
we'll go through some of those.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Senator Compos.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and I uh really
appreciate not only the
presentations, but
The commitment by the 3
individuals that are there
before us that are providing
information and of course the
testimony and to you, Madam
Secretary, as we deal with it.
Thank you very much for spending
the time that you did the other
day to uh continue to go and
build, if you will, upon what
that relationship means with the
legislative and the executive as
we move forward in in education.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, a couple
of general comments and
hopefully there'll be some
response by uh members of the
team that is presenting this
morning.
As we, we hear more and more
about what's happening at the
national level, particularly in
areas like if Medicaid as an
example is cut for those
resources are not going to be
available.
As we know here in New Mexico
about 50% of our population is
directly uh affected by Medicaid
and of course, if you will, the
services that are provided.
The other aspect of it is we
continue to hear that there's
possibly not the need for the
Department of Education at the
national level.
And so again when we talk about
education and what it means to
New Mexico and the people here,
uh, the issue to me then
becomes, and then I go back a
little bit into one other, one
other part.
So what we've been hearing, if
you will with the behavioral
health package that is going
through.
In the um.
Suggestion by leadership is.
For us to get more involved and
that means get more involved at
the local level.
And so two questions that I have
that are tied directly.
with the
strategic plan and what is
occurring with our uh secondary
educational system.
How are we preparing, if you
will, for
Possibly change at the national
level that will directly affect
us in our educational program
here at the state level.
And then the second thing as we
move forward, many of us are,
are very much involved on a day
to day basis with our agencies.
But what can be done in a better
way.
So that after this session, when
we go back home.
School districts.
truly involve us.
And the reason I bring all this
up because if.
We're being encouraged to
participate in the um strength
of the our educational program,
that's good.
But along with it, we need to
also be strong partners with the
people back home that are
dealing directly with this.
So the twofold question again,
what's the, the strategy in
terms of as we move forward.
We may be adversely affected by
what happens at the national
level.
And then locally, how can we as
legislators.
Become more involved without
impinging, if you will, upon.
Uh, the local systems and uh not
to get involved and if you will,
a, a micromanagement system.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator.
In its
A mixture as if wondering what
ever happened to her $30 million
building was gonna build in
Albuquerque that had to do with
the
The reading.
What was that called, the
reading.
Institute, I believe is what it
was called, is it the one at the
University of New Mexico or
something.
Yeah,
it was last year it was an
emergency deal, Mister Chair,
and I was wondering how much
emergency was and how we got it
done.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, we are
in the process of designing that
literacy, uh, facility right now
with our contractor. Um, we've
been working with the University
of New Mexico, we have our our
site, uh, which will be uh near
the university fully accessible
by families from around the
state, um, and so we are um in
the in the design phase of that.
And uh the, the facility should
be done.
Um, in about a year and a half.
Um, we're, we're on schedule to
um.
To get that facility built and
again this this literacy
institute will be a place where
students can come from around
the state to receive their
diagnostic assessments for any
sort of uh uh disability or, or
learning challenge as well as
interventions so I just wanted
to make sure, so we're on step
to do it 30 million is plenty of
money. Don't need to worry no
more about it,
um are on budget.
uh build that literacy
institute. Yes, sir.
I hear your own budget.
So the 30 million will build the
building,
Senator Woods, yes, it will. OK.
That's, that's, I just need to
be reassured.
Thank you for that.
OK, uh.
On, uh, the minimum wage, you've
got it, you're going to bring
minimum wage up to $15 an hour.
that create any compaction
issues, Mr. Chair.
And whoever wants to answer
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
The recommendations don't um
change the.
Minimum wage for
None of the recommendations and
changed the minimum wage that's
currently in the budget that
schools must provide at least a
$15 per hour wage for all school
employees, which is
higher than the state minimum.
But that's been in place for
several years. OK.
And
On the staff.
Salary package percent rates.
What we talk about.
Um
And 24 we had a 3%.
So increase executive res 3%
LEFC.
Recommends 3% and legislative
finance Committee represents 4%.
So
Have we got close to agreement
on that anywhere.
Sure
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think the
house is still contemplating
that right now. I think there's
concerns about um as insurance
rates also grow, uh, what an
appropriate salary increase
would be for that.
OK.
On the
In assessment reporting.
LFC.
was wanting to put in 2,770,000.
So that those assessments will
be reported back to
DFA lady LFC and LESC.
Uh, I noticed that the
Executive or the.
Ilias C had no.
Request for that.
Is there any indication in
Now
Aro about that.
Mr. Chair, Senator, they have
not discussed that line in
particular. I do know that in
the executive and LESC
recommendations, they still
provide about 2.7 to $3 million
more for that line item, uh the
LFC recommendation, as you've
noted, includes language
requesting more interim
reporting on those results.
OK.
Um
A couple more questions, Mister
Chair.
It seems that uh.
Executive recommendation for the
queer technical education pilot
project.
Um
Executive.
As for 14.
237,000.
From the public education reform
fund, kind of explained that
public education reform Fund.
How's that?
As Monsieur has that uh actually
funded that particular fund. Is
it just general funds that we
put in there annually or how is
that done?
Mr. Chair, back in 2020 when you
created the K5+ and extended
learning time program in the
funding formula.
You earmarked the amount in SCG
for that and if schools
participated, they drew down
from that earmark, and if they
did not participate, the
remaining balance would go into
the public education reform
fund. So this fund is just a
repository of all the unspent
K5+ and extended learning time
program funding, which reached
about half a billion dollars
over the last few years.
In 2023, you
Fully funded K-12 Plus and an
increase in instructional hours,
remove the earmark.
So there is no longer reversions
going into the public education
reform fund. It's simply being
depleted at this point. So the
LFC and LESC recommendations.
actually recommend an infusion
of general fund into the public
education reform fund to pay for
a 3-year pilots that will be
evaluated contingent on
legislation.
OK.
Sometimes
All these funds out there kind
of make us wonder
uh why, why we don't empty some
of those buckets out, so.
Thank you for that.
OK, um,
And noticed that one agreement.
On the
Um
Let me just read this to you and
you can tell me what it is.
For the introduction,
preparation and evaluation of
educators and school
administrator.
Administrators contingent on a
hat enactment of legislation.
So that was to create.
Standards for instruction
preparation and evaluation of
educators.
In school and administrators.
So we've, we've got legislation
out there that actually says
we're going to evaluate.
These people, is that Mister
chair I'm sorry, but I'm just
trying to get it in my head.
But this is.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, I
believe this is House Bill 1.
this
57. Thank you, John.
Um, it is a bill to revise
administrative preparation, so
preparation at
The principles, site
administrators and
superintendents.
Uh
This appropriation that you're
referring to is contingent on
that bill, um, it does
restructure a lot of the
standards of how they're
prepared and also includes um
Stronger provisions on which
programs will be approved.
PED
For this type of preparation.
OK.
OK, then we've got a, a quite a
difference.
In uh
Well, I'll read it to you. The
initiatives to improve outcomes
for Native American schools and
for the study of funding
formulas.
Mm
The uh MFC recommended
1545 million.
And the executive recommended.
90 million
Under specials.
To explained that and it, and if
you've already explained it,
maybe I slept through it.
So Mr. Chair Senator Woods, it's
a difference between the dollar
amount and the the source of the
funding.
So in the executive, it's 90
million over 3 years, so it's 30
million a year.
Um, and that's using one time
funding.
And the LFCs has it in the.
her
grow fun and so that would be
15.5 million over 3 years. OK,
so we're talking about.
Uh, 15 times 3 is 45 million.
Mr. Chair, Senator, it's only 5
per year, so 15 in total.
OK.
Just to clarify.
OK.
This chair, I'm sorry to take up
your time, but
There's some stuff here. I was
really wondering about, and I'm
sorry that after to search for
it.
Oh, hurry.
Um
OK, let's talk about just a
second, about uh
School staffing models.
And you know, one of the
Big things in my constituents
talk about this.
Having so many kids in a
classroom.
And I notice we have a
A recommendation.
From uh
LFC to uh
So that contingent on
legislation passing.
So what does the public
education department think
about.
Staffing levels, student to
teacher route.
Relation
In schools. Where, where are we
standing on that right now?
and
Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, are
you referring to the legislation
that would
Uh,
Uh, class sizes for younger
grades, so it's 1st through 3rd
grade.
And it's um addresses the
currently schools can utilize
class size averages, which
allows some classroom sizes to
be much larger than
Um
Really is ideal.
And so as Mr. Chair, Senator, is
that what you're referring to?
I'm, I'm referring to is some of
my constituents that
That their kids.
go to very large schools and
there's several classrooms of
1st, 2nd, and 3rd graders that
they do their best to shop
teachers trying to get the
Their kid into, I know it's
unheard of.
But uh
You know, some of that.
So that type of stuff that goes
on and I'm just wondering.
Where are we on, on those,
especially those earlier
childhood grades when we start
giving waivers.
To different schools and you
know I've heard.
People say, well, that teacher
could just handle more kids.
You know,
But there's some point in time
that, that.
One who is too many.
So
I don't know what I'm fishing
for him, Mr. Chairman, I guess I
was shut up on that,
I, I will say that.
Um, as a former teacher myself
when you have very large glass
sizes. It is very much
challenging to serve.
The needs of all of your
students.
Um, many of our classrooms have
students um at varying
proficiency levels varying needs
and so when you have large class
sizes and you're, you're one
teacher trying to serve all of
your students the best that you
can. It is, it is very much
challenging. So, um, I, uh,
share the concern that your
constituents have as well. I
think that, um, it's something
that we should address that when
when class sizes.
Um, are, are really larger than
they should be, I think that it
is uh a detriment to, um,
The students and the educator.
And Mr. Sonny, you got to come
in, um, Mr. Chair, Senator,
maybe I can.
Get closer to what you were
trying to ask earlier, which is
We did a recent study in
conjunction with LESC on class
sizes, and we found that most
Schools around the state
actually are at what we would
consider a research based level.
is about 15 to 1 in your earlier
grades, um, our previous studies
do suggest that as you get into
older levels and secondary, that
affect really.
Heater off. It's more effective
at the.
Younger grades that have smaller
class sizes, but even in New
Mexico, we are.
We have a shrinking population.
And we have some class sizes
that are 8 to 1 and very rural
areas as you're also familiar
with, and we have very large
class sizes and more urban
areas. So how do we essentially
leverage
Our best teachers.
To reach the most students.
And maybe it's not so much about
finding these cookie cutter like
20 to 1 classrooms, you could
have a 2 to 1 classroom, 4 of
them, and very differing levels
of teacher capacity in each
classroom.
It may be more important to be
strategic about if you've got a
new teacher coming in, maybe
they need a smaller class size,
cause it's just difficult for
them to learn the ropes when
they're struggling with a large
class.
And maybe you have an expert
teacher that can handle an extra
student or two, particularly
ones that might have some
behavior issues in their well
trained in addressing that.
And maybe you should pay them
more.
That's, that's sort of the idea
behind a more innovative
staffing strategy, you get a
little bit away from having a
random thresholds that you're
held to, and you start
encouraging schools to think
more strategically about what's
best for kids. And how do you
staff those those rooms
accordingly.
And, and Mr. Chair, that brings
me to the question.
That the uh
The
Military Institute, the
The one star that was in here
talking to us the other day
about
They actually had to start
offering a middle school program
in order to bring the kids up to
the proficiency level.
Of high school.
Uh, they were so far behind that
they actually had to offer a
Prepper course.
To the younger kids so that they
could do high school work.
And I notice here in some of
your.
Performance measures.
That the percent of recent high
school graduates who take
remedial courses.
And higher education at 2-year
schools is Sentin on 40%.
So these kids.
Received a diploma.
Out of high school.
Right
And yet 40% of them had to go
get a menial course.
Before they could do college
level work.
This chair is that the way I'm
reading that right?
That's a yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator, that's.
OK.
I guess we're just statistics
shows what it is. The other part
is the chronic absentee level.
Among students from high school.
And it reads here.
Well, let's just start in
It shows in middle school.
It's a 28%.
In high school, it's a 31%.
An elementary school is 34%.
Tell me the program that we're
doing, Mr. Chair, and
To correct that problem.
Mr.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, it's a
big problem that we need to
tackle in the state or
statewide, um, average for
chronic absenteeism is 29.7%.
That's actually a, uh, almost
10% reduction that we've seen
recently. And it's really
because we are being.
We are investing more in
providing funding to our school
districts and charter schools to
take action on this issue. Um,
it's a very complex issue.
Um
It involves everything from
students overcoming challenges
that they have at home,
overcoming academic challenges
when students fall behind.
Um, it becomes, um, increasingly
more challenging to feel like
you wanna be at school.
Um, students have various
behavioral health needs, um, you
know, it's a very complex issue.
Um, we have provided funding
that we have received from the
legislature, the, the department
has sought out funding for
attendance for many years. The
majority of this funding does go
directly to school districts,
school districts and charter
schools to provide various sort
of supports for students. It can
include an attendance, uh,
coordinator that is reaching out
to students and families, um,
helping to find out what's
happening, what's what
the most successful program we
have in this.
Um, Mr. Chair centererwoods, I
think what we hear, um,
primarily from school districts
is having dedicated staff.
Who is focused on providing
those sort of communications and
supports with students and we
are funding that directly,
Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, with
the funding that we receive.
Um, school districts and charter
schools are able to apply for
that funding and then they
decide how to utilize that, let
me ask you this. Why in the
world would we have that applied
for when we see it's a chronic
problem.
Why wouldn't we have that built
into a budget somewhere
Woods, it, it, it should be, but
we have not, the legislature has
not appropriated.
Enough funding for us to provide
uh uh funding to every school to
provide those same sort of
supports around uh chronic
absenteeism.
It's been a funding issue, um.
Sonny, uh, Sonny.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, I
think.
One thing that is very difficult
is how complicated chronic
absenteeism can be, and I'll
just oversimplify the problem.
We've got
Probably 3 buckets of students.
Kids who don't feel safe coming
to school.
Kids who can't come to school
for some reason they didn't have
transportation or they gotta
stay home and take care of kids.
And then kids who are just not
engaged.
You don't really see the
purpose, they don't understand
what their education, um, you
know, they're not interested in
what school has to offer.
And the types of interventions
you would apply.
May not get certain kids to
school, even though
You're trying to get this whole
population to improve their
attendance. So this is
complicated further by the fact
that in elementary schools, the
responsibility is primarily that
of parents and families to get
kids to school, and then as you
get to secondary, it becomes
more of a personal
responsibility to get to school,
So you take all of those in a
very simplified box that I've
put it into, and there's not
really a lot of interventions
that cover all of these spaces.
adequately. Um, there are a lot
of interventions that the
secretary did mention.
That can help, you know, you get
people out into these homes.
Reaching out and see what the
problem is and trying to tackle
the individual issue.
Uh, there are some attendance
liaisons at schools that do this
type of work, but you're right,
there are other.
Government services that overlap
in some areas related to that.
That's correct, Senator.
So if we count that money and
Also
That'd be an interesting deal to
find out how much money are we
putting at this problem?
If we could figure out from,
from CYFDE to early childhood to
public schools.
Be interesting to see, you know,
we're just doing a big behavior
health deal and the selling
point of that was we're gonna
make somebody.
Be responsible.
Now, we'll see how that works
out. Chronic?
Absenteeism is a problem, we all
see it.
30% of the kids for some reason
are missing school.
So
That's a pretty big piece of the
pie, and it probably goes
towards the behavior health
issue too.
So,
Pretty quick, we're gonna have
immense amount of money trying
to all tackle the same problem.
Is there any coordination
between all this, and I know
that's a question that's not a.
That's not an answerable
question, but
But
You see my concern.
That we can read the statistics
and see the problem, so.
I just tell them, solve that
problem for me and we'll take
care of it.
Mr. Chairiner Woods, it is a big
problem and we must address it.
We will not see improvements in
our proficiency rates at the
levels that we want.
Um, it affects our graduation
rates.
Um, we need to have our students
in school and so it is a
priority for the department.
It's one of our, our top 5.
Um, issues in education that
that we're working at the
department to address and all
aspects of the work at the
agency, we are partnering with
uh CYFD. They do receive reports
from schools for students who
are chronically absent.
Uh, they don't have additional
funding other than staffing
within the department to follow
up with students and their
families, so there's not a, a
really a large appropriation at
all that goes to CYFD. It's
really, um, their employees and
their employee time to follow up
on reports that come from school
districts and and that's what
that's sorry to cut you off,
but, that's what the local
police tell me.
When I asked the local police,
why aren't you doing something
about this.
You see these kids wandering
around out there and during
school hours, and you know,
probably close to how old they
are. Why aren't you doing
something about that?
You know, and they all say,
well, protective services over
at CYFD and blah blah blah blah
blah, you know, it's not my
problem, it's somebody else's
problem, not to say not good
people out there trying to do
good things.
But somehow
We should bring this together.
You chair took by too much time.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Senator.
I don't have anybody else on the
list for questions. I had a
question on the
It's the education piece I think
it was like the 90 90 million,
50 million.
Um, can you get back to that and
just, uh
Certainly, Mr. Chair, um, just
wanna reiterate the places where
you'll see these
recommendations.
On line 46.
There's $20 million recurring in
all of the requests for the
Indian education fund, that
happens every single year, um,
there are generally some
challenges with spending down
that amount, um, so there's
typically some reversions into
the Indian education fund.
Online.
92, this is the executive
recommendation. They have asked
for 90 million over 3 years, so
30 per year. When you add that
to the 20, that gets you to the
50 that the governor had talked
about in her state of the state.
Um
Online 93 right below that is 5
million and the LESC
recommendation one time for one
year.
Uh, to do
Indian education initiatives.
And then online one.
40
As the LFC recommendation to do,
once again, indigenous
educational initiatives.
Now 15.5 million, which would be
5 million over the course of 3
years, and that is to also study
a potential formula for tribes.
OK. And, and so what we're, what
is, what is the amount in the HP
right now, uh, the HB2, where
are we at with that? I know the
initial request was 50 million.
you know where it stands or
Um, Mr. Chair, the working
group.
Looked at a scenario on
Saturday, I believe, Friday,
Friday, I'm getting my days
mixed up. Thank you, Andrew. Uh,
their initial scenario had 30,
they had pulled the 15 million
out of the LFC recommendation.
Out of grow perf.
And put a one-time non-recurring
$30 million appropriation.
Over 3 years, so 10 per year.
But I, I don't know what they
are planning to vote on this
afternoon.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Um
No question. OK, all right.
Mhm, good. Well, thank you.
Thank you for your presentation.
Uh, I know we have to be on the
floor at 11, so we'll go ahead
and most likely uh go to the
public school support and
enrolled the other uh facility
authority and the uh insurance
over, you know, the, um,
Or we'll see. I know there's
like a faces aching, but you
know, these, these are big
topics, you know, this is half
of our entire budget and, and of
course there's questions that
want to come from our committee
members I wanna be, you know,
also mindful of that and we have
a lot of questions. This is.
You know, almost half of our
entire, you know, budget and so
forth, so Mr. Chair, can I, may
I ask on this, yeah, I'll be
very fast, uh, and I mean you
may have already talked about
you don't have to rehash it if
you already did, but did you
discuss the chair and secretary
and others, uh, school lunches
and breakfast is are we online
we are we untracked? You did,
OK. All right then I'll just
watch the tape then.
Mr. Chair, Senator Pu, we did
have a good conversation about
that and we're hoping to get the
difference made up um from the
executive, uh.
From the LFC wreck. So we are
short. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary, I am equally as
worried about what is happening
in Washington right now and this
giant step forward we took uh to
provide universal free healthy
breakfast and lunch to our
children here in New Mexico and
if something changes there with
That circus that's going on up
there, I just, we, we need to be
ready. So I hope that we're
thinking about that as well.
Thank you. OK, thank you. All
right, uh, public school
support.
was that
were you wanting PSA to come up
now, yes, I, I, yeah, I just got
informed that these two were
combined, the first two, so I
took, OK, perfect. So we'll go
with the, the facility
authority.
We need, I think I'll ask the uh
floor, we will go to at least
11:30 if you can excuse us.
So we can get through, you know,
both of the authority and
insurance I think we, I think in
an hour we can get through, so.
Go ahead.
We can make this one quick and
easy for you if you like.
Um, I'm Kelly Carswell.
Uh, the budget analysts for the
public schools facility
Authority.
Um, for LFC, I'm joined today
by, uh, Mr. Minor again and Iris
Romero. She's the executive
director of PSFA.
Um, so the purpose of PSFA is to
staff and support the public
school Capital Outlay Council
pub uh, pursuant to the public
school Capital Outlay Act. ESFA
provides support and oversight
in administering construction
grants, um, deficiency
corrections to facilities at
public schools, um, and
statewide standards and
system-based programs for public
schools. It assists school
districts with the development
and implementation of 5-year
facility master plans,
preventative.
maintenance and oversees all
state funded public school
construction.
Um, PSFA does not receive
general fund appropriations for
its operations, rather it's
operating budget is funded, uh,
from the public school capital
outlay fund within statutory
limits that are linked to grant
assistance provided from the
fund and the budget
recommendations you'll see
before you today are well within
those limits. Um, both the LFC
and uh executive
recommendations both support a
$7.5 million dollar operating
budget for the agency for FY 26.
Um, so we consider uh the very
small difference you'll see
there basically a rounding error
and the recommendations are the
same. Analysts have also reached
consensus on the performance
measures, um, and HAFC did take
the LFC recommendation.
I don't think Mr. Minor has any
comments, so we'll turn it over
to Director Romero.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members. I'm gonna be, um, real
brief as well if you can go to
probably the 3rd slide.
This is what uh PSFA is
requesting as uh it's operating
budget. We are requesting
$483,000 from fiscal year 25s
operating budget.
And if you go on to the next
slide, you'll see what that
detail is, um.
What that is uh entails, um.
Keeping in mind that 100,000 of
the 458,000 from the personal
services category is for
employee liability insurance,
uh, we're not requesting that,
that is just a line item that uh
is placed on our operating
budget, um, for employee
matters. Also, we're requesting
a 3% increase as part of a
performance-based compensation
strategy, um, in order to get
ready for the influx of phase 2
construction funding that's
going to be coming online within
the next year or so, and just
Getting a solid um foundation uh
within our department to be
ready for that. We're also
requesting two FTEs, one is
another regional project manager
that's going to assist in those,
uh, construction projects as
well as an energy manager.
Finally, we are requesting a
$25,000 increase in our
contractual services. This will
help start, hopefully a study,
um, on the current state local
match of funding um formula, so
we're requesting that additional
funds in order to start that
process. With that, Mr. Chair
and members, I stand for any
questions.
Mr. Chair, this acting CFO. I
think we're good. We're here for
questions.
Thank you. I'll go to committee.
I have Senator.
Do you, you know, campus, and I
know Woods has questions. OK,
thank you, um.
Chairman and director. Thank you
and uh the presenters uh so.
Would, would HVAC systems be
proposed and funded through here
or is that some other venue or
vein in the state budget.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Padilla,
we do have a systems-based
program that includes HMAC
systems.
So about
clarify, um, so those projects
would not be funded through the
$7.5 million budget you see
here, but through, um, one of
them costs 7.5 million
that PSFA helps administer,
which are much, much larger than
this amount.
So this is just basically the
administrative function. Thank
you. Thank you, chair, and thank
you for that, Kelly, and, and uh
yeah, each one of these systems
costs $7.5 million a year. So I
thank you for that question,
we'll move on.
So, so essentially, uh, chair,
and so, uh, how do they get
prioritized? Because I, I had, I
had had a bill on that this year
and um wow that bill did not
fare very well because I'm
repeatedly told, well, there we
can already do that. It's
already there, but it seems to
me like uh 70% of our
classrooms are still on on swamp
coolers and are entirely too hot
for both students and their and
their ability to to really
learn. I mean, there's, there's
a lot of data on, on this, and
then of course, the
professionals that work in those
classrooms as teachers and, you
know, um, and, and the other
folks. So how do they get how
does a project like that get
prioritized through this system?
is goes through um our FA
ranking system. We have
assessors that go out and assess
the facilities and based on that
assessment, uh, we'll go into
our database to see where they
land and depending on how much
funding is available within the
fund, um, every award cycle.
It could, uh, open up to the top
300. So as long as the district
has their local match to support
that project, then they are free
to apply for those funds and how
many, how much money is in this
fund right now?
Currently, an uncommitted
balance would be more along the
lines of 200 to 400 million.
I don't know why I thought it
was 1.6 billion and then there
was an investment off of that or
how does that work, Mr. Chair,
Senator Padilla, that is what is
currently in the fund as um both
committed and uncommitted. Keep
in mind we've had an influx of
awards the past couple of years
as well as an influx of of uh
awarded waivers. With that being
said, the fund that you see on
board of Finance does not take
into account that those a lot of
those funds are earmarked for
phase 2 construction. These
are awarded in two phases. The
design phase and then the
construction phase. So a lot of
those dollars are already
earmarked for already awarded
projects and chair just this
will be my last question I
promise you. So, um, what is
the, the
What is the longest outstanding
project that's been sitting
there that has not been
completed.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Padilla, I'd have
to get back to you on that.
I'm very interested to know that
because I think that we should
also, the way that we're
attempting chair to reform
capital outlay and this and that
in this building, we should be
looking at this one as well,
because if, if funds are sitting
there for too long, they should
be moved to something that can
actually get done.
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, we
agree, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Peril, if I could add just
A little more information, um,
to the funds available. So, um,
Director Romero is correct, so
the $1.6 billion is the total
balance, total unspent funds in
the public school capital outlay
fund right now.
Uh, the January financial plan
we got from the agency showed
about 540 million in uncommitted
balance.
And then this program receives
revenues, um, through the
severance tax bonding program.
So annually, uh, the council has
the opportunity to go out for
additional funds twice a year,
and the capacity, um, on an
annual basis has been between
700 and 800 million.
So there is a lot of money
available for public school
construction right now. Um, and
I would say, you know,
Revenue is not um
And if, if you have specific,
you know, concerns about
districts.
Um, and, you know, why are these
projects not getting done, um,
both, you know, you can contact
me and we can work with PSFA to
kind of figure out the specifics
of, um, what might be preventing
those projects from coming
forward, you know, sometimes
it's as simple as the district
needs to start pursuing the
project. OK, thank you, chair. I
was presenting a bill across the
hall. I'm glad I got here when I
did. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator De Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, members of the, uh,
Senate Finance Committee as as
we go forward with uh PSFA and
then uh you know uh Romero,
maybe you can elaborate a little
bit in terms of.
The amount of work that uh that
you're uh having to administer.
And it's gonna lead to some
other questions that I have, but
if you can give us an idea in
terms of the work that's going
on and the number of projects
that you're dealing with in the
limited staff that you have in
order to go ahead and complete,
if you will, uh, the work that
is uh your responsibility. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, we
currently have approximately 175
active projects.
Um, right now we have about 15
regional project managers, um,
which they are carrying,
carrying a heavy load. Um,
anywhere between 15 and
20 projects, depending on the
regions. Ideally, we would like
to see a regional manager.
Um, to carry about 5 to 7
projects. So right now we are
not.
Fully staffed, we're working on
a staffing model in order to um
Be able to request additional
FTEs, but we're also very
cognizant on doing some work
internally on a compensation
analysis as we were not part of
SO compensation analysis in
order to request additional
funding to our, uh, operating
budget along with additional
FTEs to help support the work.
Thank you very much for that
explanation, and I appreciate
the candor as we move forward
and Mr. Chairman, that's part of
the problem as we deal with it,
we have a limited staff who is
dealing with an inordinate
number of projects and
oftentimes dealing directly with
uh people who are overseeing
these projects and then uh with.
The responsibilities that go
with it we're finding that uh
we're having limited resources,
limited time, and, uh, and
that's part of the reason why,
if you will, some of these
projects are not, not moving
forward as quickly as uh as we'd
like to see them. Uh, the other,
the other part of this, uh, when
it comes to the projects that
are out there, uh, I know that
there are several that uh.
are waiting, if you will, uh,
for resources to be spent.
And in that uh I hear on both
sides of the issue, number one,
The uh PSFA is not moving fast
enough on the projects and I'm,
I'm opening this up, Mr. Chair,
because I want the uh the staff
to explain uh the the the amount
of work that they're uh in and
oftentimes duress that they're
under the second part in dealing
with it as we move forward.
There are more projects that uh
are waiting, if you will, to uh,
to begin, so my question is
twofold, Mr. Chair. The first is
going to be
How are you working with the
school districts. The second is
how many projects uh are still
waiting, if you will, uh, in
abeyance in order to go ahead
and get started so that uh we
can improve our school
facilities and in the
infrastructure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator Campos, right now we've
done some great work internally
to streamline our processes and
our uh regional project managers
as well as our contracts
department are really working
well together to uh move these
projects along. We also have to
keep in mind that, um, as far as
I understand, there's been
approximately 25 new
superintendents this fiscal
year. So when there's turnover
at the district level, um, a lot
of times that's where some of
the uh.
processes are halted. Um,
they're trying to get back on
board sometimes the school
board, uh, doesn't know how to
proceed. Uh, we do our best to
try to update each um
District as that occurs. So we,
I feel are doing some great work
in streamlining processes and um
being a lot more communicative
with the district to help them
through their obstacles as well.
So, so with that, how many
projects right now are not in
the queue that have not been
approved for construction that
you're you're aware of that are
in the application process.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Campos,
right now there's not any in the
queue, uh, keeping in mind that
we open up our um application or
application starting in July of
2025. So it'll be the new fiscal
year.
So Mr. Chair and, and uh Mr.
Romero, you bring up a very
important point as we deal with
the number of projects with a
change in administration.
Uh, in
The area where I represent,
there's over 26 school
districts.
And within that in dealing
directly with the school
districts we've had the high
turnover of superintendents, uh,
including, if you will, board
members.
And so the project of scope
changes.
The priorities change and then
the approach, if you will, to
move money from one project
possibly to have another project
considered, and so within that,
uh, Mister Chair, my final
question, and I'd like to make a
statement, uh, deals directly
with.
Uh
How are we gonna be responsive.
In the future as we continue to
deal with these type of
projects.
Uh, 2 that are cases in point as
we deal with it.
One is the Anton Chico school
that needs to be replaced.
Uh, I, I believe the litigation
has already been finalized on
that and we need to get that
school, uh, redone, that was a
fairly new school.
And then the second is the Las
Vegas City Schools Memorial
School or Memorial Middle
School.
And the resources have been
sitting there. There's about 1.5
million.
And again going back to some of
the earlier statements that I
made with the previous
presenters.
As we deal with it, it's
important for us and it behooves
us as legislators, uh, to
continue to go ahead and keep
tabs of what is occurring within
our districts because within
that uh that turnover, that
change definitely does impede,
if you will, the process,
resources then continue to um to
grow when uh it comes to the,
uh, the administration, the
construction, and the overall
operation of the project and
there's so many other factors.
So within that, if you can help
me a little bit to better
understand how you're helping
school districts, uh, Mr. Chair,
to facilitate, uh, the expedient
and efficient development and uh
full purpose and use of the
facilities, uh, once these
schools are complete. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, can
you, uh, reiterate your
question?
So in terms of that, as we deal
with our school districts and
we're finding that a lot of the
schools, um.
Are not at the level that they
should be in terms of the time,
the resources to be spent.
And how the projects had been
stalled. What are you doing
through the department to assist
to help these districts
facilitate the full uh contract.
The resources and the completion
of the projects that have been
uh.
On the list in their intended
purpose.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, when
we see that there are all
projects, we have regional
managers that go, um.
Contact them to find out where
they are in the process, and a
lot of times, um, they're on
hold based on what I had
mentioned before, they're not
quite sure how to proceed. We
recently met with um how you
brought up Las Vegas Memorial
Middle School. We met with a
couple of members of, of their
school board, and they're still
aren't quite sure what they want
to do. Um, they were thinking of
Sierra Vista School of whether
or not to move forward with
that. So a lot of it has to do
with the things that they need
to make, the decisions they need
to make at the local level.
level. We can reach out and help
facilitate, but we can't, um,
tell them what to do on the
local level, if that makes
sense. So we're always engaged
with the districts, um, no
matter where they are in the
face of their projects.
if I may, this is a case in
point.
Where 1.5 million will be
reverting at the end of June.
That being the case, if the
resources either aren't
encumbered if the full, the full
plan and design is not in place,
they lose the resources. Here's
another project where we're
caught in the middle of as we
deal with it. And so again, I'm
trying to get the point across
to the public.
As we deal with these projects
over and over, we continue to go
ahead and see.
That through our capital outlay
process, uh, there are some
areas of weakness that we need
to continue to backfill and to
strengthen, so that's uh that's
where I'm coming from with that.
And then just Mr. uh Mr.
Chairman, the final statement
that I make as we deal with all
of these school districts.
Uh
We talk about the contractors,
we talk about, uh, contracts
and, and the adjustments and if
you will, uh, dealing directly
with, uh, oftentimes, uh, the
need for additional resources as
we deal with the need for
additional resources to complete
a project, I emphasize to people
that the sooner that we plan.
That we fully understand the
scope.
That we have the resources
available and that we complete
the project, the more, if you
will, according to budget that
these projects will be complete.
So there is going to be the need
for additional work, but again,
I commend the people with PSFA,
uh, for their due diligence and
for their openness and candor as
we deal with it and uh I'll do
all that I can to to continue to
support, if you will, the need
for additional FTEs and the
resources as we, we deal with
it.
I believe if you will, the 5%
that we talk about that uh is
part of this, uh, I don't
believe it's sufficient.
I believe this is an enormous
task, and it requires, if you
will, not only more expertise
but more resources in order for
the department to continue to
fully function and to uh perform
the responsibilities that uh
that have been laid out for
them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you compos uh.
You know, I used to serve on the
public school capital LA task
force, so I think what'll be
really uh important, you know,
for at least the committee
members just to hand out that
list that has all the schools
and all your weighted averages
in the ranking sheet, so I think
could be because these schools,
you guys do the ranking and,
and, and based on how much is
available, they move up and so
forth. So I think, you know, the
committee would be uh be good
for the committee to, to see
that list, to see where all
these schools are and how
they're ranked and how they're
the weights and all that stuff.
and how they kind of moved up
and, and so forth. I think that
would be a good listing for the
committee to have just a real
quick question. I know that uh I
know the uh former governor of
uh uh.
Pick your reason always
interested. They've been working
with uh, cause a lot of the kids
tend to school, high school, uh,
in elementary, and I think there
was, I think that was moving up,
so I don't know where it's on
the list, but maybe, maybe uh
it's moved up to number 3. I
think at one point it was like
way up there and I don't know
where it's at anymore, but that
I can find out where that is,
but handing out the list of, of,
uh, to the entire uh LFC, I
think would be really helpful so
that Mr. Chair, um, the top 100
list is in volume 30, really?
OK.
looking for
it is.
Um
OK, so.
Starting on page 134 are a
number of resources related to
Public school capital outlay
council and PSFA, um, the top
100 list is on, starts on page
136.
Um, and then PSFA does update
this every year, Ms. Romero can
speak to the timing of that.
Um, and then to Senator
Padilla's question, the
Um, eligibility for systems
projects would extend beyond the
schools that are on this list,
and again, we can um work with
you and PSFA to get you any more
information on specific
districts or schools if you want
them.
If you want that.
Thank you, Kelly for, for
mentioning that so we could.
So as you can see, it's got the
list by the condition index and
also as well as the match rate
and bonding capacity, so it kind
of gives you a pretty good
overall picture of where various
districts and schools are at,
so.
Thank you. Uh, I don't have
anybody else on the list, so
thank you uh for the
presentation. We'll move on to
the uh insurance authority.
Alrighty. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, so, uh, the next
agency is the public
schoolsurance Authority, that's
business unit number 342. So
just a, a, a quick overview of
this agency. It does not receive
any direct general fund
appropriations. Instead, it
receives um insurance premiums
from both, uh, public schools
and from higher education
institutions that choose to
participate in uh this
authority's programs.
Uh
The, uh, the executive in the
LFC recommendations, uh, both
included increases for fiscal
year, uh 26, uh, for health
benefits, the LFC recommendation
included a 9 or 10% increase
while the uh executive
recommendation was 9.5% and for
risk insurance, the LFC
recommendation included a 16.9%
rate increase, but assumed half
of that um increase would be
uh paid by local cost sharing
for entities that have a large
number of sexual misconducts
misconduct claims, the executive
recommendation assumed an 11%
increase. Um, with that, and
just for your information, the
uh house appropriations and
Finance Committee did adopt the
executive recommendation as that
was the uh lower amount you can
see here. You all typically do
include some budget adjustment
authority to allow the agency to
um bring an additional budget if
they need to do so to pay.
names, and with that I'll hand
it over to Doctor Minor and uh
the director of NIPSA, Patrick
Sandoval.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chairman and
committee members, uh, Joe did a
good job explaining the
differences, so I have no
further comments at this time.
Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you, um,
Joey. I would like to introduce
Deputy Director Martha Quintana
here with me today, CFO Philip
Gonzalez. We have our benefits
manager Kaylee Marquez, and
general counsel Martin Esquivel
and also Larry V Hill from Palms
and Associates.
Turning to slide number 2, I
will make this brief.
Nimmia is comprised of 88 public
school districts, 99 charter
schools, 12 higher educational
entities and 18 other
educational entities. The
authorities served 77,900
employees and dependents with
46,985 lives insured under
medical insurance. NIMSA is made
up of 12 FTE and is managed by
an 11-member board of directors.
Turning to slide 3, slide 3
represents Nipsia's
appropriation request for fiscal
year 26, the authority is
requesting an increase in
expenditure authority of 18.54%
in benefits, 16.28% in risk and
5.58% in program support.
FY 26, the projected impact on
public school support is 39.7
million to fund the employer's
share of premium increases.
The increases consist of 22.1
million for employee benefit
premiums with an average 66%
employer contribution and 17.7
million for risk premiums.
MCS submitted a special
appropriation for the risk and
benefits fund to help address
fund balance deficits.
Risk premiums offset the
increased self-insured retention
for wind and health claims,
assist in sexual abuse
prevention efforts and seek
COVID reimbursements.
turning to slide 4.
Slide 4 displays property losses
for the last 10 fiscal years
during fiscal year 2019 through
2023, members suffered
significant losses of 65.5
million due to hail and wind
damage.
The projected excess insurance
amount to be received for these
losses is 54.5 million. These
losses caused our wind and held
deductible to increase from 2.5
million to 10 million with an
aggregate of 25 million for FY
24 FY25 has a self-insured
retention of 10 million.
turning to slide 5.
Slide 5 includes sexual abuse,
molestation, and inappropriate
touching claims.
These claims include faculty on
student, faculty on faculty and
student on student.
Fiscal year 2023, 2024 and 2025
are still considered immature.
To help reduce these types of
claims NIMSO was instrumental in
passing House Bill 128 school
personnel background and
training. This bill strengthened
reference checks and reporting
standards of misconduct to PED.
MCR also procured an anonymous
reporting system through StopI
Solutions and FY 24 for school
districts and charter schools.
Turning a slide 6, slide 6
displays the distribution of
plan paid claims.
15% of members account for 81.5%
of the plan's claims costs.
When we compare the claims cost
from fiscal year 23 to 24.
We can see that the per member
per month cost for medical
services increased by 7%.
Primarily due to inpatient
admissions due to cancer.
sepsis, childbirth by C-section
and mental health.
Prescription costs increased by
18.7% due to mostly oncology and
GLP-1 drugs.
Turning a slight 7.
Flight 7 displays the major
conditions of NIMSO members by
prevalence and cost.
The top 8 conditions are
diabetes.
Coronary artery disease, asthma,
chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, hypertension, mental
health and substance use
disorder and congestive heart
failure.
These 8 conditions accounted for
over 209 million in costs or
65.9% of medical costs.
This concludes our presentation
today, however, we have included
an appendix that expands our
request by program with detailed
expenses and cost containment
efforts with that will stand for
any questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think
you said.
I've been called a lot of things
you were, you were, uh,
superintendent there, yeah,
regulation, there you go. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you
for being here. I appreciate
hearing this information. Um, a
couple of questions and I asked
this of the healthcare authority
too. What's the average age?
Of your
clientele.
You know that?
And is it, are, are they aging
like the rest of us?
Mr. Chair, Senator, we do have
that information. I'll turn it
over to Ms. Quintana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Trujillo. So we did do,
um, we do keep those statistics
and we do have an an analysis.
The average age, if we're
looking at our um total
population is 44.7.
Um, but when we're looking at
um.
A slide where 15% of our
members, um.
Uh, do, um.
Incur the majority of our clean
costs, um.
Um, that average is at 37.4.
Oh, Interesting. Yes, that,
that's very interesting that
it's younger. I see that, um,
diabetes is at the top of the
list. Um, and I'm wondering, uh
does the authority do, do you
have programs that
Give incentive for
Um, for, for things that we know
can have a positive effect on
reducing the effects of
diabetes. Diabetes is a huge
thing in my family, so, you
know, my mom had type one and
that was back in the time when
she really didn't even get
diagnosed until she was in her
late twenties, and by then, you
know, likely a lot of damage had
already happened. Um, she died
at a very young age and um the
rest of my family.
Older than me who are no longer,
I'm now in the older category,
um, had type 2 diabetes and
it's, it's a devastating.
Devastating, um, thing, but we
do know that there are some
things that we can do to try to
Avoid it, um, or at least reduce
the effects of it. I'm wondering
if you have programs that
encourage those things.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator Trujillo, yes, we do.
One of the programs that we
launched.
Um, with our, uh, pharmacy
benefit manager, CVS is a
transformed diabetes care
service. And what that does is
that does outreach, um to our
membership who um are um
utilizing uh diabetic
medications where um it's more
of a service where there's an
outreach to them. There's a
clinical outreach, they have a
support mechanisms to help them,
um, be adherent with their
medications.
To um work with their providers
to assist them, uh, in
different um programs internally
that are offered by your health
plans, but we do take diabetes
very, very seriously. And what
we've also done is, um, um, in
the last couple of years is
we've asked of our health
carriers to, because of these
top major conditions that we're
seeing where diabetes is
prevalent is to tailor programs
of health and wellness around.
to diabetes care as well. So we
are trying to make those
initiatives to reach out to
them, to offer different
programs that will assist them
in their journey and see if we
can get them to be at a
healthier state.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Appreciate it.
Senator Woods and then Senator
Campos.
This chair. I did not hear well.
Of the house bill that you were
talking about earlier, that was
going to help uh limit some of
the
Well, I think he was talking
about the sexual molestation and
inappropriate touching, you said
there was a
A house bill that you were.
in your presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Yes, that House bill um
passed during the 2021
legislative session.
So that House bill has already
been passed, and what that House
bill did is it required reports
of ethical misconduct by school
district personnel, employees,
volunteers, contractors and
contractors employees to be
reported to the superintendent
and public education department.
It required local school boards
to adopt policies to track child
abuse and ethical misconduct
allegations.
Um, child, child abuse
confirmation, applications for
school employment contacts or
volunteer positions, enhancing
requirements for work history
and other information.
OK, thank you. I don't mean to
cut you off, but
So that has helped with this
situation.
You believe
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, we
believe it has the reports of
ethical misconduct have
decreased over the last 3 years.
Can you think of anything else
that can help.
Reduce our, our liability or or
or occurrence.
Oris.
Of, um,
Civil rights violations, any of
that kind of stuff.
And we train
Our employees better.
And
Is there something you're
focusing on?
Um
In your
In church programs.
Any kind of focus.
Mhm
Yeah, I don't know if I'm asking
the question right, but I'm
trying to figure out how we can
further reduce
Are caused
But more than anything else,
quit abusing people.
Uh, so the cause is simply.
People, other people not knowing
what they're doing is wrong. So
can you address that question at
all, Mr.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, we do
have a loss prevention program.
Um, we are contracted with Palms
and Associates with that loss
prevention program, they do
focus on civil rights. They do
focus on policies, on
procedures, and we've also doing
house, we've been doing house
Bill 128 audits where they'll go
into a school, they'll explain
the House bill to the school,
how it's supposed to work and
everything they're supposed to
be doing, and then a couple of
months later they'll go in and
actually complete an audit and
make sure.
they're doing it correctly.
But when I'm asking Mr.
Cherries.
Is there a program? Is there a
video? Is there something
directly sent to those schools.
Are those institutions saying.
some kind of training on that,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, we do
have trainings through vector
solutions, they are micro
trainings. They are anywhere
from 3 to 7 minutes, and they
encompass all of those topics
that you just asked about.
And, and Mr. Chair, can we see
actual benefits from that
training also.
We have, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
we have started tracking that
data, and right now we are going
out to RFP for either that
program or a new program, and
one of the enhancements in that
RFP is to get more data so we
can track it individually per
school district and individual
would much like to see that
performance that on that stuff
to see if we're going the right
direction here. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Capos. Thank you very
much Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, and of course to
the uh
The MC group as you continue to
deal directly with.
So many of these issues I really
uh thank you and commend you for
the work that you continue to do
to help us if you will to.
Uh, reduce the costs as we move
forward. Uh, I'm gonna go ahead
and go off, uh, one of Senator
Trujillo's, uh, initial, um.
Questions and, and, uh, and.
And issues would be in it
relates to the preventive
aspect.
Of how we move forward, what are
some of the, uh, preventive
measures that you continue to
take that as an example.
Uh, assist with and help us to
minimize, if you will, the
chronic conditions.
Reason I bring that up because
you're making some significant
progress in other areas and in
dealing directly with this, I
know that when you see 65% of
all the medical claims are
coming from the contingency
within this group, how do we
continue to minimize, uh, if you
will, which.
eventually turns into a life
savings as well as a as a as a
dollar savings, um, what are
those preventive measures that
you have undertaken and if, if
you don't have that full list,
uh, what, what are maybe some of
the things that you all are
considering to help with
preventive healthcare.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos.
So as I mentioned earlier with a
question from Senator Trujillo
is our initiatives have changed.
Um, we're no longer, um, uh, you
know, focusing on everything
we're really doing key focusing
on these conditions that are are
are seen us so much. So the, um,
we've tasked our healthcare
providers and their wellness
providers to set up different
initiatives. Um, we recently did
a presentation actually this
weekend, your school boards
association regarding um what
some of those are where we're
trying to create a culture,
we're trying to create a culture
at schools and pass information.
on two, our membership, um, with
again.
Uh, similar to the risk program,
short, um, web podcast, short
videos, short instructional um
trainings that will help them,
um,
Uh, adopt or adopt certain
lifestyles or certain making
small little changes, we're not
asking them to, you know, um,
uh, change the world here, but
we're we're asking employees is
to really buy in and trying to
make them simple and accessible
for them. We know that all our
schools have an employees have
busy schedules, so we're trying
to tailor those trainings and um
that outreach to them, um, every
month our, uh, wellness team.
uh, including our own internal
team, um, uh, push out
newsletters, um, short little
topics, again, whether it's
we're focusing on eating, we're
focusing on just mental health,
behavioral health, um, items to
help them recognize that these
are important steps that they
should be taking, um, again for
their own health and but we're
also trying to do is push, um,
again, more of a wellness
culture with um.
Uh, again, like school boards
or, you know, even, um, our
leadership at the schools to
help us promote this to help
that well-being in their
population, because again, if,
if you have somebody who's um
healthy and well, then they're
gonna, uh,
You know, promote that while
they're doing their jobs and
promote that with our children.
So so Mr. Chair, and it leads to
the second part of the question
which evolves around, if you
will, the uh non-covered costs
and the reason I bring that up
because oftentimes as I talk to
people, uh, within uh that are
provided this coverage, uh, the
indication is that possibly the
reason why they're not following
up with preventive care is
because there is that uh that
non-insurance cover.
Uh, that being said, do you have
any idea in terms of how we can
continue with the strategies to,
to better provide that coverage,
number one, and then number 2,
do you have any information
regarding that I know that's a
little bit harder to capture,
but if you could please comment
on that, I'd appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos.
So we are, um, uh, we do have
actually tracking mechanisms,
uh, which again we've, we've
charged our um um both health
plans to, to take on to and take
on some initiatives, so we have
free preventative care.
So that's just getting your
annual physical every year, but,
um, for some reason, um, again,
free doesn't seem to entice
people anymore, but again, those
services are free. It's just
making that appointment and
making sure that they're getting
that free physical every year
that they're getting those two
free cleanings every year that
they're getting their low-cost
eye exam every year because even
through a dental exam or an eye
exam, so many indications of
health are um.
Are coming up on those exams
that people didn't even know
about. So those are all um at
either no or low cost to our
membership, but what are, um,
outreach that uh we've um.
Um, past our uh health careers
to do is find these individuals
who haven't seen a healthcare
provider in the last 123 years,
and targeting messaging directly
to that member.
And having our uh even our um
community health workers, um, in
the different parts of the
state, do an outreach. I
recently had an outreach from a
Presbyterian Health plan to
provide information where they
could actually do pick up the
phone and call these people and
say, hey, you know, we're doing
an outreach. We've seen you
haven't had a visit. How can we
get you to a visit? How can we
help you get those visits of
preventative care. So those
initiatives are happening as we
speak so uh.
Mr. Chair, and the final
question that I have uh relates,
if you will, to projections, and
I know it's very difficult,
particularly as we move forward
with uh the liability and the
cost that
Uh, need to be covered if you
will, because of uh uh.
Unintended or if you will, uh,
uh.
A circumstance that occurs and
uh we do have, if you will, the
loss of a property and at the
same time as we move forward, if
you will, the devastations that
occur when uh there are some of
the issues uh dealing directly
with, with humanity. So, so in
dealing with that uh.
It's a bifurcated question on
one part, uh, do you have
sufficient staff and on the
other part, as you look at some
of the projections and even
though not everything is is uh
fully able to be uh be
understood because we don't know
what's going to happen next, but
in terms of that with the
resources uh.
According to what, what I see
here are the funds properly
funded in order for you to help
to meet those claims, and then
you might express just very
quickly, um, how those claims
maybe we don't have the
resources at that time, but
other claims are settled and
then from there how we move in
to make sure that we do provide
you with the resources to uh to
mitigate those claims that uh
that that come out if you will
through NIMSI.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, senator, so I'll take
the first half of that question,
um.
We do a 5 year projection.
That's how we project out all
our costs. We look at it over 5
years. If we looked at it year
to year, we would have to be
passing on higher premium costs.
Right now, if you look at our
benefits fund, we'd already,
we've already had to draw
everything out of our long term
investments. We have about 1
million left to pay claims and
that we, we get premium every
month, the 1st 10 days of the
month.
But we've had to draw out about
$20 million just to cover
excess.
Um, we did have to.
In the board devoted to
increased premiums last.
March by 15%, we did reconsider
after meeting with the LFC LESE
and DFA and members of the
governor's office.
And they reduce those premiums
to 10%. So now we're feeling the
effects of those premiums.
Not being 15%, we have submitted
special appropriation, the
indication is that we are going
to receive something in the
appropriation.
Um, that should be enough to
offset those deficits.
And help us pass on uh.
Increases below 10% for at least
the next two years.
That is our hope on the risk
side, we do have a big deficit
fund balance on the risk side
that really hasn't changed much
from our projections that we did
early on, um.
However, on the risk side we do
have.
Reserves and we do have IB and
our reserves as soon as we tap
out the amount of negative fund
balance to those reserves, we
will be in solving insufficient
to pay. We have submitted an
appropriation on the risk side.
And we are gonna indications are
that it looks like we're gonna
get something on the wrist side
as well.
So as soon as we get that, we
will look and we will actually
be putting projections and
taking them to our board meeting
in March to see what the next 5
years are gonna look like.
So Mr. Cur just very quickly and
maybe we start to look, if you
will, at part of the vision
building and the reason for that
because.
Over the decades, what we do is
we basically operate according
to what that liability continues
to be and unfortunately with it,
it does put some stress on the
work that you all do at the at
the local level, so let's start
to think in terms of how we can,
we can better fund and and uh
give you if you will that
protection because we just don't
know what's gonna be ahead,
whether it be because of uh wind
and other things and or if you
will be health and other things
as we deal with it. Our
population is living longer and
in that if.
We continue to go down this
route, uh, with the deficiencies
that we have and how we come up
with the resources there may be
in a time when we're not able to
go ahead and keep up with it
particularly with what we're
dealing with.
today.
Uh, Mr. Chair, that's all I
have. There's other things to
discuss, but I think it.
So the essence of time, that's
all I have.
OK, thank you. I don't have
anybody else here.
So, uh, thank you for the
