Health care program for the
elderly and this is a joint
state and federal program where
the federal government sets a
certain standards and
expectations for what all the
Medicaid program should look
like and then there's a lot of
enhanced optional benefits and
services that stakes can build
on top of that so for example
the DD waiver is actually an
optional benefit so when you
hear people talk about the need
to contain costs in Medicaid by.
Paring back optional kinds of
benefits that's what they would
be I'm talking about
we'll go through some major cost
drivers and some of the trends
that we've seen with the program
include including talking about
some barriers to care that were
revealed with a study that our
shop did this last fall and talk
about behavioral health care
Services and spending about the
data in this package just like
data that you'll get and
healthcare in general to really
point in time so it's the best
available information that we've
got
for you today so key cost
drivers on slide four.
Because the program primarily in
rules most recipients managed
care we're paying a premium on
their behalf every month and
then the managed care companies
turn around and pay for all the
health care the administrative
cost into and pay for taxes out
of that so enrollment major cost
driver and that's what we've
seen over the last couple of
years when we haven't been able
to discern role anybody through
the public health emergency
because we're getting the
enhanced federal F. map so in
Roman is is a big player in the
cost drivers how much we're
paying for those premiums is a
big cost driver
that can be influenced by acuity
levels of the clients being
covered that can be influenced
by how much services they're
using and that can be influenced
by the prices that the managed
care companies in the state are
paying the providers for that
coverage there's a separate
component that's not in managed
care a native Americans have the
option of not enrolling in
managed care they can stay in
fee for service.
So we're not paying a capitated
insurance premium we're only
paying for the services that
they're using as they use them.
On page five.
You can see the ebbs and flows
of enrollment going back through
the two thousand and fifteen
with the big increases coming
over the past couple of years
and then the projected
adjustment downward because the
department's been doing a lot of
data matching and the clients
that are on the rules right now
is identified a significant a
number of them who no longer
would qualify under the income
eligibility thresholds and it
would be working to transition
them to other forms of insurance
coverage primarily through the
health exchange.
On page six.
In terms of big buckets of that
in a moment of you know almost a
million New Mexicans.
Three hundred thousand of them
are enrolled in the Medicaid
expansion program this is part
of the
affordable Care Act that allows
states to make coverage options
available for people who are
really not insured before so
we've had pretty striking
reduction in the number of
number of uninsured New Mexicans
simply because of Medicaid
expansion these individuals are
very low income about a hundred
thirty eight percent of the
federal poverty level or less
to qualify another three hundred
thousand Medicaid adults many of
whom are have low income with
children so family care people
who are elderly and low income
and people who have disabilities
that qualify for Medicaid as
well.
Number one
hundred percent hundred thirty
eight percent for.
And then there's about three
hundred eighty six thousand
children that are also on the
program each of those brought
buckets of adults elderly and
disabled and children have very
different costs associated with
them so we can absorb covering a
lot of kids because they're not
very expensive to cover but when
we have even modest changes in
the number of elderly or
disabled individuals that are
starting to receive certain
types of services and and long
term care those are very
expensive populations to cover
and with the aging population in
our state in the flat overall
population that we've been
experiencing that's where you're
going to continue to see the the
major cost growth within the
Medicaid program over time slide
seven this is really important
for when you're putting together
the Medicaid budget
the general fund is not the only
source of revenue that you're
using is the biggest source by
far but not the only source of
revenue that you're using to
fund Medicaid there is a myriad
of other state funds that are
used as matching
funds for the the federal funds
that includes dedicated gross
receipts tax revenue from local
governments and in the form of
County supported Medicaid in the
safety net care pool
we use tobacco settlement money
that's distributed from the the
permanent fund U. N. M. since
money up to the state it's
matched and returned back to you
NM largely for graduate medical
education as an example and then
you also appropriate funding in
some cases to other agencies
directly and then they send it
to Medicaid to get matched any
waivers the biggest of those but
when you do it for early
childhood services is another
area for things like home
visiting family infants toddlers
so the myriad of other revenue
sources can come into this
department to help match those
federal funds.
There's different populations
different types of services that
are covered at different
matching rates so Indian health
services if you see a huge
increase in costs for Indian
health services that's actually
covered by the federal
government a hundred percent.
If we see cost increases for
paying for prescriptions for a
Medicare part D. the federal
government charges States a
portion of Medicare do cost for
prescription drugs that is a
hundred percent general fund so
it can range from one into the
other the amendment most of the
program is under the standard F.
map right which is been higher
during the pandemic major
spending categories
Fe for services shrunk
considerably over the past
twenty years managed care is
where all the action is that in
this particular program and
we'll see how managed care is
even broken up into a lot of
different major programs within
that sector and then
administration.
The next slide on page eight.
You'll see that
A period of of modest growth
even when we're absorbing the
expansion population that's
because the expansion population
the feds are paying ninety
percent of the cost of that
of those individuals so we can
absorb a lot of them on the
program and have a much less
significant general fund impact
and then you can see pretty
sharp increases and and costs
for the program starting in
about FY nineteen on slide nine
if we go back to FY seventeen
spending is grown from just over
five point six billion dollars
in that year to over eight point
three billion in FY twenty two
on that graph to the left you
can see managed care makes up
eighty percent of the of the
major cost center within
Medicaid and Medicaid managed
care is broken up into a variety
of different brought programs
one is for physical health the
second as long term care and
that's paying for things like
nursing homes and personal care
option and then the be able to
behavioral health programs for
both the expansion population
and then the physical health for
the expansion population so once
we turn the money over if you'll
turn to slide ten.
What are some of the major cost
centers within those managed
care programs that the NCOs are
paying for and the biggest ones
for physical health are going to
be inpatient and outpatient
hospitals and it's going to be
for your direct care providers
like your family physicians and
other providers for long term
care the major cost the drive
this particular program are the
personal care Services this
could be a homemaker services
we're people can get help to
basically stay in their home and
avoid the need for going into a
nursing home and the nursing
home care which is the most
expensive on a per capita basis
cost center within the long term
care program.
So just because you're paying
for a lot of coverage for almost
half of the population doesn't
necessarily mean that population
can actually get timely access
to care and that's what we found
on slide eleven an evaluation at
the program evaluation unit did
this last fall where we found
that
only about thirteen percent of
the time were staff able to
contact a provider and get an
appointment for behavioral
health or physical health needs
a new patient basically would
have to call six to seven
different providers to get an
appointment for primary care and
ten calls to get a behavioral
health appointment.
We did this mystery shopping
with over five hundred different
providers within the system.
We also found that the
legislative directories that
were available on who is in the
network and and offering
services were inaccurate
and many providers were simply
unreachable because the
information was not accurate.
We've identified a number of
different strategies to try to
improve this access to care the
first one is
the report found that the.
The contractual network
standards that we have with the
managed care companies weren't
strong enough and so on paper it
looked like they had adequate
networks but in fact they're
really not adequate to meet the
needs of the people I need to
access that care
one barrier potentially to
getting more providers to take
Medicaid patients and be willing
to see them as a Medicaid is
paying providers very low you
know sometimes eighty five point
ninety five ninety percent of
what Medicare pays
and so you'll see
recommendations from both
executive and LFC to make major
in roads in major major in roads
and
what the Medicaid would be
paying for Care anywhere from a
hundred percent of Medicare and
LFC recommendation two hundred
twenty percent of Medicare for
certain targeted services were
right have high priority needs
like behavioral health and
infant maternal care.
Turning to behavioral health I
want to give you a quick
background on the behavioral
health collaborative we'll go
through some of the spending on
behavioral health and then talk
about opportunities when it
comes to children's behavioral
health slide thirteen just has
some definitions of what I mean
when I say the term behavioral
health that includes an all
inclusive term for both mental
illness and substance abuse
disorders.
What does that mean for mental
health issues for kids on slide
fourteen those diagnoses for
things like attention to.
Attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder ADHD adjustment
disorder
oppositional defiant disorder
which is very common and
you know the prevalence rates
are a little over twelve percent
based on some of the surveys
And windows adolescents get a
little bit older and they start
getting in more trouble it's.
Kicks into what's called conduct
disorder then you get in trouble
with the juvenile justice system
I'm very costly Gallegos is one
that's jumped out on the scene
over the past decade and that's
posttraumatic stress disorder
when you think about that
usually associated with combat
veterans or people who have
experienced a very serious
episode in their life maybe but
not necessarily in kids growing
up and that's a new diagnosis
that's becoming much more
prevalent and very concerning
slide fifteen.
Just a kind of a history of the
behavioral health system going
back to the late nineties it's
been through a lot of different
transitions and disruptions and
challenges as a result and and
how it can deliver services
Medicaid is a major payer for
behavioral health
The they tend to the federal
government is for other
commercial payers to start
paying more for
behavioral health services I
would through requirements that
it be on parity with physical
health but be that as it may
Medicaid is one of the major
payers the state transitioned
it's behavioral health system in
Medicaid into the managed care
companies want to transition to
managed care those managed care
companies then subcontracted to
other entities to carry out the
managed care activities some of
those entities that they
contracted with the
subcontractors were in fact
providers themselves and so you
had some conflicts between
people's ability to get services
through the premier provider of
their choice because they
weren't part of that particular
network and there are a lot of
challenges and losses and
and fighting frankly over that
set up to the point that the
state was asked by the feds to
unwind it
And that's what they did and and
about that time that we started
unwinding behavioral health
building within managed care
there was a big study needs and
gaps study done in two thousand
and two
and that report found that with
many people who are already
using this system are any new
and that was that was providing
insufficient access to evidence
based care we already knew a lot
of the time in the early two
thousands before really got into
this evidence based movie about
what works to get better results
but we weren't funding and we
were providing as part of the
system
is very fragmented system and
confusing for people to be able
to to access services because
the public dollars really and
coordinated these behavior
health dollars are spread all
across government at this both
the state and local level and
the system and how it worked
with folks really focused on
managing people's problems
rather than help them leave
productive lives.
So in response on the next slide
sixteen the state created the
behavioral health collaborative
so brought together sixteen
different state agencies to try
to start doing a better job of
coordinating
the delivery of behavioral
health
in on slide seventeen you all to
have charge the behavior health
collaborative with a couple of
key responsibilities that from
my standpoint you know we're not
rocket science is what we should
be doing all over the place but
it's basically doing needs and
gaps analysis on a regular basis
and identify a plan for closing
those and ensuring that the
services you're delivering
actually work second contract
for the delivery of services in
the state chose to contract
through a single managed care
provider for not only Medicaid
services but also non Medicaid
services that first company was
value options
And develop standards for
measuring whether we're getting
what we're paying for so the
performance measurement and then
third submitted consolidated
budget because you all are
struggling with where all the
behavioral health officer very
throughout the bureaucracy
across agencies so that
collaborative is been spending
setting in a consolidated budget
request since you enacted this
particular statute and then we
we've set up a measurement
system
and there's a requirement to
submit quarterly performance
reports an annual report give
identified the needs the gaps.
Put the funding in place to put
the standards in place what are
the results and how do we
improve.
Slide eighteen.
I think this is very surprising
for a lot of people but when you
aggregate all the money that
you're putting in the budget
right now for behavioral health
it's totaling almost a billion
dollars.
It's a logical question is what
are you getting for that
you know what types of services
are we providing most often are
those working to help
individuals this very
challenging to hear that figure
and then go drive down the
street and see people you know
it's very challenging needs
right there out standing on the
corner asking for help so those
most of the money the vast
majority of the money is in
Medicaid and is in HSD and the
vast majority of that money is
in managed care.
On slide nineteen by comparison
when the the collaborative first
started they were sending out
about three hundred and twenty
million dollars through value
options so a massive change in
the in the availability of
resources over the past decade
plus.
I'm slide twenty the point of
this is even though there's a
lot of resources going into
behavioural health is still a
very small portion of the
overall spending within
Medicaid.
I tell every new CYFD secretary
that all of the mission critical
all the money for your mission
critical services for many of
the families that you're going
to interact with is not in your
budget it is in fact in Medicaid
and so develop a really close
working relationship with that
that program because that's
where your mission critical
money actually is.
spending growth has been has
been occurring within the
behavioral health over the past
couple years on slide twenty one
you can see that for both
overall and a lot of that's
driven by managed care
enrollment.
These next couple slides or just
some big pockets of spending on
slide twenty two.
Very
Different types of systems that
exist for adults in behavioral
health services children
children's behavioral health is
heavily weighted towards out of
home care and residential
treatment entries treatment
foster care adults have very
limited access to inpatient type
services like that
and so most of the spending for
adults is on outpatient
services.
On slide
twenty three you can see back in
oh six you know out of home a
residential Services are making
about fifty seven percent of.
The managed care spending for
A rural health and the vast
majority of those dollars we're
going to children under
eighteen.
So let's talk quickly about the
children's behavior health
system on slide twenty four.
It really operates on a
continuum of of services and
from
you know clinical social workers
going in and working directly
with kids and their families in
their home
the most prevalent para
professionals going in and
working with kids and their own
call behavior management
specialist to maybe going and
visiting a psychologist or a
psychiatrist in their office to
it the really expensive out of
home care whether it's in the
queue so it's in the state of
a queue Sanchez psychiatric
center a residential treatment
center where young teenagers and
teenagers can often be place for
up to six months away from their
families to treatment foster
care these are
not to traditional foster care
homes that you're about and
protective services though
there's some overlap these are
more.
Foster care parents that more
training to spot deal
specifically with behavioral
health challenges that those
used may counter.
Skip over to slide twenty nine
twenty six and you can see you
know out of home care consist of
sixty eight percent of the cost
for kids in CYFD custody on
Medicaid for behavioral health.
And we know a lot about which
types of interventions will work
to get better results on the
next slide
the more that we can invest in
early prevention and
intervention services those tend
to get better outcomes for youth
and are much lower cost with a
much higher return on investment
over the long term
acute in out of home care where
we spend a lot of our money
tends to not result in a good
return on investment and tends
to not result in good things
outcomes for youth and kids.
Finally Mr chairman on slide
twenty eight you all of made a
significant appropriation
in last year when this year's
budget not the one you're
preparing right now but this
money is already available
twenty million dollars to expand
behavioral health and child
welfare services and these would
be basically is a response to
the need to work with local
providers on the start up costs
for them to be able to expand
their services for the types of
services that we need to know
the work in those communities
and then they would transition
to bill Medicaid for those
services so some of the
examples of the types of
services could be the
department's been expanding the
services call wraparound very
flexible use of funding to try
to meet the unique needs of
individuals got some pretty good
research behind it family
functional therapy CYFD could
even use some of its own
clinical social workers that
they have on staff to get
trained in how to do this type
of therapy approach and then
build it bill Medicaid for that
as well as private providers.
The last slide just has the
strategic goals of the
behavioral health collaborative
and then the slides behind it
are just an appendix a more
detailed spending and with that
Mr chairman of the happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you very much Charles that
you're asked me to keep the
meeting rolling so until he
returns we'll go for a we can
hear from the Human Services was
is more informational
informational thank you very
much okay thank you Mr Sally
Senator Steinborn.
Mr Chairman before Senator can I
introduced the Medicaid here in
case you please questions we've
got W. secretary army ho miss
walk ins chief economist in the
in health care area we've got a
new acting director Miss Kellogg
and I'm sorry.
I'm Jacki Neilson I'm actually
for the behavioral services
division a sister division thank
you for being here Mr Sally miss
army who did you want to make an
announcement to the whole
committee that might not have
been here earlier.
Sure Mr chair at the committee
This I ever raised secretaries
reasons reguards he's actually
on medical leave you feeling
with an urgent family issue.
Thousands of the acting
secretary for the Human Services
department I'll be happy to make
sure that all of you have.
Before you leave today is that
the the the.
Thank you
will see.
Make sure that it's part of you
that just thank you for the
opportunity thank you madam
acting secretary Senator
Steinborn thank you Mr and
welcome everybody trials thanks
for the excellent briefing
question I've got a handful of
questions number one on page
eleven you know I'm glad that
you did this secret shopping
services good on you the results
were shocking a little bit so
again to summarize only thirteen
percent of the time could people
get an appointment.
The long wait time so what are
we doing or what what's and what
ideas either rectified kind of.
Get.
The first one is to strengthen
the requirements for the managed
care organizations to ensure
that they in fact have an
adequate network in the
departments already been moving
towards that and it's noon
waiver program and contracts
that it's developing and what
it's calling the turquoise Care
contracts I think there's still
room to continue to improve in
that particular area there's the
provider rates we think is a is
a major potential breakthrough
to help insure that
you know we're not unattractive
from you know service standpoint
and the third are strategies to
broadly work not just for
Medicaid but for our health care
system overall to expand the
number of providers that we have
there are available and
accessible and we know that's a
longer term strategy that's
gonna be challenging but there's
a number of different funding
items in both recommendations to
try to get at that.
Question for you can ask me and
all the.
Hello number two.
On substance abuse treatments is
continue to kind of surprised me
a little bit that we don't have
a plan we don't have a statewide
plan seemingly for.
For what you know quantify the
need of substance abuse around
the state where the treatments
needed what it would cost to
deploy it we know we have
massive problems some of the
worst in the country death rates
associated with it but we say
where the needs where you know
well we don't really have arms
Rhonda I don't so I have talked
to to adopt phone about you know
creating a plan that that seems
like a really good good idea I
introduce an appropriation bill
for three hundred thousand to
create to study the demand and
create a treatment plan with
associated dollars we can
finally get our arms around this
and I hope funded as a state
And I I would you know.
Honestly I bring it up now the
perfect time to bring it up I
would hope that we can get it in
the budget rather than rely on
members Hafeez junior funds to
do something so fundamental
we're on network that we own a
week we have to turn in our
junior money but this is
something so crucial and I know
there's support for getting it
done but can we do it through
the budget process without us
having these are doing your
money to create a plan.
Yes yes I mean that you're going
to be building you're going to
get a budget from the house that
you can make adjustments to I
would first offer that
Statutorily this is what the
collaborative supposed supposed
to already be doing on a regular
basis
and so I want to work with Dr
bowing to understand you know if
if that if that hasn't been
occurring why not and what
resources are available within
their existing budgets today
before you need to allocate more
I would say that for substance
abuse treatment and and
behavioral health largely the
the study also found some some
odd things one.
The they've done a really good
job as a department at expanding
the number of treatment
providers for things like
medication assisted treatment
the utilization of those
treatment options as been
skyrocketing the use of
behavioral health
Therapy has been increasing
dramatically particularly
through
telemedicine.
But nobody is so it's like
there's a lot more services that
are being provided but nobody
knew can get in to the system
and so is all of the services
that are being delivered are at
least working for the
individuals that there are are
receiving them because they seem
to be receiving them at a much
higher level than they were pre
pandemic and.
And then our inpatient
facilities some of which
historically are like half half
empty the ones that the state
funds you know and even in
Albuquerque in Roswell is so the
utilization of even impatient
substance abuse treatment as
confounding there are big
increases and outpatient Tensift
treatment options but again
we're still seeing when you go
outside individuals that may or
may not be getting their needs
met on everybody's corner all
over the state and a greater
rate and that's frustrating that
is confounding thank you Mr
chair and that's a good word
confounding because I mean from
what I know as a layman what
I've been told inpatient
residential treatment facilities
is like the way to go it's also
I guess bigger commitment on the
standpoint of the patient but I
wonder why that utilization
isn't there.
Then we know the demand is there
or the need is there I should
say but is there some barrier
that we need to overcome their
because I guess if the
assumption is that we're going
to bill more residential
treatment centers and yet the
ones we have are half empty and
there's a disconnect there
and I guess that's what a study
would also tell us.
You know what's working what.
Where the real gaps not just
what we think are the gaps in it
but in fact in terms of practice
but I guess I love to learn more
about why our inpatient
treatment facilities are empty
or half empty.
And those are the ones that do
you H. operates that I'm talking
okay so a number of private ones
that have been expanding you
know in the past Medicaid
wouldn't pay for inpatient
treatment but the federal
government is loosen those
regulations to require basically
a full continuum of both
inpatient and outpatient care
the department has been
expanding those options over the
past couple of years is it
enough how well it's used I mean
those are the questions that we
have to follow the NMAA.
Maybe they're doing a better job
in meeting that demand out there
and maybe we ought to be gone
more that direction if the state
facilities are getting it done
for whatever reason
So okay well look for to learn
more about that you know we
passed a law.
A year ago for a couple years
ago limiting co pays some
behavioral health.
Appointments and co pays for
some patients I realize it's not
a Medicaid population kind of
thing but I'm curious has that
made any dent that policy
any can you offer any thoughts
on that I was for the public
employee health plans and the
only thing that we've noticed
right now is an increased cost
but we haven't had enough time
for that policy to be
implemented to see if that in
fact resulted in better access
to the use the services of the
theory is that the copays were a
financial barrier causing people
from accessing those services
Medicaid we don't have that as
an issue because nobody has
copays there's other barriers to
accessing services in Medicaid
so that's something that wears
LCS LFC supposed to study in the
next couple of years as part of
that bill if I remember
correctly
and so we'll continue to work
with those agencies on how
they're collecting the data to
be able to answer those
questions Mr chair kind of
connected to what we start
talking about about people not
being able to get help I assume
that it goes without saying we
have a shortage of providers
behavioral health providers
right so what are we doing to
recruit more behavioral health
providers in the state so
there's one making it more
financially attractive we're
gonna have almost half of the
state on Medicaid the U. as a
provider in them you know.
The adequately compensated
that's the first thing the
second is there's a variety of
strategies from expanding social
work programs they've already
funded through this faculty
endowments the same thing for
nursing the same thing for loan
repayment options to help with
any kind of financial barriers
for for folks being able to to
come and work here do not L. Mr
Chairman loan forgiveness is one
of the most effective tools for
provider recruitment as I
understand it and I wonder if
If we should be looking at some
sort of package to help make a
difference and recruit more
providers just something we
could do this year anyway
welcome any feedback on that
finally Charles Mr chairman at
well second last I wanted to ask
you about.
Something you set this up we
talked about previously which is
that.
The state has funded twenty five
million dollars for some amount
of money to create new practices
around the state how is that
coming are we still in the
planning stage Mr chairman okay.
We're in that work for are still
planning the deployment of how
that's and we appreciated the
but HSD and CYFD allowing LFC
staff to be briefed and and be
involved in that and to give
them feedback which they've been
taken into account and I think
they're going back through
another draft as we speak
hopefully and and okay we'll
start rolling out for service
expansion cool thanks for
letting me go on their Mr chair
and finally I know we don't
normally do it but there aren't
many of us here and I see one of
my constituents in a major
provider in the back of the room
that that okay Garcia I just
want to acknowledge and you know
invite Mister chair if at some
point if he has any thoughts on
everything we're talking about
or suggestions for us that would
be kind of real world good
feedback for us but does it have
to happen right now but that
your discussion Mr chair thank
you senator so maybe we get
through the questions and then
we can do maybe it and also want
to prep you maybe two or three
minutes one if you if you would
like to say a few words thank
you Senator share.
Thank you Mr chair first on page
seven you talk about County
support fund what is that come
from is that.
That is a
required local G. R. T. tax
increment that is specifically
earmarked.
That's part of what we told the
county they had to tax correct
except for Bernalillo county
they've got a large mill levy
that goes to UNM hospital.
Senator Steinborn touched on
this why is it takes so long to
get there and I written some
things down certainly number
providers pay but also the
medical liability.
Insurance that seems to be a
growing thing.
while I agree loan repayment
probably a good thing if they're
free they're gonna get sued out
of business at the matter at
all.
so things that I for us to
consider.
You also mentioned copay but no
copays and and this is been on
my mind for a long time but I
forgot about it until came out
your mouth.
I keep your financial literacy
class.
And so San Juan college said Hey
come up here I teach it costs
the students nothing of the
college paid for.
There was another one that
somebody else paid for and cost
students nothing.
When I charge for it it's
different same class.
But the people to pay for get
something out of it the people
that don't pay for get nothing
out of it literally.
And so what I what I did one
time was I so people I think it
was the college wanted to pay
for everything I said charted
five Bucks five Bucks.
They got something out of it
because they had skin in the
game.
Five Bucks didn't make or break
anything.
Who is five dollars states get
in the game and then they took
the right action.
I also see it in in doctors
hospitals specialty hospitals
Medicaid patients will show up
the emergency room instead of a
primary care.
Dr okay so yep I need to you
know I got a
I need to antibiotic I know I've
got an infection everybody knows
I got infection but it cost
three or four hundred dollars to
go to the emergency room for
cost thirty or forty to go to
the doctor but the emergency
room anyway because they don't
have skin in the game they don't
care for cost thirty dollars to
three hundred all.
Is there anything that we can
do.
I mean it's a simple mindset
click doesn't have to be a lot
of money.
It can be I thought the three
Bucks.
But I think that makes a mindset
difference which then saves the
money here.
That we could pay the providers
more and I think you get a
snowball positive out of that.
So that's been looked at for
many years the there's pretty
significant limitations
Based on the state's ability to
to charge copays
And I think it's really centered
on expansion population we're
that conversations occurred in
the past and I think from what
the department found before is
it.
It might cost more to administer
that than what you collect but
that's something we can follow
up with the department to see
what those options would look
like.
Mr chair it's not so much that
we collect the money it's that
we stop paying three hundred
dollars for antibiotic can go
back to the third for the doctor
to say you need an antibiotic
right and that's where I think
the department is spending a lot
of money on I'm trying to help
with care coordination to try to
steer people to have a a regular
that needed to have a regular
access to those primary care
settings and reduce the need for
the unnecessary ER utilization I
also think Miss Mister chair
that telemedicine which is now.
Big deal my wife had a kidney
and pancreas transplant.
Went to the doctor a lot for the
first now she's now she looks at
him on screen thank yes he still
has to get blood drawn and he
looks to have all that but
just it's more convenient I
think he gets paid the same with
a few shows up or not but it's
more convenient for her and him
so we have seen an increase a
significant increase and
telemedicine
I think that the COVID emergency
room and cheaper again.
So.
The next one maybe more of an of
an offline question to let me
give you the scenario.
You'll have met my sister
Kathleen just down syndrome
she's forty three years old
pretty high functioning our
parents died what is Kathleen do
will her case she had another
family to go to okay.
I had a constituent.
Issue right now today are in
order turn.
A fifty year old.
Down syndrome it's been taking
care for seventy five seventy
eight year old parents.
Mom now has Alzheimer in dad
fell down and broke his hip.
Those two are moving into a
senior assisted living care.
What does she do.
That's where.
Eliminating the DD waiver
waiting list to make access to
those independent living
services could be the
significant game changer right
now individuals that would be
have that high risk situation
they've got nobody to care for
them
historically we've expedited
their entrance into the DD
waiver program and the DD waiver
program does provide in home
living assistance for
individuals at whatever level
they need for some people it's
twenty four hours for others
it's maybe coming in and
checking on them a couple of
hours I day and helping him get
to medical appointments or to
work are those types of things
but Medicaid does pay for the
full wraparound services if
those are what's wanted.
Thank thank you Mr thank you
senator and I just do have to
add that the Kathleen is my
favorite member of the Here
family money to.
I just I think she's terrific
but she's just outstanding human
being art Senator Campos thank
you very much Mr chairman and I
really appreciate the.
Presentation today Charles as
you go forward and I are really
appreciate your thoughtfulness
in terms of all these issues
there are few things and goes
this goes back decades in terms
of working on if you will the
the leveraging in the match one
to three maybe one to four
depending on the resources that
we have available but as we
continue to go and see Medicaid
in the resources that we put in
do you believe that we're
leveraging at the optimum level
or do you believe that there's
possibly some additional
leveraging that we can do in
order to go and secure more the
additional resources to to meet
some of the growing needs when
it comes to to the Medicaid
services for New Mexicans so Mr
Chairman I would say that this
administration has been very
aggressive at doing a much
better job at leveraging
Medicaid where we're spending a
hundred percent general fund
when it could be matched for
Medicaid I think that there are
still probably pockets of areas
deep within government that
could still be better leveraged
you got a really big tax
expenditure that's totally on
leveraged through the medical
insurance pool as an example
that one doesn't make much sense
to me from a financial
standpoint what would be is a
hundred percent general fund for
that there's probably pockets of
money within the department of
health that could still be
better leveraged for rural
primary health care clinics and
even some for trauma care trauma
hospitals.
Thank you Mr chairman and so
that Segways into a few of the
topics of of strong concern one
of them being if you will
dealing with the malpractice
insurance is that our doctors
are faced with and as we
continue to consider and I'm
very supportive of it to help to
support if you will the health
costs for teachers has there
been any thought to.
To at least as you go forward of
possibly figuring out how we can
make that malpractice insurance
a little bit more affordable for
our physicians statewide and I'm
thinking more in terms of some
of the ways to attract indicate
of our physicians statewide and
I realize that that's a very
contentious issue but I'm I'm
looking for ways to be more
thoughtful in terms of how we
can not only attracted keep if
you will
the highly skilled individuals
that are practicing here in New
Mexico so Mister chairman
Senator for.
That malpractice pool you've
already taken I think one
positive step forward number
years ago hospitals were allowed
to into that pool that was
normally reserved for individual
practitioners that at the time.
Again a huge infusion of of new
cash into the fund but probably
be created out your liabilities
that we're of of of real concern
so you split that that will be
split up going forward the
second issue and this is part of
the LFC recommendation for the
supplemental funding for that
pool is to enact either through
the budget or the through
legislation some cost
containment controls on the
medical spending side of that
the first one is I believe there
is a District Court ruling that
said the pool needed to pay
whatever charges were billed
from the legislative for the
medical provider nobody in
health care pays bill charges
that's David because of the rack
rate like we see it out at a
hotel nobody pays that they pay
some other negotiated a
reference based right so that
could be one option that could
really help with the the
solvency of the fund to bring
down the kind of price increases
that people are are facing the
other one would be to pay the
medical claims as they're coming
in over the the lifetime award
as opposed to these lump sum
estimates that may or may not
fully cover the medical costs
for those individuals those two
things from my understanding
would to go great ways to kind
of helping with solvency around
that fund again without opening
up the the other liability
payments that I know were
carefully negotiated the last
couple of years thank you very
much and Mr chairman as we start
talking about the cost
containment one of the other
aspects of dealing directly if
you will with rural health care
in our school based health
clinics we definitely have an
inordinate need to continue to
to fund those particular.
Of programs facilities and to
bring in if you will the health
care providers that can
definitely assist and and I see
that as a deficiency and again
with that
When we really talk about
prioritization of health care
and the things that definitely
would make a difference
particularly as we deal with
almost half of our state who is
on Medicaid
and for those some of the
priorities that are being looked
at possibly by the department
and then at the same time how
would better coalescing if you
will
those needs that are out there
so many people are and as is
already been mentioned are
utilizing if you will be E. R.
but in reality as we deal with
it we.
At one point in my at least in
my estimation had strong rural
and school based health clinics
and now what we're doing is
we're starting to if you will
either see them closed seeing if
you will become
more very bare bones if you will
in terms of how we're we're
providing the services and yet
in rural New Mexico
people are are in definite need
of those services is is there
can someone comment in terms of
how what we're doing to to try
to improve if you will those
services that we've lost over
the last several years that Mr
Chairman is an area where
there's already a lot of I'm
leveraging Schoolbased health
centers do bill Medicaid but we
also do put unmatched funds in
the department of health for
school based health centers that
probably could be better
leveraged
in terms of and there's both
recommendations that you'll see
for the health department have
additional money to continue to
expand school based health
centers one of the challenges I
see with using school based
health centers as a strategy for
filling in some of the gaps
particularly in rural areas is
if their hours are tied to when
school is open.
You know we know that the school
calendars in rural areas or some
of the shortest in the country
and so that doesn't do kids any
good if they can't Alexis
you know the services during the
very long summer if there's if
they're shutting down at three
in the afternoon when schools
letting out so paying attention
to like making sure that those
are more year round operate
opportune opportunities for for
folks and not just tied to the
school calendar is really
important and it may very all
over the state I'm not casting
aspersions on on that as a
strategy I just throw that up as
a warning flag before we go
online with expanding those Mr
Chairman now I know what you're
doing is you're getting to the
point I'm trying to make as we
deal with the clinics across the
state would be the rural health
clinics in the school based
clinics what we do is we go
ahead and we operate if you will
and we indicate here's the
maximum time this is when the
going to be open but if we find
those consistent Services then
there's going to be more of the
preventive health care that will
help people to be a healthier
population within within these
communities in these areas and
and the big concern is that even
though we do leverage if you
will Medicaid and they can bill
for those services we continue
to go ahead and see is that
that's not one of the strands
right now as I see it in rural
New Mexico and we're constantly
dealing with
high turnover in terms of these
these particular programs and so
maybe there is a some waited to
really work on the consistency
the continuity and and to really
stabilize that so people know
particularly in the summer that
if they do have some health
issues and they're attending one
of the universities colleges
that they're able to go ahead
and do that at the same time
participate in the community
with the rural health care.
again because it's not just for
the elders and are you but it's
it's for the population within
these communities as we see
hospitals having issues as we
see private providers closing up
retiring and moving from from a
lot of the rural areas and I
don't know if anyone from the
department wishes to at least
comment a little bit in terms of
what what they see what the
future and the vision is going
to be through this session as to
how we address some of these
issues.
Mr chair and with your
permission I can address the
question sure
Mr chair someone up to the
thanks.
I just had.
That there is a bill Senate bill
seven that's being run the
session it creates a fund of for
rural health care providers
specifically to expand or cover
operating losses
most of the time Medicaid and
Medicare and other payers for
rural providers are really
insufficient sources of revenue
and we just cannot cover what is
a really high fixed cost and a
low volume and so the intention
of that bill I just wanted to
make sure that you were aware of
that proposal which would allow
rural providers to apply for
grants to the Human Services
Department that we would then be
able to cover some of those
operating losses to allow them
to expand services
particularly you know there's a
lot of I think that would cover
actually school based health
care as well for providers that
are really struggling either to
like keep their doors open I
can't even really consider
expanding so I just wanted to
make you aware that that bill is
also so so Mister chairman and I
I I really appreciate that and
and yes I'm aware of the bill
and and dealing directly with
these type of of clinics the
other issue that continues to
surface as we deal with it is
this a priority of the HSD and
if that's the case how we gonna
go ahead and make this
I'll just go and say more stable
in terms of those resources
because in rural New Mexico I
continue to go and see often the
doors are closed or they're
moving from one clinic to the
other how do how do we
strengthen
those providers in these
communities so that they stay
verses if you will it's going to
be run out of possibly a larger
area and we're really not fully
managing and and in effective
way of those rural clinics.
Yeah Mr chair Senator we agree
wholeheartedly I think it
creating choirs a lot of
creative looking at somewhere
you might be able to health
providers serve accessor
optimize their Medicare revenue
as well as sort of some of
To serve on mentor hope that
stay afloat so I completely
agree with the strategy I think
you know there are there
potentially are some additional.
Revenue optimization things we
could look at for rural
providers that we've been sort
of considering internally as
well you know particularly for
facilities that are owned by
counties potentially
or government owned facilities
and maybe we could do some
additional matching their so it
is so if I Mr chairman and I
could just go on but on the stop
with this one so with
what we do why and services as
an example with so many of our
younger moms that really need
the services in fact
experience in dealing with one
of the situations today where
this young lady of course had it
set up where she was going to go
ahead and have delivered by a
midwife and then from there that
was working out had to move the
the birth into it to a hospital
but here again within the lack
of the consistency of the
services in rural New Mexico is
there something being done to
help to improve those particular
services through Medicaid within
our rural parts of the state.
Mr chair Senator again I would I
think that's the exact intention
of the Senate bill seven is to
really sort of help bring back
some of those services that
rural
New Mexico a lot has lost the
eleven of our counties don't
have any of the services and and
so that's one of the key things
that we've been looking at as
we've been kind of considering
that bill and making sure that
that gives providers the ability
to create a plan toward
sustainability and so would to
support like a five year plan
for them to sort of address the
issues that are strict initial
to bringing up a complicated
service like that where revenue
alone from commercial or
Medicaid or Medicare isn't going
to cover the full cost of his
sister trying to help providers
cover that for over the course
of multiple you thank you
ancestors chairman I'm looking
forward to working with you on
that because that's one of the
major issues as I continue
continue to go ahead and deal
with this and the smaller
community so again thank you Mr
chairman for your indulgence.
Thank you senator thank you
madam deputy acting secretary
she's with the other question
Senator Woods.
Mr chair a the question I have.
What's in this net loss of
providers year over year.
Mister chairman Senator I don't
know that.
Sh but it is a loss of providers
who over here.
I think it probably ebbs and
flows and changes in the network
and how you to find a provider
hospitals are gonna be very
stable all of America are in the
network
whether you know most physicians
are moving into large practices
are hospital based practices and
you can have you know somebody
move out of state and somebody
coming coming back in the state
so I don't know of we've got a
we can work with the department
to see for some of those things
whether continuing to shrink
shrink I haven't seen that as a
major issue I think the bigger
issue is their willingness to
take Medicaid patients how much
of their panel they want
Medicaid to make a
versus other payer sources well
as.
Most sure there's not demand I
mean there's plenty of demand
for.
So it's no.
You should be able to key up on.
To to manage their what are we
want to providers there.
So.
Okay thank you very much thank
you Mr thank you senator Mr
chairman I could follow up on
the Senator compasses line of
questioning sure
So that proposal would be the
biggest and leveraged part of
money out there and I think it's
it's good to hear the department
exploring other leveraging
strategies but I think that
you're also going to want more
information about needs and gaps
and we're we're going to you
know need to fill in these gaps
in in rural New Mexico and have
a really smart conversation
about which providers if you go
forward with that proposal are
you gonna subsidize losses
because not all of our rural
hospitals are you know County
based their their based their
large for profit entities that
are owned by out of state
companies that have skin they
could put in the game well the
rate increases for infant
maternal health change that
equation some for certain
hospitals hopefully but I think
that you know is having a really
smart targeted conversation
around
infant maternal care and and
hospital based settings sitting
home was like a critical access
for you know supplemental
payment system could be
something that we should we
should be looking at
as as a strategy as well.
Thank you Mr Sally Senator come
well thank you very much Mr
chairman and of course
Sicilian myself engage in these
conversations on a regular basis
so as we're dealing with how the
address rural health care in the
future that's been one of the
major contentions as we deal
with particularly north eastern
New Mexico so are we someone
goes into the are we stabilize
them and then we transport them
and and the other issue that
definitely is really becoming in
this whole process is that it's
becoming cumbersome because our
our medical providers are
leaving these areas because of
the instability if you will of
not only them providing the
services but the cost to
reimbursement and then from
there with the patients were in
reality what they're doing is
they're passing them on to to a
larger medical facility thank
you very much Mr chairman thank
you senator thank you any other
questions comments for Mr
selling.
Thank you very much for your
presentation and just a on a
point of personal privilege for
Senator Steinborn would like to
just invite Dr okay Garcia to
come up to the presentation
table for eight at two minute
description of the work that
he's engaged in at the moment.
Senator did you want to make a
few comments prior.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
for allowing this I think it's
it's really additive and and
okay good to see you here and
okay is really one of the the
health care provider leaders in
southern New Mexico Dona ana
county and I know we can learn a
lot from him and all he has been
through and he has been through
it all of the good the bad the
ugly of the pass several
administrations and is still
here to talk about and provide
for community so thank you thank
you Senator yet two minute.
Description thank you okay Mr
chairman thank you very much
Senator Steinborn for single me
out what I'd like to say is
couple brief things my name
broken Garcia
and I and the CEO for southwest
counseling center in southwest
counseling center we have
offices in Los crucis Anthony
Deming N. and Silvercity main
office is in Silver City the
Last year we provided services
to about two thousand
unduplicated kannst consumers
the the important things that
I'd like to bring out is about
two thousand twelve thirteen we
were closed down having been
felt actually leads to have
committed fraud so close
everybody down in in behavior
health many of you had been here
at that point.
The what happened at that that
time many providers left the
state having felt that they
could be they could be are
alleged to have committed fraud
at any point so there was a.
A big problem in providers
behavior health providers that
happened at that point so with
that in mind FY twenty three
point three.
Individual points is that
In the time that we were off we
came back in.
I've noticed that our rates are
pay rates for providers have
gone up between thirty and forty
percent while the rates for
payment from Medicaid have gone
up approximately ten percent in
the last ten years.
It obviously makes any
organization that is hiring
behavior health providers at a
loss you end up providing
services many times at a loss
and it also makes it very
difficult to recruit providers
the therapist are the most
difficult right now to to
recruit us secondly and I'm I'm
glad to hear that there is a
move to try and increase those
rates to Medicare which is
helpful
but it almost needs to go up a
little higher the second portion
that I'd like to make is that
one of those things that was
closed down that number re
opened is transitional living of
course Medicaid does not in any
way pay for four housing.
But housing is crucial if we're
going to be honest with
ourselves the state has a
substance abuse and mental
health problems you know during
the time they were closed down I
I made comments to newspaper on
television different times is
that
everything isn't going to change
radically right away it's going
to take some time before things
get bad because eighty percent
of providers will close down at
that point.
And it'll close for a while and
sure enough things have gotten
have gotten I.
Really bad as far as how as far
as the the homeless mentally ill
substance abuse has really grown
to the point that it's become a
problem it well it's always been
a problem but it's gotten worse
and worse over the last ten
years so people need to next
look at it and invest money in
trying to get transitional
housing in place.
the last point that I'd like to
make and I appreciate Charles
saying this is that one of the
wraparound services is very
flexible type of service and I I
appreciate that that may be
coming in place in the to
Medicaid we provide services
that are Telemeds.
And counseling to mean a
communications as well as and
psychosocial rehab for the
severely mentally ill and the
wraparound services for all of
those populations even substance
abuse is important that it
allows us to be able to to to
help the the individual become
more productive members of our
society so with that I don't
want to take too long and I
appreciate the time thank you
very much Senator and Mr chair
thank you and and we do have
just one question for Senator
Campos.
Mr chairman it's it's not so
much the question but I really
appreciate the work that
continues to happen I know who
and all that it occurred into
this state I don't believe that
we fully recovered from the loss
of those services here in New
Mexico and I hope that we're
able to really support as you
move forward to bring those
services back to at least that
level of the two thousand twelve
thirteen area thank you.
Senator thank you very much for
your comments and that's it for
the agenda will stand in recess
until Monday morning madam
