High level for this presentation
since.
I could get the committee to
check turn to page three of your
packet.
At age three.
So the first difference is
that the LFC legislative
and then there's also seven
thousand for a financial
coordinator so that's.
A hundred thirty eight thousand
seventy nine point one thousand
LFC above the executive again
for the person pretty small
difference.
And then we skip down to the
million dollars previously the
LFC and exec had you'd pre K.
fund balances which did not
revert to the general fund to
dollars in the LFC
recommendation to replace to
replace that fund balance of the
executive recommendation did not
recommend that fund balance
administrative support F. T.
that the executive did recommend
not including the LFC
recommendation I will note that
this the high level looks a
through lines twenty eight
there's a new program that
didn't exist before it's called
the policy research and quality
initiatives program that used to
be under the program support
exists not increases just re
organizing that revenue.
Finally you'll notice at the
bottom of your general fund
tracking sheet that there is
another small table for the
between LFC and executive except
for one tiny difference which is
seventy point nine thousand the
executive recommendation
included A. F. T. E. that the
LFC did not recommend in the
basin so that didn't make sense
recommend the F. T. to run it
and with that I will turn it
over to MaryBeth for any
address a couple of things that
the Kelly said
you know she just mentioned that
the the difference in need that
trust money that seventy point
nine thousand for the position
in the executive recommendation
spend move to DFA so although
the money support those
initiatives is not at ECECD the
executive still wanted to
that in there the other thing I
wanted to just address quickly
is that the the depletion of the
fund balance the Kelly just
mentioned I'm the executive did
obligating so the executive felt
that
we can keep the programs
operating budget at the
operating level we didn't need
necessary so just a little more
information for you I'm not
difference in the two budgets
Thank you madam.
Thank you Kelly I am.
We do have a copy madam
secretary and and not here have
it online.
Okay wonderful.
and are you able to see.
Yeah we we see our full screen
and you need full screen the
needs you have apparently have
been sure so we're good okay in
your presentation wonderful well
it is our right to be here with
introduce our Assistant
Secretary for native American
early education and care of on
our to let it is with me here
today and our wonderful HSD
are listening in as well and
here you'll see our.
And tastic team that is leading
the early childhood education
experience and expertise in
organizational system
developments which is really a
welcome addition to our team the
Girard has been with us since
a tremendous asset to the
leadership of the department as
we navigated COVID across all of
our program areas also in her
new leadership around a federal
January with our and we will be
hit the ground running doing
more work with our health care
professionals are pediatricians
family practitioners and making
sure that families are getting
later my presentation at and
then we have leadership across
the three programmatic Division
the to programmatic visions are
yet as family support early
she joined us from HSD also in
October and we're excited to
have her Michael quite is our
director of communications who
keeps everybody and across the
out a lot of the stabilization
money that we've had a working
through tech.
Ology solutions and Helen can
talk our human resources
yes these are our five strategic
priorities that the agency has
been focused on since our
inception these were called from
a set of listening sessions what
achieving equity and enhancing
authentic collaboration.
So the FY twenty three budget as
I said at the outset really
builds on the success that we
department in its efforts to
just I'm going appropriation
shins and all the work that you
do in the community to support
early childhood
families and children but also
in New Mexico as a result of the
executive budget request is a
little over five million.
Expands over seven hundred
preschool age children high
Two million will increase access
to families across New Mexico to
evidence based Medicaid funded
home visiting services eight
hundred New Mexico families we
parenting practices and
strengthening families
connections to the community.
We're gonna continue what you
all help support with last year
was find parity for our
programs that have the same
credentials.
I'm really excited to have the
million dollars to support the
input early childhood mental
health consultation at this was
populars our preschoolers and
this money will help get our
plan jumpstarted and we're very
appreciative of this new
investment.
settings to have our teachers
trained in the letters evidence
based.
A reading a curriculum and we
are going to expand this now to
the letters curriculum and
training.
Achieving equity I do wanna in
the chair will allow that to
turn it over to the Assistant
to just invite Assistant
Secretary are delighted to say a
few words about why this why
these outcomes are expected and
why this investment is so
important at this time in our
history.
the dedication in collaboration
with the twenty three tribes
with the nations in our state
and increase access to their
early childhood services where
we would really identify those
consultation around these one
point five million dollars to
meet the needs of their
communities.
Thank you Assistant Secretary
of applying for and managing and
developing early childhood
friends and building more
capacity around that is very
important and so to have a
grants coordinator working with
more funding coming into the
state.
Our third priority rounded
Hanson authentic collaboration
we are really grateful to the
partnership with the department
be able and ECECD that will be
able to join the O. H. and CYFD
we have seen from the eleven
hundred plus care plans of here
that have been developed early
staff about the the trauma
responsive and also what is it
needs how do we work with
families of substance use
disorder how do we support them
the car a partnership and then
of course important to link our
data and understand the impact
that our programs and services
are having for families.
will be I'm supporting ECECD in
expanding New Mexico grown in a
fifty six preschools and
increasing by almost four
thousand the number of children
we have been working to expand
our at risk program in the state
and we've heard directly from
Sanchez and others who want to
do this and find suffer and
nutritious meals in the evening
that they need some
infrastructure and investments
we can't do the great work that
this department has already been
able to do and so we are pre
should ship of the investment in
I do want to highlight I know
that there is a sense that there
is a lot of money in this
department and I want to really
again be grateful to the
executive as well as the
week I hope that you received a
hard copy in early December but
I'm hoping you have that now.
And we had some pretty the
findings that came out in that
plan and one is that.
bang for our Buck and the the
most a rapid and critical period
of development to often the
services have not been funded at
what they actually cost rather
make sure our professionals have
the training and expertise they
need that we're building
capacity of our programs across
the state that we're making sure
access to that and oftentimes
those are not resource at the
level of that we actually need
and finally we know that
partners at all levels and
support the investments in this
development of local coalitions
to help maximize funding across
the system you can get a glance
here at what our for your
finance plan has laid out for
order for us to again get
programs to scale at what they
actually costs to deliver and at
the level of quality we know is
needed for us to get the
outcomes for children and
fund is growing and then of
course we have the land grant
permanent fund I'm coming as
well so we know that we have a
long way to go but we know we do
Thank you madam secretary at you
know what it's kind of a breath
of fresh air Here cabinet
secretary were that were kinda
in the lead in New Mexico so let
me congratulate you on that I
to build an agency I think is is
pretty astonishing.
I want to leave you some
questions because that when I
come back at the end of last
season I want to know how much
you got in our by how much you
hand raised and then Senator
Steinborn.
And then Senator the essence is
here.
Thank you Mr chairman the thank
In the planning stages to what
we're saying today in many
years.
We have strived to to get to
this part but on the first
Everyone from your staff is
there.
We're on a brown is he I'm sorry
Mr chair Senator Gonzales Ron is
Senator yes that sorry yes we're
all located here.
All right very well all you had
mentioned earlier this summer.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales I'd
like to turn this over to the
Assistant Secretary she's been
leading that work
to respond yes Mr chair Senator
you we would like to not
recreate the wheel and look at
what PED is doing and we're
going to be holding some summer
convening where we bring all
stakeholders to the table to
thank you and the and that's
been my fault also with the
swipe reinvent the wheel of you
might want to add to it.
You know but I think that gives
more leverage in the
certification or staff.
other question that I was gonna
ask is still based on the on the
initiatives that you mentioned
and how it's going.
Is.
believe so as we continue to
support the language of our
children across the state and I
think it's you know the ages of
Hey
madam chair I mean Mr chairman
and the secretary.
So and Joanne is some.
To have our information early
childhood education this part of
the remedies with the
department.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales yes we
have been will participation.
percent of the permanent fund it
has to go to the voters and then
if this would be on the next
well the coming fall.
Well through when you would have
a distribution.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales my
distribution that's when that
would happen.
I don't see any reason why would
have well I have been probably
with
You know at least like maybe ten
meetings with constituents
within the last few months.
So I think it's been a very
strong wind went for New Mexico
and the last part that I would
ask is some so do our
Mr chair Senator Gonzales we are
head of all of them
Colorado just passed last year a
bill to create an early
prenatal I period of life and a
focus on health and early
childhood education and care so
we are ahead of all of our
neighboring states.
So for the team how are you
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
senator so it's just kind of the
your your revenue deficit.
Or your funding deficit in in a
few years.
Okay obviously and that'll be
Mr chair Senator Steinborn we
have grown the home visiting I'm
not as quickly as we would like
and that's why we established a
opportunity for the Medicaid
funded home visiting so why do I
and Mecca two very large
nonprofits across the state are
implementation work plan right
now focused on how to expedite
the process to make more of our
programs available to use the
Medicaid funded home visiting so
Thank you and do we do you all
market.
Market the services to all
eligible families in the state.
The home Mr chair Senator
also an electronic there's a
bright by text and we do
different ways to promote home
visiting this is the work that
with our new federal grants
these two FTEs coming on board
they're gonna be doing more
and then question is far as.
Of use in the home worth order
for things that are concerning.
That is still I guess the.
These family and what we do
about that.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn you
know it's really a partnership
the governor has charged us as
the new department to work very
led by Assistant Secretary
Archuleta I'm mapping out how
our systems interface and how we
can make sure that ECECD is part
of the response when families
nurses so we want to be at the
table equal partners there with
CYFD.
Right well as you should be
right because you're the eyes
and ears who end up in that
kind of I know that you absorb
some of those responsibilities
but.
All right well that's I know
important all of us is is just
in reading the lives of these
the services and so.
Good luck and I hope we have
just tons of success helping out
all these New Mexicans who need
it and helping out those
leadership in every want to help
make this happen you're doing a
great job madam secretary the
whole department I love from day
one high at the school little
funky cartoons and.
chairman and thank you to madam
secretary I see the
international rocks are really
education and all of her team
Assistant Secretary W. secretary
The New Mexico is helping Alaska
Montana and a few other places
build their departments and this
is very exciting that would help
in that area but huge game
changer for New Mexico I'm
dollars and cents pieces of this
so in the budgeting that we have
in place now Mr chairman and
madam secretary or whoever wants
to answer this portion we do
have the for your financial plan
that we that we get that done
there so in that we had three
components that I believe are
being worked on that need to be
funded so that's going to make
sure we bring this up in this
I think madam secretary knows
that I continue to beat the drum
on every single word in that
legislation to make sure that we
get it all done because that's
what we promised all the
to make sure we hire the right
people and we got to pay them
the right way how's all that
scoring with the budget that
you've just laid out for us and
and the items that you just
talked about madam secretary.
make good on which is that
career pathway.
Only put together with the EDD
plans.
I think we're in a great place
to do that now you just released
estimation model for childcare
we set the the lowest entry
level person in a childcare at
twelve ten this was of course
all done pre pandemic and
where you'll see the childcare
increase now we do have to work
on the policy side make sure
that those dollars go to staff
compensation and make sure that
it gets increased and that's the
work that will be doing this
front lines serving our babies
toddlers preschoolers.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm really
happy to hear that because the
bulk of of the cost on the three
items I just spoke of and I
get this department created the
salary is going to be the big
one and so I'm glad that you're
thinking that way because
salaries are going to continue
to move in in in a direction
that is going to be very very
important to getting the right
fifteen meetings on this very
subject and I said no absolutely
not because then it's in
legislation and we have to come
back and try to you know get
that changed or whatever so you
have all the flexibility in the
world I believe to propose to
comes in starts distributing do
you have specific things that
you sort of talk about a little
while ago but the a specific
things with that money is going
to go what what's the plan.
because that's really up to the
legislature to appropriate will
early every year bring our
recommendations but you can see
in there how the uses and
have put in our budget request
because we know that's your
responsibility and your role to
do that so we're just glad to
see that the trust fund is
growing at the level it is
the actual level that they cost
and insure their quality.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary I think that's an
excellent answer thank you and
the horizon in terms of major
cost that you haven't that you
didn't think of our that we
don't think of a were passing
the legislation and and building
the department what what else do
out there desert's when we have
some of these other challenges
we need them just met with a
group of our early intervention
providers last weekend
everybody you know across
private and public sector are
struggling with some of the
support our programs and
providers so that they can
deliver those quality services
to families and children.
Thank you Mr the last thing I'll
so what's the percentage do you
have a mix in terms of
percentage private delivery
verses.
really really great job of
supporting a mixed delivery
system that last two years and
last year even better with a
joint application bringing our
will programs we're very excited
about that a new partnership
with the participate Pueblo
where we've been able to fund
them to run their own preschool
program with their language and
listening session with
superintendents to hear directly
from them how better the
department can support their
efforts around providing quality
pre K. but at I can follow up
January.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary's opener all
that so yeah I'd love to know
what that is because I think
it's really important that that
mixed delivery system remain
well oiled and well tuned
basically competing right I mean
they want to drive the highest
quality
And I guess about the only other
thing I would mention is our one
would want to know about you
don't have to talk about this
submit a plan to you on how they
were going to deliver and how
much it was going to cost
etcetera to continue that
delivery portion of it is do you
to actually bring the PED staff
of the supporting a pre K. into
ECECD right now there detail
here and it's been a great
partnership really learning
working really hard in this
department thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Let me go to senator would since
Our guest the questions I've
got.
I notice you spending a lot of
money on contractual services.
And I was wondering if you could
And also
I notice you don't have a cost
per child.
Until we get over here and three
thirty four dollars are those
children.
Three and four year olds are
they in the public education
It not all TV the PD programs.
If you could elaborate on that
madam secretary Mr chairman.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Senator Woods so yes we can get
quality and the infrastructure
more the quality supports for
our programs and services to New
Mexico pre K. as Senator Padilla
was saying is a mixed delivery
system it's all publicly funded
family child care as a place
where families can choose to
have pre K. services and so
that's how New Mexico pre K.
works it's a mixed delivery
program and you don't have a
whole lot to.
To say on how they administer
as to have qualified teachers in
those.
Head start in New Mexico
Like I say you have you can do
Have the teachers in those
qualified teachers college
education teachers.
Mr chair Senator Woods thank you
to have that's years and early
childhood and that's why the
support from the legislature
last year and and hopefully in
twenty three that have that
parity will help retain those
help get their staff up to the
bachelor's degree in the eighty
degrees so we have a role in
supporting head start as the
lead agency for early childhood
scholarships and to support
mentoring and other supports
that nontraditional students
need when they're working full
time and trying to achieve
Mr chair Senator Woods in a four
year old classroom it's a group
size of twenty twenty students
Thank you Mr chair that's.
All of that thank you very much.
Thank you senator Rodriguez.
much I also initial a hand
written note here to recognised
sent everybody I was right there
when he was struggling to get
this bill passed average this I
about something you work at it
and don't give up when something
doesn't pass it's not a failure
if the staff back something this
important thank you Senator
wondered do they have are they
from.
so I think we we're working on
one of the goals in our
comprehensive systems grant is
to have a more coordinated
intake and referral system but
community this is especially
important in a rule in our
frontier communities where they
sometimes are the place that
people go when they need
assistance so I would say they
age to but over all our parents
as teachers program and some of
our other programs models across
the state to serve children at
the age I.
to visit what homes where at
zoom.
Mr chair Senator Rodriguez these
are such great questions and we
rely on our home visiting
those programs when they know
about them and self refer but
people can also tell them about
these wonderful programs that
are available in their unity so
families are referred from
different sources.
Thank you thank you very much
obviously you're doing a great
job and all of these areas that
you might I just have one quick
K. that was the fund balance
that would revert back to the
general fund for example that
that I have is what happens to
the other three men and that the
federal government not recommend
that being that is the reverted
or tell me a little bit about it
is fund balance budgeted for in
the agency for prekindergarten
fund balances and they use that
to fund some pre kindergarten
slots across the state that
replace that deeply depleted
fund balance and increased
general fund recurring revenue
source by that three point six
almost three point seven million
prekindergarten services across
the state
so that's the LFC not the
executive recommendation yes
okay thank you I do recall now
Thank you Senator Padilla for
second time real quick.
Thank you Mr chairman you think
we may have already talked about
this just wanna make sure madam
secretary so on the home
visiting portion.
information for us is is they're
still going to be a waiting list
and we still have a waiting list
for home visiting.
Mr chair Santo I will have to
and parents as teachers through
Mecca other programs may have
witness but I can get back to
you specifically on page
programs have wait lists of any.
Right down to a number but I'm
I'm interested in what that is
if you wouldn't mind letting me
know I appreciate it thank you
Mr chairman.
Yes Mr chair I have what have
the status right now of all the
different recovery funds and
up detail to you well once given
to us now and then if you have
further questions we can we can
go over it.
twenty nine point four million
those funds were used to
stabilize the childcare industry
provides many requests not many
ma'am monitors other supports we
also stirred up a call center
with those funds to make sure
that we can be responsive to
families and childcare providers
and others seeking the
other ways but I can get you
that full detailed breakdown of
on can provide that with you are
you occur so was the next
funding that we received that
million of that and we still
have a budget balance of forty
seven million and ten million of
that building on budgeted.
early childhood nationals and we
have a couple other activities
were working on what one at the
local early childhood system
requests that I mentioned we
also be working on a R. F. P. to
get and and an entity in the
state to help us build a
childcare business practices and
help our chapter businesses I'm
ten percent of the overall grant
a little over nineteen million
nineteen seven we have spent
eight hundred and eighteen
thousand little over at that
application that allowed to work
with the vendor to create the
application for child care
programs to apply for their
stabilization grants for
professionals to apply for the
support some staff that we
brought in to help administer
and make sure that we use these
dollars wisely and effectively.
date seventy eight million we
have ninety nine at this is a
little tricky because we have
obligating a hundred and fifty
budget balance but we have we're
issuing them in sixty four
months so of the three more
and I'm budgeted sixty two
million this these funds go into
September thirty of twenty four
and we're using these funds for
percent.
Our by home visiting is allowing
us to expand services to areas
in the state that were
identified as greatest need and
that was three hundred and sixty
And then we have a new
opportunity.
Our home visiting seven hundred
and thirty six thousand which is
on budgeted at this point we
little over one million at one
point two million and we have
encumbered only a thousand two
hundred and fifty nine of that
to date that again is going to
here to funding which expires in
June thirty
twenty three at and that's two
million little over two million
we using that to support social
emotional development and mental
hundred thirty eight thousand
for for for and we have a budget
balance of a little over a
million.
how you gonna go back to regular
rate increases it has won
Senator Steinborn mention about
running the deficit kind of our
careers so how you gonna go back
to normal right providing right
you gonna come back to normalcy
of right providing.
Without the pandemic month money
and say here's our budget number
and in his pre pandemic budget
numbers we're gonna have to go
one time you're not recurring
costs we did not use the federal
dollars to increase our
childcare reimbursement rate
that's we're using CCD F.
recurring funds for that
supporting universal early
childhood care and education so
but that runs through September
of twenty four we're seeing that
legislature decides that this is
revenue sources I'm again the
legislature will decide whether
to appropriated there but most
of our expenses are one time non
where the providers adjusted an
income level in the cost level
and then now it's it's going to
have to change I am just
struggling through here I mean.
At the maximum we've had most
And it's about
sixteen hundred per child.
Twelve hundred per child you're
raising a rate increase to
fifteen hundred and I'm using
six percent rate increase to to
the higher sixty two to the high
and maybe one to the low
and then when we look at your
valuation of.
your totaling thirty eight
thousand kids when there's a
declining population it's hard
for us to figure out how you're
justifying that especially when
mean there's not one because it
would somebody in the department
would be able to say madam
secretary there's a waitlist.
So we're trying to get our math
around here on your presentation
Help me out the figure that out
I mean most we ever serve was
around twenty under this right
here you're saying you're going
to thirty thousand in there's no
question and I think the what we
in our for your finance plan we
left eligibility at where it is
so at the expanded eligibility
Mexico families and those who
have all damn errant's in the
workforce that's how these
numbers were derived so if we
want to make sure that we're
childcare centers and supporting
that for public funding we know
childcare is out of reach for
most families the costs are
enormous actually provide the
quality care that is needed so
be focused on building the
capacity getting the families in
the door making sure those
services are supported at the
level that they actually cost to
order to meet the needs of New
Mexico families.
But I think you hit the nail on
the head you said a lot of
families are turning their and
so we can only serve the people
can get so chart to help us
understand that but I can Mr
chair if I could just say one
thing I did that was that that
twenty one thousand has been
when we're at two hundred
even early on and it was one
fifty for awhile one fifty
percent of federal poverty level
to get access to doctors systems
so we know that you know right
now we have well over thirty
Well one when we we be better to
serve the ones that aren't
served with the vouchers some
type to offset their costs
instead of trying to to build
it in person the.
Babysit multiple families in
five or six kids and so when we
better be a service saying
here's a voucher and and and if
This pick somewhere between
Gallup in in Farmington to
Hachey.
In your thirty miles into town
to work where you gonna send
that it I mean that's that's the
with federal money and then come
back to those providers with the
realistic approaches says now
here's what actually just
because comment in in the
situation happened we can't
And and I just want to caution
you on that Mr chairman if I
could just that I really brand I
love hearing your story about
your children as probably a
family child care home which we
providers to have streamlined
business practices reach
families wherever they are and I
agree with you we want to be
using our dollars to support New
are building our capacity and
serving family so that's good
news but we know that more
families need to know about our
services so that we can reach
working still struggle and so
sometimes it helps with child
welfare and regional welfare
do that I wanted to ask you I
have a concern about.
In in this cause may cause the
district I represent thank.
know pueblos operate different
and then tribes in so there is a
disconnect in how they work and
they're very hard to get in you
if you don't know the right
forthcoming just because one
person can handle a mall I
remember the number of blows.
Deputy Assistant Secretary stays
very busy and she does have the
support of the team but you're
right we have to build this
capacity within the department
and I think we're you know your
support and the support of the
and make sure that we're doing
this is using the dollars wisely
to support New Mexicans well
with any agency or any business
you have a real high start up
level one when we know you've
dropped the number of kids turn
from COVID right.
Yeah I think sixteen thousand
are are currently being served
it is anybody's guess but you
can make a better guest and I
can.
Mr chair we are almost at the
eighteen thousand again so we're
we're happy about that we're
going in the right direction.
fourteen in that stress on
families right now is is
enormous so they're making
choices but we know we're gonna
come for this and we're glad
that we're going to have a
stable child care industry and
money in the two hundred
thousand how well do you guys
interact with CYFD because I
mean for me it's usually one
family with two kids are one
are you.
Yes Mr chairman thank you for
that question and I'm the
Assistant Secretary has been
leading somewhere all are
fighting families work I think
with one another to look at the
child welfare system and
understand where gaps maybe when
it comes to children under the
age of four and where they are
solidifying some and we use the
CYFD on the way home visiting
should be included into the
child welfare system so we're
learning a lot and they're
see in the plans of care how
many times home visiting and
early intervention specially
early intervention and even
childcare are put into these
The and M. and me of for
instance in mind it be like a
principal of the school
Representative body from state
that information shared hello
CYFD can share that are not the
a little bit different statutory
then you we my thought is we may
I'll let you in thought but how
does that referral system go
because that's my money that's
way should work but you made in
the the secretary.
work on those programs are
mandated reporters so we do a
big focus on child abuse and
neglect prevention with
everybody in child care and home
Secretary shared I'm over the
last three to four months we've
been mapping out how those
systems operate and how we can
make sure that you know we also
call CYFD when children in
connection between protective
services and also there into
mental health behavioral health
division and ECECD is where we
are working on strengthening
that family I'm choosing our
services but I think it's been
very promising of really
grateful to secretary Vigil for
the leadership that she's
make that recommendation LFC and
Rick make that recommendation so
but the agencies are making the
recommendation.
Right.
Mr chair the executive get make
a we've been meeting weekly for
quite a few months and deepening
our partnership in our strategy
so I think the decision America
speak to this was a to
Mexico grown baby food but maybe
haven't shopped enough it would
expel Hurst.
All right that's it thank you
madam secretary vitiated you
five years and so I will have
enough money we don't have
enough money I mean the the
permanent fund that may or may
not get tapped and you having
almost three billion dollars in
then we have big issue so I
just.
Want to caution people I mean
what they did with that.
Tryout Trust Fund is completely
richest lady in New Mexico as.
The dollar amounts that you have
a.
I just.
Amazing and so you do good work
pages and sell as you struggle
on just let us know if we can
help in anyway thank you for
thank you so much thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
to try to me.
and then Tuesday we won't have
anything.
Wednesday we may or may not have
the fee bill but we'll start
back with agencies we're gonna
updated calendar for the
H. HST and.
Incentive I it every time we
hear this and everybody's on
topic the pay bands what's
holding New Mexico back from
employment so.
requesting more FTEs when the
vacancies can be filled any
other questions.
Germany.
Thank you very much you plan to
here on Monday we need to check
with the clerk's because some
trainings gonna happen Monday or
Tuesday again if if we do go
into the committee room those
your plans are so we can get the
correct spacing and the and make
sure we're complying and
everybody safe we do have one
member and and everybody should
one the in person in your
officer wanted to both the it's
fine with me but let us know so
we can plan for that that
distance in.
Senator Woods.
Okay.
A link you did everybody get
their reimbursement sheets
Senator Padilla did you get
yours we may need to get years
Council services for the for the
days
Will I need to check on yours
and see how we handle it so.
Any other questions.
on Monday the we have a LFC only
in the morning.
And we're meeting at one thirty
