Marquita may permit now they're
long.
You may have to turn down a
little bit market if you can
hear snout go ahead and begin
your presentation.
And we have a presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
joint today with Adam Johnson I
believe he's going to share the
screen and I'm just making sure
that some of my other colleagues
have been let in my because of
L. who shows it stays green is
and see is our chief of
financial strategist will be
joining us today to answer any
questions you might have about
the PPRF or any other of its
underpinnings he really is the
master of that program I believe
that
we have also trying to get in if
not in directly right every
doctor who's our manager
director credits John Brooks is
a managing director of Lente.
Maria they are those who is our
managing director of recovery
programs hospital yes who is our
CFO and then the tall B. R.
communications and outreach
manager so they may be available
to answer questions for you
should need to.
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity to present today
will give a high level overview
as requested of our public
project revolving fund our
recovery program management and
those are the three programs
that were authorized in the last
two years of forced to assist
small businesses in the stimulus
and recovery efforts and then
lastly will just touch on some
existing legislation that we see
has been introduced that affects
the NMFA of for those of you
that are new or for members of
the audience over money the
Committee that the NMFA is a
governmental instrumentality
that was created in nineteen
ninety two.
we're governed by an eleven
member board of directors and
overseen by the New Mexico
financed Authority oversight
committee currently we're
staffed with fifty four
professionals finance
professionals with a variety of
backgrounds some from banks some
from nonprofits and many from
local and state governments we
are currently budgeted for fifty
nine positions and like many are
trying to ensure that we can
keep our agency fully staffed.
A lot of folks look at the
finance authority and understand
this through one particular less
if you're small business you
really only know us as a result
probably of the recovery efforts
that we went through you just go
back one more Adam I want to
touch on one thing but the
finest Authority is much greater
we have currently operates
eleven programs actively but we
are authorized to operate twenty
programs through that were
created through ten different
statutes.
We are permitted the statutes
with eight different departments
and we currently are ask you Mr
three separate point who among
them have eleven different
communities so we're a fairly
broad based agency
our two largest areas or two
largest statutes that govern our
activities or the New Mexico
financed Authority oversight
sorry New Mexico finance
authority to act
were purposes stated to
coordinate the planning and
financing of local public
projects to improve coordination
and
Particularly as it relates to
financing the public project the
second which is not one that's
to please associated with the
finance authority is the
statewide economic development
finance that and there the
purpose was stated to assist
eligible entities in financing
projects and ultimately to
promote the achievement of
economic development goals.
Our mission is to advance New
Mexico by financing impactful
will plan projects we do so
primarily through the public
project revolving fund which is
our longstanding flagship
program.
but we do other things that are
not
seen often which is that the
service bridge to investors we
do that through the PPRF we also
do that for a new markets tax
credit bringing outside dollars
into the state we lower the risk
financial risk and compliance
risks for borrowers and
investors so we service for our
PPRF farmers we stand between
the local governments and any
other regulatory agency on the
use of all proceeds and other
things so we act as a compliance
department relative to the bonds
that are issued to support these
public projects which is good
for both investors and frankly
our borrowers.
We help provide policymakers
with a framework for
prioritizing investments such as
the water transport of the
Clooneys infrastructure four
in helping them solve defer
structure problems or in
allocating scarce resources.
And lastly we are excellent
vehicle for creating a low
interest financing programs for
both community and economic
development I think you saw that
over the last two years
implementation of the recovery
programs are actually
an experience of program
implementation and our use of
technology really did serve us
well in standing up those three
programs in very short order
these are high volume programs
nationwide
recovery stimulus programs are
subject to a lot of additional
risk because they're so in order
for them to be effective they
have to be readily available to
All businesses so that provide
greater opportunity for
potential fraud and other things
we needed to use a lot of
technology in order to make it
available but we also need to
use technology to ensure that
the funds were overseen
appropriately and effectively
I will pass over the phone PPR
sorry
What we're talking about a lot
of things that I want to make
sure that we cover all the
things that were requests the
first is the conversation about
the public project revolving
fund we make about two hundred
million dollars of loans
annually these are very low cost
loans our borrowers are state
and local governments as well as
tribal governments and these are
for port infrastructure and
capital improvement projects
appointment fire trucks very
large lender to fire trucks
across the state our farmers are
not assessed any fees so there
notice administrative fees there
no application fees no closing
costs origination fees a lot of
other lenders would charge local
governments in addition to which
our borrowers to the PPRF get
the same interest rates we get
so we're triple a rated entity
largely due to the government of
gross receipts tax and
diversity of our program.
And our borrowers none of whom
are triple a on their own are in
a position to get that kind of
interest rate but we pass along
to them regardless of the size
of the loan size of the
community to the kind of project
that they're undertaking.
currently in my staff to receive
seventy five percent of the
government of gross receipts tax
that's about thirty three
million dollars a year those
dollars witcher from dominantly
derived from the sale of local
governments sailing delivery of
water to their customers
that government receipts tax is
dedicated directly to
bondholders comes in monthly as
it's collected by taxation and
revenue sent over to our trustee
who holds the government of
gross receipts tax in any lower
payments that are received
during the year until bonds are
paid so the time bonds are paid
early June mid June that's the
point at which those dollars are
access to the otherwise coming
monthly and sit with a trustee
who insures that the money is
available when the bonds are to.
I G. G. R. T. services the
primary credit enhancement we
don't use it to repay loans but
it is available to bondholders
should there be some
interruption of payment from one
of our borrowers unit currently
at thirty three million dollars
is probably between fifteen and
twenty percent of the death
Services to annually on the on
the bonds.
So that is an important factor
in the and how we maintain our
triple a how we actually got for
Tripoli and how we maintain our
triple a it also provides us
with liquidity after the bonds
are paid so the money comes into
us we make up on payments is
June in early June mid June
wants those bond holders are
paid the trustee releases the
dollars we sent out somewhere in
the range of eleven to twelve
million dollars to funds that
were authorized by the
legislature to appropriate
through a bill every year money
to come from that she's here to
go out to other uses so we send
that money out and then the rest
of it is then maybe used to show
all of our.
Reserves are at levels are
supposed to be at an angle to
the Lee that money is used to
start our loans for the next
year so we make loans from the
money that's available after
bonds are paid and
appropriations are made we close
those loans weekly.
as we get low in funds we then
are able to go out to the bond
market.
And reimburse our state of the
PPRF for loans it has made an
already funded.
So that three to four times a
year we issue reimbursement
bonds we have two different
eight in our program so that we
have greater capacity across the
board each of those please has
its own reserve and that's
really how we have managed this
program again I have my because
of all the phones that you have
at the end of this presentation
any specific questions about up
on program but that is the way
in which the program's been set
up since the beginning we've had
basically that structure in
place and it's worked very well
as you can see a triple a
rated programs it's hard to
chief of in between those bond
issuances from time to time will
have loans that we need to funds
that are in excess of our fund
balance at the time so we do
have a line of credit that you
maintain with Wells Fargo bank
and that allows us to draw on a
short term basis between
bond issuances so we have a bond
issuance that were planning on
doing let's say a month and a
half two months from now but we
need cash now we can drive down
the funds and then obviously
repaid a line of credit
once the funds are closed are
key to your marketing getting up
to speed up your presentation
because we have a lot agencies
today and and we have the
presentations are just the start
Roland patient happy to make
happy to support this Mr
chairman so you'll see that on
page five the amount of funds
with issues slide here that's
about one point almost one point
three billion dollars a sponsor
that are currently outstanding
that's thirty eight Bonser
programs and so you've seen over
time fishing a ton of bonds or
bonds number about ten uses
maturity and with that I'll turn
it over to Adam to run through
the recovery programs
Out of a presentation
thank you Mr chairman Senators
slide six I'll just quickly go
through some highlights of the
various recovery programs to
finance authority under test in
the last couple years during the
pandemic some highlights from
the the one final purpose you
may recall the first program
that was implemented was the
small business recovery loan
fund I was capitalized as up to
four hundred million dollars and
is targeted for small businesses
that we're experiencing
significant decline in revenue.
we were able to get eight
hundred eighty applications
approved during the under the
version of the first bill for a
total of forty point two million
dollars we did have a
significant the high rate of
declines program and that was
primarily based upon the
specifics and required in the
bill with respect to both the
month of our arms are the year
over year decline in gross
receipts taxes reported by the
businesses and also just a
specific requirement that the
businesses actually reported for
gross receipts tax to the state
of New Mexico we learned doing
that program that the estimates
of forty to fifty percent of New
Mexicos economy doesn't actually
report on that system and so
there for those folks were
simply.
You do not have access to the
program a fast forward to the
program that was in
a version that was improved upon
the regular session twenty
twenty one additional funds are
provided and significant
eligibility was opened up we
essentially opened up several
different ways that folks who
qualify for the program and you
can see demonstrated in the
results there not only a nice
increasing the amount of funds
that we've been able to deploy
to New Mexico businesses but
probably more significantly nice
to climb or reduction in the in
the declines in a lot more folks
and able to utilize the program
that we still have some
opportunities to to provide more
outreach now that there's your
recovery programs in this a more
robust economy we can
differentiate ourselves mostly
research more folks for that
bill
and frontier sunset later in
this year.
To grant programs that we've
been tasked to the play the last
couple years the first is the
country we've grant funding
sources that was the federal
cares Act funds that was a very
fast a rapid deployment of a
hundred million dollars.
The Mexico small businesses and
we actually did that over the
holiday season of twenty twenty
we received over fourteen
thousand applications for the
funding we were oversubscribed
by over fifty million dollars
fortunately we were able to get
the most of those we got all the
awards done by the end of
December in that short time
frame and all of the capital
deployed before the end of
February and I think
that was a great effort by the
the legislature in the finance
authority to assist instances
during some of those Davis times
of the pandemic
the other program most recently
that we've been working on is
the local economic development
also known as the recovery act
grant program those capitalize
two hundred million of the
program application period just
finished at the end of December
we've been able to successfully
approved just under two thousand
grant applications this program
also has unfortunately had a bit
of a hi declining mostly due to
its complexity and and also in
addition to some of the
eligibility requirements under
the law
so but with that said we we're
we're nearing the
estimated ninety million dollars
in awards that we will find to
focus on performance basis of
the coming quarters if I could
just back up a little bit on
slide seven which I won't cover
significantly in the interest of
time but here's some of the
characteristics and more in
depth about the characteristics
of any adjustments in those
programs
and then on slide eight we've
got some a little bit of a drill
downs to the delivery of
carriers funds Mr chairman if
you recall the that model is
very specifically targeting the
food and accommodation and
recreation sectors of the
of.
The New Mexico economies so
we're able to address that that
requirement of the law and also
provide significant funding to
other applicants so there's a
little bit of a drill down that
is to have those funds were
deployed for that very reason
program on slide nine we have
just a little bit of lessons
learned about the programs
And under the recovery loan we
we definitely learned that
having more flexibility for the
applications for the applicant's
proved to be successful from a
one point over to the to the
point of origin we've had many
great stories is very grateful
businesses across all these
programs but as improvements as
we were able to get and provide
feedback from those changes
we're definitely appreciate a
and then the first graph relief
was somewhat targeted towards
tourism and one of the things we
learned as many of those
businesses are former employees
of state could qualify under the
program or there simply weren't
as many of those businesses
specifically in the rural areas
areas that the communalise the
funds but fortunately in the
rules we have the flexibility to
distribute and deployed nearly
all of the the funding and then
lastly with the recovery grants
some of the lessons learned with
respect to exclusions non
employer based businesses don't
qualify for the program
businesses that own their own
buildings and employees
employers that actually utilized
to the programs to keep their
employees or fundamentally not
eligible for the program because
it is based upon the ability to
add back jobs are FTEs because
of its association to the local
economic development act so I
apologize for moving quickly but
I wanted to make sure I was
respectful of your time and with
that I'll hand it back to the
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman so you can
note that we served on about
eleven thousand maybe about a
little over eleven thousand
words to date totaling three
hundred and twenty plus million
dollars to those small
businesses so that's I think in
a.
Martin thank you state
so lastly there are a couple of
pieces of legislation before you
this year the impact of the New
Mexico finex Authority very
directly there is are committee
endorsed legislation these are
three pieces that you see
annually we have our public
project revolving fund
authorization bill that's house
bill forty two our water project
fund authorization bills this is
these are the projects to be
funded by the water transport I
statute you have to authorized
that use that Senate bill
seventeen and we have an
appropriations bill which I
mentioned earlier thirty five
percent of the government
receipts tax received by MFA is
then appropriated by the
legislature for other uses this
year it exceeds the thirty five
percent because of the hi need
to Max fairly large federal
dollars so that Senate bill
thirty seven in addition there
were two pieces of legislation
in our by the LFC this past
Monday one is the hydrogen hub
Development Act which places in
the NMFA of fund and provides
for the NMFA to oversee four in
the deployment of that capital
I don't know that it's been
introduced yet there's also a
venture capital program act
which places a venture.
Fund program in NMFA
fortunately we have two people
in particular have a lot of
experience in venture capital so
we understand what that would
entail and then there are other
pre filed piece of legislation
as of yesterday that affect us
directly others the opportunity
enterprise Act house bill seven
which would
have NMFA funding projects
the Economic Development
buildings
for use in the tracking economic
development this also places the
board within NMFA
it has the charter school
facilities improvement this to
build it and facing before it
provides additional directions
to MFA to made loans to charter
schools public private
partnerships act is been
introduced again this is house
bill fifty five this year it
deals primarily with
transportation and broadband it
also puts another board under
the NMFA to and act sentiment
state funds from which to make
grants and loans but basically
that work would be oversee
partnerships P. three
partnership agreements
and then there's an
appropriation to different
proposals to put an
appropriation of the water trust
fund and any distribution of
that helps fund projects
annually the Mr chairman after
this presentation was finalized
there were two additional pieces
that were reverted introduced
one of the rural health care
project loans that's house bill
ninety seven that place is in
NMFA a funds to make loans to
rural health care providers and
then the county courthouse Fund
sensibility one sixteen the
place is an innovative grant
funds to help fund county
courthouse so Mister chairman
that is of the snapshot of the
NMFA and we're certainly happy
to answer any questions thank
you members members we move
forward we're going to.
Trying to speak through the cell
focus your questions and and if
we run out of time or something
let's uh will bring them back
question from committee members.
At one thirty.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Marquita just real quickly on
slide the weather is in the the
recovery program sorry side
seven recovery programs
on that on item Mr chairman I do
see that sorry no.
I'm sorry slide six recovery
programs some of these
unexpended are any of these
going to be I don't remember
exactly what the language were
on all of them but are any of
these that aren't fully utilized
yet will they be of the will
they be expiring anytime soon
are we going to have to revert
any monies to the Feds I mean
what what's the status of each
one of these sure.
I agree that sure I understand
so of the small business
recovery loan fund as we call it
your own one point on one point
and two point no identifies
severance tax permanent fund to
be made available for these
loans so we draw those dollars
down as we need them dollars are
not used are then can continue
to be overseen and invested by
the state investment council so
no we're version is necessary
but we do have a time limit by
which we can tell them that were
done legalizing the fund the
cares relief grant hundred
million was made available we
did actually
award a hundred million dollars
of the identified hundred
million dollars for the projects
by the time we right sized these
loans are requests and by the
time we got back all the award
agreements we ended up making
just shy of that ninety six
point nine four we had another I
think five hundred thousand for
administration those dollars
that were not utilized at the
hundred million went over by the
statute to the unemployment
trust fund.
and then the leader recovery
grants to see at the very bottom
of page six
the law that in that authorize
that he'll said most of the
applications had to be applied
for no later than December
thirty first there was a cabbie
out however that said businesses
that we're not allowed to be
opened up pursuant to the public
health order in effect when the
law was signed had until two
thirty of twenty twenty two so
bars and clubs as was identified
a public health orders have
until June thirtieth twenty
twenty two so currently we
anticipate about a hundred
million dollars of the funds be
utilized you know another ten
percent could be set aside under
our policies for those bars and
clubs so right now eighty
million dollars we believe could
be made available for other uses
and that Mr chairman is general
fund money.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Marquita so are are you planning
on these ones that say for
example the ones that were
woefully under utilized are you
going to bring anything forward
to utilize those dollars in
another way or is this just gone
now what what what can we do
there.
Mr chairman on the Senate small
business recovery loan fund two
point no while there is under
utilization I think it could be
argued that the size of the fund
was much larger than could be
anticipated for on loan program
so these are available to you a
non employer businesses and
nonprofits the only cabbie this
if they have to have net assets
of less than five million
dollars and they have to be they
have to prove New Mexico
residency and a much more
lenient definition
so I I'm just not certain that
there's a market for all five
hundred million I'm not sure
what other additions or
suggestions we would make for
that fund to hit the targets
that were identified in the
legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that I just wanted to
know if there was anything else
we should be thinking about I
mean ideally you could just put
those two numbers together and
then suddenly you're at a
hundred and fifty million so
something very positive happen
with those dollars but I I am
interested in anything else
you'd like to move forward
because you have a very good
knowledge Marquita of of exactly
how to make these things work
now with this these particular
items because we're not out of
the woods yet and and if we need
to do other things for small
businesses and others we we
should be doing them thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman if I could just note
that the application period on
small business recovery loan
fund is at the end of this may
so we are still seeing a steady
flow of applications our
footnote shows we solve
three hundred that we are in
various stages of closing and I
think that'll continue for a
while.
Thank you any other questions
from committee members Marquita
I have some questions so
on the loans there's going to be
a point where we don't need to
recovering loans anymore and so
that's going to sunset in may
and then
What are we going to do then I
guess we should plan on the end
of may and give an estimate and
move that money back or make
sure those transfers don't
happen anymore
what is your what's your
thoughts and process on that
recovery loan stuff.
So Mister chairman the
application period for those
loans is may thirty first we do
have time in statute to actually
continue to make those loans so
I think the reversion date is
maybe the end of that year and
by that any funds that we have
on hand we can't demonstrated
use for within some back to the
state investment council we've
been drawing those funds done
very judiciously we only draw
down funds we have been
identified paid for them in our
reporting allows force to see
how much that is and how quickly
the outcome so we don't
anticipate what we're but much
more than a couple million
dollars at that point in the
state investment council can
continue to an investor's funds
as they otherwise see fit.
And some of these loans they got
a little bit loose I mean
companies that David Arnold by
New Mexicans get I can get a
loan they don't have to provide
their G. R. T. which is a
struggle while some small mom
and pop may not have G. R. T.
but everybody else should have
G. R. T. if not they're living
in the cash economy and and that
makes us even more nervous about
what they're not reporting.
but at some point we're going to
want to look at it capping these
incentive game that we get it
now let's see what happens if we
need to move on to the next
project that we think
helps New Mexico do you know of
anybody that receive the money
and and has started making
payments or has paid off their
loans early.
Mr chairman we have had early
payments most of those loans
were made in the fall of twenty
twenty twenty twenty so those
payments were just starting to
come do a handful of our
businesses have told us they are
not able to make a payment are
roughly I think we'll end up
with about half of the one point
oh loans being refinanced into
the two point oh program either
for more beneficial terms were
to take advantage of additional
money that's
eligible under the revised
program
so we have seen people start to
pay them off and as I said I
think we have about five that
indicated that they are unable
to make a payment we are
starting Adams for the program
that automatically gets
bankruptcy update so we're just
starting those searches so far
we've done about three hundred
fifty businesses from the one
point oh program and none of
them have any indication of
bankruptcy action so I'm
university both good and bad so
far you know a little bit of
that mostly pretty good.
Performance of our.
Yeah and the one point oh is not
secured loans I mean you don't
have any assets to go after so I
mean good luck collecting that
money in New Mexico is not going
to collect the money even in
tackling tax payments
I'm I wanted to ask you and I
don't know if we can committee.
Of the spaceport bond.
And where we're at and we're
trying to figure out you know
where those actor a point where
the inaccurate point where we at
with the space for bonding
issue.
Mr Chairman I think as we
reported in the interim to the
New Mexico financed Authority
oversight committee those bonds
were refinanced
last year at some savings to
taxpayers so it was of of an
initial public project revolving
fund loan we refinance to
cultivate
and saved us somewhere around
six million dollars to the
regional debt service schedule.
I'm sorry eight million dollars
Mr chairman.
And so we you don't see any
technical problems that that.
Somebody may requested that
there's a problem with the bond.
That's correct Mr chairman we
don't see anything unusual about
this project
six.
And and that the other thing in
the Water trust right right you
know what our project from
authorization what's the
balances and in the PPRF and the
water.
Project funds so Mister chairman
the balances in the Water trust
all of the water project and all
have to get to that balance for
sure I know that we have are
actively working our way through
the severance tax bonds of a
dedicated to those projects we I
think we have two years open
when I think of already started
to draw down the twenty twenty.
One allocation well we're
certainly into that so we're
we're fairly efficient of the
water transport that earmark I
think outperforms some of the
other earmarks how to get to the
specific balance the PPRF
balance as I mentioned earlier
get strong down weekly was we
close loans and we will actually
I think at the end of sometime
in February beginning of
February have to draw somewhere
close to forty million dollars
from our line of credit in order
to continue to fund the loans
are scheduled to close so as I
said the balance goes up and
down down as we close loans up
as either we draw from our line
of credit or issue bonds.
that's an interesting deal so
we're decrease your line of
credit with and how do you draw
your line of credit.
Mr chairman as I reported
earlier the presentations with
Wells Fargo we have a hundred
million dollars in order to draw
from that line of credit we have
to demonstrate that we have
loans that are ready to close
and that would be reimbursed
with the bond proceeds so for
not able to issue bonds were
also not able to draw from that
line of credit it really just
allows us to space our bond
reimbursement issuances in
officious manner so that we're
not officially twenty million
here and fifteen million there
we want them to be of a size
that are efficient both for
purchases of fonts but also just
to.
control costs in the amount of
time it takes to issue a bond.
And so what is our interest on
on our line of credit.
We turn the microphone to see if
he has a it's.
yes we borrow money a one month
supply for plus a small
incremental for that for
instance the last time we
borrowed fifteen million for a
month the cost is about ten
thousand dollars.
And and then if we multiply that
times a hundred million then
that's a hundred thousand a
month
when we better off taking the
cell that recovery money
increasing their online and
drawing from there and then and
I have to pay the interest.
Mr Mr Mr chair we we don't pay
that every month we only pay
that when we draw we do have a
a committee of which really is
very little considering the
availability of a hundred
million dollars.
Okay.
Chairman as to your idea about
the internal line of credit
certainly something we would you
know we would be happy to look
at we did not have the resources
to put aside four hundred
million dollars you know sort of
internal question but if the
legislature wants to provide us
with one we're certainly happy
to look at the.
Well maybe give us cost
breakdown for savings and and
see how much money we can save
we had our own line of credit
because we have plenty of money
sitting there you could even
borrow it from a missing an
example early childhood Trust
Fund pay them interest in and
have a return on our money just
sitting there.
So I I think that there's some
excellent opportunities we know
that inflation's coming in that
we better be prepared for what's
going to happen and so any time
there's a cost savings for your
business you should be looking
your government you may not look
but we should look in some
that's something we may want to
look or maybe give in the intro
next year marketed thank you for
your presentation Senator time
of what we're we're gonna move
on because we're trying to get
through a whole bunch agencies
it's two thirty almost three
o'clock in and so if you need to
talk to market off line or
something when do that move on
to the next agency can we got.
Our mothers and the on yeah they
were here okay the new one
online right.
The.
Well we're gonna be quick but
next time next time it won't
happen so let's be clear.
I
thank you Mr president quick
question for you and
Mr Chairman market with the with
the spaceport funding and the
taxes the the Dona ana county
taxes that were used for
operations when the Attorney
General determined that they
could only be used for
construction.
Question is there a plan to to
refund Dona Ana County the money
that might have been used for
operations and appropriately.
Mr chairman I think that's an
issue to take up with the
spaceport Authority we collected
the taxes we kept our the
reserve that was put in place
for the
For for the bonds
and so I think that that issue
is one that is outside the
purview of the NMFA.
Okay.
Thank you very much market
continued do you have an
assessment of how much extra was
assessed Dona Ana County.
Beyond concerns iterations I I
don't I don't have that
information for you.
Thank you I'd like to like to
dig into that deeper and I know
that's what my counties asking
me for it so thank you Mr
chairman for the question thank
you.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
thank you Marquita next we have
a mortgage finance authority it
is the is here.
Senator Rodriguez is.
Your greatest champion I hope
you know that.
So as you go ahead and and thank
you same thing we're going to.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon can you hear me well.
Okay your live we can hear you
really.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee great to be with
you today in a person with me
today I have a Rebecca a lot of
this she is our senior director
of policy and planning want to
start off by thanking you for
the fifty million dollars in the
special session that went
towards affordable housing thank
you very much today will briefly
it at a very high level cover
housing assistance provided this
last year you should have a
packet in front of you I was
just being handed out we'll go
over economic and social impacts
of housing an update on the
COVID programs.
The highlight of some housing
needs.
The then I'm gonna give you an
update on the New Mexico housing
trust fund and then briefly
review some of the legislation
and the our priorities that we
have this year.
So with that Mr chairman if you
go to page two you will see a
chart there that has our results
as the state's housing agency we
operate over thirty different
programs they span the full
spectrum of affordable housing
from homeless to home ownership
and everything in between we
work with over two hundred
partners across the state to
help us deliver the services in
the programs at the local level
in twenty twenty we assisted
over eighteen thousand
households if you and all those
numbers that you see be below
the pictures there with over six
hundred million dollars in
funding those are federal funds
some state funds and some self
generated funds.
We are still in the process of
compiling data from the twenty
twenty one year that just ended
but the initial indications are
that we have surpassed
significantly in both the dollar
amounts in the number of
households that were assisted.
The next slide slide three I
will turn it over to Rebecca
will cover the next few slides
Mr chairman chairman miss
members of the committee and Mr
Hernandez just went through in
New Mexico the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority
provides no future member
resources to local communities
in New Mexico this budget
thousands of New Mexico Mexicans
but how what we don't talk about
enough is the economic impact of
our resources and the local
income it generates in these
communities if we look at just
four categories of MFA's
programs existing home sales
single family construction multi
family construction and the
savings realized from preventing
homelessness our programs
produce hundreds of millions of
dollars and economic impact of
this every year in twenty twenty
one alone we estimate our
economic impact for these four
categories of programs with two
hundred and sixty five million
dollars if you turn to slide
four.
There's also a lot of social
impacts for portable housing
affordable housing is not just
shelter it's a foundation of
strong communities and thriving
families study shows itself
social impacts are substantial
in in the health care world
quality affordable housing is
considered and social
determinant of health so let's
just go through a couple of the
study since starting with
homelessness failing to address
homelessness has significant
cost persons experiencing
homelessness go through usually
some very expensive defect
housing solutions such as
shelters jails psychiatric
hospitals and short term rentals
some studies estimate that the
cost of a chronically homeless
individual per year to the
taxpayers is between thirty
thousand dollars and fifty
thousand dollars per person.
Children experiencing
homelessness are much more
likely to be separated from
their family are at high risk of
truancy and poor health the
state destabilizing effects last
into adulthood children that
experience homelessness are much
more likely to have post
traumatic stress disorder
significant deficits in learning
and resulting early childhood
experiences homelessness is much
more likely to experience
homelessness as an adult.
Moving on to substandard housing
in the benefits of home
rehabilitation there's a huge
amount of evidence.
Connecting physical housing and
health physical risks from cyber
Center housing includes things
like asthma accidents injury and
disease there's also mental
health risks to overcrowding
including increased stress
levels and depressive symptoms
moving on to the need for new
development there is a huge
deficit of affordable housing
and housing development and
dresses this and it decreases
housing and security housing and
security whether it's at the
point of homelessness or you're
just behind on your rent can
lead to a number of unsettling
outcomes when low income people
have to juggle and make a
decision because they're rents
are so higher the mortgages are
so high between buying food and
paying their housing costs were
pine Medicine and paying their
or paying their housing costs it
can really develop into a
situation where they spiral into
deeper poverty providing
affordable housing that I is
recognized by policy researchers
as one of the most critical
steps to improving will be and
finally the social benefits of
homeownership are huge
homeownership for low to
moderate income families is
associated with increased
ability to build wealth and
greater social and engagement
and satisfaction.
Turning to the next slide.
I'd like to go through with you
some of the federal comment
funds that we received in what
we're doing with them.
So MFA provides affordable
housing through a number of
funding sources and we are very
thankful to both the federal
government in the state of New
Mexico for providing us COVID
nineteen pandemic federal
assistance the the six sources
that we I have listed here go
through the first MFA received
thirteen million dollars from
the cares Act for the emergency
solutions grant and the housing
opportunities for up for persons
with aids we use this for rental
assistance rapid re housing and
shelters next the state
legislature appropriated fifteen
million dollars in cares Act
Corona virus relief funds in
November twenty twenty and
thankfully expended this funding
in twenty calendar days help
nearly thirty four hundred
families in twenty nine counties
with mortgage assistance rental
assistance and shelters.
And they also has entered into
agreements with the department
of finance and administration to
administer twelve point one
million dollars in cares Act
community development block
grant funds otherwise known as
CBD.
They spent seven and a half
million dollars on rental and
mortgage assistance starting in
the fall of twenty twenty and
helped over and over and nearly
twenty eight hundred households
MFA close that program when the
state's department of finance
administration open to their
emergency rental assistance
program and the thing is also in
discussions and will soon
execute contracts with the
department of finance
administration to administer
four point six million dollars
to develop affordable housing.
Next the state of New Mexico
received approximately fifty
five million dollars from the
American rescue plan act
homeowner assistance fund
MFA oil minister about forty
nine million dollars of this
funds to help homeowners that
ever financially impacted by the
pandemic the state of New Mexico
was the first in the nation with
MFA's leadership to open a pilot
program and we fully expanded
the maximum amount of pilot
funds.
The department of treasury is a
little delayed in releasing
their guidance to spend the rest
of the funding but it about a
month ago MFA was approved for
their homeowner assistance fund
plan and now we are able to
spend the remainder of the
funding and we hoping to help to
open a program next month.
Receive nineteen point six
million dollars in home
investment partnership funds
from the American rescue plan
act this is funds for affordable
housing but specifically
targeted for housing for peer
people experiencing homelessness
or at risk of homelessness I
came guidance for this fund
these funds were delayed however
we are about to release a
proposed plan for public comment
to spend this funding on housing
stabilization activities similar
to what the emergency solutions
grant programs that we
administer to as well as
permanent supportive housing for
vulnerable populations and
finally as easy mentioned we
received fifteen million dollars
and American rescue plan act
fiscal recovery fans in December
and we are currently reviewing
the final rule which was
released last week and we
believe we have very many
options to spend this money on
affordable housing.
Six.
Really thankful for all of the
funds go to the state of New
Mexico and the federal
government we will put these
funds to good use the need is
even greater.
So I'd like to go through some
of these needs with you so MFA
is leading something called the
housing New Mexico advisory
committee which is a large
committees across the housing
spectrum with Representative
across the housing spectrum and
from across the state to try to
create a statewide housing
strategy to address New Mexico's
affordable housing issues as
part of this process we are
trying to actually quantify the
need and these are some of our
preliminary findings New Mexico
is two hundred eighteen thousand
households that are housing cost
burdened forty six percent of
these households are extremely
cost burdens which means they
pay more than half of their
income on their housing costs.
Additionally we have found that
there's a shortage of thirty two
thousand units for households
that are extremely low income
which means they are thirty
percent of the area median
income or below.
Now let's say we don't want to
help all of these individuals
let's say we just want to help
the most hello hi you need
people that make thirty five
thousand dollars our last year
for their household it would
take nine hundred and two
million dollars annually to
reduce their cost burden.
Moving on to substandard housing
there are over forty thousand
units in New Mexico that lack
complete kitchens over forty
thousand three hundred units
that lack planning and forty
four percent of the units in New
Mexico were built before
nineteen eighty in this might
need repair I think we just
wanted to help a small
proportion of the council two
and a half percent of these
units we estimate it would cost
a hundred and thirty six million
dollars.
Next let's move on to weather is
ation and I think ministers The
New Mexico energy smart program
which is the state weather is
ation program which improves
homes lower utility bills and
that's a J. dresses climate
change there are hundreds
there's three thousand people on
our wait list and there's a
hundred sixty three thousand
five hundred people that are
eligible but did not receive
services if we were to serve all
these households it would cost
one point six billion.
Finally New Mexico is growing
new households are forming we
estimate there is needed to be
five thousand one hundred new
units built housing units bill
each year for the next five
years if you look at the growth
counties the current annual
average of permits is about
three thousand three hundred
therefore there is a deficit if
we were to assist in creating
affordable housing units
proportional to for low to
moderate income families
proportional to their percentage
now it would cost one point
seven billion dollars these
numbers are staggering anything
that can be given to MFA to help
this need we very much
appreciate and now turn it over
is the Mr chairman I have three
slides to close out here I I'm
gonna skip around a little bit
and ask you to turn the slide
number eight real quick and I'll
give you a quick briefing of the
New Mexico housing trust fund
before going for legislation
slide eight as you can see there
are a the housing trust fund was
and put into place in a two
thousand five with the ten
million dollar appropriations
since and we've had seventeen
million dollars to include the
five million from this last
year.
I will not go over the need is
Rebecca just are covered that
you can see from the bubbles
down at the bottom that the
twenty seven million dollar
state investment we've been able
to make loans totaling sixty
million dollars that's by
providing the additional cut
additional capital plus any
programming coming in on
payments that were returned and
we were able to leverage six
hundred ninety eight million
dollars with other sources we
assisted over forty five hundred
households are built or forty
five hundred units that's a
twenty six to one return and
that was done with a total of or
in a sixteen different counties
throughout the state if you go
to the next slide slide number
nine this gives you an example
of just one project and how we
leverage this this project
happens to be in Espanola so
thirty six unit project you can
see that the New Mexico housing
trust and made an initial
investment of one point five
million for the construction
loan and define alone amounted
to permanent financing was half
a million dollars for a project
of a total of seven point six
million dollars in this case the
leverage was between sixteen
fifteen and sixteen percent
so that gives you an idea of how
we leverage the funds with the
other funding sources that you
see on that table
with that I will Linda ask you
to go back to slide number seven
which is our last slide talks
about the our legislative
request for this year and we do
want to thank us Senator
Rodriguez she's been are a
housing champion and that does a
great job for so we appreciate
you are Senator Rodriguez very
much.
I'll start off by the very
bottom line there which is the
the linkages program this is a
program that is does not require
any legislation the linkages
program is a state funded
permanent supportive housing
program designed to provide
rental subsidies utility
assistance and supportive
services for homeless and at
risk of homeless populations we
have a qualifying serious mental
illness diagnoses this program
is funded to HSD for the budget
that you find them it's been a
very successful program has a
great need and we're looking to
double the reach in that program
from three hundred families or
individuals up to six hundred
with an increase in the budget
there the next two items I'll
start with a very top line which
is an appropriation of seventy
million dollars that is Senate
bill nineteen that Senator
Rodriguez introduced she's been
a long time sponsor for the US
housing trust fund this request
is for seventy million dollars
and we have projects in the
pipeline that that could help
fund.
The second one it is the middle
block there that bill was just
introduced today Senate bill one
thirty four this is the New
Mexico house in person recurring
funding of two point five
million dollars a severance tax
bond capacity.
The this proposal will annually
allocate two point five percent
of the severance tax bond
capacity for that housing trust
fund which we administer and it
would start in fiscal year
twenty twenty four to build
rehabilitate and or whether rise
affordable homes for low income
New Mexicans we estimate that
this funding would be about
nineteen point seven million in
the first year.
And then it would go to to
eighteen point seven million in
twenty twenty four I'm sorry
twenty twenty five and seventeen
million in twenty twenty six
based on projections that we
received from not from staff
historically MFA has
expeditiously obligated and
expended funding appropriated to
the trust fund due to the severe
lack of affordable housing and
in just the fishing practices we
have their MFA nevertheless this
bill has in place several
safeguards to ensure funding
will revert if it is not
expended.
A lack of affordable housing has
been a problem in our state for
many years in the past couple
years the need has become even
more acute as Rebecca described.
This funding would be an
important resource for all the
affordable housing needs and is
desperately needed across the
the state follow NMFA has
received probation for the New
Mexico housing trust fund as I
mentioned a little earlier the
amounts have been very and many
years of fund has not received
any funding at all this bill
would ensure a consistent
funding source to meet the the
important maybe that would
greatly affect many New
Mexicans.
This bill is sponsored by a
Senator Rodriguez and
co sponsored cosponsored by
Representative small and it's a
Senate bill one thirty four with
that Mr chairman I'll close just
by saying that affordable
housing it's not just shelter it
is a foundation to create strong
communities and I in families
and we appreciate your support
and are prepared to take any
questions you may have.
Thank you is the just remember
members are we're on a time
frame any question from
committee members.
There's time.
Thank you Mr chairman and if
anybody can answer the question
how much additional funding is
in.
The budget framework right now
for for a your programs maybe
Center every case I mean are we
started giving creases right
now.
Mr chairman I can answer that
there is no appropriation right
now in the budget in house bill
two there is there is a nine
million dollar request for
capital
When you think about the fact
that housing needs in New Mexico
are continuing to grow and more
and more specially now during
this pandemic fifteen million
this not doesn't go very far
they do however generate twenty
nine to one returns for every
dollar that we put into this
fund for housing so it's a no
brainer that we would continue
to fund it the problem is that
we have funded it on and off a
few millions two million one
million here and there sometimes
zero of non recurring and that
doesn't sustain the fund to
continue to build affordable
housing and help with rental
assistance weatherization and so
on so there I wanted just to
explain quickly Mr chairman the
two bills here so there's not
they're not confused though with
the initial one for seventy
million this is an
appropriations bill that I
sponsor every year sometimes for
twelve million fifty or I'm
advocating for quite a bit now
because the housing needs are so
great now due to the pandemic
but we don't know if we're going
to get any funding that bill has
to pass we have to find the
funding to put anything in there
whether it's recurring or even
nonrecurring that likely it
would be something nonrecurring
if we did not the big bill here
would be sustainable form of
funding finally for the future
that is the bill that
appropriates it was introduced
today it would appropriate two
point five percent of the
severance tax capacity in that
way we get funding every year
approximately an average could
be about twenty million and if
that's the case then we generate
twenty nine to want to return
every year that would be pretty
significant to be able to
continue to build housing.
Thank you do we have money Mr
chairman for weatherization and
any REC requested increases for
weatherization assistance we now
have new weather's ation
increase in here that we're
going to ask some questions
about a weather station program
that the EMNRD wants to run.
And its exact program that they
want one so there's no weather's
ation money that's appropriated
now but there is some of the
budget for a different agency.
Mr chairman I apologize but do
is enter the wanting normally
gives funding from there so I'm
not sure why we would switch it
over to them.
The.
An internal struggle that we're
going to have okay I'll just
find a common Mr chairman I I
hope as we talk about
transformative big things with
the pot of money that we we step
up to the plate on this this
this is just huge for New Mexico
so thank you for the work you do
and Senator thank you for your
leadership and I hope we we do
some big on weather is ation and
and the.
All these programs thank you Mr
chairman I quickly this
deliberate on that senator if I
just may Mr Chile okay we'll
come back to you let's see if
there's any other questions or
not reference just quickly yeah
that senator for Senator
Steinborn is that if my bill
goes through the one on two
point five percent of severance
tax capacity that we could that
would allow to be used for the
effort of housing weatherization
rental assistance and we have in
compliance with the American
disabilities act so yes it's it
would all be in there thank you
telehealth thank I want
everybody to look at that
linkage expansion program and
we've had a really good
conversation about how this
phase in to homelessness health
phase in to mental health how
this kind in the train if you'll
do some research on that
linkages program or don has some
in the office you'll completely
understand how you can begin to
surface homelessness from one
phase to the next to the next
and begin to in that that
that'll be a priority
for us the recurring money we've
got twenty million we'll see how
Senator does with her abilities
and begin that conversation is
the on the on the weather's
ation program I hate creating
another program inside a state
agency if you look at.
The food food the programs
there's four agencies are
cooperating with food programs
for fresh vegetables and farm to
table vegetables if you look at
marijuana and hemp there's four
agencies that all have marijuana
at him money
If we were to make that transfer
ten million and it's my
understanding that the the the
HSD is there's an agreement or
something they're looking at a
local grants program could you
handle that local pros grand in
weather's ation.
Mr chairman I thank you for the
question now is you are where
MFA does run the weatherization
program for the state.
We have been very successful
with it done and if there is
additional funding that was a
allocated to MFA we feel
confident that we could use of
money appropriately and assist
the families.
Anything else you wanna add for
Rev up thank you Mr Chairman
just want to thank you for your
support thank you.
I will look forward to seeing
you with your champion a manner.
Thank you.
Alicia secretary are you on on.
Zoom.
Secretary to fire on the
amendment.
There we go Mr chair okay.
You want to go ahead with your
presentation.
We're going to I'm just waiting
to see my budget director
elevated to present presenter
status as well but I yeah I'll
go and get started thank you Mr
chair.
Okay good afternoon Mr chairman
vice chair members it's really
great to see you today unified
screen and thank you very much
this is why we start on the
cabinet secretary for the
corrections department and the
company today by and Smith who
is our acting administrative
services director and then also
on the call in New Zealand here
is W. secretary Schardin time
our prisons director Gary Muncie
probation parole director
Melanie Martinez and health
services administrator when is
also gonna and then there's
other members of my team they're
also on the call and ask them to
join us in the event that you
should have questions for you
in their specific areas.
So you all the power point in
front of you to do it includes a
lot of detail on the executive
in the LFC recommendations and
outlines the major differences
provide additional information
for each program budget code and
it's really intended for you as
a reference I might point to
questions of as we go but I will
follow along with that four
point slide today I'm just going
to provide you with a brief
overview of the agency's
operations co chair some of our
accomplishments go through some
key that we're in the executive
branch that are not part of the
LFC rack I was adopted last week
in the house appropriations and
finance.
All right so The New Mexico
corrections department oversees
more than twenty six hundred
public and contract staff
members throughout the agency
you are probation parole
division you supervised about
forty thousand people in our
communities within five regions
that are made up of forty six
district offices and the office
of the interstate compacts
management this year and he took
over the operation at what it
county correctional facility in
Santa Rosa and rats at the
facility that's previously
referred to as the northwest New
Mexico correctional facility
it's now part of the western New
Mexico correctional facility
compacts with these most recent
takeovers NMC now operates eight
correctional institutions and
overseas to private operated
institutions and today we are
operating at seventy one point
seven percent capacity.
I'm here to ensure that agency
continue to support reentry and
recidivism reduction properties
now and far into the future we
have added finally this new
budget program code do I agree I
and it's called the reentry
division it joins our a budget
program codes I mean one which
is not as in control but often
is referred to as I have C. O.
M. which is community offender
management program code five
three four our corrections
industry is an enterprise fund
I'm not five three three and
then also our programs support
program code which is five
thirty to create budget program
code we redirected approximately
eight and a half million hi Act
and about twelve from CEO and so
I just got your hand up with
CD's redirected now rex's
industry which again is our
enterprise fund we're really in
the process right now breaking
it down and working hard to
build back up strong so we can
tie and Services into trading
Development invitational
training so you'll see that we
are reducing our **** in this
their price fund and point nine
to five point six million and
this sizeable Jeff Smith or
supported by both the executive
Alicea recommendation.
now the LFC recommendation was
adopted by the house
appropriations and finance
committee last week so I'm
thinking you're support early
just in restoring some of the
funds from the executive
recommendation that are critical
to our operations the executive
recommendation was three hundred
and thirty five point one
million in general fund which
represented an increase of one
point eight one five point eight
million more than last year and
the adopted the recommendation
of the hundred and twenty seven
point seven million the seven
point four the local fall short
in the future here the executive
recommendation we funded our
agency requests for program
support industry community under
management and reentry programs
and then also supported movement
of funds and some position from
I am not into other programs
that is also one point three
million in vacancy status to
contracts that would fully
funded our needs in behavioral
health and medical services so
some things are looking at right
now is you know the executive
recommendation supported are
asked to point seven million
dollars to help cover the
increased costs following the
takeovers and that was primarily
associated with the takeover Act
The Santa Rosa institution
because I was of a much more
costly take over and then in
some small nineteen related
things like the back we've
increasing these locations and
so I'm sure you have resources
to cover these needs critical so
any support that you can find
return some of these funds would
be appreciated
your consideration to accept
executive recommendation of nine
hundred thousand to lower
probation and parole officer
vacancy rate from the LFC is
recommended a lot of five
hundred fifty thousand would
also be a great help you would
provide us the resources that we
need to keep our probation
parole K. eight chair.
Now I've talked about this in
front of this committee and and
any other committees quite a bit
over the years but you know
behavioral health services in in
additional armor this is an
incredibly important we do have
and it doesn't go away and it's
just a continual issue so I'm
hoping that you might consider
the story of those funds in
behavioral health contract
expansion because right now
we're always rooting in the just
yesterday you participated in
the back of higher with state
personnel and our primary focus
there was behavioral health
staff and filling those
positions but and you know we
also do some work where we
partner was in the would bring
in a students are seeking
licensure to come in with a shot
of some of our staff but the
fact is there's just not enough
people in the community that are
willing to come and work in our
institutions on a full time
basis our full is that we might
be able to attract some
providers that want to work with
our patients like on a part time
basis for in addition to their
regular practice
and so we're just looking to see
what we can do about expanding
our ability to to use contract
even health services are.
I'm also hoping for some
consideration to possibly backed
some of the funding for our I.
T. position licensee the dollar
figure that was different was
about eight hundred thousand
dollars which was supported by
the executive excluded from the
LFC recommendation so you know
of course that would be
incredibly beneficial as IT
costs really just Representative
basically needs of our for our
agency wide operations and then
finally the legislative finance
committee recommendation reduces
the budget for facility needs I
am just a one point six million
dollars what it does is it moves
that amount from are in our the
so I appreciate the
recommendation on in speaking
with R. S. economist I
understood where they were
coming from but this is the
first year that we're going to
be working with this new budget
program code and our focus is
really are structured the
division administering the
program expansion that we've
already initiated and
determining the needed resources
in preparation for next year's
request so this time we really
don't need the additional
support and if it does turn out
that would be able to further
expand those areas than eating
the funds in high tech would
provide us with some ability to
cover any costs programs and
needs with institution and so I
appreciate you taking the time
to hear us to date Mr chair
madam vice chair members
consideration is greatly
appreciated and
police request thank you yes
thank you Secretary okay are
there any other questions for
the committee for presented a
test Senator Steinborn anyone
else.
Thank you madam chair and madam
secretary good afternoon
question for FY twenty three
both the LFC in the executive
recommend the support the
creation of a new reentry
program which comprises of
recidivism reduction and
education bureaus.
As well as transitional money
services can you tell us more
about that program a little bit.
Yes madam chair Mr chair madam
vice chair and Senator
Steinborn.
So you know that when we were
first looking at establishing a
program code it was really based
on what some things that I saw
when I first entered into the
role and what I saw was that we
had he was sort of an
afterthought and so in order to
build up this this new budget
program code we're taking
resources out of community
offender management with which
largely is probation and parole
and services in the community
provided by probation and parole
and then from I'm act which is
the present budgets right so I
think that would have been
partially funded or funded out
of focus from the present side
or the provision of well I let's
see what we can do combine them
both boys any kind of I would we
happening in the agency act
through everything that we can
do to combine those resources to
really focus on those people
that are preparing to leave and
help them stay out and then also
to make sure that we had a
diversionary.
Only to it by focusing on people
who maybe have been sentenced to
prison and are just being
probate and I giving them
alternative assistance with
things like housing assistance
and increasing access to
behavioral health support in the
community.
Thank you madam madam chair and
secretary so aside of from
consolidation this will be an
expansion of assistance to help
inmates that are being released.
Madam chair and senator yes that
is the goal we want to expand
services and just creating more
opportunities inside of our
institutions and.
Create more of a streamlined
process for that transitionary
time free poster as people are
getting ready to release and
then after the apartments okay
thank you madam chair and then
you would reference behavioral
health services and I didn't
quite know what you're saying
but would you is that some
funding that you're hoping to
get we to expand on that.
Absolutely madam chair and
Senator Steinborn so in the
executive request there was a
one three million dollar figure
that was a vacancy savings that
we were looking to move into
contracts and that was
specifically because we're
wanting to expand our contract
options for providing the
vehicle services so our
behavioral health services are
part of our regular budget part
of our our our FTEs and we are
always trying to fill those
positions but I'm thinking is
that we can expand this is an
offer part time jobs through
contract services for you know
do whatever we can do to attract
people that operate their own
private.
Practices in the community that
we might have a better
opportunity to bring more folks
on board even if you're not have
state employees.
Sounds good to me and then final
question can you tell me why we
have different commissary
services at different
institutions and that's
something I hear complaints
about is that the prices are
very different from institution
to institution to see impacts on
families who are paying those is
very different can you speak to
that at all.
Certainly madam chair and
Senator Steinborn so we recently
entered into a contract with a
provider they're called you
supply and they provides for
commissary Services that
everyone of our institutions so
if that was an issue in the past
is no longer.
And are also down there to see
if you ever wanted to stop by
and see their operations the new
commissary is operated out of
the Los crucis facility and it's
just it's a really great
appropriations so if you want to
visit these any time.
Thank you I appreciate that and
thank you for those answers
madam secretary thank you madam
chair he's Senator all righty
we're gonna go on to Senator
Woods your next Senator.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam secretary nice to see you
today.
I I have a question I noticed
that you have a contract
services on your operating
budget for twenty twenty.
Of seventy nearly seventy seven
million dollars and I was
wondering if you could provide
me with a list of those
contractors.
The amount of the contract and
the services provided.
Operating yes I want
to hire your screens like Mr
chair is there but if he is that
I was a Mr chair not vice chair
and Senator was also great to
see you today we will email you
a list of of those are
individual contracts and some of
the big ones that you know where
to jump out of the is a things
like our medical services
contract with next and the the
commissary contract and if you
want to jump in added to that
please do.
madam chair and madam secretary
no I I just have been asking the
most ever HSD just to have a
list of those contractors and
the other thing I wanted to ask
about.
Was
You pretty well have the Santa
Rosa facility in your control
now.
the actual facility who owns
that actual facility now.
Mr chair madam vice chair
Senator Woods the facility is
owned by the geo group still and
at this time we are engaged in
the secretive with that so
leased the building from them
but they are the owners of of
that facility.
Okay that's that's all I needed
to know madam chair thank you
very much thank you madam
secretary thank you senator
Senator share your next.
All
of.
Thank you madam chair so.
The first.
You for reading this right the
population madam secretary and
population went down by eighteen
percent eighteen plus percent is
that true.
Chair
And senator so yes we're we're
right now today right where you
one point seven percent of our
capacity but it's been dropping
steadily since about twenty
eighteen we look at those
population projections from the
New Mexico sentencing commission
and we have seen a steady drop
in the US summer of twenty
twenty we drop down to about
seventy six percent capacity but
it's just steadily dropping the
population numbers are just
declining had you know
sentencing commission does tell
us that we anticipate to see an
increase but they're not
anticipating the.
Large increase.
Yes but they are doing very
regular assessments of our
population projections right
thank you it also looks to me
like you have a vacancy rate of
four for public facilities of
twenty seven percent and private
facilities of twenty five
percent in vacancy that means
officers of correctional
officers vacancies.
Is that.
So is accurate of course are
different different facilities
myself but I'll just I'll give
you one example after the
takeover at the Santa Rosa
facility you know when we first
took over they were looking at
about a seventy three percent
easy right it's reduce now to
about
forty percent vacancy rate
that's still very significant
right so because our population
is low what we're doing to
assure safety in facilities
where we have low numbers
staffing we're we're struggling
with some of those those
bringing more staff members on
board is that reducing the
population so at the Santa Rosa
facility you'll see that half of
that population is is filled the
other half of the building is
needed and that really was so
that ships Act resources over so
while that those numbers do
exist as far as our vacancy
rates are concerned our
population numbers do allow us
to see the ratios state.
Okay so.
Vacancy rates are low but.
What needs to be there for the
for the inmate population is
still the at the right level
things that right.
Yes yes correct so it again I'm
trying to make sure that the
goalies paper for the right here
your total budget is three
hundred twenty nine.
Million Bucks the.
In that neighborhood right
through this
Yes three hundred twenty nine
three oh nine that's your.
Budget is we're asking for but
if I'm reading this one right
which is the reversion table you
reverted a hundred and thirty
one.
Million Bucks last year which
is.
Forty percent of your budget.
Why.
Mr chairman madam vice chair
Senator share ad Smith acting
agency director so of the
hundred and thirty one million
and I'm not sure if some other
agencies have mentioned this yet
a hundred twenty six million of
that was we were I and I is a
public safety agencies so the
department of finance at the at
the end of the fiscal year did
swap outs with cares Act money
so that we can revert a hundred
and twenty six million of the
hundred and thirty one back to
the general fund and we included
that is federal funds are FY
twenty one budget okay so we
reverted about four point ninety
nine billion or about I think
one point three percent of our
budget.
Well I was trying to find this
in the in in our book here
because I assume they had the
federal money somewhere but I
couldn't find where that was
that means that mean it wasn't
there I just couldn't find it
but then there are a couple of
the program Sir what is your of
the GDP of this year percent The
Village believe me to earn a GED
five percent.
One minute that to me seems like
relatively low hanging fruit.
Mr chair I'd like to ask W.
secretary consignment
Thank you
Mr chairman and vice chair
Senator secretaries meeting
a lot of it actually had to do
with not Gigi and also we do a
high school task and they're a
little bit different but our
numbers were low and that was
really the impact of the COVID
and how we had to restrict
movement so we were right and
bringing a large number of
incarcerated individuals to the
classroom we were bringing the
work that and that reduced the
amount of individuals that we
could have been one area at the
same time excuse me but we are
continuing to expand that we're
looking at providing instruction
on tablets.
Of increasing our numbers and
you should be able to see an
increase in our numbers and our
testing.
All right.
Thank you madam chair madam
secretary I just I'm looking at
some of these things looking at
the agency request for another
nine and a half million dollars.
We will your your inmate
population is going down of the
number of correctional officers.
The vacancies were up there
twenty five twenty seven percent
but you seem to be okay with
that of I I had to assume that
the reversion was federal money
but if I can't find it that that
mean it's not there but I just
don't see the the extra nine and
a half million dollars thank you
for your request of I just don't
see the need for that in here I
was trying to get some put some
clarification on that but thank
you
Madam chair.
Thank you senator chair and
secretary there's two things I
want to bring attention number
one the declining prison
populations and then the cost
savings that should have been
generated from the leases of
those facilities the other thing
is when we were talking to CPO
on your corrections officers
you are immediately starting at
the lowest rate band possible
for some of those officers and
that's why some of those
vacancies are there I'd urge you
guys to look at when you're
hiring officers that you
increase in that first rate then
move them up I think there's
flexibility there and you'll get
more officers instead of just
saying your new year's lowest
pay then that's where you're
gonna move in you're gonna have
to make those adjustments to get
some relief on some of those
correction officers that we're
better there appreciate your
time today and and the
questioning I think we're pretty
close on the on the racks in we
know that the the populations
declining in in the.
So I think there's some costly
was at thank you madam
secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman just
wanted to comment if I may for
the committees awareness we did
increase the starting pay for
correctional officers and
actually did a significant rate
increases with your
appropriation from last term of
the that point nine million
dollars and we were able to
bring up the pay rates for every
single one of our security
ranked physicians within the
prison system in our
correctional officers now
everywhere start off with a
twenty dollar an hour rate of
pay but thank you Mr chair
appreciate the time today thank
you madam secretary secretary
but we you're our last presenter
your online with this joke in
our zoom operator.
Richard this is corrections.
We have the presentation.
Secretary are you there.
Secretary but we are a.
Chief Johnson.
Maybe Jay symbol we.
I I know Secretary Boeing is
watching so I'm I'm not sure.
Okay.
The call is not in the list.
Well when you are you can see
and we can't see him Mr
secretary hopefully can here's
your last presentation so we
know that the governor did make
her announcement that that she
wants to increase the police
four thousand two officers my
plan a Sherman is to make sure
that officers that are been
there that we have them in the
correct pay schedules in and we
appreciate their work and so
we're gonna make sure that that
happens in the Senate finance
for officers that have been
there before you start looking
at new officers with new money
Mr secretary you want to go
ahead with your presentation.
Certainly Sir can you hear me
and see me okay are not yet
we've got you now sorry about
that and I senior last name
correct correct yeah those
funding for answers about a.
And started anytime the.
Yes Sir we all have the red
lights as we headed out for the
weekend so.
The thank you so much I'll start
with the students and staff is
for minutes I like doing that a
lot of the starting with self
they are truly the ones that
will keep your Mr secretary you
may just need to move a little
closer to the Mike or something
we're having trouble hearing
you.
Okay I'll try to speak up a
little bit you hear me OK now
yeah we're good now.
Are you Sir I want to start
introducing status permitted
first of those people would
really keep you organizations in
the point I I want to make sure
they were recognized first and
foremost and so here today we
have.
She Johnson.
Miss America safely support
Senator million you want about I
used to go to the that a cabinet
secretaries twenty Whistler that
the need for strategic planning
and special projects so the
sermons are HSD director Herman
about the our deputy director
for technical support religion a
blue reaches our budget director
just closer we run our slides
for us today CRG financial
officer and we have in this
state chief information officer
information technology we have
many more people behind the
scenes to match that how much is
stating the latter records and
whatnot just for the second time
is give you a high level of you
know all connected to the point
so
What I want to start with just
for a minute is provide you a
high level overview today
obviously I don't want to go
into every slider made a similar
cover kind of house slides match
RCCG tools and so it all kind of
covered briefly as we are how
much the services that we
provide a kind of talk about
will quickly some signature
issues and our our strategic
goals are top priorities and how
the presentation today in our
budget request have coincides
with those priorities over also
starting on slide number two
there that's our our vision our
mission our values values you
see more for yourself those
under pandemic each decision
that we make a point on weekly
basis those things are going to
prison for so I started kind of
with our structure on slide
three four what I wants to point
out for a minute is is those
service that we provide to
state in Mexico and a lot of
people see New Mexico state
police and certainly the most
iconic piece of the yes there's
much more than to the news on a
GPS serves thirty three counties
hundred three cities
and again this is a medical
being provided is in most
counties but there are
commercial vehicle inspectors
unanimously eighty within our
technical support division
accounted friends laboratories
the service about three hundred
agencies the process about
twenty one thousand species of
the evidence for the state The
New Mexico on any maintenance
which is tremendous you have a
lapse of reserve level Santa Fe
hops Los crucis Parmar forces
record record your referred to
as learn here this is about
twenty four separate divisions
for units and I will never
realized for exchange how much
is it for an impact the GPS have
nearly costs these are problems
your comments were automated
fingerprint ID R. F. for a
missing persons all the clearing
houses on records national crime
information center really is a
tremendous is look around here
for the department.
Our information technology
division.
They provide services to all he
sees a lot of work related
diseases Mexico there total
about eleven hundred this is
really provide services within
the law enforcement courts tend
to centers this is attorney's
offices are we providing various
out of access for all of them so
I just want to just mention that
just briefly number press the
time and when we get on with it
demonstrates.
The S. and service that we
provide overall to the criminal
justice system the ABC stated
Mexico and so to hear say
there's more than one dollar in
us deviation to investing in the
state as a whole and processes
so I mention is in our pre
presentation all coverage is
real quickly as we know the
issues are crimes of the
counseling process low one of
those being passed over the tiny
that up and whatnot but if
you're but police officers
national manager for how we
increase accountability within
police power.
We want to say we want safe
communities one of the
constitution please and we're
looking to deliver the services
of New Mexico tech in our
priorities point
one ounce of our budget request
seventy three yes this is a
lease and how viruses work on as
a whole so in general we
identified was that we have
salaries of responsibilities
person ever intended in over
years and work duties and
responsibilities on the same
time what we always answer the
call for service we have.
I believe in the profession the
morning right we have less
people want to do this job
coming to law enforcement more
in the process.
So that will be recruited is
having a definite impact on the
lives of these foundational in
issues of money underscoring our
priority within here yeah yes
those are the issues that if we.
Share our partners from.
Some of those challenges in mind
our budget is focused on.
We're gonna retention.
On crime reduction increases
County William trainer those
stamina discriminated what we're
hoping for is vaccine officers
for transportation sectors
instructors our friends last
person and our support staff and
we currently have is through our
compensation located in finances
on the next slide that would be
two hundred.
Open through the our current
efforts you can put it in the
market.
from out of state and currently
notice you too in the office
today we are trained and
certified police officers are
this is our land for scientists
in those communities seeking one
out of state for more
opportunities and loses Medicine
on investment in our people each
time I walk on the door the
person that and that we are
hiring the new.
Body coming this is the person
that we're losing and that is
just one loss for for New Mexico
and opportunities.
On the violent crime reduction
side we've identified that we
have commission officers doing
jobs and tasks and
responsibilities that and we
could have non commissions
professional civilian staff
could take on some
responsibilities that it
currently have our police
officers doing free them up to
take more action please so as
you may be some requests for
extensions based on the solution
for better distribution of our
law enforcement officers in
this.
In our last coming county
leaders right side we're moving
strategies and make sure we have
the quality of training with
several of our options have
become willing is a large part
of that.
So we're confident we maybe get
an impact on crime priorities
that I just outlined and so
before I get into that is real
quick I want to emphasize this
equipment in this region final
slide six
of your presentation.
I don't really realize yes when
I was with the C. director for
twenty seven years servers
passed I never really realized.
The impact Mississippians
Ashcroft's the million whatever
we call as an agency they always
always always sitting here is
here now are you know.
The fact that you have crossed
the state agency on slide six
their hound faster service they
have taken across the state I'm
here for our really see how many
are for of the communities
throughout and it's something
really exceptional in the
rifle of the the representative
I found we're we're actually
very accommodating and very
proud families as part of a with
their son and we we we on the
school board and when we asked
they always came and it was is
exceptional jobs on.
Part of that now Indian that's
why we're committed industries.
Across the state on the phone
daily basis so the reality is
less officers inevitably means
that we have less room this is
only in our communities we have
more opportunities to promote
more gaps in coverage let's
officers are patrolling our
highways and reader response
time to calls for service
after trying to sell seven
lessons Act or opportunity I
have with regard to greater yes
so with those challenges in
mind.
You will our next slide
compensation slide seven eight
but that's really the crux of
the vision of retain people that
we currently have to invest in
the ones that are currently on
what we're creating a huge
challenge being able to work
of the special here today so
we're hoping to have a
compensation package the
president and to make sure we
retain the blowing Act look at
businesses eighties oriented
there is no live spoken with
chief in Rio Rancho depending as
well trying to figure out how to
the conversation they're and so
we want to make sure that we
retain the people of the current
have those were down more police
officers that is a tremendous
number forty organization so we
strive and want to find
sentences that we always have
lower numbers naturally question
driving very hard we will make
sure that we stay successful
mentors as far as our goal is to
provide harm reduction if you
reference slides the eighty nine
area for many.
right there you can see our.
Extension requests are full time
employees other requesting
parties again going back to oil
was trying to take some effort
in off of long court trying to
keep you to fill these areas
possibility that currently so.
So this is an example that we
have police officers are
traveling across the state needs
transporting evidence all the
way to three different crime I
would change that's something
that we can have.
The civilian professions that
are nine introduces national
listing the information.
It's it's like a fingerprint for
cell cell basis underground a
crime scene in the community get
input into the database early on
we saw you taking taking it's
not traveling on highways to
the next of in order to assist
civilian crimes and looking
maybe clear your talking about
your tires anyway we recognize
that happen with a lots of
locals Mr I want to help want to
trigger you want to introduce
the overall success of reduction
on New Mexico however
you know they may not work
Dr please
come along and one of the first
to contribute these.
The tax for of these issues
public services I don't know
that our current emphasis on
this last time these are this is
a tremendous platform for young
people to be.
To join our organization to a
non emergency calls for service
and get into the system early on
and help us with
our record you as public
services are.
Thank you.
Service call for your
organization the rating showing
our work so I don't want to go
through every one of these
infants a time.
Your self but again we feel that
by capitalizing on people who
wanted to to the surgeon on the
removal Commission talks to the.
Hello if you would referenced us
like ten and eleven
Expand the same concept just a
little bit more.
When I want to highlight here
for a minute is differences lie
the same one we have scientists
are doing administrative work
that are processing the scene is
that are answering phones and
doing all of the things that
other people support within
three or four sizes too large
scientific work things in our
report you can have a civilian
staff those administrative staff
taking care of all of those and
administrative processes and he
can be successful in the lab
in New Mexico were Senators
anymore this is not the
FTEs in public records.
Our April explains all these
things this is a man human
is Asian communities Warner
commissioner reading currently
managing places organizations
you must be on your store your
data and volume and rate for was
never designed cameras at every
angle you know initially started
on officers bodies and whatnot
and and officers four officers
on the call for one hour is
generating at least for our work
that someone asking you
to do this so
we want to slice the.
Slide twelve there that they're
county totals are this is the
nation's quest our expansion
requesting we can expand on the
ones on the request for the
second time are recognized as
one of when we move in some of
you have heard this
presentation.
so they're there for your
review.
It pretty much online is the us
the need for all those for
programmers no have staff the
lancers requests is no LFC
owners online as well get into
the details for for close out
slide thirteen words just
limited our cybersecurity this
is something of a little more
from the last few weeks.
All the news at all they're
right where's act relating or
will county a cyberattack here
he just had a cyber attack as
well these are areas you cannot
commercial and in those places
the emphasis on the yes and our
team will provide beginning we
provide law enforcement criminal
justice information to hire a
mixed records iterations office
even if you are reassessed the
opposition we provide services
to any of our system goes down
we were to be held hostage by
either we can for the fact
police officers and who's on the
ground trying to access
information regarding who is out
with the two point trying to
make a decision on partners we
can simply not fail in this area
and so we need to invest in
cybersecurity for our
organization we need to make
sure that we have staff meeting
early on IT status and we need a
cyber security team for we are
obligated with twenty more
twenty four hour loan for
support statewide businesses
have Representative size size
size to work providing services
to our state really about our I
really want to emphasize the
FTEs the funding needs in that
area I'll close by saying this
even cybersecurity.
The seasonal service structure
Security Agency which is
comprised of the FBI the in the
state they need so we can go
give your cybersecurity larger
advisory on Russia's request to
you is structure so I can't
emphasize this is all of these
if you have two very different
possible on so I want to this is
my cell and I know everybody
supports law enforcement really
appreciated the support from
senators people that support us
and were extremely grateful for
that and we hope the government
entities Stephens.
I want places where this is here
and on the side streets Lopez is
also very important for us Mr
Chairman with that thank you for
hearing us on stand for
questions.
X. that have to do.
Thank you thank you very much we
were having a few difficulties
with the zoom in webcasting so
we just wanted to make sure are
you done Mr valley.
I am I am done I think the like
I'm screaming and the whole time
as you can hear me but now we
could hear you yes no no you did
a great job we could hear you
very well that before we go on
to even any questions I think it
would be
Appropriate to have the LFC
analysts who are here are on the
background but couldn't for some
reason we couldn't see them but
they are we would like to hear
from them and I don't know who
the LFC analyst corporation I'm
sorry.
Alan raven thank you Alan can
you
To see if we can show up here on
the zoom or or speak if you
could we can't see here your
video at least.
Me too thank you there we go
there you are thank you Alan.
I'm sorry about that and sorry
for the confusion I know that
secretary out but we really
covered pretty much everything
has a again a lot of detail
about their request in the
difference between the two
recommendations so I'll just
give you a couple of you know
high level points here overall
LFC is budget recommendation is
the entire really prioritizes
improving public safety and
recommendations for DES looks to
do this provide besting in
recruitment and retention of
high quality law enforcement
officers enhancing officer
training and education expanding
the use of evidence based
policing practices increasing
officer and agency
accountability and
strengthening.
Levi's goals are in alignment
with the goals of the agency and
the executive.
I spend a condition.
I.
high levels I think on page
But.
that does look like online
thirty nine the LFC
recommendation is higher than
the executive this is really low
because of how the two
recommendations out of their
recommendations officer
compensation so the LFC
recommendation has departed
increases in section four and
then there's the overall
employee state employee
compensation package of seven
percent from section sixteen on
am
special compensation package in
section eight our police
officers don't have internet in
his name for me is not
experience so I'm happy to go
into any more detail that you
want about that I know it's a
little bit complicated but
there's a there's a high level
that I think that out of well on
on page three also on page four
there's a high level of
compensation specific.
Really the most important thing
to say I'll let you know that
agency did for this budget on
January thirteenth they don't
legislative recommendations but
basically the subcommittee to
address some of the significant
differences between the
recommendations I'm just four
because I do want to just note
that.
Has been an incredibly operative
in transparent agency especially
in the past year I have on as an
analyst as huge amounts of
progress in any budgeting and
performance reporting and I'm
honestly pretty proud of them
they work really really closely
with us asked is yes and I think
that both the legislative and
executive recommendation to
reflect that high degree of
confidence we have in this
agency.
Thank you so much.
To Alan appreciate that and and
I understand the that you have
some.
Problems or if you
I guess you can call it problems
trying to connect to zoom for
the up prior presentation which
is the department of corrections
also but I'm happy you made it
for this one and we were able to
get you and so thank you very
much for that and for all your
hard work and for now we are
going to go to questions from
the committee if there are any
Senator Padilla your first and
we have anyone else.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr secretary and and to the
a key staff that is here today
thank you very much with regard
to the salary increase
incremental increases that are
going to be taking place where
does this then put state police
officers with regard to
the other the police departments
in the state because I I think
I've been given some data of
late that maybe our state police
officers are the probably about
a third between the third and
the top from from the top third
to the top in terms of pay but
but still woefully behind a lot
other departments it As that
accurate and be aware with this
pay into incremental pay
increases the governor proposed
where would that put you.
Madam chair Senator P. A. the
question appreciate that if you
look at slide number seven
demonstrates some of that of
course these are the numbers as
we understood them at the time
and we we build presentation out
like I said other agencies are
trying to fit it in sametime and
and look at their in criminal
increases as well but that
demonstrates more LESC and where
we're at so and and were hoping
for.
So madam chair and and Mr
Secretary so is it is what we're
seeing in the I had to step out
of the room for about eight
minutes and then I got my rear
end right back in here with the
data we're seeing on slide seven
is that today's story or what
what would it look like with the
incremental increases the
governor proposed.
I can have our our budget
director expand on that today's
if you look at the hourly to
twenty six forty on number three
that would be the starting rate
currently and I understand if
you look over with the new rate
increases but as of thirty one
eighty more and then moving over
to the office and stuff of kind
of the same the same thing there
the sixth and moves number one I
would hope so so Mister Smith
and chairman Mr secretary if I
look at the thirty one eighty
and then I see the Carlsbad PD
at twenty eight sixty six then
that essentially puts your new
officer pay the highest in the
state and and then equally on
the right maximum step thirty
eight fifty five
puts you above Los Alamos County
PD so does this make the state
police force of the highest paid
law enforcement or police in the
state.
Madam chair in the center with
helping us okay.
And
And then what what happens to
these folks I would that then
they go into the so is the the
range is still going to be
thirty one eighty to thirty
eight fifty is that the entire
range for the the pay here.
Madam chair Senator Padilla I
would I go ahead and just turn
it over to our budget director
or he's the director not sure
which one has the authorization
fee with turnover that it's been
a little bit further.
Good afternoon.
Madam vice chair Senator Padilla
and members of the committee yes
we have our steps for patrolman
the starting range will be
thirty one eighty they can
progress up to steps up to a
maximum of thirty eight fifty
five and we also have.
The range is allocated for other
range which includes sergeant to
deputy chief.
That so I just want to make sure
that I was reading that
correctly so that that the
information on the right hand
side then if you were to Reese
you know reject or re uh stack
rank this it would put them
above or with the highest paid
law enforcement in the state
and.
Yes will be the highest paid law
enforcement agency in the state
provided that other local law
enforcement agencies don't take
a look at what our rate is and
then they because they're under
home government they can adopt
and implement rate increases
faster than we as a state agency
and understood that's what I was
thinking you might say thank you
madam chair that's what I wanted
to thank you senator for Dan
thank you to the staff and the
department for your call for
your answers are there any other
questions Senator Woods has a
question or comment.
Well yes thank you madam
secretary madam chair in
Michigan area I was wondering if
you could.
I notice you have
Contracted services here listed.
And the at the tune of FY twenty
two five million five hundred
and eighty thousand dollars.
And I was wondering if you could
send me a list of those
contractors the amount of the
contracts.
And
the services provided.
Madam chair.
Chair members of the committee
Woods absolutely because.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator thank you cabinet
secretary any other questions
for the committee all right it
seems like we are we're done
here let me think the department
of public safety for your hard
work and as the chair senator
Munoz mentioned that we are
truly going to focus along with
all your other requests on
trying to get the the pay on to
the equity level that it should
have been many years ago because
you are truly so on in equitably
paid and long and hard over
worked so thank you know that we
appreciate you and that you have
a good weekend and stay safe.
Sure I read that senators for
the weekend okay at least
hearing committee thank you all
very much and have a good
weekend I move to adjourn until
