Martinez you you want to start
with.
House Bill to ninety one isn't
as amended and that's introduced
the bill go to public comment
and then we have an amendment to
that bill.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee House
Bill to ninety one is a bill
that provides to tax credit to
working families the first one
is an increase in the levels of
elector which have not been
increased in in over twenty
years and it also increases the
threshold
the income threshold to qualify
for elector elector stand for
the low income.
Our comprehensive tax rebate.
The the other
tax incentive that the bill
provides for is an increase in
the working families tax credit
from seventeen percent which was
increased last in twenty
nineteen to twenty percent Mr
chair members of the committee.
Working families tax credit is
also proposed to be extended in
this bill to to populations that
currently don't receive it and
that includes workers who file
their income taxes with
individual taxpayer ID numbers
as opposed to social security
numbers and it's also extended
to young workers without
children.
I'm
talking about the amendment lets
developers.
Yes that that is the that is the
bill that's in the
rehabilitation okay right
the bill also provides for an
income tax rate increase.
There are.
Three new brackets that are
created
above the above the the ones
that we have not right now we
have a four point nine and a
five point nine the bill calls
for the rate of five and a half
percent for those making between
a hundred and thirty five seven
hundred ten thousand and then it
calls for a six point two
percent rate for those making
between two hundred eighty and
four hundred fifteen thousand
and then a six and a half
percent right.
those rates were amended in the
previous committee Senate tax.
and they actually bump them up a
little bit higher and bring them
down to the income levels a
little bit lower so it captures
more revenue.
The other thing that's in this
bill Mr chairman of the
committee is a repeal of the
forty percent capital gains
deduction the deduction has been
in the books now for since two
thousand three used to be fifty
percent in two thousand nine we
brought it down to forty percent
our bill attempts to repeal that
almost in its entirety the only
part that is left is a forty
percent capital gains deduction
for the transfer of a small New
Mexico business
Mr chair members of the
committee
the last thing that this bill
does and this was also amended
out in the Senate tax was
property tax lightning and I
will get too much into those
details because that entire
section was removed and Senate
tax well but that's the other
piece that this bill did Mr
chair with that I I'd like to
open it up for for questions and
twenty proposed amendments if I
may Mister chair I do have my
expert witness miss amber Wallin
with New Mexico voices for
children I mean I see that she's
on fear it should be available
to answer any of the technical
questions that you all may have
this morning.
Thank you.
The public comment.
Chairman members of the
committee at.
We have and.
People on both in opposition and
support for the bill in
opposition first we have Carla
Sonntag's.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
I hope that you will take a hard
look at this bill this is one of
the most egregious bills
introduced this session.
At a time when businesses are
just really from the shut down
of this pandemic there is not
one business that will go on
skates by this tax increase if
it goes through.
Most businesses eighty percent
of New Mexico pay out their
personal income tax rate which
is going up significantly and
then corporate rates will go up
sixty percent over the next five
years no business we'll get
through this without a tax
increase.
We cannot help the poor and the
financially challenged in New
Mexico by harming those who are
already helping them we cannot
help those who most need help by
driving New Mexico businesses
out of business or out of the
state this causes the state to
lose both revenue.
And jobs and we fall further
behind in helping all New
Mexicans I urge you to vote no
against this bill and thank you
for your consideration.
Next we have later at Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
representing all today the
national federation of
independent business as well as
New Mexico idea which is the
statewide association of
economic development
organizations
in both our clients are very
concerned about this piece of
legislation and the tax
increases as ontrack noted you
know eighty five business eighty
five percent of small businesses
are structured as pass through
entities you're just
corporations or LLC's sole
proprietorships and
partnerships.
They pay taxes on their business
income at the individual right
and that means the personal
income tax increases really a
direct tax increase on New
Mexico small business owners and
this is especially impactful
because the lessons we have
learned from the pandemic one of
the most important lessons we
learned was the importance of
operating reserves for small
businesses as we look towards
economic recovery small business
owners are looking to better
manage their cash flows and
build up their cash buffers to
whether challenging times
without relying on often
expensive credit sources.
However at a time many
businesses are working to build
their cash but but for in order
to increase wages to expand
their businesses and create new
jobs the increased personal
income tax would potentially
penalize them for planning for
their future investments.
On the other side related to
economic development New Mexico
idea is strongly concerned about
the effect of the provisions of
this bill regarding the
corporate income tax increase
rates and the negative impact it
will have on business
recruitment and retention.
Stability in the tax code is
heavily valued by business and
economic developers alike as
they want as much certainty as
possible when making long term
business decisions on where they
can locate an operation to
investor expand an existing
business
area development magazine is
considered the leading executive
magazine covering corporate site
selection a relocation annually
the survey companies and site
selection call consultants on
the key decision factors that
influence a company's new
location.
Of the twenty twenty surveys
show that the corporate income
tax rates is in the top ten for
site selection factors
especially in more important
today New Mexico needs to
consider its position in
restoring on shore in and near
shoring discussions we are
proudly positioned to cover all
of this today however increasing
the corporate income tax will
really diminishing the gate
those efforts so both New Mexico
idea and and but B. stand in
opposition thank you.
Next we have Terry called.
Good morning Mr Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Terry Cole president and CEO
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we are opposed to this
bill because the state should be
raising taxes on families and
small businesses in New Mexico
especially during the pandemic.
These tax increases are also not
necessary the state is
projecting a sizeable budget
surplus these tax increases
would make New Mexico less
appealing to businesses and
workers alike in fact they would
make our current workforce
shortages even worse especially
and he feels like health care
where it's already difficult to
recruit professionals to our
state and keep them here the tax
bill completely avoids the
biggest problem in our tax code
are onerous gross receipts tax
addressing R. G. R. T.
challenges would make New Mexico
more competitive and improve our
business climate the bill would
do neither of those things one
final point we do not oppose
changes to the low income tax
rebate or working families tax
credit if you pass them we
should absorb these costs in our
growing budget there's plenty of
room it's simply a false premise
to say that the only way to pay
for these changes to raise our
income taxes and create a tax
code that punishes jobs
businesses and workers away
thank you we appreciate the
opportunity to share our point
of view.
Next we have and a Jason Weaks.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee Jason Weaks registered
lobbyist for XTO Exxon Mobil on
target which is mainstream
company and Optum medical we're
all the entities are
representative stand in
opposition to the bill
principally because of the
proposed corporate income tax
increases in personal income tax
increases
you know when you look at a
place to locate a business or
expand operations you look to
see whether or not the tax code
stable we don't we don't really
have much stability in the tax
code at this point particularly
if if this is a an act because
Martinez tax reductions just
come online fully in two
thousand eighteen we don't
really even have a baseline to
say what those taxing reductions
have done have they attracted
more business have had the
helped us to start diversifying
our economy the only year that
we have as a baseline is twenty
nineteen
twenty nineteen is not
sufficient baseline basically
when the business looks at New
Mexico they're gonna see this
fluctuating corporate income tax
and say we're just gonna stay
away from that state because we
have no idea what our
liabilities are in this agency
called mention or G. R. T. is
pretty owners so when you
combine that with a fluctuating
corporate income tax it's pretty
significant additionally well
the right seems like a nominal
increase from five point nine
seven point six that is not
normal in any sense of the word
because it really represents
about forty percent increase
over the relevant period to any
individual business meaning that
are increasing that the
businesses will pay taxes of
forty percent roughly forty
percent higher once this comes
online than they do today and
that's a huge problem spread
been particularly given the the
the circumstances we find
ourselves in with respect to
recovering from the pandemic the
other issue is the personal
income tax and and for up to
medical group I think it is a of
particular concern because they
they really have to offer almost
higher salaries to physicians to
get him to come here that that
are offered in Texas or Colorado
in.
And a physician is going to look
at the corporate income tax rate
they're gonna look at gross
receipts quite frankly and
they're gonna say when you know
what my tax burden in New
Mexico's too high I may be
getting a little bit more money
but I'm gonna let have less in
my pocket the the state within
the state which honestly then
makes it harder to improve the
quality of our health care
system here in New Mexico which
quite frankly does need
improving for all those reasons
we urge the body that we were we
urge this committee to get rid
of those two portions of the
relative bill they're just not
good for New Mexico they're not
good for New Mexico businesses
and the fact is they're not just
going to apply to the corporate
income taxes increase isn't
going to just apply to big
corporate entities complies
small businesses I think that
threshold is roughly five
hundred thousand in revenue so
just about any restaurant in the
state and so this is just not
something that's good for for
businesses or for individual
given the situation we find
ourselves in recovering from the
pandemic in the state does not
at present with the money thank
you.
Next we have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee I'm actually Wagner
director of.
Actually our audio is breaking
up.
The next one the next mayor
Vera.
But policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we are
concerned about prince's this
bill will team uses
justification for reasons that
resorting.
Next we have taken a Rivera.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak this
morning took me here there are
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we respectfully stand in
opposition to house bill two
ninety one New Mexico formalized
drive represents twenty thousand
member families statewide many
of whom run agricultural
businesses we have multiple
concerns with this bill
including the limitations in the
capital gains provision which
will negatively affect our long
time farmers and their families
we also have concerns with the
personal income tax provision
which lowers the income levels
at which the new increase
personal income tax rates would
be effective this will result in
less money in our members
pockets.
The new income tax rates will
affect hard working individuals
and their families during a time
when people are struggling
financially due to the pandemic
lastly many of our farms and
ranches are structured as LLCs
and pay taxes on their business
income at the individual right
which means that this bill and
the personal income tax is a
direct tax on agricultural
businesses and their viability
now is not the time to increase
taxes the state is financially
stable and we will soon receive
an influx of federal funding for
these reasons we oppose house
bill two ninety one thank you.
I'm next we had that Brandt
more.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Brent
more of a registered lobbyist
for Kanako Phillips and kind of
foot conical Phillips stands in
opposition to one portion of the
bill and that portion of the
bill is the corporate income tax
increases that were added in the
Senate tax committee those.
Those changes to the bill appear
to be.
Not necessary given where the
sponsor was taking the bill and
where the sponsor wanted to go
with the bill they weren't in
the original bill and they'd
seem like an add on page
definitely drew the attention of
others I would tell you that
there are three good reasons to
remove those corporate income
tax increases from the bill as
it stands before you the first
is that the proposal walks back
the corporate income tax rate
from where we had gains in a two
thousand thirteen actually what
it does is it takes you back to
those similar levels but it's
even more aggressive than it was
in two thousand thirteen because
it eliminates the middle bracket
makes the higher the higher tax
rate applied at earlier levels
of income so it is more
aggressive than we were in two
thousand thirteen on corporate
income tax the second is
volatility when site selectors
and other businesses are looking
at different states they look to
corporate income taxes one of
the factors that they look to
when they see a state that
continuously is.
Assessing or evaluating
different corporate income tax
rates it gives them a negative
impression of the state into
continuously go back to
corporate income tax in keep
tinkering with it changing it
gives the state a bad
perspective when looking to site
selectors the last is the these
corporate income tax increases
would go back to in a portfolio
portion of it to the oil and gas
industry we hear a lot of talk
in the legislature about
reducing the dependence of the
legislature or the state of New
Mexico on the oil and gas
industry well good portion of
these revenues would go back to
the oil and gas industry and in
some sense you are exacerbating
the problem or at least taking a
step in the wrong direction by
increasing the amount of revenue
you get from the oil and gas
industry conical Phillips would
respectfully request that the
corporate income tax increases
that were added in syntax the
taken out of the bill thank you
very much.
Next we have packed block.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee I'm Pat
blocked registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico retail
association are similarly to
those who spoke before me we
have grave concerns with the
amendments or placed on to the
bill and Senate tax business and
transportation
the introduction of those
amendments stated that the
purpose of that increases in the
personal income taxes corporate
income tax rates was to reduce
the gross receipts tax rate but
that did not make it in so we
have some concern about the
whole purpose of these
amendments and their goal being
gone but the increases state
you know from from where we sit
New Mexico seems to be of two
minds we want to diversify the
economy we want companies to
come we use things like J.
typically to to bring them here
but the flip side of the coin is
were implementing a a twenty
eight percent tax increase no
numbers are interesting thing
during the tax hearing in on the
Senate side sponsor did note
that it's only a one point seven
percent increase and that's true
but it's a one point seven
percent increase over right that
is five point nine so you go up
to seven point six to twenty
eight almost twenty nine percent
increase both of those numbers
are correct it just is a matter
of perspective
we also have a concern with the
reductions in disposable income
that New Mexicans would end up
with because of the personal
income tax free increases and so
well we agree with and applaud
the efforts to diversify the
economy and also to diversify
the state's revenue we feel like
we're putting the cart before
the horse and you really ought
to pursue economic
diversification first that will
lead us to revenue
diversification so thank you
very much Mr chair.
Next we have bill we.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is bill
Lee I am the president CEO of
the Gallatin county chamber of
commerce and also small business
owner I just a would echo a lot
of what is been said today in
the interest of time and say
that we do oppose house bill two
ninety one and that's that you
keep in perspective that the
state's budget has a surplus of
nearly two billion dollars in
reserves and an avalanche of
federal funding is on the way
through the recovery package
just passed by Congress tax
increases are.
Being disguised as reform and
this is a wolf in sheep's
clothing these tax increases
would make current workforce
shortages even worse and
especially to key industry in
the state at a time when we're
really working to try and
diversify New Mexico's economy
we can't afford these tax
increases we don't oppose the
changes to the low income tax
rebate or working families tax
credit this is been stated we
believe these changes can and
should be absorbed in our
growing budget there's a two
million dollar two billion
dollars of room in the surplus
it is a false premise to say
that the only way to pay for
these changes is to raise our
income taxes and create a tax
code that really will push jobs
businesses and workers away from
our state we ask that you please
opposed to ninety one and we
thank you for your time and for
your consideration thank you Mr
chairman.
Chairman members of the
committee that includes
opposition to this bill in
support first we have Bill
Jordan.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I first want to
think that house Sanchez as well
as Senator Shendo and working
Candelaria for all their time
and commitment in developing
this package that ultimately
brings more equity and revenue
stability to our tax code this
bill lifts up many of our
families by providing an
increase to the low income
comprehensive tax rebate and the
working families tax credit in
ending unfair exclusions to the
working families tax credit both
of which will put money in the
pockets of hardworking families.
With increases to corporate
income taxes and personal income
taxes capital gains this bill
improves racial equity raises
revenue and will help us begin
to meet the needs of our
communities and classrooms it
does this in a way that's
progressive by asking only those
who can best afford those with
high incomes and those with
wealth to pay just a little bit
more in taxes.
House Bill to ninety one
supports our seniors and our
families in need bolsters our
economy and diversifies revenue
we strongly urge your support
thank you.
One real quick second go back to
Mrs.
I think connection with.
Why is at Ashley.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Ashley
Wagner director of public policy
for the New Mexico chamber of
commerce as I was previously
saying the messaging in New
Mexico the incongruent on one
hand we have this bill which
narrows the capital gains
exclusions and increases the
corporate income tax rate and on
the other we are trying to pass
legislation to attract large
investment into the state in
fact I testified in support of
such a bill and house tax
yesterday this bill also raises
rates on personal income tax in
a way so that folks are
classified as middle class will
be negatively impacted as well
small businesses I ask you to
please remember that thirty
seven percent of New Mexico
small businesses have closed
since January twenty twenty we
do support providing extra help
to those in need but because New
Mexico is actually flush with
funds at this time it doesn't
make sense to raise taxes on
businesses who are also trying
to get back on their feet are
disincentive eyes those who seek
to invest in New Mexico in order
to pay for it thank you so much.
Next we'll go back to support we
have Bob Edgar.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I I appreciate
are you listening to me.
Bill two ninety one.
Have it brings our tax code so
it's more progressive.
By some tax relief for working
people it provides low income
tax rebates they're updated so
that it's not poverty as defined
twenty years ago.
It also
It also affects the aging out of
foster care so that those that
age out of foster care are left
hanging what this bill provides
some assistance for those that
are up to twenty five in order
to allow them to get on their
feet this helps the most
vulnerable in our state and our
urge you to have a pass on to
ninety one thank you.
We need more.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and distinguished members of the
committee speaking this morning
on behalf of policy solutions
institute.
Now's the time to go pick Egolf
actually the agency still does
in terms of revenue raised it is
time to trim the diversify state
revenue we all know the age of
fossil fuels as fast ending with
many automakers twitching all
lectured vehicles in the next
ten to fifteen years and with
renewable energy being a more
available the oil and gas
industry are on a long term
decline we all know this to be
true.
So the fiscally prudent thing to
do for New Mexico is to go big
on revenue diversification.
So that we don't have future
budget cuts ahead of us.
Republican senator currently of
Hobbs commented the other night
I think it was Thursday and
Senate tax business and
transportation committee the
court this would have been a
better time to do a really big
tax overhaul because in three or
four years we will be in the
same place in regard to revenue
so it's widely recognized we
need to diversify revenue.
H. B. two ninety one a is a move
in that direction it's important
one and it's also
transformational and
transformational the different
way you will increase education
all come for New Mexico students
this might seem a far field for
a tax bill but we all know many
adverse childhood experiences
arise and municipalities
distressed by economic hardships
in cases that do directly impact
student success.
House to ninety one to reduce
aces their students will do
better improving educational
success when our students do
better in turn makes New Mexico
more attractive and successful
as a place to do business thank
you and thanks to sponsor Mr
chairman of your Martinez for
the staff tactic bill and share
Shendo and we are worse for the
great work on this to.
Thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
screw.
We do have.
Bill.
That.
I want to get ready.
We got.
Mr Chairman I'm getting at I was
not aware there is an amendment
my apologies.
That is.
Mr chairman Senator chair at
cemex then we'll discuss.
Legislative sessions going and
these **** are trying to third
taxes on us and this.
Speaking as one of the **** Mr
chairman that was super
inappropriate.
And I think it really goes out
of business community really
thinks about the people of New
Mexico right there clear there
clears deck.
Sure we can make was.
So.
Talking with the sponsor and and
other people on the legislature
we agreed upon this ammendment
what does it strikes out all
every portion of the taxes.
It holds the elector and the
working family tax increases.
The in two.
Over the years it's held at
twenty percent and then in the
creases over over the out years.
Also increases those who are
eligible from eighteen to twenty
five and holds elector at at the
same rate there are some federal
changes yesterday that changed
our numbers a little bit I think
committee members didn't get
the.
Spreadsheet for this morning at
email.
Janet I miss anything on.
Now Mr chairman that's exactly
what it does I'm not sure the
committee members not the charge
the new chart the nation
confronted up on the screen.
Have a motion on the amendment.
Mr chairman for discretion.
From China.
The motion and.
Second discussion purposes
Representative you have any
questions on the amendment.
Mr chairman of the committee
first of all thank you for your
work on the amendment and and we
we had discussed it previously I
haven't seen that the new chart
I'm assuming it doesn't change
the numbers to drastically
but but I do appreciate the
support in the commitment to
working families particularly
through keeping elector intact
and by increasing the working
families tax credit I know I
know senator Candelaria has been
very vocal and active in in
making our working families tax
credit one of the best in the
nation I think that you're and
it actually does does that Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative my
mother told me before I left the
session to make sure you take
care of the poor people and so
that's what we're gonna do with
this ammendment.
Questions from committee members
Mr Chairman.
Senator Candelaria thank you Mr
chairman
Well I I had a whole bunch of
things is gonna say but I think
the COVID the the hot my comment
from one of our business
lobbyists.
Really just summarizes the whole
kind of feeling I have about
this bill
side of fascinating we have
these business lobbyists.
Calling members of this
committee **** that's that's a
new one for me I'll tell you
that's that's a new one for me
but I think it just really
symbolizes just how what how
little civic responsibility.
Self appointed representatives
and champions of small business
Just how detached they are from
reality in this state and just
how insulated they are for their
own selfish interests
So what I want to be able to be
that harsh but when someone
calls me a bit
of that is done to stop really
on the filter.
So.
Problem Mr chairman
I was.
Marchers travelers need
whoever's talking or kick him
out.
Candelaria.
No they called us we're well
aware.
I'm always about I have to but
maybe not I will repeat the word
anymore.
He does that I I want to beat
the word anymore I think
everyone has heard it but I do
think Mr Chairman moving on to
the point it is it is emblematic
of just how what how little
civic responsibility factors
into this conversation.
For folks given those attitudes
We finally just stopped clear as
day what the attitudes really
are so I was really I was here
when we did this is Adam
Martinez tax cuts.
The corporate income tax cut
that's being you know heralded
as the and of western
civilization if we increase it.
I just want to remind us as a
body for those of us who weren't
here for those of us who maybe
were.
you know we were sold a bill of
goods we were told pass this
hundred million dollar a year
decrease in corporate taxes and
we will lead you to the land of
milk and honey there will be so
many jobs will be tired of
winning right talk about a snake
oil peddler.
And.
You know we were we were sold
that there was no FIR on the
floor
we I remember quite distinctly I
was handed the bill in ten
minutes later we are on a roll
call.
Voted against the bill and it's
probably one of the best boats
I've ever taken in this
legislature why is the corporate
tax doesn't despite the mis
representations of some of the
self appointed business
lobbyists in this chamber and
this zoom.
You have colorful language we
We we we did not see
all those jobs all we saw was
the state spending hundreds of
millions of dollars to subsidize
companies like conical Phillips.
Fascinating Mr chairman members
of the committee and the public
listening and I are encouraging
the public to actually question
how much money to conical
Phillips make the United States
the last couple years and how
much they make in New Mexico and
how much the thing their
lobbyists to fight this modest
increase in going back forces on
a Martinez cuts let's talk about
what we had to do Mr chairman to
pay for those corporate income
tax cuts to pay for companies
like conical Phillips and others
to be able to hire their
lobbyists and come here and had
all this misinformation well.
You know.
What did they give us what did
we get in get jobs we don't get
the revenue so what we have to
do is a state.
Between the years of two
thousand and eight and two
thousand and eighteen Mister
president we cut public
education K. twelve by
approximately three hundred
million dollars when adjusted
for inflation it is only been
over the last two to three years
that we are actually putting
more money into public education
that's above inflation.
So the narrative that we've
simply been throwing money and
growing government is simply
mathematically faults if you
adjust for inflation if you
actually look at the numbers and
want to have an honest
discussion about policy we were
under we we we we were all
teachers and students and
special ed kids and rural kids.
And everybody we we went in we
told features screw you so that
we could pay for conical
Phillips.
I'm gonna go Phillips to pay for
its lobbyist to pay for its
power.
This bill is about.
Mr Chairman the corporate the
corporate income tax cut was the
biggest mistake we've ever made
in this legislation it was a
joke the process was a joke and
the notion that maintaining this
corporate tax cut is necessary
for economic growth is insult.
To those of us who actually are
New Mexicans whose families have
been here for hundreds of years
and we run business what I find
fascinating Mr chairman in
closing at this stage of the
hearing because I was just so
shocked at this point still what
is happening today.
You know
Regarding the personal income
tax.
I I find it interesting and I
think Mister chairman Senator
serve this is made this point to
me on a bill I was chairing
Senate bill three I wonder how
many of the lobbyists and
representatives to compensate a
are the voice small business
that ever had to run a business
or ever had to balance the
payroll because I I know for a
fact most of haven't.
It's very easy to make
statements when you've not
actually live the reality of
running a business are bouncing
up payroll or making investments
so let me share with you a
little bit of what that
experience is light.
I don't have any silver Spooner
anyone to hand me anything I've
built my business and on my real
estate in downtown Albuquerque
through sheer hard work.
So actual hard work an actual
business but not talking about
it.
And you know part of that part
of the issue that's never
discussed by by the quote
unquote experts from the
corporate lobbyists world.
Is that as a small business
owner I am not tax dollar for
dollar on every dollar of fees
that gets paid to my law firm
okay sh the the passed through
and should see rules at at the
federal level the IRS level Mr
chairman are incredibly generous
and so the the the amount of tax
I pay the the taxable income I
pay is a number that is far far
smaller than the amount of money
I pay myself and distributions
every year very much smaller
than that and and much smaller
than than than what the actual
receipts of the business are
because I can deduct you know my
internet bill my light bill my
legal pad bill money that Lexus
nexus bill.
you know I pay for a hundred
percent of my employees health
insurance why because I don't
believe in rapacious exploitive
capitalism and I like to think
that we should be investing in
people
so you know the the idea that a
one percent increase to the
highest income tax earners would
somehow be the death now.
Of New Mexicos economy is simply
false I'll just say it it's just
it's there's been so much
fatalism and misinformation from
one side of this debate this
session.
but it's been it's been sort of
change life changing in my view
of things in the legislature.
Because I think at some point
you've been here long enough you
see in this this history develop
and you've seen the
representations that were made
initially and now you see the
misrepresentations today to
justify the best representations
of the past and I just leave us
all with this I've never heard
or never had a.
Okay just let me leave everybody
with this and I think this goes
to the heart of the policy
making we're making I don't
think if we had somebody who
would who is a beneficiary of
the working families tax credit
or the earned income tax credit.
we raise their taxes before.
every time we raise the gross
receipts tax to preserve the
corporate income tax and to
preserve the tax benefits for
the wealthy
many at and let me just be
honest I'm speaking to this
issue also Mr chairman as a
Hispanic male recognizing that
most of the voices we heard
against the tax justice today
from the quote unquote business
community we're not people of
color and do not leave my
experience and I find that very
fascinating and I think it's
telling.
Because I really doubt.
Hello me just say this in
closing I've been here for nine
years and we raised the gross
receipts tax at least once maybe
twice to preserve all these tax
cuts for all of these well paid
lobbyists and their clients and
that's fine that's fine but
let's remember what we do when
we raise the gross receipts tax
we tax the poor.
we we take money to get out of
their pockets to feed to the
wealthy that's what we do just I
and we can say no but that's
it's a regressive tax
I never heard once those low
income working people come to a
legislative committee.
And addressed this chamber or
this committee with the level of
disdain and utter contempt the
business community has at the
notion that conical Phillips
would have to pay one percent
more in corporate income tax.
Fascinating Mr chairman.
People's true colors surely do
show thank you and that's all I
have all support the amendment
so we can get some good tax
relief for working people but
today's hearing is been truly
finally eliminating of where
people really stand thank you.
Thank you senator Candelaria
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So.
I appreciate here and my
colleague senator Candelaria
talk about transparency of
lobbying of course you know I'm
going to.
Gratuitously mention that we
have to transparency bills.
one of which just got its first
hearing several days ago the
other that has yet to receive
the hearing in the Senate rules
committee that would disclose
all lobbying activity as well
as.
What always lobbyist get paid in
the state of New Mexico which
twenty six other states provide
just so we could see the role of
money an employment agency.
Just to affect policy and it's
and it includes nonprofit
volunteer this so it's just all
ends of the spectrum so Senator
come let anyone else listening
you're welcome allies.
That's a very tough thing to do
but moving on to this bill.
Mr chairman I would like you to
please summarize again what this
amendment cuts and how it
changes this bill.
I want to get it yes would you
please summarize the amendment
again and how it changes this
bill and what it what provisions
it removes and.
Just wait summarized sure you
have the.
Amendment in your email also
made implemented back up
so morning talking with the
sponsor and and what was
happening.
We can agree where we're gonna
head.
What remains in the bill and
everything else is stricken is
no working families tax credit
and the elector all the rest of
the other things are stricken
from the bill.
I'm sorry so.
Mr chairman to so does that mean
we're getting rid of the
corporate tax increase.
Senator yes there is no tax
increases in this bill we're
getting rid of the work force
okay so we're getting rid of the
new path levels we're getting
rid of the corporate tax
increases we're just doing the
tax credits basically.
Yes.
Loan compacts with right Mr
Chairman.
To the Sanchez this is a
friendly amendment.
The bill Sanchez.
Mr chair and Senator Steinborn
we've had some conversations
with the leadership of this
committee and staff and and we
decided that this is a friendly
amendment.
Okay that's all I have thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator share.
I'm getting there Mr chairman.
So Mister chairman there's a you
know every once in a while a
dog's growl at each other
especially female dogs depending
on what's going on so.
My.
Sometimes friends in the end
today not so much a morale
little bit.
even though I don't think myself
as a female dog.
Mr chairman and madam please
refer to as a female dog and
getting kind of tired of the J.
O. no no I here so can someone
just not refer to me as a female
doctor thank you so Mister
president I apologize it was
based on the word that was used
earlier.
Because that's what that word
actually.
One of us what but that let's
move on legislative I certainly
didn't mean that as an as an
insult anybody.
just trying to a.
Not use the word.
But I do have a couple of
comments here Mister Mr chair
and and whoever else is
listening out there.
That's order my guess you was
certainly a a new issue it's not
the first off Mike issue of both
on both sides of this thing.
But.
The idea is to the small
business owners are just
selfish.
does bother me.
So I want to ask.
Rhetorically who are the rich in
New Mexico.
It's certainly not the big
corporate CEOs from Walmart.
Well we're any other big box
store there is not here.
The rich it's certainly at least
by this bills measure.
Our small businesses.
Small New Mexico businesses.
By the measure of this bill as
it stands without this
ammendment.
That to the rich are in a state.
The same small businesses where
the business is that that were.
They were crushed by the COVID
closures.
These are these are family owned
businesses.
We're just put out of business
in many cases and knows is
survived might not hit that
income threshold this year
because of the the closures.
It typically those are the
businesses that we would call
rich under this bill.
The New Mexico businesses
businesses are actually owned by
people that live here.
People who live in New York or
California to happen own
businesses operate is here.
So let's go through some of
those.
An awful lot of those are our
doctors or health care
professionals.
And that bothers me a lot.
Because New Mexico already has I
don't know how to say this
without sounding insulting
either but New Mexico already
has the oldest doctors in the
country.
New doctors are reluctant to
come here.
The doctors have been here for
twenty thirty years they're here
this is where the family is is
where they're stab wish.
New doctors are coming.
In this that should be a worry
to us.
We hearing here especially from
some of the advocates that for
this bill that we need universal
health care.
Well the problem is if you don't
have any health care physicians
yes universal it's a universal
zero.
That matter who's paid for if
you don't have doctors you don't
have health care.
In the call I miss which
category.
Which you know what else they do
they hire people.
In fact the greatest
philanthropists in New Mexico or
in fact doctors.
The people that
think they went into that
profession to help people.
And they help people not only by
providing the medical care that
they need but they actually give
away a lot of their money.
I can't say that for every
doctor.
But on average.
Doctors are the philanthropists.
And we're gonna say no.
You selfish.
You should pay more.
And we're not bringing in new
doctors so we're not gonna have
health care.
What's another a group that
we're worried about here not
paying their fair share.
About the restaurant two years.
They were by far the most
affected by this COVID shut
down.
These restaurant owners many of
whom were just absolutely
destroyed.
One of my friends in in in in
Farmington.
A great guy.
Large family huge flames were
pissed.
Great Italian restaurant.
He just got beaten and beaten
beaten over this thing.
And he went to for.
Yeah my wife said I wonder if
they're getting ready to move to
Florida.
And sure enough that a month
later he actually asked me if I
could help him pack up his
restaurant.
And and and I helped him pack up
his restaurant and pack up his
house and he moved to Florida.
In a couple weeks later his
restaurant was operating in
Florida he had already gone to
Florida he rented the place he
got all of the licenses he
needed he did everything he
needed to do.
And when we packed up his
restaurant including U. haul
trucks.
He drove straight through to
Florida unpacked his U. haul
trucks set up his restaurant and
was ready to go.
A small business.
The small business.
Just we just ran out of the
state.
We ran out of the state.
Because COVID but he's also
concerned about other things.
But now we look at the small
restaurants.
In probably today on the floor.
We're gonna say Hey you have to
find all of this this family
leave and sick leave and all of
this stuff these businesses that
just barely hanging on right
now.
Barely hanging on.
And one of the problems that
they're facing is is I can go to
work for that restaurant today
immediately take my two weeks
leave.
And go find another job
immediately take my two weeks
leave.
And both of those businesses
have to pay me for two weeks.
Well that's strike one.
Strike two is this minimum wage
that's come that that's here in
the in the threat of of even
more.
These restaurant to barely hang
on now restaurants don't have a
high profit margin.
Most restaurants fail because
there's not a high profit
margin.
Now we're gonna say look you got
to pay a little bit more you got
a raise your prices.
Strike two.
And now we're talking about this
tax increase.
Because after they pay rent.
Pay insurance pay their staff.
Pay taxes.
All of the things that small
businesses have to pay.
What they get to take home now
we're gonna say well you're rich
you're not paying your fair
share we're going to tax you
more.
And even one dollar more it's
just it it's just.
How many times can we beat the
small restaurants.
And you know who owns the small
restaurants.
People of color for the most
part.
Who works in the small
restaurants people of color for
the most part.
That's that's good.
We want to lift people out of
poverty not by giving them money
but by by given fish but by
teaching them how to fish.
That's we want to do that's the
better way to lift people out of
poverty.
And the small restauranteurs
we're just being smashed and
smashed and smashed.
But we called the rich.
Oil and gas.
We know oil and gas is leaving.
We were told that everybody
knows.
But in New Mexico.
With the rich.
It's not the CEO of conical
Phillips.
They don't live here.
It's the small independent
producers that live here.
It's the small independent
producers.
Whose fathers or grandfathers
started businesses in
Farmington.
They're the same people that I
went to high school with in
Farmington.
They're the same people that are
children went to high school
with.
In Farmington.
And they're the same people that
our grandchildren.
Go to Farmington have we're
going to Farmington high school
with right now.
Generations.
The small businesses small
producers.
They're forming their their New
Mexicans.
And they do provide a lot of
jobs.
A lot of jobs.
For every color of person.
You go out in the oil field you
don't see white people out there
you this is exclusively you
don't see of the Spanish or
Mexican or Navajo or Japanese
choose teams.
That are blended teams consisted
could won't care if you can well
you can well.
And that's what they want out
there.
Some of the best welders in
America have been trained at San
Juan college.
And work in the oil field.
And the Navajo.
The best well this in America.
And if you're that good Wilder
you make plenty of money and all
of a sudden you're rich.
Under this bill.
What's interesting here is
certainly during boom times.
Oil and gas industry pays very
very well.
Very well.
You have people coming home out
of the oil fields with eight or
ten thousand dollars a week.
When things are going well.
On the other hand when things
are going well they come home
and nothing.
Because I don't have a job at
all.
That's the boom and bust cycle
and I agree we need to change
that.
It also said we're going to take
these families make a lot of
money one month and nothing the
next column rich because they
made so much money.
During the Texas freeze.
Natural gas wells were freezing
down there.
And the Texans don't know how to
deal with frozen well.
They were hiring people from
Farmington to go down there and
work on those wells and bring
them back online so that we
could have heat and electricity
in Texas.
And I asked one of my friends
who's getting ready to go down
to Texas you know how cold it is
down there.
He said yep but it's not any
colder than it's been up here
and they're paying me a heck of
a lot of money to go down and
put those wells back online.
Now he's rich.
Under this bill.
He didn't have hardly a job at
all.
Now he's gonna be rich because
they pay him so much money to go
down and put those wells back
online.
How about a rag industry.
We got all these small farms we
got some big farms they're owned
by New Mexicans.
yeah there's some big Ted Turner
ranches out there.
To pay any income tax in New
Mexico.
But the farmers who live here
do.
The farmers there even in this
body.
Pay taxes in New Mexico.
In one of the things that has
always boggled my mind we fear
all of these stories.
All the stories about how Ag is
doing bad things but but Mr
chairman.
Three hundred thirty million
Americans Marcellinus.
If we just ate one quarter pound
of of meat matter what kind of
meat that was if we just do one
quarter pounder that every day.
You know what that equals.
But somewhere around eighty
three.
Eighty two eighty three million
pounds of meat.
Every day.
Every single day our farmers
have to go out there in per
produce eighty three million.
Pounds of meat every single day
three hundred sixty five days
here.
Yes yes business.
And when you start driving
people out of hand.
We stop at all what I don't eat
meat.
You know how much we.
We we we we have to put out
every day every single day.
Is something like two hundred
million pounds of wheat.
Every day.
And we waste less than meat.
You got a transport that.
We need about one eighty per
person every day.
Whether we're making.
Economists is scrambled eggs
were put them in the bread
whatever you we need about three
hundred million eggs.
Every day.
And this is huge it would and
and we don't even think about
that we think that all this just
come from the grocery store.
We got to the grocery store from
a former.
And ranchers and dairy.
In a huge amounts.
In Agassi the second biggest
business in New Mexico.
And now we're about to say all
of those farmers.
Our rich.
Affirmative hard work.
Hard work.
An awful lot of those farmers
are people of color and all
those people to work on those
forms are people of color.
Hard work.
But they get paid.
They've learned how to fix would
not just give them a fish.
And are also not slaves.
They work there because they
want to work there.
We talk about how we need new
industry and how you greet I
agree absolutely we need to do
industry we need something that
just a little more stable than
what we've had.
With oil and gas.
We need to be attracting new
industries.
But have we done this in the
past.
We've offered huge tax breaks if
you're gonna come here.
We're gonna ask you not to pay
taxes.
Well that's not a stable tax
base when we're not collecting
taxes.
We've offered huge tax tax
rebates and tax credits for wind
and solar.
And Facebook.
That's not stability in taxes.
That's still reliance even more
reliant on oil and gas because
somebody still has to pay the
bills.
And here we are saying no.
We need better industry more
industry different kind industry
diverse industry.
But the only way we can attract
them is by not taxed.
That doesn't sound like.
Equitable.
Taxation to me.
Just didn't come across that way
that's not stabilizing revenue.
In fact what these tax increases
do is not not only do they not
bring in new revenue they try it
out our existing revenue.
They send people away.
Terrifying to me what we're
doing to small businesses it's
terrifying to me what we're.
It's terrifying to me what we're
doing.
Across the board.
I'm not I'm not trying to not
help people.
I'm just saying that this plan.
Doesn't help people.
When you drive off all of those.
Small businesses that also
higher New Mexicans.
Then you make more New Mexicans
unemployed.
And less able to fish.
I've been confused by this.
People fall of aging out of
foster care which I heard.
So now we're in the state twenty
five years old.
But we also at the same time say
Hey we need sixteen year olds
vote sixteen year olds are smart
enough to vote but twenty five
year olds aren't smart enough to
find a job.
Yes.
That just makes me I I can't I
can't wrap my mind around that.
It.
All kinds of people.
Lee high school.
And figure out how to go to
work.
Some of them have had pretty
rough lives most of them in fact
in New Mexico pretty rough
lives.
Almost half of our state is
already on some kind of
assistance on Medicaid there on
of something.
We need to change that so that
people have an opportunity to
move up not to speak given
something in the it and again
it's not out of.
This prostration that.
I just know that that work has
value it has value just for the
sake of value.
My sister who has down syndrome.
Wants to work.
She has worked.
She's worked as a volunteer.
At elementary school for twenty
years.
She doesn't need to get paid.
But the value of work is
enormous to her that's what she
wants.
That's what most people want
they want to be able to get up
in the morning and have a reason
to get up in the morning.
When we talk about we know that
oil and gas is going away.
Because we get rid of internal
combustion engines well.
Yep yep we're going to lectures
the elector cars.
Yes you should not go away.
Oil and gas isn't just fuel for
our vehicles.
Oil and gas producer's.
And fertilizer.
That's right.
Oil and gas producer's the
fertilizer schools farmers and
ranchers can produce that eighty
three million pounds of meat and
two hundred million pounds of
wheat.
Oil and gas does that.
Least helps with that the
fertilizers.
Thank our products Grohl better.
And actually more nutritious.
Pharmaceuticals are also.
Supported by oil and gas.
Aspirin or take pain relievers.
For millennia.
Literally were chewing on a
willow tree willow bark that was
the pain reliever.
For millennia everybody knew
that if you had a headache it
will mark.
And then somebody figured out
how to make it with the help of
without just eat no willow tree.
That was bear bear asked German
company.
They had aspirin.
While the rest of the world
eight willow trees.
And at the end of World War one
one of the concessions that the
Germans had to do was to find
the formula for aspirin.
To France and Germany and United
States.
What the what what's in there
it's it's largely produced.
With natural gas.
All of those parts that we need
for electric cars to make them
light enough so that they can go
our plastic.
Where's all that plastic come
from.
Well yes.
You don't have an electric car
without plastic.
We need this industry.
Solar panels and wind turbines
have enormous amounts of
plastics in them.
The insulation that we need to
keep homes warm and cool.
Oil and gas.
And I'm just really troubled by
this Mr Mr Mr chair I know you
want me to shut up here but I
just got all worked up because
of the disdain and contempt.
For small business in New
Mexico.
Thank you.
We're on the amendment just so
you know we gotta get the bills
and then and there is one more
than that Senator once resent
stopping server right Mr
chairman I'll wait until we get
to the bill that that's fine
thank you.
Thank you.
Any more questions on the
amendment.
Have a motion about the
amendment.
Some of Mr chairman I can't
Senator Diamond.
We have a motion and a second.
Any objection to the amendment.
You have your hand up I'm sorry
for my comment later.
No objection to the amendment.
Everybody's hand.
Representative amended bill.
Thank you another amendment
center sure wants to propose.
Mr Chairman can can we put that
amendment up on the screen yeah
sure wanted in that amendment
you want to.
To number on that amendment.
What.
I don't know Mr chairman to to
Six point one.
To to number force.
Mr Chairman
this ammendment was actually
going to go to the corporate tax
portion of this bill.
But since the first amendment
has been on.
With there's no corporate tax so
like this this amendment no
longer fits in there but it was
try to make the corporate tax
make a little more sense to
corporations but but without the
with the first amendment this
amendment is no longer rel
relevant so I would draw the
amendment Mr okay.
Senator sure
We are questions to committee
members sent Senator Burt you
had.
Again if we're back on the bill
is that correct Mr Mack the
bill.
Okay well thank you Mr chairman
and and
First and foremost that the
COVID that we offered is is not
fair should be made.
I in no way shape or form.
Knowledge that to be.
Good
and I'm sorry that it was made.
And you know the reality is Mr
chairman.
And I think the my Senator from
from.
Albuquerque understands that to
we are very good friends in the
fall we may not see eye to eye
on issues from time to time.
We have great respect for each
other I have great respect for
him and I'm sorry that.
You was put in that position as
were all of this.
And because people will quite
frankly but so the COVID is is
not that is not fair should not
have been made and but the
reality is Mr chairman.
All of this.
All of our different
personalities and comments like
that in all honesty are made on
both sides of the fence and so
let's let's be honest let's be
real about this and it's not one
sided.
It's just.
Who who may be here or maybe not
smart enough to turn off the
microphone again not justifying
the COVID it's that is true I'm
just trying to bring the
reality.
To the discussion.
Mr Chairman I'm.
There was a reference made in
the.
The testimony in favor of and
against of this bill about a
it comments that the secretary
Senator Kernan may be on the
line and committee meeting.
I'm at it the inference for me
was that she was saying that
she might be okay with the tax
increase or she might look at
that favorably or something like
that.
And I've talked to Senator
Kernan and and I know Senator
Kernan very very well in what
she was saying what I sent her
intent was that New Mexico needs
major tax reform.
Let's tear down to the ground
rebuild foundation and and look
at major tax reform that was the
intent of for COVID so I just
want to committee on that and
not have people having a
A different impression of that.
So it.
With regard to this site I am.
Previous at the amendment that
was passed.
I.
I think it's I think it's a good
amendment but it I have to wait
in a little bit here just as we
were talking yesterday in
chamber as well as today on tax
increases that.
Let's take a step back in in in
can you get away from from he
said she said and the politics
of this tax increases do in fact
generate increased income into
the state.
But honestly tax increases hurt
somebody because they have to
pay more taxes when that some
that somebody or some business
or some person is hurt by tax
increases if they have a
business.
or if their individual they have
to find out a way to to pay
those taxes.
So you would have to make an
individual.
You get a of an additional job a
better job maybe this process to
take on some additional hours I
don't know but somehow you have
to pay for that tax in a
business and I'm a business
owner by the way for over thirty
two years so I've been down this
road many times before if you
have a tax increase or you have
additional expenses kind of the
way because of regulations you
have to figure out a way to to
pay for those in and not to
break it down to simply but you
have two choices you can figure
out a way to make more money and
if you cannot do that because
again I'm at times are are not
good then you have to
if you got a way to cut expenses
in the last review is to
eliminate somebody.
In my shop that.
At twelve.
Full time people and probably
about six to seven point one
three contract people that
engineers.
A full to keep our property and
so forth one thing I want to do
is is you know get rid of
anybody and and even to this
COVID issue well I I did cut
hours I had no choice I never
fired anybody.
And and that's not a Pat on the
back it's just that.
I love the people I work with.
In if you take that a step
further and you talk about taxes
and we we talk about big
corporates in here.
That X. share one Walmart and
all those things let us not
forget that was corporate so not
here in in in their structure
may be a little bit different
for the in the probably in
states where the corporate
structure is a little bit
different would be my guess.
These companies corporations
employ thousands thousands of
New Mexicans.
It oftentimes they create really
good paying jobs for these
folks.
It allows him to lead a better
life to provide for their
families better and to give them
opportunities that maybe they
didn't have as they were growing
up so.
It I I I don't you know if if
the corporate make a lot of
money and and they do because of
the level we're taxes don't hurt
them as much I understand that
but let us not you know.
Let's not forget that the
employee thousands thousands of
New Mexicans if we raise the tax
year somehow that's going to be
black impact not only state New
Mexico but those who have to pay
the taxes and yes there
provisions built into this where
we're we're helping the folks
who are not in the best of
economic situations and so that
was a good move on our part.
But anytime increased taxes in
is going to have a negative
impact on you your family in the
in the company that you work for
and there are ramifications to
that so so we have to be very
much aware of that.
What is your a couple stories Mr
will try to be brief sentences
important issue.
Last year and my wife and I
would meet our kids and
grandkids unfortunately they
live in the Los Angeles area
because they work in the
entertainment business.
So we chose to come to meet them
halfway and and instead of
making one the Phoenix more we
decide to go a northern route in
a meeting in Kingman Arizona
lake Havasu and bullhead city
most places around there because
my oldest grandson's going to
play in a soccer tournament that
I took my son to.
Many years ago.
Firstly that huge commitment
that draws kids in from all over
the place and by the way has
been canceled since and because
the COVID issue I was gonna be
played in bullhead city Arizona
why because.
They were so much push back from
the national organization to put
some of the tournament and the
and the organization that is the
host which is based in San Diego
California.
They were not gonna get the
teams and a level playing if
they want to because it was too
expensive.
Because the and economic
environment within California is
not in good state right now so
the chairs on which has a more
friendly to actually but
certainly more friendly economic
environment to deal with.
And so that was quite and and
and I opening experience.
And I will tell you also that my
sister lives in weather for
Texas right outside of fort
worth Dallas.
And we were talking about how
much it had grown in the last
five or six years issues live
there.
And I got to researching a
little bit about real estate and
so on so forth and it was time
in last year when The Dallas
fort worth metroplex to
schooling by eight thousand
people a day eight excuse me
eight thousand people more.
And according to the realtor
organization majority those
people coming out of California
because they could no longer pay
the tax property taxes and and
we're we're.
Disinfect you waited if you well
with the the the tax region in
rules and regulations that they
had to to live with their.
And that is just reality I mean
real reality and that that we
see in this and so I I think is
is we look at.
In New Mexico we really have to
look at it at the what we tax
people I mentioned this
yesterday.
And I'm certainly mentioning it
again I believe one of the the
best ways that we can change the
direction of New Mexico
regardless of what path you want
to take you to do major tax
reform and build the foundation
of a tax structure that protects
the.
People who don't make a whole
lot of money that taxes fairly
the businesses in the state and
make sure that we're we're
trying to be as fair and
equitable with the companies who
provide those jobs to our
residents as best we possibly
can and then only goes to tax
reform and in tax policy but to
general rules regulations and
policies that we have on how we
treat businesses in in the state
and I have to tell you.
As as again a business owner who
was lifted last year it is tough
when you don't have businesses
open that you rely on to sell
advertising to.
It makes things very very tough.
And so to come out of a
situation like this and the
people just now starting to get
a breath because we're we're
doing better with the
competition starting to open up
again and now we wonder.
Turnaround tax people more with
the B. A. A. corporate tax or
income tax it's going to affect
all of us in some way shape or
form taxes do that that's a
reality and so it is very hard
for me to justify any kind of
tax effort that.
We may be trying to do and I
think what I'd really like to
see the state do is to take a
step back let's let's former tax
committee this is not not too
long ago in the in
Representative Harper really
took on the challenge I think
about four years ago to to
reform taxes and.
We spent two years of Blue
Ribbon committees and in
investigations all the stuff and
he brought.
A tax revision.
Tax code revision to the
legislature to the state and and
everybody had little bits and
pieces of that you like about it
is we get it into the not going
anywhere and I applaud need some
Harper from doing that in in
fact Jason Marshall bills I've
been champing for last I don't
know six eight years about
military retirement we still tax
military retirement one of the
thirteen states maybe twelve now
additional taxes military
retirement so I will tell you
that.
I think I'll probably want to
start that effort or one hundred
sixty eight veterans in the
state a hundred sixty thousand
veterans in the state and I
think what we're now I've seen
anywhere from a hundred fifty
four hundred forty four veterans
in the state and I will take you
through the reserves of of that
bill I know for sure that ninety
five percent of people who
retired military in the state in
this research at that time I I I
don't know if that holds up
today but ninety five percent of
those people who
did.
The.
Retired in the state let the
state for many reasons but that
was the primary reason from the
research that I was sure that
was shared with me as to why
they were leaving the state
again it becomes a tax issue and
we're sitting here the issue
with some issues of of taxing
social security which in my
opinion is a double taxation.
I'm and we would like to move
that along to help out.
Those folks who are on fixed
incomes and and need some help
because drug prices and cost of
living is up and to give them a
break but we we can't seem to
bring that to the table have an
honest discussion and I think
that's only fair so it goes back
to my personal discussion about
major tax reform in the state of
New Mexico and I I will reach my
hand across the aisle in the
date and time to to sit down and
have some honest discussions
about where we could take the
tax code of New Mexico to make
it fair and equitable and more
pleasing and yeah get rid of all
lunch waivers maybe bring the
tax go down.
You know let's look at options I
don't know what all the options
are out there but but let's have
some honest discussion about tax
codes instead of just costly
looking at will from needed to
pay for programs or something I
guess just raise taxes is only
half a percent it's only the
purchases a quarter percent all
of that adds up initially said
yesterday on the floor it's
death by a thousand cuts we
don't want to kill New Mexico I
just coming at one one or two
percent a year until we have no
reserves until we have a tax.
Policy in the state New Mexico
we're tax issues that no one can
afford to live here.
so anyway Mr chairman I wonder
it's concerning this tax
increase because tax increases
are not healthy I'd rather have
a good conversation about tax
reform in ways that we can move
the state forward without
causing the burden on anybody
whether it be the poor or
corporate so let's see how we
can really work on something
like that that's a harder
challenge Mr Chairman is the
harder challenge to to figure
out a way that we can all work
together as opposed to just.
Going out there and saying what
was just tax this was just this
group of people it's still
selective in picking winners and
losers in and I don't think
that's what my constituents in
district thirty three one want
to see is picking winners losers
because that's all happened last
year with this is individuals so
thank you Mr chairman I'll cut
my compass right there but.
I had real issues even with this
modified bill thank you.
You know we're gonna get some of
these other bills done before
you go on the court House Bill
pan is going to get done House
Bill up it is going to get done
before you leave us so centered
I mean you're next let's try to
keep our comments short.
As we can make your point.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman I will keep this
brief you know it seems that the
narrative of this bill really
seems to focus on wealthy
corporations and it somehow hard
working new Mexicans are
actually being helped help did
not negatively impacted by wide
reaching legislation like this
and so I ask myself with every
bill how does this affect my
role remote for district because
my interests aren't wealthy
corporation in fact my interests
are mostly hard working farmers
and ranchers and and I wanna I
wanna appreciate a public
comment that was made that
reminded us that that many of
our farmers and ranchers are
actually structured as LLCs and
they pay taxes on their business
income at the individual right
so that means that the personal
income tax would be a direct
direct tax on agribusiness and a
direct impact on our farming and
ranching community very far from
our our wealthy corporations so
I want to first say that I
appreciate the amendment that
was made related efforts to make
what I consider a bad bill just
a little bit better I appreciate
that amendment and and maybe I'm
just a little too due to the
legislator with all due respect
haven't lost all my common sense
yet but I just cannot understand
why we would even consider
raising taxes when we have a
huge surplus right now and why
would we consider raising taxes
in the midst of a pandemic a
pandemic that's brought small
businesses in the poorest of
poor communities Columbus adamis
Williamsburg to their needs this
is just something that I can't I
can't supported all I want to
tell you that it's been an honor
to serve on this committee and I
take my duty to be responsible
guardian of New Mexico's
finances very seriously and I
recognize that this is
unnecessary legislation and
quite frankly.
You're responsible legislation
so I will yield my time with
that I know we're sorry Mr
chairman thank you.
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised.
I want to make some comments on
that.
COVID just wasn't right.
And then we get into the
structure of of what the tax
package really get.
Here some information for
everybody so they know that
seventy three percent of the
people in New Mexico or under
fifty thousand.
Only pay eleven percent of the
Ph.D path.
And then you move up so there's
over fifty thousand.
Page eighty eight point two
percent of the the P. I. P.
tech.
What percent of your under fifty
thousand it's hard to it's hard
to even make a living that
really if you're single mother.
A merry following to gather with
kids it's almost impossible to
do.
But the other problems we saw
was.
That.
When we did that.
Two ninety one we were there
shifted that we should be
thousand people in over ninety
three percent of tax burden.
And the fifty thousand under
would only pay seven percent
still under fifty thousand we
only roughly have about a
million tax yes he tax returns
in the state of New Mexico
four trying to figure out
something.
You're gonna make a hardship
seventy three percent will only
pay seven percent attacks while
ninety three percent.
Maybe that was the was the way
they wanted then we got to the
business portion and then about
really.
because tweet the capital gains
and PhD L. C. and you and you
ship that come to your personal
we all pay their and then you
pay on the capital gains in
years really got after that the
structure would just not not
there for me.
I don't disagree that.
The changes my main concern is
right now COVID.
People are already worried and
nervous we're just barely
started to reopen in New Mexico
other states program
you know the one that we want to
create this business environment
Economic Development Department
had a long chat about this bill
and they said you know we're
trying to do a G. R. T. L.
proposed businesses will build
over.
Our projects and we change the
corporate income tax and we
change it Ph.D that sends a
message to them and timing
wasn't right Senator
conversation with with
leadership and everybody else we
came to an agreement on what
would happen.
New Mexico does needed changes
taxes.
What doesn't work the way it is
Senator Rodriguez and.
If you were gonna try to just.
I don't know if you need to come
to the capital yet or not but
we're gonna do two more bills if
you need to come to the capital
we can we can hold off for
something.
What about anyway let me just
get this wrapped up and so
structure really wasn't there
and wasn't fixed correctly and
whether it was.
Corporate income tax rate
changes over the last couple
years and we've never seen that
stabilize out we just keep
changing changing changing so I
never get the right numbers
that's why you say well we don't
get that much of corporate we
need to raise well we need
stability and everybody talks
about this in the tax system we
change the corporate income tax
so much that we can figure out
what we did because we will
never let it sit there and then
look back and say oh in this
point of time these are numbers
in to change it again.
Want to wrap this up so just to
be sure we.
You know that already hit with
ads on the corporate income tax.
We had this discussion we came
to an agreement Representative
was there we all figured out how
what we wanted to New Mexico
and and we're all in agreement
we talked about every single tax
tobacco tax some people that
want that.
You know.
People want personal income tax
and so that's where we move to.
But as we move forward
especially in Senate finance I
think in our next years and and
Representative Martinez and
Representative Harper is on
there.
We're gonna need to take a hard
look on how we do this.
And again my only concern was
during the COVID to change that
tax structure for people it is
very hard to figure out what
we're doing because we don't
know what our coverage can you.
Sure I would want my more money
in the budget this is the right
way you know how do we get it on
when we get is raising taxes
that we are that's what
government does.
So we need to look at very
carefully with that centers or
you have a question Mr chair
this share I move to table.
We have a table in motion.
Thanks to everybody share right.
Debatable hi Mister chair Mister
sorry Mr chair my my my mic is
needed you called upon me and I
was trying to speak if I may
just make one comment before the
table one we have a table in
motion right you you called on
me Mr chair and I just couldn't
get my mic off I apologize but I
can just went eight one sentence
and then.
That motion.
That's okay yeah okay thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman so I I just want to say
I am disappointed I was in the
house when we did this corporate
tax cut which frankly.
We didn't really see common and
and I was on the tax committee
when we saw the fiscal impact of
that bills which we knew was at
seventy five hundred seventy
five million dollar hit the
general fund.
It was lied about a course on
the house floor there would be
no impact but of course it
wasn't.
And then what happened.
Our revenue was down at a
revenue was down and then we had
to cut services for New Mexicans
so I just want to say that Mr
chairman that would be more
revenue in the state not with
that I will stop talking in line
little disappointed about today
thank you we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator burnt yes
to table yes the table Senator
complex and.
Senator Campos no to table
senator Candelaria.
I do not see him Senate.
Yes to table.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales no.
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
share yes.
Senator sure.
What.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn no to table.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes the table.
Senator Woods yes to table
Senator Rodriguez now.
Senator Rodriguez now and
senator Munoz will.
Hi has joined us.
Okay senator Candelaria the
motion is to table.
You wish to vote.
I do not hear from senator
Candelaria but the.
Total is seven no three yes and
one excuse.
I.
Therefore no a yes is this
stand.
I'm sorry Senator Steinborn did
you you want to continue in your
comments section.
Your I'm sorry.
I'd be happy to keep elaborating
Mr chair so the the the point is
is that you know when the rubber
meets the road rubber meets the
road with all due respect here
in New Mexico.
Some of the grandstanding.
Against.
Regressive tax structures.
Also don't have the.
Also haven't shown the desire
the past actually raise that
revenue the quick the past when
Mexico does fall on hard times
which Mr chair you yourself is
that.
That you believe that we're
gonna be back in those hard
times we're gonna be back in
cutting the.
Is that the other side
unfortunately would rather cut.
And rather eight and what we see
we saw increased tuition for
kids increased poverty.
Increase child abuse.
Increased incarceration that was
the one thing the budget did
increase.
So we've been down that road Mr
chair and if we want to build a
state with the resources to
actually turn around.
Poverty investing kids invest in
education then we have to get
real with the finance to that
situation.
And so
We've done some things in the
past state which which greatly
put the burden frankly on which
greatly.
But the burden on working people
the state financially speaking
with capital gains with upper
income tax brackets things like
that so
I thought this was a good year
to have that conversation but
Certainly the need will continue
and and
You know just had to get that.
Add to a but my point of you out
there.
As well so.
Morning in.
Senator Rodriguez can have a
motion.
Mr.
Second the motion.
We have a motion and a second.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chairman I do want to
clarify and the previous bill to
to our.
Motion to table it was four to
six for yes and fix.
Just to clarify that but on the
bill Senator Burt.
Up vote no.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria.
Do not hear senator Candelaria
Senator Diamond now.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
No.
Senator share no Senator
Steinborn.
Just.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes Larry about that.
Senator Candelaria yes it is
seven yes.
For no.
Sorry six yes for no and one
excuse yes seven yes and for now
sorry one is no longer.
Seven yes important.
Thank you Representative.
We appreciate that it's not
everything we wanted and that at
least.
Important and we're helping
people that need help the most
throughout the state that that's
really important to me again at
I I will make sure that whoever
that person was that was on our
June meeting will no longer be
allowed on the Senate finance.
Anymore I don't think that was
right
Mike was left open but that some
responsibility and that set off
AT Atlanta things that should
happen.
And we should act a little more
respectable.
To us that Sir.
Especially us that serve and
serve for free we get a per diem
and that set.
If they want to take the abuse
and which I've already seen for
myself with the ads and and
taxes on that's fine but at
least live in New Mexico because
you guys are running ads have a
Beverly hills address.
You want to set the policy in
New Mexico from out of state
people and that's not right let
New Mexico said its own policy
let us as the Legislature
determine what's best for the
state let us work together let
us figure out more taxes.
And let us move New Mexico
forward so I don't create either
side of the aisle with their
responses and what they're doing
so I'm just be well aware that I
do have the belly hills address.
Retake our democracy or
something one of the members
must be nice to the Beverly
hills and and try to get tax
policy in New Mexico.
Mr Chairman thank you
Representative Science Center
I are working going to Mexico.
We're going to House Bill ten.
Representative Figueroa.
Is there Natalie Representative
Figueroa by Representative Gary
on Representative the girl you
want to go ahead and start with
House Bill Page.
Chair Mister chairman thank you
committee for your time I have
sincerely hope this bill will be
less contentious than your
previous Mr Chairman do you want
to drop the amendment move the
amendment or should I.
number is six three two point
eight.
Senator Rodriguez can have a
motion to amend the amendment
for discussion Mr chairman.
One second Representative you
want to talk about your
amendment and I believe Adrian
is on June K..
Four thank you Mr chairman
Micaela Fischer is also here and
if we have rural universal
service fund questions the
bureau chief my partner is here
as well.
And as amended is the
complementary broadband bills
that together with Senate bill
ninety three will address New
Mexico's piecemeal hodgepodge
At issue toward broadband we
have good things going on but
they're all over and across
departments you've already heard
in past ninety three it has gone
through some changes to make
sure these two bills meld
together and blend in a
complimentary fashion you have
this ammendment before you
Senate bill ninety three in the
office now and House Bill ten is
going to build the framework and
the accountability piece to go
with that office to position New
Mexico to disperse funds and
alignment with a statewide plan
bring all the different efforts
under one umbrella so that we
know where the dollars are going
and we can track what we are
getting for those dollars.
The bill creates the council.
The first part of the amendment
is taking out the section of HB
ten that created a broadband
division that peace is now
taking care of I ninety three
the remaining parts that are in
this ammendment create the
council that will coordinate the
broadband projects across the
state to make sure they're
aligned with the plan that the
office is creating and dispersed
grant funds that align with that
plan and that in particular
prioritized the twenty percent
of New Mexico that still is not
connected.
So.
most aspects of the council and
the fund as created in house
bill ten are similar to what
you've already seen.
What's new would probably be the
reporting section and that is
session seven.
So the office and the council
together have to report out on
how well each year they have
progressed toward achieving that
plan what is the reduction in
that number of twenty percent to
our unserved what is the
reduction in the number of folks
who have service but it is not
adequate.
What are the obstacles.
To building a uniform licensing
and permitting or at least
streamlining it and R. O. W.'s.
And what grant recipients are
receiving state dollars what
federal matches are we getting
what is being built and what are
we getting for that money that
in section seven.
Sessions eight and nine are
tweaks to our world telecom Act
and the rural universal service
funds we are increasing the
amount of the rural universal
service fund that is dedicated
to broadband from five million
to eight million.
We are asking the council to
align the telecom projects with
the statewide plan as well as
our regular agency and local
government and educational
institution projects were
pulling the PRC telecom projects
under the umbrella not in terms
of funding this eight million
dollars is not general fund
money this is Raul universal
service fund money but we want
to projects to be aligned with
the statewide plan and Mr
chairman and committee that is
an extremely abbreviated
version.
Out of respect for your time
crunch that you're in right now
but I am happy to stand for any
questions that you have.
Or Mister chair I can.
I'm sorry about that there was
the amendment you have
questions.
Yes Sir Mr chair.
I was wondering
if you have comments on the
amendment from but our
broadband.
Vaider of lacto wireless are
black so have you talked to them
at all Mr chairman and.
Representative.
About this ammendment.
Mr chairman and senator no I
have not heard from hotel we
have spoken with rural electric
co ops because a lot of those
are going to be building out
some of these projects and we
have spoken to several of the
smaller I just piece but hello I
don't believe we've heard from.
And I don't guess you've heard
from more than northern New
Mexico either.
We use with Kate Carson a little
bit with consolidated with
sacred wins.
That's what comes to mind right
now.
Chairman and senator.
And everybody's.
Good with your amendment.
Mr Chairman everybody's on board
with the amendment.
Senator Adrian have you talked
to any of those and have you
heard any comments from them I
think this amendment and the
broadband stuff is been shot.
Throughout the legislative
session
we did have some B. O. T.
comments are at the very end and
that's kind of why we needed to
make sure everything was right
correct and and everybody's kind
of got in their two cents in the
bill.
Thank you.
Thank.
Thank you.
The motion.
Ocean a second yes we did.
We're.
Any objections to adopting the
amendment.
Anybody's hand raised up here
maybe our representatives you do
have in an amended bill we're
back on the bill questions on
the bill committee members.
Mr chairman.
House as then.
Yes.
All second the motion.
We call real.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
test center share yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez at Senator Rodriguez
yes and Senator manuals.
Yes.
You have a Levin yes.
Thank you Representative is
thank you for letting us work
with the thank you for we're
working hard on this this is a
big issue in New Mexico.
I really appreciate what you
guys did and and I know we've
got a head with the slide the
beginning in any weather really
is by the I think you learn that
come along at and and included
me in your clan and and he is a
smart intelligent young man and
I hope you appreciated the help
with getting you up.
That's what we're gonna send
this I will let you know and
he'll be from Russia.
Thank you committee thank you of
the house bill two next
Representative Ortiz and that
Representative Lujan
Representative Ortiz.
Are you with us so if you want
to begin Representative which
everyone wants to begin first go
right ahead.
But thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Christina Ortez I know it's so
much like Ortiz but there's any
thank you so much for for having
me here today I'm here to chat
about the
HB fifteen H. the fifteen as
amended replaces the sustainable
buildings tax credit from twenty
fifteen passed by senator Wirth
who also introduced the original
tax credit and at the two
thousand seven that twenty
fifteen tax credit has been
truly instrumental in
transforming the market for new
buildings in New Mexico a few
years a few years ago The New
Mexico energy conservation code
was updated and now we need a
new twenty twenty one
sustainable buildings tax credit
to be adopted so that our
policies are up to date and then
we could really as a state
encourage and reward energy
efficiency and sustainability so
what this bill does it it
creates tax incentives for new
homes and commercial buildings
that include requirements such
as broadband access we think
these new requirements really
are the best way to move the
market forward toward the very
best energy efficiency and
sustainable building
technologies the building
science at but the bill also
does something that's really
important for New Mexico
families HB fifteen includes a
new tax credit for energy
efficiency for existing homes
and buildings this is for things
like energy star products that
heat pump water heaters windows
insulation and doors there are
nearly a million buildings in
our state existing buildings so
this new credit will help those
homeowners and business owners
invest in the latest
technologies that will make
their buildings more sustainable
and efficient and it'll also
help reduce energy bills for
many New Mexicans improves
community health through a
reduced emissions there is an
added incentive for low income
New Mexicans they can get double
credits that are.
Are transferable this also
applies to builders of
affordable housing I think this
is a really important way to get
the benefits to our low income
New Mexicans who you know
wouldn't be able to afford these
kinds of innovations in their
home station C. and comfort
because the up front cost for
some of these products are just
so high this bill has an annual
cap a sunset and includes annual
reporting requirements I
cosponsored Representative Lujan
is also here to speak on the
bill and I have an expert in the
field of corn from the southwest
energy efficiency project to.
What is more details and with
that and and and Representative
Lujan.
Mr
chairman.
Representative I think you are
muted.
We know we can't hear you now.
It is now.
Yep.
So I just wanted.
Thank you all.
What
what the Sanchez because we.
Are you from.
Mr.
It
you looking.
The one that you called.
We can barely hear you
representative and just so you
know that we can't.
You might.
Press
want to say
I remember when this bill was.
With
Senator.
Senator.
And I just want
to.
Or
We do not work issues that I'm
still getting.
Respectfully ask for.
Thank you very much.
Representative nor do that.
Representative Lujan that I'm
sorry we couldn't hear your
comments on what was happening.
Thank you they look good when
you're talking about.
questions from committee
members.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and I don't have any
questions that I don't see any
other hands here but because of
the for the sake of time for
twenty thank Representative
Ortez and representative Charlie
Lujan for your hard work on this
this is one of those bills that
quickly Mr chairman that we need
to look at seriously to
reinstate and update these
positive and good tax credit
that we have and so with that in
mind the less you have anyone
else I'm gonna move would do
pass Committee substitute for
House Bill fifteen is amended
and that's where I think that
thank you Mr chairman I'll
second the.
We need to go to public comment
real quick make and if we have
any public comment.
Chairman and members of the
committee yes we did
we receive notifications of
opposition to this bill.
In support first we have Camilla
I amend.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm representing
our thirty five thousand members
and supporters of the Sierra
club's Rio Grande chapter we
support this legislation
enthusiastically and thank both
representatives for bringing it
forth without its passage the
tax credit remains however on
updated.
We also think that helping low
income folks and allowing some
modest credits for existing
homes is reasonable thank you so
much for your time and service.
Next we have JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
American institute of architects
and they strongly support this
bill.
Next we have Amy Miller.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members my name's Amy
Miller I'm calling from
Albuquerque New Mexico
representing southwest energy
efficiency project this bill
helps with energy affordability
for New Mexicans and continues
to support a growing part of our
economy we appreciate your
support for this bill thank you.
And the last we have Charles
good marker.
Charles.
I believe that can.
Members of the committee sorry
about that thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak to
comment on behalf of policy
solutions Institute I'll be very
quick just we support this bill
think it needs to pass it's
important for lowincome folks in
New Mexico as well as for the
building community thank you.
That Mr chair members of the
committee that includes public
comment.
You have a question.
I just want to make sure I heard
that these tax credit would be
so.
Is that right Mr chairman.
Senator the tax credit
cannot be sold anymore that was
removed my correct
Representative Representative
Brian.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senator Woods.
The transfer ability the tax
credit was was amended and that
is included in the bill now that
was made on the Senate side
Senator what's so the parts of
the.
But he transferred Senator can
be transferred to Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Woods as they can be sold of the
way they are sold now through
through a broker.
These.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman at center
with they can thank you they are
allowed to be sold.
Thank you.
Thank you senator no other
questions I think we are on a
new path motion made by Senator
Rodriguez and and remind me to
second a motion.
Senator was.
Hello second Pat Woods call the
roll yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos.
The lady.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria get Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes.
Well it's yes Senator Hemphill
yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Yes me know I'd like to explain
my boat no.
Senator Woods now Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator yes.
That is nine yes and to know.
Would you explain about.
I'm sorry Mr chairman I had or
can get about mute.
I just don't believe that we
should give a marketable.
Credits out of this that is
against principles I think there
I credit means against your
income it does not mean we go on
the set give you something to
resell thank you Mr chairman.
Representative congratulations
you have been passed motion.
Your time and waiting on us
we're gonna go down to the.
We are all.
For the for the need to quorum
Senator Rodriguez I apologize
because I know that you're a
couple minutes to get here but
we need to get their these bills
and as a technical difficulties
last night when we come off the
floor will probably come
finance.
And clean up the rest of this
that we have seen here.
A
guy into the staff anybody
that's going to be on the bill
this afternoon we're gonna send
you a new link and we're gonna
send other people that want to
comment in the link.
We can't have what happened
today in Senate finance I don't
appreciate it will trying to
find out who that person is and
make a call.
It just set something in motion
that should happen in motion.
And then the priest at all but
we will need to clean up crews
on with us so we know they are
it's.
Not appropriate and and I don't
like it at all so we're going to
fix that problem this afternoon
everybody that's got a bill
we'll get it differently and and
thank you.
What appreciate it.
