Thank you senator thank you
madam chair what we're gonna go
over the summary of house bill
two that I I think everybody's
in the room because it was
pretty bank it last night when
we're doing bill.
Somebody wants some information
about money so madam chair and
members of the committee on
house bill two makes a
reoccurring General Appropration
of eight point four eight
million and forty million up
thirteen nine thirteen point
nine percent from FY twenty two.
And house bill one and the
supplemental amendments
increased spending on the Senate
side by eleven point one.
Million above the house version
including three point five
million for judges salaries
increases and five hundred
thousand for domestic violence
CYFD for five hundred thousand
outdoor classrooms and one point
five million for NMSU and UNM
athletics one million for
eastern New Mexico university
and four million above the house
version for the executive agency
then ma'am it's because one
million and recurring and one
million a nonrecurring first
sexual assault.
The Senate amendments at a
hundred forty one million.
And six hundred thousand in
nonrecurring appropriations for
compared to the house version
the Senate finance amendments
increase appropriation for
evidence based criminal justice
by forty two million one forty
two million to sixty seven
million in total for law
enforcement and retention
stipends.
Twenty five million increase was
another ad for Lisa and that
brings the total to fifty
million.
The amendment adds ten million
to the housing trust fund for
homeless and homeless
individuals and we had sixteen
in total in that for a total of
twenty four million for the food
hunger initiatives throughout
New Mexico.
In ten million to the lottery
scholarships to move ten million
from the lottery scholarships to
opportunity scholarships for
free college and community
college tuition.
And one fifteen million for a
new issue to and you to upgrade
the school the public health.
Then then then also as twenty
seven million to various
transportation projects in house
bill two and house bill
Bluetooth leaves with
approximately four hundred
million of tax related
initiatives that are still to be
heard.
The rest and then a roof refers
to house bill two.
As amended in I will yield to
the.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and just kind of
walking through the rest of the
documents that you have
available as chairman yesterday
great job of the summary of the
changes that Senate finance made
from house bill two but I'll go
over the remaining left amount
of the narrative which helps to
describe what in general house
bill two does by broad sections.
So for public education House
Bill to include three point
eight billion dollars for public
schools that's about a twelve
point three percent increase or
about four hundred and twenty
five million dollars over what
we spent last year for public
schools
the bill
provides funding for minimum
salaries for levels one two and
three teachers to fund
teachers and principals to a
minimum salary of fifty thousand
sixty thousand and seventy
thousand respectively it
includes a seven percent salary
increase for all public school
personnel and it also includes a
ten percent average salary
increase for all personnel in
schools that participate in K.
five plus or extended learning
time programs.
the funding in this bill is
sufficient to pay all school
employees at least fifteen
dollars an hour and it does
target pay for hard to staff
positions.
Moving on to higher education
the funding for higher ed is
increased by twenty eight
million or about three percent.
House Bill to includes twelve
million dollars in recurring
probation and sixty three
million dollars in nonrecurring
appropriations to expand the
opportunity scholarship program.
It also includes a significant
investments in university
endowments for nursing education
exceed the university endowment
for a variety of
targeted at education
initiatives for public education
nursing and social work for
those in Taos meant in that
endowments significant funding
for nursing education technology
research development and social
work programs it also fully
funds the lottery scholarship
for for for for years.
It also house bill two is
amended includes five million
dollars to endow faculty
positions and it for native
American studies programs at UNM
it funds comprehensive financial
aid programs including covering
the cost of attendance not just
tuition for students
particularly for obtaining their
teaching and nursing degrees at
selected institutions.
On page two there's an overview
of that house bill to use
increases for health and Human
Services.
House bill two includes a one
point three billion dollar
budget for Medicaid it includes
the Medicaid program includes
twenty eight million dollars in
state funds that for hospital
and nursing home labor costs and
another eleven million in FY
twenty three to increase
hospital provider rates there's
fourteen and point four million
to provide postpartum health
care for a year after delivery
and four point two million to
help boost the health care
workforce including in rural
areas.
The budget for behavioral health
also includes twenty million
dollars to develop providers
that include start up costs
implementing Medicaid evidence
based behavioral health services
programs for adults and children
and child welfare services and
it also includes four million
dollars for the nine eight eight
crisis now hotline.
There's one point three million
dollars for non Medicaid
behavioral health provider rate
increases and it also includes
ten million dollars to provide
assistance for low income
residents for up to seven
hundred fifty dollars per
household.
House Bill to includes four
million dollars four point three
million dollars for state
hospitals and long term care
facilities by D. O. H. and the
Senate finance amendment re
appropriates an estimated a
hundred and twenty million and
freed up revenue as a result of
a ten percent increase in home
and community based Medicaid
matching rates included in our
past that freed up revenue will
be re match with federal funds
for over seven hundred and fifty
three million dollars in funding
through FY twenty five to
eliminate the DD waiver waiting
list and find post pandemic
assistance payments for
supporting and strengthening the
system of services.
The probation for CYFD or about
a seven point eight percent
increase at a little over
sixteen and a half million it
prioritizes evidence based
services like early intervention
intensive case management
functional family therapy
wraparound services extended
foster care.
In conjunction with the seven
percent statewide salary
adjustment the budget would also
improve recruitment and intent
in retention reduce case loads
and also sufficiently fill forty
three vacant positions in the
protective services program.
For early childhood
appropriations were increased by
fifteen point three million that
includes increases for home
visiting for tribal early
childhood services for
prekindergarten and for work for
supplements such as scholarships
and we work for support such as
scholarships and wage wage
supplements.
in looking at the judiciary and
public safety the bill provides
an eleven point two percent
increase in recurring general
fund revenue it aims to improve
policing with raises of almost
sixteen percent for state police
officers targeted pay increases
for other positions to address
for addressing and reducing
violent crime and almost seven
hundred thousand for the law
enforcement academy board which
oversees training.
the amendment for courts
includes a thirty percent raise
for judges and the compensation
recommendations include at a two
percent increase for judicial
employees that is in addition to
the seven percent statewide
compensation.
Moving on to economic
development there's an eighteen
point nine percent increase are
about two million dollars in the
base operating budget for
economic development.
It does address top priorities
including recurring funding for
J. tip filling vacancies in the
film department and creating a
justice equity diversity and
inclusion office as well as
expanding regional
representatives to local
communities.
The tourism department received
a fifteen percent general fund
increase that's about one point
eight million dollars and in
addition to those recurring
budget increases the legislature
appropriated fifteen million
dollars in the special session
for marketing and tourism
revitalization and the Senate
finance amendment to house bill
to include another five million
dollars from the general fund
for marketing and local events
promotional activities.
In natural resources House Bill
to includes increased funding
for the state engineer energy
minerals and natural resources
department as well as the
environment department.
For compensation
in addition to the seven percent
average salary increase both
from state agencies schools and
university employees there is a
seven fifteen dollar an hour
minimum wage that is funded in
house bill two.
And there's also two percent
funding increase for employer
contributions one of the
amendments to the US Senate
finance made to house bill two
was to add an additional four
million dollars to the
compensation package and that
was to ensure that all our
professional employees under the
state agencies will also receive
the full seven percent increase
the other employees will be
right
that receiving an on a statewide
average.
Someone supplemental
appropriations there's a total
in sections five and six of five
hundred ninety six million
dollars of which two hundred and
fifty nine million is from the
general fund this includes
things like ten million to EMNRD
for a community energy
efficiency program and
underserved communities five
million to DPS for law
enforcement retention stipends
fifty million of general fund
revenue for leader projects
eight million for eight million
for building renewal and
replacement and higher end and
one point seven million in
general fund revenue for cyber
security a higher education
there's also a twenty million in
in other probation for cyber
security and for broadband
expansion as well when looking
at those other probation here on
the last page on page four this
includes a general fund
appropriations as well as
appropriations from the federal
dollars the state received from
arpa in order to expand the full
amount of those federal dollars
that were received this includes
and amendments
from.
The Senate finance committee to
in.
Increase the DOT appropriations
by thirty seven million dollars
that includes another thirty
million dollars for major road
projects and maintenance funding
which now totals two hundred and
forty seven million for road
projects statewide as well as
adding a few other additional
road projects in the ones that
were listed in house bill two
that came over from the house.
other DOT appropriations in this
bill include improvements to
local roads upgrades to rest
stops purchasing grow to quit
meant upgrading airports and the
Senate finance amendment also
adds additional funding for
rural air services as well as
corridors for wildlife to pass
safely through state roads.
Total transportation projects
and in the bill total about
three hundred and seventy three
point five million dollars with
the Senate finance amendments to
house bill two general fund
reserves will ended FY twenty
three at an estimated two point
four billion dollars or about
twenty eight point five percent
of total recurring
appropriations this total does
assume that thirty million
dollars of general fund
appropriations will be included
in the capitol bill once that is
heard.
I just want to ask you briefly
throughout the next few pages of
these are I won't go through
these in detail if you have
questions we are all here and
happy to answer them but I do
want to explain what the next
few pages include.
The next page page five is a
single high level appropriation
summary for all recurring
funding and house bill two it's
broken out by major state
agencies it also includes the
amounts for a fifteen dollar
minimum wage at the bottom item
forty five you can see the
increased appropriation for the
fifteen dollar minimum wage as
well as the seven percent
compensation increase you can
see the changes that were made
there and Senate finance this
column here second to the right
that says SFC Amendment those
are the changes that Senate
finance maybe and then you can
see the very right hand column
is the now new total
appropriation for each of these
agencies within those Senate
finance changes.
If you turn to page six this is
going to detail all of the
agencies so that that high level
summary on the pages forces the
large agencies but if you want
to see all individual agencies
listed out that's going to be on
these next few pages if you
start looking toward the right
hand column you can see the
Senate finance amendment if
there were changes made in the
Senate finance committee yes
that's the final of the final
total and then you also have a
total percentage change from the
FY twenty two operating budget
after the Senate finance
amendments are made.
I'm gonna skip forward to
explain.
page eleven.
This is a simplified version of
the section five probation as
you know there are quite a
section five six and seven there
are quite a few probation and
they're this provides only a
summary of the changes that were
made in the Senate finance
amendment from of house bill two
is it came over from the house
if you see appropriations not
listed here that means they were
not changed from what was made
in the house version.
I do want to point out that
there is a typo on this sheet we
just want to make sure that we
get the correct amount here if
you look down on about a quarter
of the page down for economic
development department there was
fifty million dollars the Senate
finance has in total in its
amended bill for Lida there is
an extra amount and that
additional column that should
not be there that is a type of
for so the total for leader with
fifty million dollars in the
general fund if there's any
questions on these pays when we
end happy to answer any
additional questions on these
items I just want to make sure
we know how to look at and read
these two pages.
And then if you turn to page
thirteen this does provide a
detail for the sections nine ten
and eleven this is additional
general fund appropriations as
well as the appropriations from
the appropriation contingency
fund which is where the are both
funding was deposited in the
special session this does list
all section nine ten and eleven
appropriations you can see and
the US starting on the green
columns near the right
the total amount as it changed
in Senate finance from the
general fund The appropriation
contingency fund in other words
the are but dollars if or if
there were other state funds to
just take you for an example on
how to read this page if you
look at item number one for road
projects as it came over from
the house there was general fund
of two hundred and seventeen
point five million dollars
funded in house bill two after
Senate finance amendments there
is now two hundred forty seven
point five million dollars
appropriated for this item so
that's how you would read these
additional pages I'm not going
to go through each of these in
detail but I would be happy to
answer any questions as well as
the rest of our staff and
senator Munoz if there are
additional questions on these
items and then the last thing
I'll draw your attention to at
the very back starting on page
nineteen is the general fund
financial summary this provides
a high level overview of total
appropriations and revenues one
thing I will point out is as as
came over from the house there
was four hundred million and
availability for a tax package
that room is still made
available with the Senate
finance amendments so that is
included in the assumptions here
on the financial summary and you
can see down at the bottom on
page eight that elected on the
right hand side is the twenty
eight point five percent
estimated ending reserve balance
assuming the Senate finance
amendments the additional
funding in the the capital bill
that I just discussed as well as
potential passage of a tax
package.
And with that madam chair
members of the committee I'm
happy to turn it over to any of
the other panelists you might
want to add anything on or we
stand prepared for questions
thank you done good job at
appreciate you okay time David
or Charles any comments Senator
anyone Madam I think there's
some highlights in the Senate
amendment you know we passed a
minimum wage out we know that
the new way to buy everybody is
working we fully funded of a
nursing and teaching program of
forest and a four year and two.
The nurturing nursing and
teaching program to your to your
to your universities at and
western to fully fund teacher
stipends for.
Tuition room and board stipend
in any other costs and may have
while they're doing that and
we're gonna test that and see
how that works that's one of the
highlights I think that we we
started a full ride tuition
program and we're testing those
they're the only ones in the
state The said they have
availability and capacity in
their schools.
Are there some other highlights
and then we'll go through the
questions
I think those that's one of them
everybody in New Mexico seems to
have got something.
And we put a lot of money and
economic development and it had
better be fruitful as we move
forward or New Mexico is going
to be looking at cuts again we
ride the roller coaster of oil
and gas in as long as you want
to continue that we better plan
carefully we better check point
change the way we plan and
budget New Mexico in a recurring
and non reoccurring money that
is highly important as we did
this differentiate that
so that madam chair I think will
stand for questions thank you Mr
chairman David and Charles
anyone no okay thank you we're
going to do now is we're going
to go to the audience on stole
him Senator his okay thank you
are going to go to the are you
sure thank you I was going to go
to the audience on zoom first
and we only have one person LA
this Ralph Ron is we're gonna
have the ones for the for the
Baylor and then we'll ask for
the once against.
Ralph runs W. R. O. N. S. are
you there for the middle Rio
Grande water advocates.
Ralph are you there on zoom I
guess there's nobody there okay
thank you very much than anyone
against on zoom also.
All right thank you now we're
gonna go to
audience and see if there's any
comments from the audience on
this for or against before we
proceed to ask questions here.
Okay thank you very much now
they're just I don't see one.
Okay thank you ma'am can you get
up and ask the question.
Thank you can you state your
name for the record please.
Thank you.
Thank you very much all right
and no one else committee
members we have any questions
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Padilla also I'm sorry
senator you were first yeah he
was first so then Senator
Padilla first and then Senator
Stein thank you Senator for your
patience thank you madam chair
and thank you Mr chairman and
the staff wow what a great job
of lots and lots of hours and
surprised even succint not
straight so thank you very much
for all the work that this had a
couple questions on some a
statewide stuff on the
Lottery transfer over the
opportunity scholarship of the
ten million so when we do this
this year is a something that
that will happen every year or I
I know you said we're going to
fund lottery completely for four
years but what happens next year
with the is our transfer them
or.
Enter an opportunity last year
they didn't use all their money
so there is a leftover balance
we're gonna hear bill in just a
little bit about opportunity
that the exact.
As in and we now change that to
the legislative opportunity
scholarships and so we're making
that change the lottery
scholarship according to pass
data is tracking on course with
the one thirty or one forty that
we have in there for a five year
sustainability and so madam
chair Mister chairman on the
opportunity I'm assuming that
some of that's you know kind of
start up in one year your one
year two year three to get it
fully ingrained in the whatever
so when they didn't spend all
their money it's possible that
you know that they they just
they're they're going to do that
this year but I'm glad I just
want to confirm we project full
funding for lottery scholarship
for four years.
That's great that's great news
thank you
on lead to what the fifty
million you know I've been
pushing really hard on that one
you have Mister chair and others
for Mister chair Mister chairman
so we went from twenty five
million to fifty million.
is that contingent at fifty with
about other twenty five now is
it contingent on anything else
legislatively to make that fifty
million happen insurance center
no it's not conditioning has
been removed okay thank you.
And
So so the state police we were
we were doing in all the various
races and everything that's
going on that way both but what
would the state police wind up
with I heard one twenty nineteen
then down to sixteen and what
was the final was a
representative to be on the
sixteen
Enter Padilla I don't what we
ended up in this budget as it
sits right now a seventeen
percent increase we've heard
from the state police over the
last week Albuquerque just
another pay raise and the
signing bonus on there is
another crime package that is
floating around that we're
looking at additional money for
state police to retain our
officers
and so on.
Their rate increases their and
we had a fifty million dollars
for recruitment and retention so
now we're capable with
Albuquerque if they sign a
retention bonus or need a
recruitment bonus that our
officers will have that and that
will be available throughout the
state.
What we're seeing with police
agencies is one agencies trying
to outbid another agency
Albuquerque out bids.
The rest of the state then you
see an influx in Albuquerque
especially in their three years
over the last three years of
retirement position they
increase their time in the final
average salary and so somehow we
either have to get more officers
in the retention Division
million for recruitment
retention could help that.
The governor said she wants a
thousand new officers we don't
see that is capable but the
money is there in case it does
happen.
Thank you for that think they're
gonna be very happy with the
extra percent so I think that's
good that we're able to provide
that and then on the section
detail section nine ten and
eleven here
under the item number one there
was thirty million added to the
two twenty seven of things or
two seventeen SEP which is a two
forty seven
The additional language that was
added through our process I
don't I don't know that I see
all of it here I had submitted
and we have already acted on
doesn't mean it has to be we
acted on it the subcommittee in
the language I mean.
I'm getting I guess seven years
because I I can't see that right
I'm I'm I I'm I use my phone to
make it a little bigger but I
don't see is liable of Arden
Bernalillo county listed here
Senator is listed on page two
twenty I did see if in fact of.
The language for D. O. T. I'm
gonna go through this in detail
right now so from the twenty to
twenty okay.
There's no line item is there
but is listed on page two twenty
of of the total house bill two
that you have in place what what
what was the why did we
initially talked about not doing
any more than two seventeen I'm
thrilled I'm glad that we did
but what what is the other
thirty million how did that get
put in there just Senator
particular project manager in
our conversations with DOT
maintenance and repair were high
priority because we had never
budgeted money for maintenance
or repair in that fund was was a
little bit lower so that's where
we added money for maintenance
and repair I think it's terrific
I think all the muscle I think
all New Mexicans should be
thrilled two hundred forty seven
million dollars being put into
these crumbling roads all over
the state it's gonna be
remarkable it's going to help us
he could with economic
development with safety and so
I'm I'm really excited about
that I'm really thankful for
that and then just an overall
you know general question that I
have is is around the size of
this budget and this kid can you
give us madam chair and Mr
chairman to some guidance here
on how are we going to sustain
this for the next you know three
to five years because it is it's
remarkable what we're doing but
I want to make sure that we
don't have to come back to Mr
Mrs New Mexican and three to
five years and just cut off our
nose in our arm or something
Senator the largest portion of
our budget increase was for
Medicaid and Medicare if you
would back that number back out
we we would not have a lot such
a large increase across the
board
people in New Mexico on how many
times have we given pay raises
and taken aback how many times
have we change parenting in that
sustainability our forecast
based oil on about fifty dollars
we know oils about ninety today
and we did not get new revenue
generations so that should help
us maintain some reserves in our
reserve will go up when that
money comes in
but sustainability is always a
question in New Mexico and we
had Senate bill one fifty five
about diversifying the NMAA New
Mexico if you really want to
really change my new.
Mexico does stuff we should plan
for a twenty year plan for
economic development.
In order to do that you have to
put put your non reoccurring
money in a bucket for economic
development and make a twenty
year plan because we know it's
going to change at some point.
And so that's the most important
thing we can do is is Craig
sustainability in New Mexico for
a budget in place are
reoccurring on reoccurring
money.
We know what could happen in the
future we don't know for sure we
could know but we don't know
projections look like a revenues
are up for next year but
anything in the Konica down
trigger that we know inflation
is hovering around eleven
percent seven percent for sure
gases doubled and we'll have to
watch it closely but as we move
forward we're gonna have to make
sure that New Mexico has a
stable budget that we may not
have this money forever we will.
In the queue to get this money
out is in that part of money you
have two years to get that money
under contract if that money
when we come back is not in the
contract when we come back to
session next year we're gonna
start looking at moving that
already in the following year
when we come back we will
transfer that money.
Or will go back to the federal
government so that's a that's a
requirement we're gonna track
very heavily in LFC and Senate
finance so that we don't lose a
seven hundred million that just
came out of the air from the
federal government force.
And so those are the important
things are gonna have to track.
Your reserves on two point four
billion and we don't count our
early childhood Trust Fund in
that yeah that that's roughly
additional for two more billion
so that's four point eight
billion that that's available
on.
We do target is targeted stress
tests on a budget and I know
some people don't believe that
we should have higher reserves
were little below our target but
we think when.
Our forecaster finally comes
that we didn't raise that
revenue forecaster reserves will
generate back up above thirty
that's our gas right now.
But stress test is the most
important thing that we can do
for budget downturn economy we
do that it tells us how much we
should have an reserves where we
should go on in our next our
revenue growth for the next year
showing about a six percent
increase six to seven percent
increases what we have targeted.
Appreciate that and so just just
on to one other thing to other
things so Senator Gonzales and I
have the these two
little tiny bill's going around
they're going to be pretty
expensive one of the money is to
reduce the to almost eliminate
the so secure taxed so security
Senator Gonzales G. R. T.
reduction due do we still have
that that all of that capacity
left to be able to do that I saw
four hundred million but then
there were a few other things I
think we're gonna be thrown in
there the solar markets tax
credit and maybe some other I I
don't know do we have the
capacity to the to do these two
massive historic tax cuts here
in New Mexico you know Senator
we have four hundred million
booked in in there was rumors
going around that was booked in
a different place it's not it is
in the tax package that just
came over to Senate finance
we're going to look in and see
what the house tax package has
in it as it comes over and then
we're gonna start scoring stuff
in in doing that the most
important thing I think you can
do for New Mexicans now is not a
not a G. R. T. reduction for
quarters a quarter on every
hundred dollar you spend I think
we should look at refunds in New
Mexico for families that have
children
for families that pay taxes
that's where should target are
money putting social security
including some backroom staff
but we're gonna squirrel that
tax credits are going to be
really tight as we move forward
next year we're told we're doing
a complete wash of our tax
let's see if it really gets done
but it needs to be done we sure
left four hundred million and
safety pull for tax
restructure make sure in case we
make mistakes and we heard a
bill about mistakes yesterday
that devastated the community
and we had a back fill some of
that money so as we move forward
we should plan for future so
those unintended consequences in
tax reform we have the
capability COVID.
Appreciate that and so I just
really hope that we can push the
sole security income tax
exemption completely through a
we're in good shape at the
moment to be heard in this
committee next so excited about
that on on rebates is there any
dollars available to provide
rebates to the to to taxpaying
families.
And we have four hundred million
in capacity it's a legislative
decision what we want to target
and what we want to do
I believe the social security
tax rate or from one twenty to
seventy seven depending how we
place them in in their tax
brackets so if you'd score that
is certain percentage and say
again a hundred million you have
three hundred million capacity
in there some other tax credits
I think around but we're gonna
have to look at those pretty
hard as we move forward thank
you madam chair Mister chairman
the last thing I'll say is this
is my tenth year here and every
year we've talked about full tax
reform and tearing the entire
thing down in the Swiss cheese
and with our on all these words
and everything about how we
would describe it I brought a
couple of tax things along the
way which quite a few what is
your projection chair Mister
chairman on true tax reform next
year because if we don't have
money to do it and I think
that's going to be the next
excuse all my gosh we don't have
money to do the you know so
where were we headed and what
your what your forecast there.
Madam chair center my forecast
is not a crystal ball and you
know that's why we should wait
to do that my personal opinion
is on the two communities that
we heard from last night
Carlsbad and Hobbs was a fifty
million dollar reduction in
their G. R. T. by something that
we can plan and we didn't know
about but when you see high
numbers like that for just to
communities that produce most of
our budget.
Thirty three percent our budget
and we should really target what
we really want to do but if you
don't plan for the future.
And we don't hold money.
In reserves
then we can't make that change
or something during the downturn
in the economy and we make those
tax reductions we're gonna be
sorry because then we will not
ever be able the tax reforms.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman again thank you to
the staff I learned a lot this
this session from all of you and
and you did a great job thank
you.
The process thank you thank you
madam chair Mister chair
This this.
Document have all the language
that we approved as the
committee.
Mr chair.
Madam chair center yes it does
have the sentiment language in
the back and it starts on page
Cynthia glasses on.
Thirty five years
page eleven.
If you'll scroll through that
and then that document ties back
to house bill two that is on
your desk in a section of
whichever agency that you're
looking at the language to be
included there with a dollar
amount for total spending and if
you.
So Mister chair I just want to
say so during this budget
process with Senate finance
there's been many times when
members of the public have said
is this document online can we
watch this and it's never online
we're not we used to when we
first COVID put things online it
seems like we've stopped and now
we're doing the most important
bill will pass this session
people can't see and and we're
being handed it right as we set
out so it's kind of hard to
process it so I have I have I
have a couple questions because
I'm seeing I'm seeing a few
things that aren't.
Thanks a new language and
there's some language I'm not
saying at all that I saw
previously and I just wanna ask
you about those items.
So Mr chair finished my
momentary the document is online
at and there is handout there's
handouts they brought I think we
block fifty over today printed
handout so the document is on
those listening Mr Stewart
Senators David Abbey director
Avid for Thursday morning you
looked at spreadsheets and
directed staff to bring this to
this top forty eight hours to
prepare for our staff including
some changes yesterday that have
the state we appreciate the
comments that recognize the
other for but the reason earlier
you can see is just because of
the length of time it takes to
prepare this and what it is
court stakes and go back and
forth and with our family there
are some complexities that we've
never seen before so so that's
the challenge and both times
this and so it is key to keep
those spreadsheets that you
would act and then we can go
back contracted sure you through
the process are we sure they
made it in the state of the.
The man that you know the exact
cracks did not come down to late
and so I will tell you that
those LFC staff members are we
going to do something for them
at the end of the committee
state till midnight two in the
morning last night till I don't
know what time because I didn't
touch base with them but it
worked late in that hours just
because the exact we were late
for the budget in the exact rex
didn't come down and and that's
what causes some of those long
nights I understand Mister chair
and it's you know it's it's
being on this committee in the
thirty day session is just one
of the real things I think we
need to look at changing the New
Mexico which is our thirty day
session is not enough time to to
do a budget to start with a half
billion dollar budget I mean
this committee has how many days
or yeah this is kind of crazy
not to mention the other things
we deal with but and so I
empathize and I do appreciate
all your hard work I mean it's
it's just unbelievable the
torrent of and it's
understandable on all ends you
know we're we're spending a lot
of money that's everybody has a
stake in that and unfortunately
it comes through a couple people
have to try to process that it's
it's just incredible but so
there's two language issues on a
flag and I welcome far for
cation number one there was the
last person we were shown before
the technical language committee
there was a line item four
million dollars of our authority
for the environment department
between programs look through
this document multiple times I'm
not seeing that
can you flag that for me is that
still exist.
Mr chairman of page two forty
two eleven thirty four.
Million dollars I think that was
when you.
This fund real quick it's what
takes you forty two thirty four.
This.
That's great to see second
question thank you Mr chair
chair Mister chair
The film academy so the film is
growing statewide the language
up to now is set to support from
academy in the building now
suddenly we have language in
there had not been there which
says in Bernalillo county.
In Albuquerque Bernalillo county
and I can tell you that.
The tenth of of economic
development is to invest in
training around the state which
is super important help grow
from around the state so I don't
know that's the language the
flags Bernalillo county in
Albuquerque and that needs to
I think we agree executive that
language should be there so for.
Madam chair Senator the exact
right then in that language.
Was that something that came and
just in the last two hours.
That is in there
What is the Senate finance
members so this will be the
first time this language
repaired that was initially a
couple of recommendations second
of cinnamon used model that came
in at the last minute so for the
first time this bill
incorporates the attempt to
address that request they it
available to the house because
discount locally within the
executive requested us this
questions with members about how
to get some of your.
Senator Steinborn that language
more the language that the exact
path in Capwell and and I I have
one more thing.
We know the executive requested
fifty million including forty
million for building in ten
million for programming so I
think the executive intended for
building in Albuquerque but
program statewide which is not
in this bill the program.
Right let me.
If I may ask Mr chair sorry no
not police there is also twenty
million in capital separately
and do you know does that
language in that more this
language here that says
Bernalillo county or authority
Senator the the exact requested
forty million dollars for the
film institute they didn't ask
for different capital for
different programming the for
the total forty million was for
a film institute they didn't ask
for any programming dollars well
thank you Mr chair I can tell
you that I think that's
something that we need to fix oh
one last the capital thing that
does not specifically say
because they've had a lot of
conversations with higher a
higher education including NMAA
you which is you know this is
got a very growing film industry
and that NMSU alum who's
producing the Superbowl
commercial.
They would also that the second
right probably so but anyway so
anyway.
that's something that that
doesn't align with conversations
we've had with with the exact
maybe that's where it started
but but it's now they're
intending to invest it so I
don't know set of that let me
ask you this Mr Wiese are you
intending for us to vote on this
budget today yes.
Okay so that with and therefore
be maybe an amendment that we
can make right now.
You know the they are the staff
is went to track the language
but because it's the language
that that we felt trapped in the
capitol request from the
executive okay
for to my just on that point
thank you for allowing me and I
promise to get back to you but
David could that be just
enquiring here on the because it
says Albuquerque for example
Bernalillo county could that be
because the Film Office itself
is New Mexico film office is in
Albuquerque New but it's but
well I've that they had a one in
Albuquerque is what I heard or
is that just for Albuquerque
this want to make sure.
Response from Miskito who's been
working with the executive in
the capitol building and.
It does indicate it will say
Bernalillo county in the capitol
bill as well because it was
their initiative and that's the
way they brought it to us.
And you can count.
They brought it to us that we
are the Mr chair that you have
to answer that yeah that doesn't
aligning so I I would I would
potentially moving amendment in
the committee I hate to do that
but I'd rather do it here than
on the floor because that brand
new information that.
That doesn't align with there's
one we're looking at the capitol
request from the executive in
the in the G. O. bonds and they
there's TV and this all aligns
with the language in the capitol
that they requested so that
amendment if you did that would
split the dollar amounts for
failing that the executive
request.
Mr chair they could still.
Well.
We should probably fix both of
them but at least it would have
a half of the money not be here
more towards one County and
that's super important as we
grow from economic development.
Senator madam chair center the
forty million dollars is for one
infrastructure project the split
the money then the project can
be completed and so this is for
film institute I don't know
where they the executive told me
they're requesting capitals for
Albuquerque Bernalillo that's
our language in the capitol that
we went over with the exact we
match that language in house
bill two that was a the exact
request and if we do that then
then the building will never get
built because the infrastructure
money will be separated for
years what I can tell you Mr
chair at and I've been in
communications with the economic
development secretary so that
shouldn't be here more towards
just just Bernalillo county so
it's it's not necessarily just
one facility I realize it's a
project that there doesn't have
the maybe enough information on
but a.
But that I can tell you I've
been.
Your contact since being the
session we had contacts between.
The Economic Development in NMSU
in other schools and.
But I understood that it's not
just one facility so I maybe all
the information that needs to be
updated.
Senator.
Texting someone from the sector
so I can get that answer that
was never any conversation that
we were in with the exact or any
conversation about changing that
they never said that there's a
language change in capital and
Senator capital down Christmas
Center Rodriguez is our capital
come down yesterday went to
drafting I think that master
drafting language so I haven't.
that conversation in.
We're waiting for an answer back
from the exact.
We haven't seen the capitol
language yet but yes number can
we go to your next question or
waiting for the answer.
Well the last thing on the staff
because if we don't catch up
cleanup I had heard that we had
I know we had a technical
language committee but now it
seems like we're.
Where the and and.
The end and in place here so I
think I know the answer to that
question we did catch up cleanup
on on Thursday in committee.
And so that's where we're at.
Mr Chairman and that their cyber
crime interject we just asked
for the language on the capital
bill it it's just to the film
division's very tiny of the
economic development department
to acquire property and to plan
design construct renovate
equipped and furnished studio
facilities in Albuquerque
Bernalillo county.
Yeah so you know this is the
problem Mr chair with just kind
of see in this language for the
first time and now we're
supposed to vote is that we have
a disconnect absolute disconnect
and Economic taxing with the
department right now that needs
to be fixes is a billion dollar
industry in the state this is a
forty and fifty once we from the
other ten fifty million dollar
appropriation it actually must
be statewide.
So this would be a huge problem
if we don't fix this.
Based on my understanding
etcetera I don't know where
you're getting your language but
the language from the exact has
always dispatches what we did in
the bill and matches what we're
doing capital yes and so.
Chairman of David maybe David
can help us Senator David the
language here clearly says that
is for the building so the
building would be in Albuquerque
what about the services and
comments from miss key home
looks like this is a summary but
the Film Office indicates main
Film Office in Albuquerque with
hopes campuses considered other
states with this year's.
The film office was in
Albuquerque and maybe services
would be throughout the state
because yeah no no the important
words there you heard is tops
this is the absolute intention
is to spend some of that money
outside of for a little County
it's not just services that's
super important Madam chair
Senator Steinborn I just got the
text back from the W. any said
that his understanding the
building would be situated
burning Bernalillo county but
the program would be statewide
they may have other program
money that we've not seen or
don't know about but that's
that's from the.
No Mr chair that's that's not
accurate and I can't let this
one go because the of the the
budget language here specifies
that that money only be spent a
Bernalillo county and that's
absolutely not what's been
agreed to so I'm sorry there's a
disconnect it's not your fault
it's not the staff's fault but
on the.
But we need to fix it.
I would.
I would move in I want to be
clear that you know to my
colleagues and so the New Mexico
what this means is this means
spending serious resources in
the southern part of the state
to actually grow from outside of
Albuquerque and Santa Fe give
our students opportunities to
access the state of the art
facility for training there.
The people close by rather than
continuing to concentrate the
investments of the state of the
industry one part of the state
so.
To not unimportant.
Mr Chairman may I suggest
something here if it's if the
intent is what's on the taxed
and and I believe that and I I
think there are Steinborn has a
point that it doesn't say that
clearly on the languages so I'm
wondering if we can just clarify
it to indicate what the intent
is of this you know that would
ensure that.
No madam chair yeah my
recommendation be just take out
the words in Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county and that way
they can visit they're still
very much in the planning stage
but there's.
We're.
Chair Senators we gonna make
there's a motion or yes I'm
going into that I was at the end
of your questions and then yeah
that that is my final point Mr.
Make those motions there's Madam
chair on that point yes thank
you maybe staff or somebody
explain what this motion is
because I want to make sure that
we're.
Clear on what the insurance
center it would strike
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
thank you Mr chairman may I
clarify that a little bit more
go ahead and then I will yeah.
And madam chair Senator Padilla
existed.
Be clear on what exactly it is
for looking here on page two
twenty five.
It is item number twenty three
to the Economic Development
Department you see the twenty
million dollars to the film
division.
The a motion it sounds is to
strike the the words on the
second line of that allocation
that says in Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county.
This is that the exact line item
that will Madam chair for my yes
please in that that done so that
just means that the twenty
million would that be available
for any project anywhere in the
state wouldn't necessarily be so
so we're there was initiatives
very plan specifically for in
Albuquerque facility do we know
that yet.
Madam chair center according to
the film institute in their
portfolio they said that would
be located there.
In the capitol bill matches
that.
They didn't say they didn't need
any instructional money I think
incorrectly director Abbey
currently wrong there's thirteen
thirty one or thirty eight
twenty universities currently
doing film studies are filming
in the universities I don't know
the exact connect plan on
expanding those or where that's
coming from.
There's no one available to
Senate Bill.
Recent Senator Padilla let us
read what we're we're gonna read
from what the Film Office has on
it.
And madam chair Senator Padilla
so this is a a document
published by the economic
development department from the
New Mexico Film Office that
talks about the next generation
media caddie in this document
the first bullet point The New
Mexico the next generation media
academy will be
the main campus will be in
Albuquerque with satellite hub
and spoke campuses being
considered in other areas of the
state a bilingual certificate
program is also being
considered.
And then and that means money I
just want to be really clear we
have real specific madam chair
Mister chair that that includes
real specific money
conversations about the forty
million.
Not just.
Services respectfully I think
chairman for us okay so so I
guess that might might follow
questions on this and
respectfully Senators I'm off
of.
I want to hear you as well I
promise but so there are any
plans in place we've already
done a lot of work we've gone
down the road and now we have
something do we have this
already designed or whatever for
any other part of the state I
don't hear that in any of the
comments from the executive.
For from the information that
was just shared.
Center in talking to the the W.
W. director used to work for me
in the first time it came in the
capitol that the exact
recommendation is is correct and
house bill two it's a Mister
chair Mister chairman and and
the others with this would
prohibit students from anywhere
in the state attending this
particular for being part of
this academy.
Madam chair and senator no not
that I know of once academies
bill but I think anybody can go
to from any place in the world
and I'm happy to hear that thank
you that's awesome thank you Mr
yes thank you and David you had
your hand up before we go back
to Senator Steinborn now okay
then let standard go ahead and
then I have a point about like
to make go ahead Mr chair chair
of the very disappointed at
what's transpiring today because
a group of we had actually
agreement this is not me trying
to say Hey we should get some of
this plans have not been made.
That's what that doc me says as
hubs and spokes it doesn't say
services provided that's what
that language means I'm sorry
that maybe the movie they're
going on I don't really know but
no no I'm not saying by you I'm
just saying.
I'm just say this a lot of money
and there was agreements to back
make the statewide and I know
there's a retraction on that but
the.
The whole session with the
department with my screen and
commitments made to them.
So.
I'm I'm ready to make a a motion
and and I and I will tell you I
don't think there's any plans
I'm aware of for life how to
spend this money in Albuquerque
because the work once
commitments to spend that around
elsewhere so.
Forty million dollars a lot of
money.
There's time morning in talking
to the W.
there's always been an agreement
that they can be would be built
in that the the higher end
institutions would do that so we
don't know about anything else
we just know what the exact
recommends to us what we put in
house bill two in what they tell
us so we don't know of any other
being.
I.
So anyway thank you bill I would
make a motion on this particular
one Mr chair in order at this
point have to wait.
Madam chair Senator Rodriguez as
the chair Senator Steinborn yes
thank you Senator.
Here did you have a are you
secondly there's a motion on the
table you seconded for
discussion or I got to meet in
the state before we go there
okay well R. L. following to
proceed if there is a motion on
the table okay.
So
Mr chair and everybody that
worked on this.
First I the collective we I
think need to pay of thank the
people that actually paid all
the taxes and of course that was
oil and gas a large part of this
but that was also all of the the
people that have jobs it was a
small business ownership was the
teachers who was the police
officer who was the welders in
the in the firefighters of all
of those people made this
happen.
So I know what we're talking
about what we want to do and how
we gonna take credit for
whatever it is I think we just
need to remember all of those
folks who actually put these
numbers on here.
And and first I want to thank
them I know there was a brief
discussion about rebates.
Okay and I completely support
rebates going back to the people
that helped build this the
people that actually paid the
taxes to make this happen.
And I just a.
Well there's plenty of things in
here of Mr chair.
That bug me.
Overall I want to thank you all
for building a budget.
That I think is more good than
bad.
It might cost me heart trouble
this year but I might
accidentally vote for.
Thank you for sure we can we get
one of the federal leader.
EMTs on standby I want to make
sure your health is our
maybe in the next couple of
thank.
Right thank you and I know
there's a motion of the floor
and seconded for discussion so I
can make my point here before we
vote but David correct me if I'm
wrong but it seems like this
ammendment request or proposed
merely clarify taking the words
and correct me Senator but what
you're trying to do is take the
words Albuquerque or Bernalillo
county just that's what you're
doing just remove them from
there correct Senator is that
that's what I want to do thank
you with that in mind I'm
thinking that by taking those
words out does not change much I
mean as far as it doesn't
preclude the governor from doing
it in Albuquerque anyway and it
clarifies the language that it
can be and ameliorates the the
concern that it that it won't be
done statewide so I I think it's
a reasonable amendment I don't
see myself that it's anything is
going to hurt anything I think
it makes a governor's intent
anyway and doesn't reduce the
the the plans to proceed forever
she wants to put that the have
any obviously or the main
building and that's in
Albuquerque so I'm going to I
second that amendment senator
and
and that's will move on to vote
so can we Madam chair wanted the
exit can strike the language if
she doesn't want it there but
everything we've been told to
text messaging and in the room
and everything else is the exact
requested that language be
there.
Thank you Mr chairman but I do
see that the film academy of the
Film Office in New Mexico and I
just have a language is pretty
clear in there that if the
intent was of the Hobbs would be
there I doubt that they that the
governor would be wanting to
exclude programs and operations
throughout the state so
I don't think it changes
anything in there that would
hurt myself that any part of the
comments from the committee.
Senator Woods.
I would request whatever then
that we may be written down on a
scrap piece of paper and passed
over to me.
Okay.
Thank you thank you senator all
right can you get a hand
amendment here Jon or somebody
to so we can visually see it
thank you.
The secret.
It was up to twenty five that we
just come up and.
Sure with.
Forward.
Right you know.
Is.
Twenty five Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
Thank I can also read it this is
just wrecking for words on page
two twenty five.
That would work.
No
we need to maintain some kind of
a process here.
Because if I bring an amendment
in any committee I don't have to
go through council service to do
that madam chair and not least
wanted on a piece of paper so I
know what a vote on the Senator
you have a right to ask for that
so I think it's coming here in a
moment Richard can you double
check John here thank you.
Thank you very much all right.
Madam chair finish of the Syrian
let's try to this will not vote
on house bill two let's get the
exact to talk to Senator
Steinborn and see what their
intent is.
Well absolutely madam chair
Mister and I know that there's
other issues others may have
language so that may be a good
thing to do R. thank you madam
chair so is there any other
language issues that we're
hearing.
Thank you for your message and
record to the fact that yes yes
ma'am we're not gonna take
action today than that I don't
need to move the members right
now.
There's a time when we we're
gonna have the exact in in touch
with you so they know that their
you know their intent.
Office chair for if we're going
to take action on this and I
would like to move this
amendment.
If we're not gonna take action
that only to move the amendment
right now well we well we work
with Senator we're not gonna
take action we're gonna let the
exact talked about what their
intent is and then we may come
off the floor this afternoon
when we're when we're hearing
that Senate Bill income up to
committee and do that.
The saying we will not vote on
it right now Mr we're now voting
on house bill two right now okay
so I do not need to do an
amendment well we work this out
and any I think there's some
other issues too so madam chair
let's continue with the hearing
in any other questions or
comments from committee members.
Rested from committee members
Senator crystal by thank you
madam chairman thank you
chairman I have just a couple
quick questions on.
Also some minor just language
differences from what left the
language subcommittee and what
I'm looking at now if I could
direct your attention to page
seventeen.
To the higher departments the
third from the bottom this is
what the the school of public
health we're creating a world
very supportive of we originally
had ten million going to you and
and I going to NMAA you but with
the language change in here
right now just includes UNM for
the entire fifteen million.
But in the language that came
out of the subcommittee NMSC was
still include.
The madam chair.
Senator if you look on page two
thirty.
Item forty eight is five million
for New Mexico State University
for school of public health.
I believe the Charles I know
it's just it's a little
confusing here because.
I vote on this this okay okay
good point guard Charles.
Informational and okay you're
you're actually.
That's just the type on the
spreadsheet what I get for
looking at the cliff notes a
couple other questions
We have some language completely
missing that was to the public
school support I think insurance
going to pull that up so by the
time we meet again we can see
where that is in the main budget
and then this is just a because
I haven't been following the the
issue now is is a pretty basic
question is where are we in
hydrogen because we still have a
hundred twenty five million
dollars in here I don't know I
don't know where all that is
what are we going to do if this
doesn't pass so we can have a
hundred twenty five more million
capacity we.
Please madam chair Senator.
Madam chair etcetera so we
didn't book the hydrogen money
in any appropriations spending
this appropriations bill so that
bill fails that will just go
into our reserves okay that's
helpful I thank you I can't
thank the staff enough I can't
believe you guys can get the
sheets amended and edited in the
amount of time that you do if we
ask point I can't thank you guys
enough for what you've done
really how healthy you are
connect with agent before we
meet again I just a couple
little things again thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
senator anyone else Senator
Burt.
Thank you madam chair will be
brief and and again I just want
to add my two cents worth of the
amazing work with the staff does
on this.
It's mind boggling quite rightly
that you get the staff and
thank you for the maritime and
with such incredible accuracy
just I don't have any questions
ventures a couple comments with
regards to Senator Steinborn I
just want to reiterate that time
and time and time and time and
time again we see all these
programs that will be done
statewide they're implemented
and then the never done
statewide they go to larger
communities and a couple
communities outside of
Albuquerque or Santa Fe or maybe
going in somewhere and but they
never really become statewide
projects so I want the committee
to come continue to remember
things like that and I wanted to
be high on the right are that
there are a lot of communities
maybe not for the film institute
but other programs need to be
aware that this is a state of
thirty three counties people
everywhere who deserve an equal
share of the programs that we
designed to the statewide
secondly just want to express a
little bit of concern.
About the our money in one time
money that may be involved in
programs may enhance programs
are established for helping to
establish new programs and I
again I haven't had time to
really dig into this yet
but I get concerned that we we
start programs we enhance
purpose of our money and then
you get to three years down the
line and the and there's a cliff
in the nearby you also screens
we have to have to do this and
then we have to go back in time
reoccurring money to supplement
that in our budget goes up again
and again again and that
oftentimes happens with oil and
gas is a little.
So I just want to express to you
we need to be very very
concerned how we applying on
reoccurring and reoccurring
funds to this budget those those
comments again I just think you
guys do incredible jobs but we
as stewards of the taxpayer
dollars of got to be cautious
about how this money is applied
because it's not fair to people
we make promises to for programs
and things like that and you get
two three years down the line
and and program has to come to a
stop or we have to take money
from somewhere else to
supplement this program in
robbing Peter to pay Paul and
that's not the way it right way
to run a a state either so
we just I just caution people
not to be cavalier with the way
money is spent and the way it is
appropriated within this budget
or any of the budget thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
This is a more of an
informational to the general
public.
On to raise is that we are
giving.
The the.
Not.
With the other school staff the
other state employees.
And.
I'm I've already talked to LFC
I've talked to done and I would
like for them to explain how the
seven percent raise is going to
be a new issue dated but because
of had school financial people
call me
public school finance people
call me and say the language
doesn't work for the raises that
we're saying that they're
getting so it if I could madam
chair done wanted to explain R.
for explaining that to me
yesterday of someone else would
rather explain it I need to get
that word out so somebody can
watch this in the future and so
I all that's how it's supposed
to work all right thank you
senator thank you don can you
explain please thank thank you
madam chair Senator Woods yes so
with the the
compensation increases for
school employees as well as all
other state employees it is
three percent salary increase in
FY twenty two so this fiscal
year that would raise the entire
base salary but because we only
have so many months left in this
fiscal year the funding to raise
that base salary that full three
percent is only needed for a
quarter of that funded but the
base salary still raises the
full three percent and then
starting in FY twenty three the
base salary increases again by
another four percent so in FY
twenty three it is indeed a
seven percent total increase and
I do understand how it can be
confusing when looking at the
documents when it sees that
we've only funded a quarter of
the FY twenty three increases
that does not mean they only get
a quarter of three percent it
does mean they get the full base
salary.
The increase of three percent
another base salary increase of
four percent on top of the three
percent so it actually ends up
being a little bit more than a
seven percent total base salary
increase.
And madam chair what I'm getting
at is is.
If you read the document.
it reads to get a three quarter
percent increase.
In twenty two the way it reads.
And they've explain to me how
that's a three percent but only
a quarter of the year one one
quarter but
so.
And it's many times allowed to
be paid as a one time payment at
the end of the year because it's
so hard to.
We don't want those school
districts to have to go in and
change all of their salary
schedules for twenty two so we
want to give them one time
payment it was a deal struck of
to help them with their
financial deal but.
The trick of it is is to show
that base salary being three
percent higher before we start
next.
So that they can give a four
percent on top of that if you
understand what I'm saying madam
chair and I had requested
somewhere in there just.
Put seven percent in there
somewhere in the language but
they told me that that wouldn't
work but I just wanted it to be
known out in the general public
at in the school districts that.
Even though.
To me it's a very convoluted way
of doing it that's the intent of
of doing it that way to get to
that's that seven percent
average race thank you madam
chair thank you senator and I'm
Madam chair Senator Woods when
you have to do pay increases on
the last quarter of a payroll
and then come back the next year
and implement the difference in
the rate increase that's the
problem that we run into is how
do you implement a three percent
come back and implement a four
percent in school districts and
so the best link where we came
up with the language was to fix
that so they can adjust their
income for the year by a stipend
and then come back the next year
year and in short on their
payroll as a full seven percent.
R. that's the issue we run into
it.
With thank you given a three
percent increase in one quarter
sure Senator the only thing I
want to make of the reason I
made this comment is because
I've sent a few contracts in my
life.
And they didn't turn out like
they were presented so I just
wanted to make sure how this in
public comment time here how
this is going to be done so
those public school
administrators know what the
intent although we're not
supposed to say intent of the
legislature sure that is our
into madam chair thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Senator thank you Mr chairman
okay thank you for your points
and those are good points
because it's true it's it's not
what we do it's also but it's
about the perception out there
what if they understand so
that's good thank you Senator
Campos and then Senator Gonzales
thank you very much of Madam
chairman of course to the
members of the LFC and to DFA
and to the various agencies as
they've worked diligently to put
together this type of budget
which is it's a huge budget I
make the general statement to
the to the general public please
hold us accountable as we begin
to go forward in the expenditure
of these resources we've seen
over the the years that there
have been resources that have
been spent there's been others
that I have been delayed or held
back and so with this this is an
opportunity for all of us to
work together and to bring
forward if you will not only the
resources and H. B. two but also
the various departments so if we
use the resources that we have
in a diligent fashion what we're
going to find is that level of
sustainability the strength that
we can build whether it be in
education or health care or any
of the other areas that then we
can design something that
definitely for years to come
will be the basis or if you will
the premise that is definitely
going to go ahead and help to
move us forward as a state so
again.
To the chief executive to the
individuals within the various
departments and of course to the
those that will be expanding
these resources I want to ensure
that the stress tests are there
that as we move forward that the
vision is going to be explained
regardless of what the
department is and then most
importantly as we all work
together into the future that we
bring forward if you will the
institutional knowledge that we
already have and then take it
forward so that in a year from
now we're going to see that the
resources will definitely be
available for us to continue to
grow those areas that are
essential to our children
particularly in the area of
education and in the area of
health care as we move forward
so are elderly and others are
going to understand that we not
only care about in but we're
able to go ahead and take care
of their needs there's so many
other things that a person can
go through particularly with the
our our budget but today I would
just like to go ahead and
express my full thanks to each
and everyone of you for your
vision over the years the
accountability that would bring
forward and most importantly the
implementation of what we
consider to go ahead and be a
program.
Resources and of course all of
this for the entire state that
is going to make a very positive
difference for each and everyone
of us thank you madam chair
thank you senator.
Senator Gonzalez thank you madam
chair I just one of basically.
From the a lot of the points
that are being brought out for
the there's two things that I I
just want to go for one twenty
percent is so.
The hard work that has gone.
That we're seeing here with a
four year process the effect
will be starting for next year
starting in April and then what
you see you know what we have
here but one of the things that
of is very important and this is
to the LFC staff.
This the amount of research that
is done throughout the year I
mean there is such a quantity
and quality of the research that
has been done.
And the what we work with you
know to come to this point the I
don't think we can thank you
enough the entire staff you know
from all.
You know the different
departments and DOT DFA and
everyone that you know how they
put this but it's always in the
it's always looked into the best
interest for the state the the
with that of thank you madam
chair thank you Senator for your
good words thank you Senator for
your good words that was offered
all right any other comments
Senator Padilla.
I'm gonna vote today at this
moment maybe later to.
This moment we're going to try
to stop.
Process.
All right we're now voting okay
no other questions here from the
committee I just wanna also say
thank you to the staff I've done
it in before and I want to do it
again there's never enough words
we appreciate you very much
madam chair as we move forward.
I want to make sure that.
People understand what eight
billion dollar budget is and how
much money it takes to make an
eight billion dollar budget and
how much work people have to do
whether it's the guy upon the
highways the plumbers working in
the backyards whoever's working
in order to make government
function.
I don't think I've had as many
sleepless nights as I had trying
to understand how to spend three
billion dollars extra in the
state in New Mexico and try to
do it correctly but the people
that were are dependent on the
government and and frontier
government we're the ones that
really make New Mexico grow and
move every single day along the
highway whatever their job is.
They're the ones the guys in the
oil field the companies that
invest in New Mexico on to make
New Mexico's budget what it is
today those are the real hard
workers that don't really get
the credit because we don't see
in there the guy at the at the
restaurant washing dishes.
There the restaurant owner that.
Eight in the morning at five
every morning opens restaurant
by seven to get the stove warmed
up there's quite a few people in
New Mexico that deserve respect
and responsibility and we have
to have done this correctly we
hope we district we should have
done it correctly but I think
that's that's to makes New
Mexico work on our teachers in
our classrooms the educator
children now becomes complete
across the state whatever
they're gonna do everybody makes
New Mexico better place and and
so what we work on this and
where the legislative body.
It's the people in the business
of New Mexico that make this
budget work for them.
With that madam chair I I just
have one more comment.
You know the the LFC staff has
worked behind the scenes I bet
in the last week I bet till two
in the morning one night to
midnight one night.
Proofed checking going to
language working on legislation
doing FY ours for bills trying
to cover all the bases in a
thirty day session and there's
forty six four we have a thirty
five permanent Mr chairman about
ten times tractors so we have
the five permanent staff that
the services the around from
Ellis.
Those are smart intelligent
young people and people that
deserve the credit of what we're
doing today.
They don't often come around you
don't see them over here in the
capital very often unless
they're working on a piece of
legislation but those are the
ones that in New Mexico that
really put this together for us
and those are the ones that
really deserve the credit
because it's a year round
process like Senator Gonzales
said this just magically appear
in thirty days this is a process
that submitted with every agency
and every department on what
their needs are and what's
happening in planning for the
next year and what they can
handle and capacities we may
have over founded some agencies
they may not be able to expand
that dollar amount because we
don't have the FTEs in those
agencies.
But the LFC staff
I highly recommend try to hire.
is the ones that really deserve
the credit for putting all this
together force in their late
hours in their time frame and
director Abbey and deputy
director trial so late just
managing people in managing a
hundred twelve legislators in
their legislation plus there
staff plus eight billion dollars
of language and everything I I
just people need to know that
the recognition is there the
they really drive the bus and we
just get in on the thirty day or
sixty day in and then we make
decisions so that madam chair.
Thank you very much agreed thank
you senator thank you staff
again all right we're I think
we're going to move on from
house bill two until we come
back later on today thank you
senator when we proceed you want
to proceed with Senator madam
chair I think I need to we're
gonna break for five minutes and
just need to catch up with the
exact so they make sure that
we're square on the language and
and so let's just break for.
A few minutes and then C..
Put it on for thank you want to
get House Bill to clean up K.
there is an.
Okay thank you thank.
