To your your substitute bill.
Um
Senator Stewart when it starts
out, and we have
The tracking number is
0963.3, correct?
For the substitute.
Yes
OK.
Center, you're gonna start this
and then we'll get the
substituted in.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee.
Senate Bill 4.
Which we also call the clear
horizons on the progress we've
already made and we've made a
lot of progress in New Mexico.
It sets in place a regulatory
framework.
And investments necessary to
protect our families,
communities, and economy.
From escalating climate
disasters, which we have seen so
much this past year.
Fires, floods.
Not just in New Mexico, but all
over the country. So we looked
out, in my opinion, by having
A governor
Who came in, uh, saw these
issues and immediately did an
executive order.
Asking her state agencies.
To work on climate.
Especially reducing greenhouse
gas emissions.
Executive order.
Also asked us to be part of the
Paris climate accord.
So the first and major thing
that this bill does.
is to codify.
those
Requirements from the governor
on her executive order.
So that means that we would
codify her emission targets.
that she set in place 6 years
ago.
Those are
Tell you what page they're on in
the bill, if that's how you want
to look at them.
H 5
So by 2030, 45% emission
reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions by 204075% emissions
reductions and by 2050, 100%
reductions using a net zero
target.
So we do this by empowering the
environmental improvement board.
To
Make rules around these
emissions targets and required
them to set in place an
inventory and a progress report.
Every 2 years.
So
We first for the timeline, we
ask that the environmental
improvement board adopts
monitoring rules for all
sections.
By September 30th, 2026.
And of course, all stakeholders
are involved in that rulemaking.
So January 1, 2027 would be when
the monitoring rules go into
effect.
July 31, 2028 is the second
inventory and so it goes every 2
years with that.
July
When he
8, then it would be July 31,
2030, etc.
So
The first inventory that we're
requiring 123126. We already
have a lot of that information
already. Mexico Environment
Department has put out a report.
Um, certainly the interstate
stream commission, the Office of
the State Engineer have reports,
so it's really making rules,
getting the first inventory out.
And then every 2 years, having a
published inventory report with.
Are we reaching our goals or
not?
And which sector is not reaching
their goals, and what can we do
to help and what projects can we
offer?
You know, there's a lot of
comments about this bill not
working.
Uh, certainly, I've been on
social media for 6 weeks now. I
understand that you all are now
in that social media. Welcome to
that meme club.
Um
So this bill really uh set takes
the standard enforcement
approach that for federal and
state pollution control, because
that's really what we're talking
about. We're talking about
pollution pollution control.
That's what greenhouse gasses
are, they're pollution.
They promote asthma and cancer
and all kinds of other
respiratory ailments.
Um, those ailments tend to be
situated in what we're calling
overburdened communities.
The Environmental Improvement
Board and the air quality
control commission have to take
into account those overburdened
communities and we've put in the
bill ways that they can do that.
For the oil and gas industry.
This bill builds.
On our nationally leading
methane requirements that our
Lungriam administration has put
in place.
Actos rules were put in place by
2022, between 2020 and 2024
production has doubled in the
Permian Basin.
Our regulations are helping to
improve pollution without
impacting production from the
industry. You've heard that
we've got the best oil in the
world.
Sweet Permian oil we're 2nd in
the nation.
In the
Amount of production.
We can all be proud of that.
And many of us are proud of the
funding that we've received from
this industry. It's not
insignificant.
What we're asking for.
is to continue to work with us
on controlling the pollution
that comes from all of our
industries.
Because of climate change.
You know, we don't like to talk
about it.
It's kind of embarrassing.
And the industry is really
embarrassed by it, but because 5
decades ago, their reports all
said we're going to produce
climate change.
They didn't tell any of the rest
of us, but.
So this bill meets international
targets and clean.
Gass standards.
These targets are aligned with
the International Energy Agency
that says it's necessary in
order for the industry to reach
net zero emissions by 2050.
Are the targets that we've put
in.
Many global marketplaces.
that are importing our oil cause
we, we hardly use any of that.
We export most of it.
They're putting in place clean
standards.
From Europe to Asia, countries
are moving towards implementing
methane intensity requirements
that are aligned in this bill.
So
Uh, Mr. Chairman, as you might
imagine, I've been meeting with
a whole lot of people that have
a whole lot to say about this
bill.
Um
I was really impressed with the
4 oil and gas companies that we
met with a few weeks ago.
Because they're part of these
organizations that I had no idea
existed.
You have an oil and gas climate
initiative.
OGCI.
And we have a oil.
And gas decarbonization charter.
G O G D C
And all of the people in those
organizations have committed.
To the standards that we have in
this bill.
Uh, we met with Oxyevron Conoco
Phillips and EOG. I just want to
read to you some of the comments
that they have from their.
Oxy is helping develop real work
projects, innovations and
solutions for a lower carbon
future.
We recognize the significant
challenge, climate change poses
to our society and are committed
to be part of the solution.
We are leveraging our experience
in carbon management and
storage, essential chemistry and
major infrastructure projects to
achieve net zero and accelerate
progress on the goals of the
Paris Agreement.
All of these companies have
statements like this.
Um, EOG oil and gas companies
must be part of the methane
solution if we're to keep global
warming to 1.5%. EOG is focused
on being a responsible operator
and part of the long-term future
of energy, emissions reduction
targets have proven valuable in
our efforts to reduce emissions
intensity as evidenced by the
early achievement of our current
targets.
Conical Phillips says they're
voluntarily conducting pilots of
the emergingnologies at numerous
facilities to determine
effectiveness of scalability of
next generation detection
technologies will also deploying
thick sensor technologies and
aerial survey.
So these companies are not
sitting back.
These companies are developing
ways to reduce emissions in the
furtherance of keeping this
climate from burning to a crisp.
Let me go back to the bill just
a moment. I failed to introduce
my uh expert witness. Uh, this
is Professor Gabe Painia at UNM
who teaches this kind of stuff
every day.
Um, I'm gonna turn to him in
just a minute.
So I've told you about the
amendments, that's pages 1
through 4 is where we defined
overburdened communities, um,
we've, we're right in line with
what Colorado has done with that
definition, um, there was a
screener at EPA. They are now
screeners at several states
around us to help us determine
that. Colorado has already
passed these regulations.
Um, the targets are on page 5.
What counts the inventory and
the progress reports.
I'm gonna turn it over now to uh
Professor Painia to make some
more.
Cha Munos members of the
committee, good afternoon.
Thanks for the opportunity to
address all of you today. I'm
just gonna keep these open
comments brief and, and happy of
course to answer questions that
you all may have later. I just
wanna echo Senator Stewart's um
comments that this is that this
bill builds on a proven
architecture uh for reducing
pollution, and it's not just
reducing greenhouse gas
pollution, the basic structure
here is the one that we in New
Mexico have used for over 50
years.
to reduce conventional air
pollutants.
The Clean Air Act sets national
standards, one standard, you've
got to get down to so many parts
per million of
Ozone, for example. And then
what you all have done is the
legislature is empowered the
environmental improvement board
determine what the mix of
regulations is on different
industries to meet those
national standards or in some
cases, standards set by New
Mexico.
And that's basically what this
bill does. It says the governor
has set these science-based
standards, we're now going to
codify those standards into law,
and we're gonna give the
environmental improvement board,
the same authority that it has
for meeting our other types of
air pollutants and to decide the
mix of regulations that make
sense with different industries
to get down to the science-based
level of greenhouse gas
pollution that is necessary to
protect all of us from harms.
And I'll note that
This is also the same type of
framework that other states, 14
other states have codified
greenhouse gas emissions and
standards and law.
I can give you details, but
they're all about the same place
where this bill would codify the
standards. It's the same place
where the intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change says we
need to get to prevent the worst
harms of climate pollution.
Arms that we're seeing already
in terms of our
terrible ski season this
semester this season.
Um
I'll also note that of those
states, about 9 of them have,
have not only codified
standards, but they've done very
similarly to what this bill
does. They've asked the state
agencies to determine what's the
right mix of regulations here
and then empower those the state
regulators to put in place
regulations that will be
sufficient to meet those
standards.
And finally, I'll just note that
there's a number of changes in
the proposed amendments here
that were made based on feedback
that we received from the
environment department and from
industry including from oil and
gas in uh companies to make this
bill uh more feasible for them,
um, in compliance.
And just briefly, those some of
those changes include clarifying
the 2050 target can be met, um.
Both by direct emission
reductions and by uh increases
in carbon sinks that would net
or offset any remaining
greenhouse gas emissions in
2050.
It also includes a change to the
definition of methane intensity
emissions intensity. It's a
technical change, it won't bore
you with the details. What I
will say is that the outcome is
it slightly reduces the
stringency of those methane
emissions targets.
But oil and gas companies told
us it would be easier to comply
and Senator Stewart um accepted
that proposal.
Um, it also includes a
clarification of what sector
means in this case. Wait, wait,
are you working on the sub? Yes.
OK, we didn't
Senator Sindo, we didn't vote
to.
I was gonna ask that, yeah, OK,
so can I have a motion?
Let me see what the motion is.
I have a do not pass on Senate.
Uh, Senate Bill 4.
And
To get a, let me see, did it, it
did not get amended in
conservation, correct?
And.
OK, I do not pass on tenant Bill
4 and a do pass for Senate
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 4 for
discussion purposes
I have a second.
I bison or Padilla.
Any objection to that motion.
See then, OK, now we're on the
substitute, so.
Just make sure we're in the
right order.
You're still go ahead, I just
had to play that catch up.
My apologies, uh, Cha Munoz and
members of the committee, and I,
I just finished mentioning that
there were a couple of other
changes in the substitute
amendment that again we're,
we're intended to make the bill
more practicable and I and
address issues that were raised
by, among others regulated
parties such as oil and gas.
Among those is in section 5 uh
G7, that's page 19 in the
amendment 923, um, uh, something
that explicitly states that the
environmental improvement board
has the authority to consider
that if there are companies out
there that have already made
progress consistent with the
state targets. They shouldn't be
penalized. So if there are good
actors out there and um they
shouldn't be penalized because
others aren't necessarily
meeting the target.
Um
Similarly, the next, the next
line G8 says that um and again,
this is in response to specific
requests we had from industry.
If a sector is not meeting the
targets that the Environmental
Improvement Board has said that
it hopes that sector will meet
the environmental improvement
board will first seek to make up
the gap from that sector so that
it, it's even and fair among
different sectors.
And finally, um, again, at the
request of some
Industry stakeholders.
Uh G9 says um that uh the EIB
expressly may differentiate in
its regulations based on
operator size. So a larger
operators are in a different
position from smaller operators
and that that's something that
the EIB can take into account.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I, I just have a
few more comments.
One is a section 3 on page 8.
this is where agencies uh look
at climate equity principles. So
we certainly want them to
prioritize greenhouse gas
reductions and overburdened
communities, incorporate tribal
consultation and outreach when
rulemaking and incorporate
outreach to overburdened
communities and finally to
consider how to address adverse
health environmental.
impacts from greenhouse gas.
So we've so I'll just say one
more thing and that.
Many companies that we talk to.
Basically said they're really
almost there with the first one
on their way towards the 2nd
target.
So, uh, you're going to hear.
That, oh my God, the sky is
falling and oil and gas will be
run out of the state.
That is just not accurate. We've
done regulations so far, the
methane rules were hard to
implement, but we did and
production has doubled, uh.
Companies in New Mexico are
making a lot of money off of our
oil and gas, and what we want to
promote is it all of us have to
work together.
Lower these greenhouse gas
emissions.
So
We will stand for questions, Mr.
Chairman.
OK.
We're gonna go to the audience.
I mean, do we have on Zoom?
Oh
She already introduced the the
subcommittee, so we're gonna go
to comments now that we know
what the sub does.
Right? I mean do we have on
Zoom, sorry.
111 people watching.
Start splitting them up for for
and against. So we'll, we're
gonna start off with 15 minutes
4 and then I'm gonna try to
catch up on Zoom and then see
where we're at with the
The 30 minutes, so you want to
line up, we're gonna start with
the 1st 15 minutes.
And, and try not to be
repetitive, uh.
Because if you're repetitive
then.
Other people aren't going to be
allowed to make their point.
We're gonna start with these
young kids first because they
already got the mic in their
hand.
to go
You gotta catch the bus to get
home for.
OK, tell us your name and, and
uh
Um, Mr. Chairman and committee,
my name is Valentina and I'm in
6th grade at a Madre Elementary
School.
Yeah, um, my friends and I
attend the afterschool global
warming Express program. And in
this program, we've talked about
the SB4 or the Clear Horizons
Act.
And, and other bills in this
year's legislature.
Um, we're here to support SB4 or
the Clear Horizons Act, and each
of us have our own reasons to
support for me, either is I I
like this bill because as
greenhouse gas emissions in New
Mexico will go down to net zero
by 2050.
And
LD um supports the bill because
um as she's interested in
climate equity, and she thinks
that everyone deserves clean air
and water.
And Adam is in.
Adam's interested in it in SB4
because
Adam's interested in SB4 or
because he believes eaves that
communities next to
environmental hazards, herds
will have extra cleanup support.
And my sister,
uh Victoria believes he's that,
um, she likes the bill because
as $3 million will be given to
support the bill each year here
in New Mexico, and that that'll
make it work.
And Lily supports the bill
because
As she, she likes the strong
reporting requirements. Hence,
for our environmental department
so that we know, oh, if our
greenhouse house gas reduction
goals are being met, and
likes to build because Newmex,
she thinks that New Mexico can
set an example to other states,
it's so that together we can
make planet Earth a healthier
place to live.
Thank you for listening to us
today. Thank you for um thank
you for supporting us on SB4.
Good afternoon committee, um,
I'm Patty Williams, registered
lobbyist for the Navajo Nation
Council Office of the Speaker,
and um I want to report that the
Navajo Nation as a sovereign
entity, um, has no position on
this bill.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Karen Bia and I am a
lobbyist for New Mexico native
vote. We advocate for the
cultural vitality of native
peoples and policies that
support economic development
while ensuring the prosperity of
native communities and the state
as a whole. We recognize the
intersections of the working
class, the stewards of the land,
those who make New Mexico the
land of enchantment. They are
our ranchers, farmers, loggers,
mothers, fathers, and teachers.
We also recognize that by
Uh, vital contributions of the
oil and gas industry to the
Mexico's economy, which
continues to thrive despite
recent regulatory efforts, oil
production has increased by 42%
from 2021 to 2023.
We want to, uh, convey our
support also because there are
no implications for tribal
communities. Senate Bill 4
explicitly does not extend to
tribal lands, court precedent
there's also affirms that Senate
Bill 4 and state regulations do
not extend over tribal lands,
ensuring that sovereign tribal
nations retain full authority
over environmental and economic
policies within their
jurisdictions are under their
control. We conclude that the
Clear Horizons Act and Bill 4 is
about the balance reducing
emissions while safeguarding.
our economic growth. We are
encouraged a do pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Naomi
Valdez, a registered lobbyist
for NEA New Mexico, representing
thousands and thousands of
educators around the state. NEA
New Mexico stands in strong
support of this legislation as
public educators, NEA members
spend their days and lifetimes
investing in the future of New
Mexico. Our children and our
grandchildren. It is critical
that the legislature acknowledge
the moment we are in and act now
to protect that future by
passing the Clear Horizons Act,
ensuring
Through law that the Air New
Mexicans and our children
breathe is clean and safe is the
right and necessary thing to do.
Senate Bill 4 is responsible
climate legislation that will
protect our communities and the
industry that helps fund our
public schools. Thank you.
Hello. Thanks, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Denise Foster. I'm the president
and CEO of Conservation Voters
New Mexico, but I'm here today
on behalf of a very large
statewide coalition made up of
38 business, community, health,
environmental groups from across
the state of New Mexico. Well,
everyone please stand who's part
of that coalition that has been
working on this bill for years
and years because climate change
affects every single
New Mexican from our rural
communities to our teachers and
educators, our students to our
frontline communities, our rural
communities to our unhoused, to
our LGBTQ community to everyone
across the state. The Calf
Canyon fire alone cost $1
billion in a 5 firefighter
response. Um, the fiscal impacts
of this bill are significant in
helping our economy, creating
new jobs in new tech.
Technologies to meet our
emissions targets and to
reducing the amount of money in
our state has to spend in
climate disasters. Um, so
please, we encourage the
committee today to, to vote for
yes on the Clear Horizons Act
and a due pass. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Camilla
Feibelman. I'm the director of
the Sierra Club's Rio Grande
chapter. We represent over
35,000 members and supporters. I
wanted to just take a minute to
describe what a rulemaking looks
like at the environmental
improvement board.
You can't
propose any old thing. The New
Mexico Environment Department
writes a rule based on a whole
series of considerations,
including economic impact and
then all the impacted parties
intervene and go through an
extensive basically trial where
you bring experts where they
write testimony where they're
cross-examined, a hearing
examiner writes a recommended
decision and the commissioners
themselves have a right.
to make changes and vote in
favor or against. This is a
serious rulemaking with remedies
in court, we all want our kids
to thrive here. I'm an
Albuquerque bulldog, and my kids
are growing up here as well, but
we need
The money that comes into the
state to be as much as it's
costing us to keep things going.
Thank you so much.
Hello, Chairman and committee.
My name is Karen Carl, lobbyist
for New Mexico Native vote. I am
impressed with the industry's
ability to comply with rules
that they initially imposed.
Still, oil and gas extraction is
simply costing our state too
much. I watched this committee
debate the cost of insurance and
the scarcity of water, but both
of those things are directly
caused by climate change, which
is being driven by the Permian
oil boom. Please vote and in
favor of this bill, the cost of
Action is just too great.
Good afternoon, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Tyler Chipiro and I'm
from the Pueblo Auni. I'm a
young mother to two young boys,
um.
I work for NM Native vote where
I advocate, where we advocate
for the cultural vitality of
native peoples and the policies
that support economic
development.
S4 will ensure the land, air,
and water will continue to be
able to support life in the
future as we move forward, we
must continue to shape policies
that uphold these values for the
benefit of all New Mexicans
without these protections, our
future is at risk. Please vote
in support of SB 4. Thank you.
Hello, Chairman and committee.
My name is Monique Hardy. I am a
community organizer with New
Mexican Native Vote. As a mother
of 6 children, I am worried
about our environmental changes
and how it will, it will affect
our future generations. I am in
support of SB 4, and I hope that
you will vote in favor. Thank
you.
Yach a
My name is Santiago Hardy. I'm a
19 year old youth intern with
Animatedo I, Spanish and. I'm
from Albuquerque, New Mexico,
and I'm here in support of SB4.
And I urge you all to support
this bill as well on behalf of
our youth and future generations
to come because it is important
to provide a, a brighter, clean,
sustainable future, not just for
me and our future for our youth
and ensure that we keep our
industries accountable for their
pollution.
And make sure our youth will see
a positive change and grow to
become capable, strong, healthy
leaders so that they can make a
difference in their own
community. Thank you. So please
support SB4.
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Sahara. I am the program manager
at Equality New Mexico, the
statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization speaking in support
of SB 4, which is a legislative
priority for EQNM.
Equality New Mexico has
historically not engaged in the
environmental advocacy space, at
least until now, thanks to the
hard work by advocates to ensure
that their priorities remain
inclusive of the vulnerable
communities who are oftentimes
most impacted by the harms of
climate change.
Equality in New Mexico support,
supports this bill because it
centers those impacted first,
all while getting the work done
with environmental stability,
economic sustainability, and the
preservation of our state's
land, air, and water at the
forefront. This act provides a
real and effective plan to reach
attainable targets for clean air
with provisions to codify
standards, track progression,
and adjust as needed in order to
reach these goals. Queer and
trans people have been at the
center of conversations to
ensure that these new standards
are provided in an equitable
manner, promoting the initial
effort of greenhouse gas
emission reduction to.
communities that are
overburdened in New Mexico. EQ&M
strongly urges the due pass on
SP4. Climate change affects
marginalized communities first,
so climate policy should do what
it can to reach, preserve, and
center these communities first
too.
Go and see him at all hope.
Hello, uh, chairman and
committee members. My name is
Alicia Carris. I'm from the
Senate, the Pueblo of Santo
Domingo and the lobbyist, uh,
this has been our home for
thousands of years. My family
has invested in our community as
artisans, farmers, and ranchers
for generations upon generation.
Having a positive and
responsible relationship with
our land, air, water, and
animals. And so today you are
senators have the power to
protect our people, land, air,
and
water just as we have for
generations. So I please urge
your support for Senate Bill 4.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Laconia
representing the SaIA project
and some MIA action today, I
stand before you to advocate for
Senate Bill 4, which is not just
the climate initiative, but a
blueprint for future proof
proofing New Mexico's economy
through job creation for a
youth. This legislation offers a
proactive approach to climate
change by setting emission
reduction targets and pioneering
innovation and energy generation
by integrating climate.
principles it ensures that BIPO
communities are central to
crafting climate solutions
aligning with our mission to
advocate for justice, equity in
all forms. I urge you to support
and pass Senate Bill 4.
Hello, Chairman and members of
the committee. My name is
Mikayla Lee, a citizen of the
Navajo Nation. All children
deserve to drink.
Clean water and or drink safe
water and breathe clean air for
generations. Our lands have been
poisoned and our voices ignored
as before, Clear Horizons Act is
the bare minimum to protect our
future.
We will not be silenced. We will
not let our children be
sacrificed for profit. We don't
have a lot of time to do so, so
I urge you to support SB4.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Charles De Sain. I'm an
attorney and a registered
lobbyist for Coalition for Clean
Affordable Energy. We strongly
support Senate Bill 4. the bill
would, uh, adopt the targets of
greenhouse gas emission targets
of the governor's executive
order and the Paris Accords.
More importantly,
He would instruct the
environmental improvement board
to adopt regulations to, to meet
those targets. And as Mr. Pinak
said, this is the, the standard
way that we adopt environmental
regulations in New Mexico. Uh,
this legislation is critical to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and address the, the, uh, the
burgeoning problem of global
climate change. Um, this is
especially true given the new
administration in Washington DC,
New Mexico must do its part.
Uh, to address greenhouse gas
emissions and the the uh the
problem of global climate
change. We urge a due pass uh on
Senate Bill 4. Thank you very
much.
You might be the last one before
we switched to Zoom, but the
rest are up there just wait till
we get in place and then see how
many we get runs in.
Yeah, a chair and committee
members Aa Chavez from Sannosity
Mexouihua Pueblo. Both sides of
my families are farmers and
ranchers who have lived here
since time immemorial. We need
this bill to ensure we have the
water to grow our food that does
not get killed by the extreme
heat before harvest. We have
seen presidential executive
orders tossed aside under this
federal administration. This is
why we need reasonable economic
based rules to reduce our
emissions and costs. We strongly
urge your support for SB 4.
Yeah.
OK, we're gonna switch over to
Zoom.
Yes.
Byron
Percy
and
Byron, I think I know
personally.
I think Percy.
Uh, ya, can you, can you hear
me?
and we're gonna turn it down.
OK. All right. Thank you.
um.
OK, all right. um, thank you,
uh, Chairman Maoz and um
committee members. Uh, thank you
for allowing me to speak before
you. And um before I start on be
brief about this. I just wanna,
um comment that um um I'm, I'm,
I'm speaking on behalf of my uh
late uh papa. Um, he was a
Vietnam combat veteran as well
as he worked in oil and gas
industry at one time. And um,
One of the concerns that he
mentioned to me at one time as
we were talking about the
environment was
He spoke about Agent Orange and
how it impacted his
His, his health and
And, um, and what he went
through at Vietnam.
And we went further beyond that
talking about.
How the environment is so
important to us.
And that, um, and that we
realized that energy development
is important and it has brought
a lot of prosperity to us. And
um
But the one thing that we need
to consider is that
We need to also consider the
environment, the water, and what
energy, um, the impact it has
for our social, economic,
education, public safety and
health.
And um, so I, I speak on behalf
of not only him but also uh a
number of community members from
where I come from a manualito
Seato and Chechota here in New
Mexico, and we support um SB 4
and so thank you very much.
Aha.
When it
Who's next?
Uh
Joanna's
Joanna,
You're next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Joanna Struther and I serve as
the senior director of advocacy
for the American Lung
Association as a leading public
health organization, we are in
support of Senate Bill 4. The
American Lung Association state
of the air report reveals that
54% of New Mexicans live in a
county with a failing air grade
for air pollution. The air
pollution burdens are across the
state. Albuquerque, Las Cruces,
and Eddy County topping most
polluted cities in the counties
and in country lists.
Everyone's health is at risk
from breathing in polluted air.
Poor air quality can cause
respiratory and cardiovascular
harm, including heart attacks
and strokes and even early
death. Many people, including
young adults, experience
decreased lung function or
breathing problems such as chest
tightness, coughing, and
shortness of breath, often
within hours of exposure. Air
pollution can also worsen
symptoms um with people living
with lung disease, such as
asthma and COPD. Our report
called zeroing in on healthy air
revealed.
that transitioning away from
fossil fuels could result in 3
billion in public health
benefits, and that's just right
here in New Mexico. These
benefits include lives saved,
asthma attacks avoided, and lost
work days avoided. We can
protect the health of New
Mexicans by by pivoting away
from combustion and harmful
fossil fuels towards zero
emission technologies in the
energy and transportation
sectors, and Senate Bill 4 would
provide the necessary framework
to do so. Let's protect the
health of our next generation.
The kids that spoke earlier,
that's who SB4 protects. I ask
you to please give SB4 a due
pass.
OK, thank you, Paige, you're
next.
Hi, good afternoon, and members
of the committee. My name is
Paige Knight, Deputy Policy
director with New Mexico Voices
for Children, and most
importantly, mom to two little
girls. It's with them and their
futures in mind, and my nieces
and nephews, the kiddos in my
community and throughout this
beautiful state that I stand in
strong support of the Clear
Horizons Act. This legislation
is vital to the health and
well-being of families by
ensuring meaningful pollution
reductions happen as swiftly as
the science necessitates. The
fis
and social costs of inaction are
simply too great and will only
continue to grow. The negative
impact pollution has on public
health as well research, as you
just heard, with our children
and our elders harmed the most.
In addition to increased
healthcare costs, inaction will
also lead to greater
environmental costs due to
contaminated water sources,
disruption of ecosystems, and
increase in wildfires and
droughts due to extreme weather
and other economic costs like
agricultural impacts with
changing climate patterns affect
crop yields and water
availability. Further worsening
food security for families.
Reducing greenhouse gas
emissions as Senate Bill 4
proposes will help mitigate
these costs and help protect our
children's futures, and New
Mexicans who are most
overburdened and at risk from
pollution. Our children's health
depends on it.
I want to thank the sponsor for
her commitment to this important
legislation, and I respectfully
urge the committee to please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Kaylee, you're next.
Hello, my name is Kayli Shoup
and I'm a community organizer
for a grassroots environmental
advocacy group based in
southeast New Mexico, called
Citizens Caring for the Future.
We stand in strong support of
SB4. Living in the Permian oil
basin, I have seen firsthand how
the current regulatory framework
falls short and truly
controlling air pollution in our
area.
The area that is responsible for
the lion's share of climate
warming emissions here in New
Mexico.
Despite stringent rules, such as
the ozone precursor role. Health
harming ozone levels have
continued to rise in southeast
New Mexico. And in fact, we are
one of the only regions in the
country where the ozone levels
are trending upward.
Legislation such as SB4 ensures
that we are able to actually
strive for and reach the climate
goals our state has already set
by calling for transparent
accountability, enforcement
mechanisms, and proper funding
for agencies that are tasked
with ensuring the protection of
our environment. I encourage you
to vote in favor. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you, Bob, you're next.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the committee. My
name is Bob Scott. I'm a member
of Third Act New Mexico. We are
a group of New Mexico elders, 60
and 60 years and older committed
to fighting climate change in
New Mexico and in the world. We,
I stand in support of uh SB4 as
amended. Um, I agree with all of
the comments and support, uh,
before, and I won't go through
them, but I do want to
Encourage the committee. This is
the time to act now. Um, we
can't wait any longer. Um, we
can't wait till the next
legislature or the legislature
after that, we have to act now.
Um, I ask you to please vote to
pass on this bill, and I thank
you for um your time and
attention.
Thank you, Carlos, you're next.
Yes, my name is.
I am the New Mexico community
advocate for green Latinos. We
are a national organization
dedicated to environmental
justice for Latina communities
and other communities of color.
Here in New Mexico, we have been
a sacrifice zone for too long,
and what you will hear on the
opposing side is going to be the
boogeyman of oil and gas
companies taking their money
away from New Mexico if we
impose these common sense
regulations.
Well, I'm going to remind you
that
Recently, Chevron cut 20% of
their workforce, even though
they've earned more than $18
billion in the last year.
We're talking about a major cut
in jobs for New Mexico while
they continue to take funding
away from us. We encourage you
to think about the people of New
Mexico, not the companies. We
urge you to vote do pass on
Senate Bill 4.
OK, thank you, Sophia, you're
next.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Sophia Jenkinto. I'm here as a
spokesperson for Yucca or United
for Climate Crisis Action, and
I'm here to suppress, to express
his support of our members for
Senate Bill 4.5 years ago, we
encircled the roundhouse with
thousands of our peers to demand
that this body take meaningful
action on climate change to
protect our futures and the
futures of our grandchildren.
It's been really hard to watch
our state be ravaged by the
largest wildfire in its history,
with the devastation of flooding
and extreme drought. It has been
even a harder
live through that and watch the
adults and leaders who are
supposed to be taking care of
business and making our world
work for everybody, especially
young people, sit and do nothing
because oil and gas runs the
show.
We are thankful that this bill
mostly has real emissions
reduction standards, and that it
actually provides the regulatory
mandate and other structures
needed for some real
accountability.
We're heartened to see also
community consultation and
equity actually built into the
requirements of the law.
We do want to say that climate
science demands a much more
rapid timeline and much steeper
standards and accountability
measures. We're willing to start
somewhere strong even if it's
not ideal, and it's not ideal.
We have concerns about this and
want a flag that we believe we
should be doing better and being
brave and committing to real
climate action by only including
real emissions. We are part of
the no-fault Solutions coalition
that raises that concern that
harmful extraction may false
solutions fall under net zero
when it's not fully defined. So
we are opening the door up for
hydrogen carbon capture and
storage, and other false
solutions to significantly
threaten and potentially
diminish the real climate
benefits of this bill. SB4 is a
critical step towards addressing
the climate crisis. It
establishes
Central greenhouse gas emissions
limits, mandates real reductions
without relying on offsets, and
integrates climate equity
principles to ensure the voices
of overburdened tribal
communities are heard.
These are significant victories,
and Yaka celebrates these
hard-won provisions. Please
support us and fight for a
better future for youth in New
Mexico by voting yes on SB4.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll probably have
time for one more in Zoom and
then that'll wrap up our 30
minutes, uh, Stephanie.
Steph
Yes, can you hear me? Yes, we
can hear you.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chairman
and committee, um, I am with 350
New Mexico representing 7000
members, and we strongly support
this bill. I also live in the
East Mountains, where rising
temperatures and droughts are
taking a toll. My homeowners
insurance has gone up 120% since
2020, um, to over $8000 a year
and I'm lucky to have it. My,
um,
I've spent $22,000 over the last
three years to take down dead
trees and to try to save a few
sick ones, and every one of my
neighbors has had to drill a new
well, and we're lucky that we
can afford to do that, but not
everyone can. I am scared of
wildfires and everyone here is,
and that fear is also pushing
back on the development of
renewable energy out here. I'm
also terrified.
by the attacks on federal
programs that support
firefighters and disaster
recovery, um, as well as um
pollution reduction in clean
energy. We must do now all we
can to protect New Mexicans by
codifying our emissions
reduction goals. So please pass
Oops, sorry, I'll get you a mic
and then we're gonna finish up.
Thank
Jeremy Munoz, members of the
committee.
My name's Diana Woods.
I'm in New Mexico citizen.
Since 1979.
I'm a member of 3rd Act.
I've raised my kids here.
I retired from teaching at Santa
Fe Public Schools.
I've been watching the fire.
In Los Angeles.
The fires, the devastation, the
total loss.
Of
Liberty
And insurance.
And then I'm looking outside
every day this winter at the
total lack of water and snow.
And I
urge you to support this bill
SB4 with the amendments.
We
have to start making a change in
the emissions.
Because that
causes climate change.
No doubt
And we are at risk our children
are very much at risk. I don't
know how anybody could vote
against this bill.
Thank you very much.
got about one minute, young
lady.
time
Carrio. I'm here today to
support Senate Bill 4 because I
care about my future and the
environment. Thank you.
30 seconds left of the
committee. My name is Bernadette
Hardy, uh, resident of District
19. I run a food pantry. It
serves over 200 people every 2
weeks we receive fresh produce
from farms, uh, one farm alone
gives us 70 rows of healthy
food. I see this because we need
healthy soil to support our, our
food systems. This bill supports
that and doesn't poison it.
Thank you.
Thank you, that'll finish us
off.
No, no, no, we're done.
And
Oh, just tended to someone there
at the table. Thank you, Justin.
We're gonna go in opposition
instead of making people stand.
I'm gonna go to Zoom first, so
we'll start a clock instead of
making them stand there the
whole time.
Who's first.
he
Arvin Trujil, you're the first.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Members of the Senate committee.
My name is Arvin Trujillo, and I
come to you as a member of the
Navajo tribe.
My background has been in tribal
government industry, economic
development, and energy and
natural resources management. I
asked the committee table,
Senate Bill 4.
The Navajo Nation, the greater
Four Corners region have been
burdened by decisions made
affecting the energy sector in
the Four Corners region.
With the passage of the Energy
Transition Act by uh by the
legislature as a result of
The governor's efforts to reduce
greenhouse gasses.
We've seen impacts here in the
region with PNM shutting down
San Juan generating station. As
a result, there have been direct
job losses at, at the power
plant, as well as San Juan mine,
both impacting native and
non-native employees. Indirect
jobs in the Four Corners region
have also been realized. There's
a lots of, of a tax base for
central consolidated Schools
district, as well as San Juan
College. Also with the loss of a
stable moderately priced power.
So, electric, electric uh costs
have increased here where the
Navajo Agricultural product
industry in Naval commercial
farm is struggling to meet
operational goals with the
increase in price for electric
power to run their equipment and
pumps.
Though the ETA does not directly
affect tribal government or its
businesses through the ETA's
implementation outside the
tribal lands, Navajo people and
businesses are still being
impacted with job loss, impact
to local education capital needs
and operational challenges.
The ETA has currently achieved
29% reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions and is estimated to
reach 32% by 2030. This shows
that we need to improve our
innovation efforts to reach a
goal of 45%.
This includes exploring offsets
and new technology. Placing more
restrictions will not help move
the needle. Let the ETA continue
to develop and let us learn how
to balance emission goals with
job growth and positive economic
growth.
I asked that the state consider
effective consultation with
tribes to develop realistic
goals and identify impacts that
can be addressed together. The
nation has seen the decline of
fossil fuel industry.
And again, this has hurt us
tremendously.
With the closure of three major
power plants and 5 mining
operations since 2003. This has
been a real impact. Real jobs
have been lost jobs supporting
families on and off the
reservation.
The nation is working on
transitioning its energy
portfolio, but time is needed to
introduce and implement new
technology. Let's determine a
way for our government and
businesses to work together to
meet needed goals. Let's find a
way to promote economic
development and job growth for
all individuals in the Four
Corners region.
Let's learn from the ETA and
provide a future for our
children. Let's bring our kids
home.
Table Senate Bill 4 and let's
develop a model together through
the existing ETA. Thank you.
Thank you, Don, you're next.
John, I'm sorry, John.
Yes, Mr. Chair, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Yeah, my name is John Byram. I'm
with Processed Equipment and
Service Company up in
Farmington, otherwise known as
Pasco. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee for
letting me speak. Um, Pesca was
a 50 year old company that has
been here in Farmington. We have
400 employees now.
Uh, over 70% of which are Native
American. Most are, are Navajo.
Uh, we're a proud manufacturer
of process equipment. Most of
our products are sold to oil and
gas companies across the West,
um, we're a leading
manufacturer. We compete with
companies in Houston, Midland,
Denver, and other areas.
Um
I would say that echoing the,
the comments by Mr. Trujillo
Farmington is definitely felt
the the impact with the plant
closures and some drop in oil
and gas production. Our
population has dropped by 5000
people, um, and that is a burden
that we have had to to handle.
Farmington, um, depends on
Pesco. We're one of the larger
manufacturers and uh in the
state, and definitely one of the
largest main employers up here
in Farmington.
And I think I'm speaking in part
on behalf of the, the children
of our employees and the
importance of having a
breadwinners that can support a
healthy family, provide for
education, healthcare, etc. and
that's every bit as important,
um, I think in the both sides of
this argument, and please
remember that New Mexico is
already a leader in emissions
reduction. I think New Mexico is
definitely doing our part, um,
just, uh,
Apiarical mentions that China
has added the equivalent of 100
new coal-fired power plants last
year. That's 100 gigawatts.
Um, while we argue here, um, in
something that could really
affect industry and reduce the
jobs for minimal global climate
impact, um, when we have a
number of people expressing
concern about that, the real
impact is, is
And those industries that are
outside of the state, and we
should be looking more at what
we can do working with the
industry to continue to make
sure that New Mexico is on the
forefront, but does not threaten
an industry that is so critical
to the livelihood of, of people
here, as well as the economic
health of the state.
So thank you very much for
giving me the opportunity to, to
hear my comments.
Thank you, uh, Nikki, you're
next.
Hello.
My name is Nicky McCarty, and
I'm a resident of Taos County, a
community where many families
already face financial
struggles. Send it before would
have dire and lasting
consequences for our county, and
especially low income
communities like mine.
This bill would place an undue
burden on people who simply
cannot afford to replace their
vehicles, stoves, or heating
systems to comply with its
requirements. Many in Taos
County are already living
paycheck to paycheck and forcing
them to bear the cost of these
mandates would push them deeper
into hardship. We have already
witnessed similar policies fail
in states like California and
Colorado. These states set lofty
goals, but were ultimately
forced to revise their mandates
because they could.
it meet the requirements. New
Mexico cannot afford to follow
in their footsteps and repeat
the same mistakes. New Mexico is
blessed with rich natural
resources, and we should be
using them wisely to strengthen
our economy and improve our
communities. Instead, this bill
risks throwing away valuable
resources while causing
financial harm to families
across the state. I strongly
urge you to vote no on Senate
Bill 4 and to protect the
livelihoods of working families
in New.
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, Don, you're next.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, can you hear me?
Yes, I can't.
Uh, my name is Don Hartman. I'm
a farmer in southern New Mexico,
and I also represent the Mexico
Farming Livestock Bureau, and I
strongly would
I, uh, like you to oppose Senate
Bill 4. Agriculture is the
background, the backbone of our
state, providing food, jobs.
And economic stability for New
Mexico's rural communities.
Agriculture takes pride in being
responsible stewards of the land
and are already implementing
sustainable practices.
We farmers are producing far
more carbon than we are
greenhouse gasses. We should be
getting a big thank you for that
and not punishment from further
regulation.
Yet, Senate Bill 4 imposes rigid
greenhouse gas reduction targets
without clear guidance on how
agricultural producers will be
affected or how we are supposed
to comply. It threatens to
increase operational costs,
drive up our fuel prices, our
input prices, and create new
regulatory burdens on family
farms and ranches already
struggling with drought and
inflation.
On top of that, the bill
mandates comprehensive
greenhouse gas monitoring
measurement reporting and
verification from all sectors
but provides no clear road map
or how our industry is expected
to meet these requirements. How
will livestock emissions be
measured?
Who determines the methods and
at what cost? Well us farmers be
required to hire outside
consultants just to prove
compliance.
These unanswered questions
create massive regulatory
uncertainty for New Mexico
farmers and ranchers. We need
policies that work with us and
not against us. Instead of
imposing vague and costly
mandates, we urge you to reject
SB4 and develop policies that
provide practical science-based
solutions without putting our
agricultural industry and our
rural communities at risk. If
nothing else, I would ask to
have in.
amendment to exclude agriculture
from this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Santa Fe Chamber,
you need to send us your name.
We're gonna go to Bill and then
Mike and that might get us close
to wrapping up.
So Bill, your first and then
Michael.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, I'm Bill Lee,
president and CEO of the Gallup
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce. We stand in opposition
to SB 4 along with the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
The Clear Horizons Act is a
clear and unreasonable overreach
that will have irreversible
negative impacts across all
sectors of New Mexico's economy
and our way of life. The bill in
its unrealistic standards only
serve to harm every New Mexico
business and every citizen will
suffer with the consequences
from increased prices, job
losses that will be created by
companies forced to leave our
state due to a litany of
standards and a timeline that
are largely and unattainable
fantasy by current technological
standards. Achieving emissions
reduction through
electrification, especially by
alternative sources, is more
than challenging due to the
state's lack of electric
infrastructure, especially in
rural New Mexico. In McKinley
County, our infrastructure is
weak at best, with many
residents who don't have
electricity for their homes, let
alone for char
cars, making the mandates of SB4
even more impossible to achieve.
Additionally, once again, in
considering SB 4, you are
relegating the legislature's
authority to provide oversight.
By giving your authority away to
an unelected environmental
improvement board. You will take
the, take away the ability of
the citizens of New Mexico to
ask for your meaningful help
when the board creates and
enacts rules that go too far.
Where they can, New Mexico
businesses are already working
hard and
making significant strides in
addressing climate change by
reducing emissions. More and
more businesses every day see
the power of focusing on their
people and the planet and their
relationships to sustainability
and a strong bottom line. The
private sector knows this is a
critical issue and does not need
more government overreach that
will kill business and crush
innovation. We ask that you vote
no on SB 4.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Michael, you're next.
Good afternoon. Uh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Mike D'Antonio with
Excel Energy. We serve
electricity to the eastern part
of the state and are recognized
national leader in renewable
energy deployment in all of our
service territories. Uh, we
wanted to thank, uh, Senator Go
for meeting with us to talk
about this bill. Unfortunately,
we were not, uh, uh, we did not
arrive at any uh significant
change or change up to the bill.
Uh, we are opposing the bill,
uh, because of the negative
impact it will have on our
customers.
Uh, this, this bill just needs
to have more reasonable and
attainable goals, uh, which, uh,
are many of our customers
cannot, cannot achieve the uh
the unintended consequences.
Uh, are numerous, one that I
will cite is that we do a
resource plan every 3 years.
We're at the end of that
resource planning process. We
rely heavily on load forecasts
from our
Customs, uh, in determining how
much additional uh
infrastructure we need both
generation and transmission, and
that uh it it that go that input
that goes into our resource
planning, and it's very likely
that uh this uh bill will cause
that power uh demand to lessen,
uh, which may result in
overbuilding of, of, of assets
resulting in stranded costs and
at the very least, uh,
additional ratepayer costs is we
have
You would have fewer customers
to spread those fixed costs
over. So, uh, again, we look at
uh or suggest a possible interim
kind of committee to look at
more reasonable, uh, goals for
every industry we all want lower
emissions, but we agree that uh
at least from our perspective,
this bill does not do that.
And uh we respectfully ask for a
no vote on on the bill. Thank
you.
OK, Bridget, you got about 38
seconds and then we're gonna,
people that want and support are
in opposition lineup. Would you,
go ahead.
Hi, my name
Well, it looks like we lost
Bridget.
No, I'm here. I'm here. Can you
hear me?
OK. My name is Bridget Dixon,
president of the Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce. Senate Bill
4 threatened Sanofi economic
stability by increasing costs
for businesses, limiting growth
in key industries and
discouraging investment, the
bill's new regulatory framework
will create uncertainty in
construction, transportation,
and manufacturing. Industries is
essential to our local economy.
Businesses are already investing
in emissions reductions, but our
current energy infrastructure
cannot sustain.
rapid compliance with new
mandates without viable
solutions, this bill will force
businesses to cut jobs or leave
New Mexico. We urge you to vote
no on SB4 to protect our
economy. Thank you. Thank you.
We're gonna start in the room,
go ahead.
Thank you, Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director of
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce.
in strong opposition to SB 4.
This bill creates strict
mandates to discourage new
businesses and investments in
energy, manufacturing,
transportation, all industries
that are vital and the backbone
of job creation in the state.
The additional regulatory
burdens imposed on utilities,
manufacturing and agriculture
will lead to higher energy
prices and increased
transportation costs, and those
costs will be passed down to New
Mexico families.
This bill will lead to a
significant reduction of
operations in the oil and gas
industry, resulting in budget
shortfalls for our school
programs, healthcare services,
and infrastructure projects.
This will have a devastating
impact on all our communities.
SB4 is extreme restrictions on
key industries will drive
businesses to neighboring
states. Oil and gas alone
supports over 134,000 jobs and
contributes billions to our
economy.
This bill puts all those jobs at
serious risk without offering a
viable plan for economic
replacement. For these reasons,
we strongly oppose SB4. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair and committee members.
My name is Pearl Martinez. I
live in Lybrook.
I'm a Calen Kaf operator in San
Juan County, and I am on Eastern
Agency and the Checkerboard
area. I oppose SB 4.
My people and I drive long
distance.
Many of us heat our homes with
wood. We cannot afford to
convert to electricity.
Or to, to or pay in high
electric higher electricity
bills and transportation fuel
bills, please vote against SB4.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name is Tom Patterson. I serve
as president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers opposes SB4 as
amended.
We've spoken with the sponsor
staff about our concerns with
this bill we've reviewed the
committee's substitute.
Frankly approving this bill
would be like signing a blank
check.
No one apparently knows how the
provisions in this bill will be
developed.
How levels will be monitored.
Measured, reported, or verified
or how non attainment.
Will be enforced against our
fellow citizens.
But there are some things we
know.
We know the track record in
California.
With greenhouse gas emission
reductions has been dismal.
It's not clear.
Why we would be different.
We know from California that
there will be shocking increases
in electricity and fuel prices.
We also know that without a
stick beating us.
Agriculture has made great
strides over time reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.
The beef industry, for example,
reduced emissions by 28% between
1990 and 2022, while at the same
time increasing.
Production by 44%.
But what happens to us when
agriculture can't meet the
timetables here.
We have to stop producing food
for New Mexico.
What we don't know about this
bill is bewildering.
What we do know should make us
run for cover.
If our children are going to be
able to stay in New Mexico. They
need jobs. This bill threatens
their job prospects. Cattle
growers urges you to vote no on
SB 4.
This Chairman, members of the
committee I'm Howard Hutchinson.
I am a registered lobbyist for
the coalition of Arizona and New
Mexico counties.
Uh our counties are basically
rural natural.
uh natural resource based
economies.
I'm
Troubled by the idea that we're
using 2005 as as a target date
to measure by, I don't know if
any of you know what our
omissions were in 2005, but it
seems like.
We're gonna be hard pressed to
figure that out. And then to
base our reductions on a figure
that nobody knows.
Second
We talk about net zero.
A lot of people think net zero
means zero emissions.
It means net zero.
It means we're gonna end up with
carbon trading schemes.
But only benefit a few.
And harm consumers.
Third
Carbon dioxide is not a
pollutant.
Without carbon dioxide, there
would be no life on this planet.
Increase in carbon dioxide
actually benefits plant
production.
It reduces a plants need for
water.
We need to have meaningful
things done to improve our
environment and to improve our
air quality.
For 6 decades.
I've pleaded with the
environmental improvement board.
To reduce the smoke from.
Catastrophic wildfires in my
community.
No, any change.
We need to invest in forest
management.
Reduce that smoke that comes in
nearly every year in our
community.
Please oppose this legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
committee members. My name is
Jim Eubank.
My wife and I own a small ranch
up in Chama.
Uh, 38 years ago I married into
the Naranjo family of Riariba
County.
And they have been farming and
ranching agriculture for over
400 years.
It is our hope to continue to
pass that on to at least 2 more
generations of our of our of our
family.
We have a small operation where
we raise between 40 and 80 head
of cattle in any given year, uh,
this next year may be worse,
probably will be.
But the reason I speak to those
numbers because the statistics
indicate that the average size
herd in New Mexico is 50 head
and that's about where we are.
That also is a group that is
most likely to fail.
With the upcoming price
increases that would come from
this particular legislation.
Now, as a former lawyer, I
should probably be in favor of
this bill because they're gonna
make fortunes.
But in terms of the ranchers and
the small ranchers in
particular.
Then the risk is for failure is
tremendous. Our margins are very
thin, uh, for example, for 2023,
uh, with a 20% increase in in
energy costs, uh, for our small
place and with the loss of two
cattle due to a lightning strike
our margin was wiped out.
If those sorts of costs
continue, which they will with
this type of emissions
controlled without the with
these things, then uh we're not
gonna be able to operate and not
be able to pass on that dream of
uh of of continuing to have a
working ranch. There's no heavy
equipment that operates on
electricity on ranches there's
no way to get my cattle to the
market, uh, with an electric
vehicle, uh, and so these are
things that are very rare and if
it did have an electric vehicle
or electric equipment in.
charming and broke down. What am
I gonna do? There's no
infrastructure to support that,
so I would urge you to consider
the plight of the small rancher.
Who's at risk for failure if
passage of this bill continues.
Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Jim Winchester. I
represent the Independent
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico and um let me start by
saying that our industry is
certainly very proud of the
significant reductions that have
occurred in greenhouse gas
emissions, um, and as we have
heard the administration already
has passed the strictest methane
rules in the country and as we
can see those reductions are
working, but I am here to serve
witness that those rules have
wiped out.
A number of my member companies,
the smaller New Mexico-based
companies and that is a fact.
This bill does not build on the
existing state methane rules, it
moves the goalposts and that is
all too familiar and it's a
challenge and a struggle to
companies who do love this state
and choose to work in this
state.
Finally, I think as we've heard
this bill does not just hurt the
oil and gas industry. It hurts
every industry that provides the
basic necessities of life, like
food, transportation, and
healthcare.
And that will really hammer our
underprivileged communities,
communities that legislators in
this room represent, so please,
with all due respect to the
sponsor, vote against this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name's
Dustin Johnson. I'mdani, born
for Toinni. I'm a member of the
Navajo Nation. I also
In a rancher, a farmer, and I'm
here on my own accord.
Um
SB4, like you guys said.
Admissions rules. I ranch in
Montesco Mesa, 20 miles south of
Farmington. I ranch also in
Beini Becenti chapter in
McKinley County, and to get to
those is not just down the road,
it's 60, 70 miles if I was to
use an electrical vehicle, how
am I gonna do that? How am I
gonna do this? The emissions in
this, you guys talked about. um
I also work in oil and gas. I
had to go out of state to get a
job with oil and gas because New
Mexico was the same way. I
worked for a mom and pop, not a.
uh corporation like the for uh
for uh corporations that this uh
Senator Stewart was talking
about. Those are easily said to
done. They can uh uh apply for
whatever they want to, but the
mom and pops, like what I used
to work for, had to close down,
had to close because had to lay
me off and I had to go
elsewhere. So I get charged
taxes, 3 states, Colorado, New
Mexico, and federal. Now, if you
add emissions to that with as a,
as a small farmer rancher.
It's unspeakable.
It hurts my pocket, it hurts my
family pockets. It hurts my
neighbor's pockets, and we all
in our, in my area, we all live
on a wood fires, coal fires.
To heat our houses,
unreliability of the
infrastructure, electrical
infrastructure. So I was, I grew
up uh on on Cisco Mesa,
unreliable power came from uh
Cuba. I could tell when it was
raining over there because the
power would go out for us. It'd
be dry on our, our area.
And in talking about climate
change.
Since I've been a little kid, I
can tell you that the, the
seasons have been really dry,
but
The admissions have been the
same.
So there's no change in it. Now
that's the, you guys talked
about reduction in emissions
now, I should be getting 4 or 5
inches of extra rain, but no,
I'm not. So this admissions
rule, uh, like the speaker or
the sponsor said, there's
already corporations are
already, uh, oil and gas is
already doing their emissions
rules, allow them to do it and
vote against SB4.
Thank you.
Chairman and committee members.
My name is Bailey Tom. I'm from
Gallup, New Mexico. I oppose
Senate Bill 4 as amended as a
young livestock producer, I have
real concerns about this bill,
reducing emissions could lead to
increased operational costs for
industries like agriculture,
transportation, particularly
when they rely on fossil fuels,
these higher costs could be
passed on to consumers leading
to higher prices for goods and
services, farmers and ranchers
will face higher costs related
to new equipment or technology
to meet.
New emission standards, please
vote against Senate Bill 4.
Thank you.
We got about 2 minutes left.
OK. Hello, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Becky
King Sindle, and our family
raises beef and we sell to
schools and preschools under the
New Mexico grown Program with uh
Cinabel for we simply wouldn't
be able to excuse me, I get
nervous, produce or provide um
the healthy nutritious food
store community and these
penalties that were unfairly
target agriculture, we are
improving our emissions, but the
timelines, um, in this bill will
not allow.
us to continue to feed our
communities. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman members, uh, my
name's Randall Major. I'm a
landowner and I produce natural
beef. The FIR clearly states the
delegation of authority of the
department in determining
regulation fees and the like
make it difficult to assess how
admission reductions will be
achieved and at what cost? This
bill is too vague and too many
unknowns. Please oppose Senate
Bill 4 for the reasons and
others previously stated. Thank
you.
Chairman members Matt Thompson
with the New Mexico Mining
Association. Mining Association
has about 35 members right now,
only 6 of those are active
minds.
We have 17 of 35 critical
minerals located in the state of
New Mexico, but we haven't
approved a new mining
application since the late 90s.
Um, obviously domestic mining of
those critical minerals not only
enhances national security, but
it also helps build renewable
manufacturing.
Now you tell me if there's any
company that's gonna move into
the state of New Mexico with
these sorts of emissions
reductions or um or even mine or
run their diesel, uh, large hall
operators or anything of the of
the like. So we ask you to
please very respectfully vote
against the Senate Bill 4.
About 10 seconds.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs in Mexico Oil
and Gas Association. We
represent over 200 member
companies right behind me is
PBPA. Um, we appreciate the work
that went into this bill and the
communications with the
sponsor's office, however,
Nimoga still has many unanswered
questions about the viability of
the proposed timelines and
reductions, respectfully, Nimoga
opposes Senate Bill 4 because
the proposed requirements are
overly burdensome and with no
offsets until 2050, the
Goals are simply not achievable
in a state with a large low
income population, we're
especially concerned that this
bill will increase costs and
adversely affect the communities
that it seeks to help. Thank
you.
Thank you, we're wrapped up.
Questions from committee
members.
Woods
I would like to
Mhm.
the test
Hey Michael.
Advocates.
From
You know, many advocates for the
bill.
And they're saying, well, I'm
uh.
I'm a
Member of a climate organization
or
I'm a member of, you know, this
group or that group, and then I
hear
People from agriculture.
People from agriculture that's
But in their heart all they
wanna do.
His feeds
The world feed the United
States.
And there's nothing in here in
this bill.
That promotes the future of
that.
Agricultural production.
They're doing their best in this
bill.
And and
You know, it's said somebody
stood up here and said,
Well, we're gonna have the
environmental improvement.
Division
Uh, was it environmental
improvement board.
Make these decisions.
I might mention the fact that
the environmental improvement
board decided that uh 43% of the
cars to be sold in New Mexico.
Next year will be EVs.
Now, I bet if I took a poll
right now in this room on how
many people's gonna buy an EV
next year. It wouldn't be 43% of
the people in here.
I don't believe in the rural
areas, the infrastructure is
there to, to use the large
tractors it takes to.
To do the farming.
Uh, the trucking industry
happened to tell me that a.
Disel tractor that goes on a
semi truck.
You can buy one for $180,000.
In the range, the fuel range of
that truck is 1200 miles.
He said alike electric truck.
would cost $1 million in the
range areas is 200 miles.
The difference in weight, it can
only haul a third of the
payload, the other one that will
put 3 more trucks on the road
that, what will that do to your
Your freight bills in the state
of New Mexico.
Most everything we get in the
state, we don't manufacture
nothing in this state.
Everything is all to us.
What's that gonna do to your
Walmart.
Pricing
Check out lane.
What's it gonna do to the food
price in the state of New
Mexico.
We're talking about uh poverty
level.
Uh 43 to 50% in the state of New
Mexico.
We got 50% of the people of our
state on Medicaid.
We're a poor state.
We not a prosperous state. We've
got a lot of oil and gas money
coming in.
That we're spending very
greedily, man, we're pitching it
out here and
And large shovels.
But the people working in the
state.
We've got a lot of people that's
not working.
I believe our workforce is
870,000 the last time I heard.
Our population is 2.1 million.
2.1 million and we got
870,000 people were, what's the
matter with that?
This is going to kill more jobs.
This is gonna kill more good
paying jobs.
They're gonna say, oh, we're
gonna do it all with clean
energy. You got to bring every
bit of those wind turbines in
here, you got to bring every one
of those turbines in here,
you've got.
For cement, you better do
everything and we're gonna make
that all out electric.
This year.
I don't have any, any questions
for the sponsor.
I know how I'm going to vote on
this bill.
I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna
kill New Mexico's jobs.
And that's what this is. It's a
bill to kill New Mexico.
Mo
Thank you.
Senator Stewart, you want to
respond to that?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
I barely recognized my bill with
what people said in here. I
mean, uh is one of the gold star
issues in New Mexico.
This says so already.
Firm emissions per person have
dropped 50% since 1990.
Smarter methods to improve
techniques cut overall emissions
by 25%. This is what we want.
So this is at extreme penalties.
There's no penalties in here.
I mean, I think most people who
talked about this bill haven't
read it.
Probably only read what's in
social media.
This is not a job because as one
of our bright spots.
Doesn't say anything about
killing jobs in here.
Mr. Chair.
They're they're responding.
If I could have um my expert to
say a few things.
Munoz, Senator Woods, members of
the committee, um, just, just
two points that might be
helpful. So first, this bill
only regulates um this bill only
accounts for in-state greenhouse
gas emissions, those emissions
that directly come from
in-state. So if there are
emissions associated with
Products that are imported into
those states, this, this bill
doesn't have anything to do with
that. We're just, just like
every other state that tries to
meet its climate goals and do
its part. We're just looking at
the emissions generated in
state.
Second, I just want to note that
um we do have a really good news
story that we are trying to
build on here in terms of oil
and gas. Um, thanks to the
governor's initiative and the
New Mexico Environmental
Improvement Board and NMED, um,
and oil and gas industry that
that um was at the table during
the rulemaking process, like all
rulemaking is required, uh,
ozone precursor and methane
waste rules were promulgated in
2021, as we heard, some of the
most important um in
and most uh important standards
in the nation for reducing
greenhouse gasses. Now, those
are important baseline
standards. They do get us to a
new baseline level. They don't
require the kind of continuing
emission reductions that will be
needed to meet the target.
But the good news is that
industry is already proving that
they can meet those standards
and since 2021, we've seen an
increase in oil and gas
production by 27%.
In addition, we've also seen an
increase in methane mitigation
industries. There's 20 new uh
facilities or service companies
that have built there that have
invested and innovated.
To meet the new climate goals,
the new clean, cleaner oil
methane mitigation technologies
that are required.
And this, that's what this bill
would do. It would signal that
this is, we're going to be
setting.
Uh, a baseline for cleaner
technologies over time, we would
encourage innovation in the
state by existing industries and
new industries to meet those,
and that's what we've seen in
states like Colorado and
California, where those states
have not backed down on those
their climate commitments. In
fact, they've increased them in
recent years. Colorado did that
in 2023, and they're seeing
increases in in global domestic
product, not decreases. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Chair, uh, I think the
expert is an economist.
law professor.
You what?
I'm a law professor who studies,
I'm sorry.
I thought you said you was an
economist. I'm sorry.
So because I was gonna ask you
what the profit margin was.
On the, on the account.
Mr. Chairman, he doesn't know
that.
Profit margin on a cow. This
bill has nothing to do with the
profit margin. Well, I tell you
what it does.
of the chair.
I tell you what it does because
To, to reduce emissions, you
will have to go to electricity.
You will have to.
Go to electrical tractors.
You'll have to go to the
electrical vehicles.
Am I wrong?
Madam Secretary, Madam
President.
Madam,
Madam Prote
sorry
all of these sectors are
lowering emissions. I'm just
really glad to get this because
I didn't even read all the rest
of it on him.
You're welcome to read it
are trying to lower emissions,
that's been the executive order
that everybody's been under for
the last 6 years.
Um, I think Ag has done one of
the better jobs of lowering
emissions. There's nothing in
this bill that will do penalties
on A or anyone else unless after
a number of inventories were not
lowering them, and then we'll
have to look to see why, to see
what else we can do to help
people lower their emissions and
this is a long term problem that
we're trying to deal with.
Through our regulatory structure
like states all around us,
Colorado just passed a law very
similar to this definitions are
almost exactly the same. It's
incumbent upon us, I believe,
low emissions, and we heard
everybody talking about we're
trying to do that. This just
tries to build on that, put in a
regulatory process, so we all
know what are the emissions?
What can we do to, to lower them
every 2 years, it takes almost.
It takes 1 year and 4 months
before the rules are even
settled and then we're on a
process to try to continue to
lower emissions. That's all it
does. It does nothing about, oh
well, you can't have a job and
you have to buy an electric
tractor, you're have to do this,
it's just silly.
And it's just must have come
from some social media that got
the bill totally wrong.
I'm sorry, ma'am, I hadn't read
any social media today.
So
I don't live on social media,
Mr. President. I, I do not, but
I.
Do you know
The cost of changing.
A line of equipment.
That I have on my farm.
And buying new equipment.
I know that it takes.
A lot of fuel right now.
To farm 7000 acres.
And I know that if you force me
to buy electric tractors.
From what I'm doing right now or
even if you force me to upgrade
my equipment.
I know it's going to be a huge
cost to me. It won't be to you.
It will be to me.
And it will be to the people
that
Buy food
Because if I don't get paid for
that.
I don't produce.
Now, maybe that's OK, maybe it's
OK to import from Addison out of
country where they don't have
rules like this.
Maybe that's what the deal is.
Maybe we're gonna create
paradise in New Mexico.
And have everything brought in
to us and have our servants
serve it to us. I don't know,
Mister President, and I'm
getting carried away and I'm
sorry for that. I'm gonna quit.
And I'll let
They respond. Thank you. I don't
think they need to respond. You
didn't ask a question, so, and
then Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brandt, you're next. This, let's
get to the questions and
keep moving forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will
try to do that.
I try not to pontificate at all
today.
President.
I do have a
A few questions and, and your
experts said something about
the, if it's produced outside of
the state of New Mexico that we
don't worry about how it was
produced. Is that, is that a
good way of just kind of
summarizing what you said.
Uh, Chair, Senator Brandt, uh,
members of the committee, um,
actually applies to both inside
New Mexico and outside of New
Mexico. This bill only looks at
uh direct emissions with a few
exceptions like emissions from
imported electricity, but it
doesn't look at the admissions
associated with.
Producing any product that's,
that's not within the scope of
this, OK, because I was just
looking at that on page 4.
Um
And it says including emissions
from electricity.
For consumption in New Mexico,
both imported and produced in
New Mexico. Oh, transportation
fuels.
and heating fuels combusted in
New Mexico, buildings and
structures, residential,
commercial, institutional and
industrial waste management.
So, I think that's why persons,
people out there were concerned
about.
burning firewood for heat.
And they'll have to convert
their systems.
Well, they would, according to
this.
a.
Mhm
the sectors in New Mexico.
All of whom are trying to lower
emissions. This bill puts in a
regulatory framework.
measure those in inventory and
make sure we're all on the same
page.
OK, so Madam Chairman, I
appreciate that, but that
definitions are important, as
you know.
I mean, we, we run into
definitions all the time and we
even talked about definitions
some on the floor today and uh
you know, I was with you 100% on
that bill.
This one, not so much.
But
This clearly talks about these
things that are produced outside
the state in New Mexico.
The the their emissions count.
Yeah
Why is that important? Because
when you get into the next
section.
Dealing with greenhouse gas
emissions reporting
requirements.
My 3 by 2030.
Which is 5 years from now.
At least 45% less than 2005
levels. So first of all,
I'm pretty new to this.
This type of stuff. Explain to
me why the 2005 levels.
Um,
And you know
why, why is that the date that
we're using.
Did that get changed? I think
someone said it got changed.
I'm gonna answer your question,
but then I'm gonna ask my
experts thank you. I thought
maybe he was an environmentalist
is why he was in here as your
expert, but a lawyer,
you know, should have,
he specializes in helping law
students understand climate
change and climate change law.
Appreciate that. Uh, so.
So the, if we use the 2005.
We actually get a big break on
oil and gas for emissions
because they were so high in
2005. We had to start regulating
them. We had started, we didn't
have the methane rules, etc. So
this is kind of the standard
that people use when they set a
target and.
Hunted
where are we at right now?
Where are we at right now in
this 45 because we've only got 5
more years.
I was gonna say comes the ball.
is most of the many people, many
energy companies are already
there. Those ones that I talked
about earlier, they're already
there.
Uh, if, if not soon they will be
because they've all agreed to
the zero net emissions 2050.
They all agreed to that. So
they're on their way.
Um, to get there, but.
Chair Munoz, Senator Brant,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you for that question. Um,
so just in, in terms of the
2005, so maybe first I can just
address the, the definition. So.
Bill does regulate emissions
that are emitted directly here
in New Mexico, but.
Accounting for those emissions.
Sometimes it's easier to look at
like the carbon content of
fuels, and this is not just New
Mexico that's doing this, this,
this is a standard way of
accounting for greenhouse gas
emissions within a state. The
EPA has an accounting tool that
it uses for.
For a nationwide emissions, all
the other states like Colorado
use similar methodologies,
similar definitions with the
goal of accounting for those
direct emissions whether they're
coming from vehicles in the
state or from stationary
sources. The 2005 baseline is
the standard baseline that is
used, for example, um, by most
in the inter intermental panel
on climate change, so the
international agreement that
almost all countries agreed to,
to reduce emissions, um.
The United States, for example,
uses a 2005 baseline. In fact,
it's the United States who
proposed the 2005 baseline, just
because you need some place to
measure from, to see what kind
of progress we're making. To
your question about what the
emissions are, um, the New
Mexico Environment Department
issued its most recent
greenhouse gas inventory, uh,
just this past December.
And so the, the number of
greenhouse gas emissions in 2005
was 96.4 million metric tons
using the same kind of
accounting that would be
included in this definition in
this bill.
Um, it found that emissions in
2021, which is the most recent
year that we have.
Um, numbers for, uh, were
reduced to 83 million metric
tons and in the great news is
that it projected that based on
the current policies already in
place, the New Mexico would meet
and exceed the governor's target
for 2025, which was 25% emission
reductions. The inventory
projects that New Mexico would
actually achieve close to 30%
reductions by 2025, exceeding
the goal that was set, which is
great news, and that's thanks to
both regulations.
Methane waste and ozone
precursor, and the great work
of, of companies that are taking
action to meet their own goals,
um.
Unfortunately, it also projects
that currently we aren't on
track to meet the 2030 target
that's already been set by the
governor and executive order.
Currently we're only on track to
reach 31, 32% emission
reductions instead of 45%
emission reductions, but
The, the same analysis shows
that meeting 45% emission
reductions is doable by 2030.
The, the governor's existing
target and the same target in
this bill.
And it, it looks at what might
be required in different
sectors. And for example, for
the agricultural sector, it
doesn't envision any new
regulations by 2030, nor does it
nor does it envision.
Any further reductions beyond
what's already what would
already be achieved in 2025.
And that's similar to what's
happened in states across the
country. What we see in states
with much larger agricultural
sector emissions. We don't see
direct regulations, we see
incentives so that if people
want to take incentives to use
climate smart agriculture or
change their equipment they can.
We don't see direct regulatory
mechanisms, including by states
like California that have been
doing this for
20 years now and we're just
getting started.
And, and I, I guess, Mr.
Chairman, um.
Senator Stuart didn't warn you
never to use California for me.
I'm, I'm sorry, Senator Brandt,
noted, noted. Thank you because
I actually come from there.
There's a reason I don't live in
California.
My whole family does, so.
Um
But yeah, that's, that's never a
good one, that never, never
appeases me on anything. OK, so,
so we're really not on track for
2030, but you're saying if we
make some changes, we could be.
Um
But this bill doesn't say what
those are, you're leaving that
up to the environmental board.
Make the rules that will make
those changes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes.
But they have to follow the
guidelines in the bill, which is
try to reach the limits, try to
work within a sector to lower
emissions.
From now chairman and you.
Mr. Chairman, sorry.
Um
Senator Stewart, you know that
I'm a real stickler for
You know, what the bill actually
says, not what we
hoped it would say.
And the bill says shell.
limited as follows.
It doesn't say that we'll try to
reach those. It says it shall be
reached. How are we going to
reach those?
And what's gonna happen if we
don't. That, that I think is
people's fear. You and me both
know that people fear the
unknown more than anything else.
Right? I mean, we, we fear
monsters that we've never seen
before because we're not sure
what's in that dark room.
Right, and then I think.
That we have some recent
Examples from the environmental
board.
That most of us feel are
completely unattainable and
unreasonable.
And so that's, I think also
makes a lot of us very cautious
about trusting them.
And I brought this up to them
the other day, so this is
nothing new.
About trusting them to make
rules and regulations and what's
going to happen if they're not
reached.
Because it says they shall, it
doesn't say we're gonna try. It
says it shall be done.
Well, you know, Mr. Chairman,
That's what you have to do when
you try to have a state plan
when you try to put people on a
regulatory process. We're trying
to set stand, well, governor's
already set the standards.
Governor already did an
executive order.
Um, setting those, so we're
trying to codify them.
We're doing that with quite a
number of things actually.
I'm working on that one,
anti-Semitism, as you know, if I
ever get a hearing on the bill.
So
There's no penalties in this
bill.
It would be the usual regulatory
process. We have penalties
originally those, uh, they were
the only things that people
focused on.
So we have the ability to
regulate.
All of these sectors right now
through our environment
department and we do.
And people follow regulations.
That's what governments for, so.
You know, if we don't meet them,
uh.
What we say in the bill is that
we work towards finding
solutions to meet them.
inventory that's every 2 years
is not only where we having
emissions in these sectors, it's
also
What's not working. People are
trying projects, what's not
working and what is working,
so Senator, I really hope it
works that way.
I mean, and, and I, I agree that
that's probably your intention.
I really do. I, I, I believe
that.
Let's finished answering your
questions before you jump in.
I just, I just don't know that
it's gonna work that way.
And and my bigger concern comes
in 3.
Right, when we're saying by
2050, which is only
25 years from now.
And by then
I still won't, I won't be here
probably.
But
By 2050,
100%.
That means zero emissions.
Right, we're gonna get rid of
all emissions.
How we gonna breathe?
Because that causes emissions.
So Mr. Chairman, again, it's the
100%.
Uh
But it's achieved through net
reductions uh environmental
improvement board and local
board may consider all
quantifiable and verifiable
mechanismnologies to achieve a
net zero limit.
That's what the
The companies have already
agreed to and are working
towards. I read you those
statements earlier, uh for the
companies that I met with had
already agreed to them. There's
another 8 or 9 that are in that
group also.
It's what the scientists say.
That we have to strive for.
Not
Burn up our planet.
We're doing pretty rapidly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
Center, I think I'm done asking
questions. I, I think it's, I
hope it's attainable. I know
that the rule next year for 43%
electric cars is not.
And yet we did it anyway, and
we're going to punish every
dealer in the state and probably
close them all down, but that's,
that's what the Environmental
board has chosen to do, and I
think that's why none of us
really have a lot of faith in
them. I think if they hadn't
done that, I'd be a lot more.
Open to listening.
But by them doing that and not
listening to all the testimony
that was given to them. I think
it's really made it hard for me
to trust them all as a
department overall.
Um, I think you can understand
that. We may disagree, but I
think you can understand where
I'm at on that.
I do think that that.
You know, a lot of this, you
know, I think we all want clean
water, we all want clean air.
I actually think that's one of
the things we really do have in
New Mexico. I think we're
already ahead of the game here.
We know that San Juan has been
given awards several times
having the cleanest air in the
country, even though it's a
major.
Natural gas producing area of
our country.
And so, you know, I, I, I think
we already have a lot of that.
I, I hope we don't completely
shut down our state. I don't
know how you'd build a house in
Net zero.
I don't know how you build an
apartment complex that 0. I
don't think it's possible.
But
Maybe in
25 years, they'll have
technology that
I'll be wrong.
There's lots of technology being
made and that could make
changes.
We probably should wait till the
technology gets here before we
set it along.
Senator Steinbor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Leader, um, thank you for
having the courage to take this
on.
On, on behalf of these kids that
were here earlier. Thank you,
and you're always taking these
kinds of issues on and I really
appreciate it. And thank you to
your expert witness, this team
professor for coming here as
well and sitting on the line.
It's not easy. And thank you
everybody who came today. You
know, I, I really sincerely
appreciate where each of you
come from in your industries and
your concerns about this. It's
all, you know, fair, totally
fair.
Um
I want to say, Mr. Chair, you
know, um,
I think it really is about these
kids that were here earlier.
This is really about the future.
It's about our planet.
And, uh, Madam Chair, you
probably, or Mr. Chair, Madam
Prote you probably agree this is
not a bill of choice. This is a
bill of necessity.
This is a bill of
Dealing with science and facts.
And um
You know, the experts say now,
you know, when you're a
policymaker, you get to decide,
we may have our own opinions and
different news channels may try
to spin different facts, but
when 95+% of the scientists in
the world sees me maybe closer
to 99, give you a piece of
information. Do you choose to
accept it or not accept it.
And
When we see what's happening
with our climate and drought and
Things that are causing
catastrophic economic damage,
not.
Years from now, but right now.
What, what is causing that every
year a new record year of
temperatures.
Um
It is climate change. It's
man-made climate change.
And respectfully, I don't mean
to offend anyone or maybe
everyone with this comment, but
we
Our generation, we have, we're
killing this planet.
And um we can reckon with that
together and look at facts and
put science first or we can just
look in our little silo and say,
No, we're cool. We'll just keep
living life. Life is good, and,
and meanwhile, you know, what
are we passing on to the future?
What are we leaving for them?
And what kind of economic ruin
are we leaving for? Never mind
this job. What path are we on?
I think we all individually as
citizens and as governments have
to deal with this if we care
about those things, and this is
New Mexico's best faith effort
to do so. So I appreciate it.
Um, it's a big, big challenge,
and there's probably different
ways to do it in multiple ways
to handle it. I realized we're
still earlier in the legislative
process, so I hope because it's
so vitally important that we
pass this bill.
Recognizing it's going to
continue to be worked on as it
moves through the process.
Um, is that fair to say, um,
Madam Prote, Mr. Chair.
Mm
Yes, absolutely. It's part of
the process.
And, uh, but to just say no,
we're just kicking the can down
the road like we've always done
and
And um that's unfortunate. So
with that being said, um, I, I
do have a question for you and
your expert real quick. Um, is
cap and trade at all envisioned
as a solution to dealing with
some of maybe the bigger
sectors.
Madam chair.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, that
certainly has come up. We
certainly didn't want to put it
in the bill and we didn't want
to keep it from being also
something that could be looked
at. So we've written it in such
a way so that it can be.
And I'm just curious for my
education, Madam Chair, um,
sorry, Mr. Chair, Tim, um.
Do we have like when you look at
the total pollution in its
carbon emissions in the state,
it did, do we have some big
buckets that you can just say
off the top like 75% comes from
this sector.
Could you quantify it in those
terms?
Mr. Chairman, about 53% right
now is from oil and gas.
About 14% is from
transportation.
two bigots by far.
And then the rest is, I've, I've
got a piece of paper somewhere
that says that.
Rather than looking for it.
Thank you. Thank you, ma'am
Protem and Mr. Chair, and I know
we had a clean fuels bill and
that's what that was all about
because so much of our pollution
um comes from transportation as
you mentioned, and there's
solutions we can do to do that.
So, I think I, I agree with
those and said, you know, the
boogeyman in the closet is
always the more fearful thing
and, and how it can affect
smaller players, but in fact,
we're dealing with some big
sector issues here that we can
deal with.
And um and I hope as the bill
moves forward, it's kind of how
we put those in more defined
boxes might be a way to kind of
deal with this a little better,
but um,
I do hope we act today. I do
hope we accept our
responsibility as leaders to
deal with climate change and
think about these kids in the
future we're leaving them.
And the planet and our economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We'll start off by saying that
um,
I remember that in the Pliocene
epoch, which was 3 to 5 million
years ago, um, the measurable
CO2 in the air was the same or
even higher than the average um
today.
And that's when the
saber-toothed cat roamed the
earth.
The giant shark, the giant
rhinoceros, the giant armadillo,
um, and even in the last ice
age, um, there was measurable
amounts of CO2 in the air, and
that's when the planet was
covered in ice.
And I don't think that we had
people extracting oil and gas,
um, or people roaming the earth
in in vehicles or diesels, but
um, I'm looking at page 11.
If you would, please look at
line 2.
And it mentions local authority.
I'm not sure if that means the
environmental board can, can you
describe what you're talking
about specifically in this
paragraph for us.
Munos Senator Tobias and members
of the committee, um, this is
language that currently exists
in the environmental um
improvement Act.
Uh, I'm sorry, in the air
quality Control Act.
Basically, the Clean Air Act
federal statute allows states to
delegate some authority to
local.
Agencies and boards if they want
to. This legislature decided to
give certain counties and cities
that the ability to do that. We
have one local board and local
agency, Albuquerque, Berlio Air
Quality Control Board. And so
this just preserves the status
quo. There's an environmental
improvement board that regulates
air pollution for the entire
state with the exception of
Albuquerque Bernalo County,
which is regulated by the
Local board and local agency.
Thank you, and Mr. Chair, I'm,
I'm glad that you mentioned
Albuquerque and Berlio County,
which is what I represent, um,
and I know multiple industries
that are very, very concerned
about the language in this bill,
and I know family owned
multi-generational car
dealerships that are currently
strategizing exactly where they
will be moving their operations
this year in 2025, um, because
they're, they're basically being
forced into a corner where if
they stay.
could easily go bankrupt, and
these are, these are people.
New Mexicans that have been here
for generations that employ
thousands of New Mexicans. So
when I look at this, I'm looking
at it also from a business
perspective, Mr. Chair, and, and
I'm highly concerned about over
regulating business to a point
where it shuts down or over
regulating business to a point
where ultimately the way
business works is that the, the
new hardworking New Mexicans,
they're going to pay that price.
Not necessarily always the
business owner or that industry,
but the cost that they will bear
to do ultimately what is coming
and what is described here will
be passed along to the consumer,
um, consumers that are already
in this state really, really
struggling. Um, so for that
reason, I'm, I'm looking at this
wondering like I got this
letter, oh my gosh, hang on.
Did you get this, a letter from
Industries around the state of
New Mexico. Have you seen this
letter?
With all the logos on it.
There's an even bigger one,
it's, it's that page, but it
goes on to show.
All these logos of industries
and associations, and there's
over like 30 here.
That are standing up pleading,
saying, please slow this down
and I agree many of us have said
this. We all want clean air and
clean water.
Um, but
At what point do we go so far
where no one can afford to be
here.
Um, what does this do with
expanding and and new emerging
technologies outside of the
green space.
Will they automatically turn and
run from New Mexico like they've
Done quite honestly for many
years, have you sat down with
economists that are not
associated with
The green movement, so to speak,
and, and asked for their
analysis of how will this really
affect the economy in New Mexico
and the average New Mexican.
So, Mr. Chairman, I really do
believe that people just aren't
reading the bill.
I mean
Innovation is incredible in all
of these sectors.
Doesn't say anything about that.
Um, it's simply as the state to
monitor an inventory what we're
doing and greenhouse gas
emissions in these sectors.
Over a period of time.
Uh, so, you know what people are
thinking this is going to do is
just not based in fact.
Uh, so
I don't know how to answer
otherwise, maybe.
Pinia, we do it better.
Cha Muno Senator to bison,
members of the committee, thank
you for the question and I, I'll
just note that um
There, there is
Flip side
To the, the kind of economic
argument that you're putting
forward, which is what happens
to all of those businesses that
rely on tourism when our ski
seasons disappear. What happens
to businesses that rely on water
when we experience.
Greater increased droughts,
increased frequency, what
happens to businesses that are
impacted and residents by
increased and more frequent
wildfires. The science also says
that is a certainty and that in
order to reduce those impacts,
we have to take action now.
And what we've seen historically
is that when you set a
regulatory bar, you create
business certainty and give
businesses the certainty to
innovate to meet those standards
and that, that's, that's what we
hope to see here in New Mexico
is to see the great innovation
that exists here, meeting the
challenge, helping prevent those
increases in wildfires, in
droughts, and loss of our ski
season.
While, um, innovating and
continuing to have success.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, I
think what I just heard you say
though is regulatory bars.
Meaning that at some point you
will be holding industry of
every kind responsible and or
accountable to actually reduce
emissions, I, I believe that's
what this is headed towards and
so we're sitting here saying
this in some ways is nebulous.
And in other ways, almost
threatening to not just a way of
life, a way uh uh part of what
is the economic engine of this
state.
There doesn't seem to be a well
thought out plan with a lot of
details of where is this going?
What does it mean? And I think
Senator Brandt may be the one
that mentioned.
People are fearful of the
unknown.
And are, are we opening
Pandora's box, so to speak, to a
point where
We can't function.
I mean, I heard a, a young
woman, I'm not sure what.
tribe, she said she was with,
but she said, hey, we
We heat our homes with.
Logs with wood we're burning
wood to keep warm.
Think about all the regions
around the state where there,
there are currently and will
continue for the foreseeable
future to be CO2 emissions for a
myriad of reasons.
What's the plan?
And when I look at emerging
industries that right now our
governor is talking about
bringing here, we have AI AI and
quantum physics that takes more
energy than you or I could ever
imagine.
How do we bring those in, we
don't have the grid to sustain
it. We alternative energies
won't do it.
How, how do we do that? So this
is where
For me, I will just say I, I
cannot support this bill.
There's too many questions and
too much at stake.
And again, it's not to say that
anyone, no one wants to see our
state destroyed air.
Earth, water, we all understand
we need that in all these
industries need it and um
Senator, you actually mentioned
that many of these industries
have said, including ag, how far
they have come in in reducing
their footprint, which is
amazing and I think actually we
live in a state where probably
more than most other states,
your industries do understand
the importance of that.
But to put something like this
in place, it seems so.
I guess aggressive and
overreaching and at the same
time nebulous and confusing, um,
it, it's hard.
It's hard to vote yes at this
point. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Lanai.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome.
Um,
Is it OK to call you professor?
Well, I'm education too.
I appreciate that.
You know, I had, I had a, a much
more open mind when I came in.
than I do now.
I I've just got to be honest
with you.
Um
I, I just want to hit on a
couple of little places and, and
try to make this quick and, and
as painless as I can.
For you, um,
The first thing I want to talk
about.
I
Is this as strong as the
California?
Environmental laws or is it a
little bit weaker or?
Just kind of put me where.
Or it might be.
Before he answers that, I'll
tell you this is very similar to
what Colorado passed last year.
OK.
And
Um, let me find my Colorado, Mr.
Chair.
Um
My county borders Colorado.
And it's, it's actually worked
out pretty well for us until
this point.
Propane is more expensive in
Colorado.
They drive down to San Juan
County and purchased our
propane.
Yes. Electricity is more
expensive.
In Colorado.
Natural gas is more expensive in
Colorado.
Gas prices are about the same,
diesel is not.
So I, I'm not sure we want to
compare ourselves to Colorado
necessarily.
But, but I really am interested
in Mr. Chair, and the, the
California law.
Uh, Chairman Munoz, Senator
Lanier, members of the
committee, thank you for making
this little painless as
possible. Appreciate that. Um,
so the, the care, the California
law has been around a lot
longer, so they use a different
baseline. They use 1990.
And so, um, there, and they also
have a suite of policies. So you
know, many different policies,
uh, including, uh, cap and
trade, um,
100% clean energy standards as
you know, they've got the most,
uh, the strongest vehicle
standards in the country. So,
um, there.
Their standard, they have
different numbers that they're
using on a different baseline,
so you can't do an apples to
apples comparison. Overall, I
think most experts would say
that they have more stringent
policies in place, then the
standards contemplated by this
bill.
And I, I'll note that
You know, Colorado, which is
using the same baseline as a
more stringent.
2030 target. They are using a
2005 baseline, they have a 50%
target by 2030.
Yes, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
so
Is the population going up or
down and California?
think it's going down a little
bit.
I don't know how much they have
55 million people.
They could lose a few million
and not miss them.
That, that might, that might be
true.
And is it also true that their
economic
Development is.
Not what it used to be, even 10
years ago. Don't even have to go
back all the way to 1990.
So, so
Mr. Chair.
Metam protein.
So, so my point is, let's just
move to the economic part of it.
The economic part of it is what,
what scares me to death.
So if we just kind of go down
through a list.
You know, is this bill gonna
promote new business?
Is this bill going to help
Residents
Is this bill going to help
commercial development.
Is this bill gonna help in
industrial.
Is this bill going to help
agriculture?
Bill going to help cattle.
Is this bill
Going to help the
Oil and gas, I mean, that's been
kind of a hot topic.
And, and I don't believe it's
gonna help any of them.
I, I think we're gonna hinder
them with this bill.
I do
Leave
That if you go through one of
the economic developments, I do
believe lawyers.
are going to make some money.
I do think it's going to
increase.
Their economic development.
That would be my guess.
And I just, I kind of wanna just
finish up a little bit, um, I
appreciate all, all of the
people that came in today,
especially my son, San Juan
County folks, SJC.
And
But I want to talk a little bit
about
The tribes in New Mexico and
The Navajo Nation in particular.
Do you see?
The cost increase in their
lives.
Just, just the tribes.
In the Navajo Nation.
Chair Munoz, Senator Lanier, um.
I just, just as a threshold,
this bill is not authorized the
regulation of greenhouse gasses
on the Navajo Nation, it's
reservation or trust lands or
the reservation or trust lands
of, of any uh sovereign tribal
nation in New Mexico.
Um
Uh, because the state doesn't
have the authority to do that.
Um, and so, um, there, you know,
what, what, how the Navajo
Nation decides to respond to to
climate change and whether or
not they regulate greenhouse gas
decisions.
Miss is their decision.
Um, I don't see any reason that
this, that this bill needs to
Um, increased costs on the
Navajo Nation.
But this bill does leave a ton
up to the regulatory process. It
does allow.
The New Mexico Environment
Department to suggest strategies
and on how to meet the emission
targets. And I do want to just
note that
This bill specifically requires
the environmental improvement
board to take into consideration
other existing state and federal
rules on page 19, and it's
specifically
Authorizes the environmental
improvement board to take into
consideration voluntary actions
by local governments and in
private and private entities,
um, as well as philanthropic
investments, grant programs. So
there's no need to do all of
this by regulation.
If there are industries that are
taking action to come up with
great solutions like we already
have. This spill specifically
says, yeah, we can use those.
There's no reason that we don't
have to use those strategies and
work with business on voluntary
mechanisms to get emission
reductions. And so, yes, the
devil is in the details of the
Implementation of this bill and
this bill specifically requires
consultation with tribal
governments and tribal
populations does not allow
regulation.
Over on the trust lands or the
the um reservation lands, um, of
tribal governments and
A lot when lands are a little
bit more complicated, but I can
also talk about what the law
requires in that, um.
And it allows for working with
voluntary actions to minimize
costs to consumers.
Underrepresented groups, etc.
OK, and my last question, Mr.
Chair.
So if
If this bill passes,
Don't you agree that it's gonna
take
Everybody in New Mexico.
Working towards it to get to
2050 net zero.
Chairman is certainly near.
Yes, this would involve lots of
people working together on
innovations and solutions and
wouldn't it be worth it if we
could reduce.
Wildfires reduced drought,
reduce the loss of our ski
season and tourism. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, so
The tribes and the Navajo Nation
are gonna have to get on board.
You know, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator, you heard a lot of
support from them, and then you
heard some that were not in
support.
So
You know, when, when I, when I
look at them, I, I've worked on
wildlife quarters.
The tribes and the nation are
experts in wildlife quarters.
They already have developed
wildlife quarters on their own
lands. They certainly will deal
with lowering emissions on their
lands. They're better stewards
of the lands than the rest of
us.
OK, thank you. um, Mr. Chair and
Madam Protem, thank you today
for, for talking about this and
and bringing this bill forward
and the one underneath the
The fire there, um, I just, I
want to end, I was, I was really
appreciative.
Pritive of the students that
showed up, because I do think
that's important that they have
a voice in this.
My biggest fear, though, is by
202,050.
The population in New Mexico
will have dropped so far we
won't have jobs for those young
people.
They will be moving out of this
state and that, that's what
scares me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In.
Mr. Chairman, may I make a
motion?
I still have Senator Shindo on
the list and then.
OK
Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and uh
thank you. Just a follow up
question, um.
On section 3, on section 2.
Um,
the reporting requirements.
uh
The deep, uh, where the
department shall publish.
It, you know, it talks about
consultation with the various
departments, agencies, including
tribal entities.
If they're not, if this law is
not impacting them.
How do you see tribes
participating in this process.
You know, Mr. Chairman.
Tris and the and the uh nation
are in New Mexico, so we want to
consult with them about how they
can lower emissions too.
Even if they're not part of the
regulatory structure.
OK.
And on section 3.
Where it talks about
consultation, I believe.
See
On page 8.
Thank you. Oops.
the
Climate equity principles might
not be what you're looking for.
OK, I, I appreciate the fact
that in this section you're
talking about, uh, with the
climate equity principles.
The
The board
Or part of the rules development
that
Will incorporate tribal
consultation and outreach to
tribal communities and real.
So how do you see that?
Happening when there's not.
part of this.
Well, Mr. Chairman, they're,
they're part of it and not.
You know, they live here, they
want to work on climate.
They want to lower emissions,
and yet they're not part of the
regulatory, so we, we, uh, feel
like they should be part when we
look at overburdened communities
sometimes tribes are in that
category, so we don't wanna
leave anybody out.
It's important to consult with
tribes in the nation about these
issues.
I think the feedback that I've
been getting from, you know, a
lot of the tribes.
is
They wish that they had been
consulted.
As part of the development of
this bill.
Because you have tribal
governments and economic
development corporations.
that do business off reservation
that do partner with non-native
corporations.
I mean, they're back and forth
right now.
Other tribes are still neutral
and some have said, you know,
You know, we're opposed, and I
appreciate people that spoke
both for and against and I
appreciate my constituents.
Individuals that came from San
Juan County, Rio Reba McKinley
County, Sandoval County.
These are real people whose
lives are gonna be impacted.
I have Hickory Apache right now,
they're all in gas. They're
staying neutral, but
They may weigh in later on.
I have individual lattes.
In San Juan County, northern
Sandoval County.
They're gonna be impacted.
You heard from an individual, I
had the entire navigable
agricultural products industry
in my district, 80,000 acre.
You heard
That their electric
Bills have gone up as a result
of what happened in San Juan
County.
These are real people's jobs. I
have families.
That are taking care of
grandkids because individuals
are working now in Colorado,
other places, and our
grandparents are taking care of
families.
Children
Because her mom and dad had to
leave the state.
You know, to make a living.
You know.
Us as native people, we've been
stewards of this land.
Understand it.
But I also have a lot of folks
in my own community, Haus that
are cattle ranchers.
The grazing areas that we have.
Isn't right there in the valley.
Themigration area we have is 25,
30 miles round trip.
South of Cuba area.
And I see those guys.
Back and forth all the time,
trying to make a living.
These are real impacts.
We try to do a solo project in
Hama with Haus Mount Electric Co
op.
About 8 pueblos are within the
heinous Electric Co op.
We couldn't move on anything.
Because Triate refuses.
To allow anything beyond 5%.
And when
He and his mom electric co op
board decided they were gonna
approachtriy to buy at least 30.
Megawatts
They were denied and they upped
the price so much that
The CEO left.
Now we're back to square one.
To come to Hamas in the winter
time.
You're up in the valley or in
the mountains or south of Amos.
You see a white cloud.
Because everybody is burning.
Would
Or propane.
That's not regulated.
My concern isn't about big oil.
My concern is about the
increased cost.
Of fuel of propane.
I, I don't think I have seen
any.
Solar panels and any homes in
any of my Pueblo villages. I
represent 7 pueblos.
Not a single family, I don't
think it's put a solar panels on
their rooftops.
I have not seen, at least in
hateness, anybody driving
electric vehicle.
At all.
Now we're talking about
How do we increase?
Taxes for road, there's been
discussion about.
People want to charge people at
the amount of travel they do.
That's gonna impact the real
folks.
Because we our families thrive
on hour and a half, sometimes 2
hours, one way for a job.
Yes, this stuff doesn't apply to
tribes.
Per se.
The tribes with their economic
development, we're probably,
some of them are probably the
largest employers.
In their regions.
So
If this is gonna impact economic
development in ways that were
hurt.
It is going to directly impact
tribes.
And in particular the families
they try to make a living off
the land.
So I don't know what I'm gonna
vote.
But I appreciate, you know, the
conversation.
And what we've heard.
Because I have tribes, I have
individuals.
Both sides.
This is real.
Because I've seen it today how
it's impact.
I volunteered, you know, to pay
propane for my daughter when
she's decided to, you know, live
close to Hamas.
And I could not believe.
The cost of propane, and I think
meth.
Families are paying.
On a monthly basis, almost
probably the cost of a mortgage
to pay for propane.
My entire district.
From the corner of 550 on.
Santa Ana
All the way to Charman Colorado
border.
All the way to San Juan, south
of Broom south of uh.
Uh
Aztec and boil.
Nappy all the way down to the
south of I-45.
I bet you, 99% of those folks.
Rely on either.
Oh
What
propane.
he
These are the families.
That I'm worried about.
Because all we all want clean
air.
And until we can get our
infrastructure, electricity.
Transmission
Everything's set up. I don't see
a lot of these folks converting.
heat pumps or any kind of
electrical because
infrastructure is not there.
And if these co-ops are
continued to handcuff our
tribes, we're never gonna get
there.
Thank you.
Thank you. Let me just ask some
real quick questions. How many
other states have passed this or
similar, you said there's a
number of states, but I don't
know how many.
14, OK. Uh, you said import is.
Import is excluded in this, so.
Have a contractor comes in from
another state.
And is
Contracted out with another
state. He's excluded from
reporting whatever he builds or
emissions or anything, so that's
an import.
Chair Munoz, uh, just in terms
of products, so if, if there's
like a
Importer that that sets up a a
source that emits greenhouse gas
emissions, those, those sources
are still subject to regulation
here.
OK, but is product when he
trucks it in when it's freighted
in when company comes through,
the freight company loads and
Phoenix, Arizona and comes into
New Mexico and goes to
Yeah,
Things that are just passing
through not, but if it's, for
example, if it's imported fuel
that would be combusted here,
then it will be regulated. OK.
We're subject to accounting.
I don't think there's a, there's
one refinery left in Artesia, so
all other full fuels are
imported, right? So they'd have
to report that.
So then once they report that
field then there.
The next buyer, whether it's the
Uh, I buy from you from uh all
the time. I'll say the name, but
I don't want to say the name.
So, so the in synergy who I buy
bulk fuel from, right? So then
they'd be taxed, they'd have to
comply with that, and then you
have to tell work who each
individual fuel buyer was,
correct?
No, uh, so right now the clean
transportation fuel standard
which, which this legislature
enacted, that's, that's the
probably the
The main and only way that the
state is going to address fuels
and that leave.
It's at the rack where the, the
regulatory is assessed. So
there's no downstream.
Um, regulatory requirement.
And then
On page 8.
On section, it's line 16, it
starts there.
State agencies shall apply
climate equity principles,
except where prohibited by law.
What's currently prohibited by
law?
Munoz, this is just language to
reflect that this may not always
be allowed. So there's no.
So for example there there may
be there may be a particular
regulator regulatory authority
that EIB tries to use and it
doesn't allow for considering
other factors in that, in that
case, this just acknowledges,
OK, we can't foresee every
situation.
And, and then the same
paragraph, it starts.
climate, the principles to rural
development.
So
What would be equitable in a
person that
Us propane to the person that
Doesn't use propane.
Thank you, Chair Munoz. These
climate equity principles build
on what's already in the air
quality Control Act and um on
page.
Uh, 20.
Um
Line 2 says that the EIB.
Shall give appropriate weight to
all facts and circumstances,
including those factors listed
in subsection F. Um, the 742-5.
So that's the, that's 7 section
of 74-2-5 is the part of the air
quality Control Act that says
that for any
Air quality rulemaking, what the
The board has to take into
account and it's got to look at
costs and impacts to regulated
entities, and so that's included
here.
OK. And then there was
should look, should have had
them before, but we went over it
before.
Uh, in page.
14
Section 2
Overburden community means
population communities that
potentially
this approach disappropriate
disportional environmental
harms. So like there's a plume
over San Juan County right now.
Everybody knows that exist. Some
of it was caused by
Previous stuff and some of it
just exists from the ground.
So would they be an overburdened
community because of the plume
exists naturally or would they
have I mean I I just don't
understand how it works.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, we're gonna have
a, a map, uh, ability to map out
over burned communities. So if
you notice it also is a
consideration of income.
Along with exposure to
pollution. So we'll have a
screener, a map, ability to look
at all these issues around the
state.
So everybody is bringing up
these individual little stories
about here and not what this
bill deals with.
And and then, you know.
I, I, I developed, right? I'm
not putting any gas in any
subdivisions right now. They're
all electric, right?
That's where we're headed,
that's where people need to be
prepared for. Uh, it's hard to
deal with the gas company in New
Mexico or whoever the gas
supplier is, you're running in
there, you're paying you to
utility bills. I converted a
three-story building to all
electric, right?
It didn't really change my
cause. I thought it would save
it a little bit with, with new
technology and electrical it in.
Right, and then, so here's the
Here's what happens, and this is
the city of Gal.
I'm not gonna speak for any
other, you know, so I paid
double of what they charge in
the city because I live outside
the city limits.
In the city limits services
Church Rock chapter that I
represent, so they pay double.
So I think they were 13 cents a
kilowatt, and I think I'm at.
26 or 30 outside the city
limits, right? That's already
double, but we get our power
from tri-state.
In tri-state furnishes to the
co-ops who services everybody
from
Zuni and Navajo utilities do not
serve, right? to the north we
have Navajo utilities and I
really don't know where their
power comes from.
But the co-ops, uh, by their
power from tri-state.
I, I just
And I I'm gonna.
Beat a dead horse, but those are
some of the real things. I mean,
I'm looking towards the future,
but I can't resolve all the
other problems and
disproportionately, I, I hope we
would head that direction, but I
think it's, it's a little too
rapid for me. I'm trying to head
that direction myself and, and
make sure that things that I'm
building are ready for the next
technology. I mean, my, my wife
is remodeling my house while I'm
gone, uh.
Much to my surprise over the
weekend
and so I'm getting new cabinets
and I'm uh updating my uh
cooling system, uh, so we're,
cause my, I, I have a
I use radiant heat and, you
know, propane is 325 a gallon is
what I paid before I came,
usually fill up in the summer
when I try to cheat, but I have
2000 gallon tank, and it's
pretty expensive, it will last
me two years like watch what I
use and, but I mean, all our
propane is used to be spending
gallon compress it and they call
it spinning.
But now it's all done in
Colorado. And so every piece of
propane or every gallon of
propane comes from Colorado
because that's where the
compression station is Ignacio.
And they truck it back to Gail.
There's some undercoun.
Underground cavern stores just
over the Arizona line, and they
store it underground.
But people still buy coal.
Believe it or not,
Every day in Gallop, you can go
buy coal on the side of the road
from the casino to uh Church
Rock and the root, you name it,
and there's people selling
firewood every single day. Um,
sometimes I buy firewood just to
help people out cause it's cold
at night and they're sitting out
there trying to sell a product.
They have families to be.
I think it's just a little too
early for me to, to try to
support this, but I mean there
there's real issues when we,
when we talk to to people and,
and it'll disappropriate effect.
poorer people than it will other
people.
Sure, I want to convert my house
all to electric. Sure, I got to
pay double the rates, right?
But I know it's more efficient
these days.
And it's more efficient than
natural gas.
And I
We all know we're gonna head
there.
Just a little too rapidly and I
really don't have the faith in
in the EIB board to come back
and say,
Hey, how does this really
disinfection disapproachingly
infect other people, right?
Oil and gas has got a lot of
money.
Listen
There are, you say they're on
track, they're kind of on track.
We hope they're on track, uh,
and, and we can do that. When it
comes to smaller people or
smaller communities, how they're
gonna react in the cost, I mean,
every farmer and rancher, I'll
tell you right now, don't
complain when it rains, they'll
complain when it doesn't rain,
they'll complain when fuel
prices are high and they'll
complain with fuel prices are
low and they're back there
laughing, so don't complain when
cattle prices are too high and
cattle prices are too low, um,
farmers do.
the exact same thing, I mean,
uh, so I don't know if you ever
make them happy, but there is
actual cost to that, right? In,
in
And so you got to figure that
out and balance it out, so
that's kind of my comment, so
thank you, Senator Trujil. You
want to make a motion.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
make a motion uh to do pass
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 4.
Hey, we have a second I move the
table, Mr. Chair.
We have a tabling motion.
Undebatable.
We call the room
Senator Brent.
Senator Brandt votes yes,
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
votes no. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes no.
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
Bosia, senator Padilla.
Yeah
Senator Padilla votes no.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes no.
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasson votes yes. Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes no.
Senator Woods.
Sinner Woods boats, yes, Senator
Schendo.
Senator Sendo.
Yes.
Finner Sindo votes yes, Senator
Munoz. Yes.
Mr. Chairman substitute motion.
Boats, yes.
We have the table a table so now
we'll take a substitute,
substitute motion to uh do pass
no recommendation.
So we have a substitute motion
at tight votes.
That's right. I'm sorry.
It's 65
6 to 5, sorry, it's tape.
You have a table.
So it's the bill's tables in
there.
Thank you very much for the
afternoon and the.
Thank you.
We're, we're a journey center so
Cervantes. See you next week.
