Yes okay.
It's still your seasonal.
So before we get started with
the and.
To get to a.
Of the discussion she
one of the issues that that are
that I'm noticing is that we're
all invested in it
in the.
This is huge.
I.
How we.
Will.
The staff is another major.
Yet not not.
But
for the department.
To maybe talk to them so that we
all started to get on this.
And so it is just going to.
He's gonna talk a little bit
about the things are rolling out
next year and if you have so
that and it is.
we'll try to finish within the
hour.
The second time.
Particularly some of the.
Focusing on.
Significant issues that the
address.
I want to do is first of all to
this day introduce.
And as you notice he's he's
running around.
Really good working diligently
and all these things again this
is going to be a conversation I
don't know if the assessments
will be coming in
leave it up to you to the as the
experts to talk about these
things and and some questions so
we've already started.
Okay.
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee just personally
from the next week because of
the opportunities extended
learning the meeting again next
Thursday and are in the hearing
on both house and Senate bills
all those orders.
Senate service and and or today
organized sort of space the
session we've got and here of
listening or anything Sir
questions and that's sort of
Indian primary focuses questions
that the committee has a
relating to these very seems
just sort of requests are and
get a better understanding of
the various water issues and the
next week we're gonna dive more
into this for more on
recommendations and and I really
appreciate that thank you very
much for the
for the if you will the roadmap
as we're we're dealing with this
so so a couple of things before
we get started number one we
want to make this as informal as
possible but as a indicated
earlier what I would really
appreciate those people that are
online and of course with our
various departments as we move
forward in order for us to tie
in all of these pieces it's
going to be incumbent that we
really get the word out so
people understand that this is
even though another component
the whole issue is how are we
going to have the discussion
regarding the the various things
that we're we're dealing with
yesterday was very helpful and
and hi I was just extremely
pleased with the way first of
all that I saw you all working
together but more than that how
you're helping to give us that
guide now as we go along if you
see this is just another piece
please with all candor let us
know because we want this to be
an impactful piece as we as we
go forward so going back to the
water things as you take a look
at them and there may be others
if we could have that discussion
again very informal if you have
someone that comes in and
they're sitting in the audience
and you want them to join you
here feel comfortable to go
ahead and do that but again what
we'll do is we'll we'll take
your lead through the discuss.
Should so if we may probably
just start with the state
engineer and then you can help
to give us some guidance in
terms of the various entities
and how we're doing.
Okay thank thank you Senator of
we certainly will
Welcome this great opportunity
to.
To to
Sure thoughts on all of the
different things that have been
laid out here and and your
agenda we we certainly
the state engineers office so
we're kind of interwoven in the
all of these in some form or
fashion
as well as my colleague at the
enemy the and also nurtures
their different aspects of
almost all of these topics that
we all
some some engagement on so we we
can no we can the end to it by
agency and all the themes if
that makes sense or or we can we
can just go kind of.
you know the way theme if you
like it how would you like to
proceed so so I believe what
would really be helpful to all
of us to there is a level of
organization if we do it theme
by theme and in that with the
highlights so that we can try to
keep it within the hour if we go
beyond that it's understood but
I noticed yesterday that we
start to going to lose people
after about an hour so within
that just get used to having
those conversations so so we'll
do the same bye thing start with
the domestic use there's gonna
be some questions in terms of
maybe how we can even best
coordinate that the agency so
what will handle it that way if
you're if you all feel
comfortable without guidance
what I'd like to make one
comment from yesterday's
discussion relative to the
Water policy and infrastructure
task force report a I think I
think after the Senator Diamond
made her comments about the.
Another noise going yeah.
Thank we just heard something
okay gunship okay thank you Mr.
Somebody else speaking we were
speaking district okay great
thank you
the to see what she meant a
point that the the really really
looking you all are really
looking to us the the experts
for recommendations and guidance
and and and I didn't really get
a chance to follow up on her her
comment relative to the to that
point but I I would like to just
go back and say that that that
that this this report really was
intended by all the parties are
participating including us here
to actually be kind of a road
mapping guide guidance when you
look at the seventeen
recommendations and and all of
the of the speech the strategies
that are within each
recommendation we also have a
very detailed spreadsheet of
about a hundred and ten.
Action items that is not in this
document but we should forward
to this to you guys the the the
the this committee the
subcommittee members
and then maybe also those are
going to be working next
Thursday and both the house and
Senate to to really show that
yes the the the the water task
force with all of the the
experts from around the state
and the stakeholders and all
that really gave a serious
thought about it being a a road
map with with specific
strategies and specific action
items that could be looked at
over the next three fiscal years
that's how we set up the
spreadsheet and and that's not
invented in this document as a
surly it's spoken to implement
but we we can find that so I
think that would be very helpful
so
so with that the Mr chair all
but we can dive into domestic
use and then from the of state
and the state engineer
perspective
we are and and you know
basically in charge of and
oversight of of the actual water
rates
for a domestic use across the
state any order use press
statement particularly we spend
a lot of time.
in my view unnecessarily.
Working with all of the the
small
the government says that
communities to the mystics
and many other appropriators of
water for for drinking water
purposes and and and it's also
connected to wastewater because
returned for credits and all
that make make the portfolio
Water Rights foreign entity but
we spend an inordinate amount of
time trying to get compliance
with with the actual permit.
and we don't we don't we don't
have the the full breadth of
staff necessary to guide and we
we run into problems that the
water transport also I'm also
the chair of the water trust
board and we run into problems.
Consistently with smaller
entities trying to get
I guess qualified for water
transport Grant who haven't
dealt with their water.
Permit appropriately by
reporting their well pumping and
and all these other things that
the permit requires and we find
ourselves denying their or or
giving them conditional the
approval if they comply and
oftentimes even that time
between the time that they're
initially approved and the time
that they have to so that that
they've met their requirements
they still have they still
struggle to get caught up on
their compliance mechanisms in
Water Act and often times
they're in violation of their
permit they've over pumped so we
have to do a lot of work with
them to keep them informed and
and and compliance with their
their permits so so that's a
major issue for the state
engineers office we we we do
have recommended in our like our
three year outlook of about how
to grow the agency in the
direction of being able to be of
more service to all of these
entities that are struggling to
maintain their records and and
report and according to their
permits and also to help them
understand the value of their.
You know a mutual domestic when
they expand their service area
they can pull those domestic
water rights into their water
its portfolio so they can grow
their their their capacity from
water commence perspective and
and they don't often do that in
a timely manner so so we were we
want to help them we want to
help.
All of these entities be have
the proper water rights and the
and the water available to them
when they need it for their for
their work so so that's that's
one one area I would I would
focus on for the state
engineer's perspective in this
category so if I may as we go
forward tying in the thematic
pieces the issue then becomes
okay so these are the categories
but with that if it's going to
be are we gonna need the FTEs
are we going to go ahead and
need and we have the
accountability how are we going
to streamline this and over the
next three years as an example
with a hundred ten action items
how are we gonna start to lay
this out if if we take full
advantage of this opportunity
and share this with the various
committees that are here in both
the house and the Senate I
believe then that we're really
off to a good start if if we
don't and it just becomes if you
will another site or isolated
conversation then definitely
we're gonna have a harder time
in dealing with it so that's
just a thought that came to mind
as you're describing how how
we're going to move forward with
some of these things so please
proceed.
Is so open open ended up to to
John here on the on on the
drinking water infrastructure
side of it
and and and we work closely even
at the water transport level
within the trying to make sure
that these entities coming into
the system looking for funding
get qualified appropriately both
on on your side as well
thank you and and thank you Mr
chairman.
So.
To build off of of what Mike
said you know the compliance
issues something we struggle
with on in the drinking water
bureau.
And it comes back most of the
time to capacity and so when
we're talking about capacity
we're talking about capacity at
the system level the fastest
have technical operators who can
keep them in compliance but also
the capacity to have
administrative staff and we run
into this quite often whenever
we have that unity is looking
for funding they can't qualify
because they're not current with
their audits
for the system they may have
other reporting requirements
that they're behind on and so
you know we will report
compliance issues that
In our quarterly reports some of
them are administrative and some
of them quite honestly those
administrative issues has been
there for years but because they
can't afford they can't get the
staff to do it
less of the issues are with
water quality although we have
some systems that that are have
chronic problems that they can't
afford to fix
in in some cases of problems are
exacerbated because they have a
system that they don't have the
staff to operate.
And so this is something that we
have already begun as is
modified outreach to these
communities to try and make the
application process simpler to
try and work with them to come
into compliance so they can
qualify for the funding but we
are short staffed in our
community outreach programs with
drinking water.
We when it comes to the
compliance side
We also have limited enforcement
staff in most cases I have staff
doing multiple jobs
in so they are able to focus
like they'd like to so part of
it is is
Staffing internally in the
department.
Tailored to meet the needs a
bigger part of it to be quite
honest is how we can help these
communities access the services
they need to be complied and
this comes back to our
conversation yesterday about
creating what in the the task
force report it's called the
water infrastructure projects
authority which would be a
mechanism that would be able to
have on staff engineers
financial folks what they needed
that potentially these
communities could.
Good access to help them operate
their their their systems that
obviously doesn't exist yet but
I think it's a crucial point.
That is going to need to be
addressed to help us be
successful now there's a lot of
legislation
this session regarding capital
outlay because that comes into
play.
You know we we we administer
through the drinking water
bureau in conjunction with
The New Mexico finance authority
the drinking water state
revolving fund.
And we have a lot of money
available at the very low
interest rates many communities
that need this can qualify for
zero percent interest those that
don't can get eight point zero
one percent.
what we run into all the time
though is the two communities
don't want any kind of a loan
component and that's the problem
that this is federal money comes
with our loan component
requirement we don't set the
rules they come to us that way
and so you know historically
communities have opted to try
and get capital outlay money you
know from the legislature's
which is a good thing but
sometimes.
They're not advocating for the
rights.
Thank and and I'm encouraged by
level legislation because we're
starting to look at capital
outlay and and develop some
tools to that some of these
requests and figure out what
they really need you know
community doesn't need money for
construction until they've done
their preliminary engineering
reports and things like that the
to identify cost estimates so
they have a clue what the
project is going to cost you
know and so that's where I I
really see the emphasis this
session is is looking at how
capital outlay gets handled the.
Help use the money the way it
needs to be used in an efficient
manner so we don't have it set
and doing nothing and that's
important but even you know once
we once we get that piece in
place capital outlay is not
going to pay for most of these
projects because are
significantly more expensive so
we have to be these communities
to take advantage of the state
revolving fund.
And the and and take these loans
you know and and be able to work
with some of these loans have a
small loan component and the
rest of it is is grant money but
there is but it's like a piece
that has to be there and it's
like it or not it's how we have
to do business and so get in
these communities the resources
to be able to access to staff
appropriately is crucial and I
think.
You know I think it's going to
take development of some type of
the co op if you will like this
water infrastructure planning
agency that could provide that
service
we support these communities to
the full extent that we can with
our staff both in drinking water
construction programs but we are
migrating water barrel currently
the engineering section has two
people one senior engineer and
then at an engineer underneath
her we have initiated
contract with a third party
engineering firm to assist us to
fill the gap because we can't
hire people and we're utilizing
this third party company to do
sanitary surveys force so that
it allows me to target my staff
one of the things that we can't
use a third party for so that's
important and that is going to
be something that we have to do
moving forward
so so if I may with that couple
things that come to mind first
of all with our educational
programs and I hope that there
are people out there that are
listening to this or at least
with follow up if if we're gonna
need level one level two is
we're gonna need maybe even the
level forces we go along how are
we gonna set up these programs
whether it be there at C. N. M.
or one of the other institutions
the second part as we deal with
it when we start dealing with
our our university level
programs how are we going to
continue to recruit if you will
the engineers and so forth so it
sounds like
recruitment retention and
completion for these programs is
going to be eminent hopefully
that'll be part of what we deal
with even though that's going to
be more related to the people we
can definitely have
jobs for these people four three
percent when it comes to
unemployment but we don't have
the opportunity to go and fill
these jobs it means that we
import that.
Population to take care of them
which in all reality we want to
grow our own as we move forward
so it's just a thought as as we
as we go forward you all please
continue thank you and and Mr
Chairman absolutely agree you
know this is a multi pronged
approach to to get New Mexico
where we need to be and and
building the work force from the
high school level up is critical
so we have engaged you know what
San Juan college I mentioned
yesterday that we have a program
to train our utility operators
This comes back to another
crucial piece of how we look at
structuring this going forward
cause one of the problems that
we see with the smaller mutual
domestics and may serve hundred
to five hundred.
You know residences in their in
their community is that they
don't have a financial base that
that they can afford to do a lot
with their system is not big
enough to be self sustaining to
be quite honest and.
So they can't afford to pay the
operators that they need.
Number one and number two some
of these are located places
where it's difficult to get
operators and we've engage with
rural water and that.
They do assessed as those are.
Other agencies these
communities.
But it's going to come back to
this I think this cooperative
look at so regionalization where
multiple communities are sharing
operators so that one
communities not incurring all of
the cost it shared for the
operators for the administrative
staff
it's a mechanism we don't have
it's a mechanism that can be
created though
I think has to start with the
legislative level to create and
that.
That co op that board and then
we flush it out from there
but that's going to be part of
the answer you know the other
thing quite honestly is as you
say education there are a lot of
people don't realize what the
job opportunities are in the
water and wastewater industry
and good jobs to their very good
jobs you know and some of them
can be real high paying all of
them should be.
it's a tough job to do and that
so we have to look at that and I
and it's something I think we
have to look at at the state
level
You know are not advocating that
the state pick up the tab for
everything but advocating
potentially that the state
create this this agency that
communities could pay into based
on a formula on their income on
their on their customer base so
not everybody's going to stay
the same.
Price but ever got it
everybody's going to have a
share in paying for
radical wave to do business
something different than we've
ever done but I think it's going
to be necessary for us to really
solve these problems long.
The.
Right and then you for
structured part of this gonna
ask a.
Role to to join in with me on
this conversation we have the
great opportunity to meet with a
a large contingent of of local
governments led by Priscilla
looser from the southwest card
yesterday to talk about the they
really collaborative
infrastructure program that just
falls right in with what John
was saying about the they're
they're actually talking about
inter connecting all the the
villages was over city down
there and also the even the
mining company there Freeport is
is willing to step up and and
they're putting some water on
the table of for the smaller
communities that currently in
Santa Clara is that correct and
and a couple other communities
down there
on the infrastructure side and
it's tied into what I'll have a
roll the visit with you all in
on the New Mexico unit fund
which is another source of money
but it also ties into our work
together with Senator Hemphill
to get some local resources on
Thursday per bill to the because
in other places to do this
really necessary planning on a
regional scale of that also is
going to fit into a bill that
you you'll see the seeing zoom
is reinstituting the regional
planning water planning effort
which will be really key for
helping the areas like southwest
or any part of the state
consolidate their resources and
make recommendations to you all
on their priorities that will
feed into whatever type of
capital outlay system we we we
we come forward with and maybe
some of these other water funds
that are are being discussed to
be set up with this great
opportunity of this state money
so so roughly women turn that in
this right and if I may just to
at the very.
The forefront help me a little
bit to better understand why
dams aren't a priority and I
they they could be with you all
but as I keep looking at the
budgets are saying well maybe
we'll use five million dollars
for dams we have the a sick as
mutual domestics we have the
opportunity to leverage so much
and I know this is what you're
going to address now but in that
I it just continues to perplex
me as we deal with it where
whether it be like Malloy it be
story lake would be either
entities as we deal with it
elephant Butte that that it
seems like for whatever reason
fixing a lot of our downs is not
really a priority outside of
let's say the people that deal
directly with it sorry I mean
interrupt don't Mr chairman of
centers I've I'm not sure if
Mike wants to say anything about
them so I I can just say
something on the I guess the
standpoint we work with the
federal agencies you on that
their activities associated with
some the large dams like
elephant Butte and others and
the money that goes to
maintenance of those all federal
money and it's a lot you know
the corps of engineers dams on
the rate goes on the Rio Grande
elephant Butte reservoir L.
Eldorado of the with the bureau
of reclamation right now is
spending close to that almost a
hundred million dollars to
rehabilitate ovata reservoir so
there's actually when when
you're looking at these very
large dams that are there for
flood control purposes and
bigger kind of water
conservation we're engaging with
them and it's but it's generally
a federally funded process now
there are hundreds of other
names that are out there that
are much smaller that I know of
the state engineer stand safety
program is engage with and we
know that that there are a
significant number of those that
need to be repaired and also in
our C. S. storm water flood
control dams old ones the issue
that is there is something
that's very similar to what John
Robert talked about the other
day the with the state in.
Juniors office you know you
can't be the planner designer
permettre oversight person all
the way across the board and
that's the the issue that the
state engineers office has right
and then trying to figure out
how you separate the fire wall
if you're gonna support
somebody's private dams and
others and in and kind of
recapping their their facilities
and I don't know if Mike if it
point that they have the proof
of you Senator and I think I
think your bill recognizes of
the need right the to have some
kind of a resource for all the
local dam owners to tap into for
construction dollars and and and
and we're we're an oversight.
An agency for them safety
regulatory but we're also
working with the local them
owners to help them get prepared
for if and when construction
dollars are available the
they'll be in a position to
pursue them either themselves
through whatever programs
available for with a little bit
of assistance from from our
office and and and in theory we
could potentially have a them
safety construction component.
that within our office that
could be project management
related kind of like the way the
second program runs in the ISC
but we're not set up that way
but we certainly want to provide
the oversight and
recommendations to
engineering firms or whatever
the are correcting these
problems and then we would
expect them to make sure they're
done properly so so that's our
role at this at the agency level
for dams but we recognize
there's a seventy down backlog
the the the U. of of the
recognized as well and we
certainly know that the the
governor also offered up some
are four dollars for two or
three dams that are on the top
priority list that are shovel
ready that we can use our per
dollars to get those
corrected Nichols for the stream
from us here's one of them
power power them and and Santa
Rosa is another and then and
then there's the I think it's so
what is the one that's hard yeah
right yeah so so those are those
are the three that we've
identified that that twenty five
million that's in the governor's
recommendation could address
with the our footballers Senator
and and like I just add though
that if you you know going back
to the okay.
Can you hear me now yes right so
you know if you looking at the
recommendations from the water
task force that really go toward
the drinking water side just a
little bit more I think they're
also at the to the point to dams
or on any of these areas where
we have built a large number
needs extruded yeah in the
smaller rural communities and so
on in the creating the info set
up water infrastructure projects
authority to assist those
communities so some party
wildlife governmental that can
go in to be able to help you
know the idea of regional of
collaboration on the number of a
project that might be there that
are drinking water systems or
dams that are inter related with
them and then enhancing
technical assistance I mean all
those things are are really kind
of missing right there from up
regulatory standpoint is
generally the regulatory part
that's there.
And and that that assistance
part of the project and building
part really hasn't been there
and this is not part of at least
my understanding of a lot of the
agency for well over a decade it
just to it's no longer there
and I just want to kind of wrap
this back around to where the
state engineer was a little bit
ago with the Grant County
regional water project and I
want to just highlight that that
project that was a project that
has been on the books for a
number of years and and has a
you know a number of small
communities so for Tyrone Santa
Clara Baird early that all have
been kind of working
independently to kind of also
their water supplies and in
various times they've been
together at times it works out
right and and then most recently
with Freeport as a as as Mike
was talking the Byford for
coming forward including some of
the water rates to go to the
table one thing I want to hit on
here you know yeah we have a lot
of money for water
infrastructure and sometimes not
as much for water rights but
there's a lack of recognition I
think in the state of New Mexico
that there's no water to
appropriate and so if you want
to grow something in a city or
domestic water supply whatever
you gotta get Water Rights
entrance from some from
somewhere else to go into
basically to build that supply
we're gonna conserve to be able
to grow for this regional system
piece of it that aspect of the
Freeport having water rights and
bringing to the table that looks
made of of really big difference
there yeah I see helped actually
I think you know former
directors and others said it and
I just see if
provided about two million
dollars for oil field that the
that went in but then wasn't
function because of some water
quality issues that will which
goes to water that act right how
much information you know about
certain areas before you start
and what's really I think very
positive in this is now we have
a situation where all of those
regional entities and come
together every single more was
at the table saying you know
that we're here to work together
to find a way of one car systems
to provide of reliable supply of
water to our existing citizens
and for future growth and then
in my mind fits right within
this overall set up in here
Senator Hemphill's Bill SB
seventy right and looks at this
at it providing a certain amount
of of of resources to the south
was called
that where they can apply
friends together for example the
water transporting old movie I
just see for you to fund monies
or for other sources to help the
smaller communities there
actually be able to do the
applications but then manage the
project so I mean that's
basically that the that number
one piece of the recommendation
number two where they came
together right all of those
communities saying we're gonna
find a way to collaborate and
continue this effort because
it's that important to us they
recognize the impacts of climate
change right continued warm is
gonna reduce the supplies no
matter how very well they are
going as much as twenty five
percent and that's going to put
a stress on everything you need
people to come together region
wise they're doing that and then
the technical assistance support
you know I think they're asking
for some of them are still of
peace that is necessary to make
it work it's a great example of
I think we're the
recommendations from the water
task force fit.
Actually what the communities
are trying to do themselves and
I think that that can be very
successful so I just wanted to
highlight.
So so with all of this and I I
really appreciate it we're we're
we're not talking about
regionalization but statewide
how we can apply the best
practices and and every every
region is going to be a little
bit different but how we can
apply this so that unilaterally
what we're doing is we're
getting people acclimated to
this is this is the best way to
deal with it here's how you can
going connect so it's going to
be the southern part but not
only the northwest and the
northeast it's going to be all
of us collectively then going
back to the Rio Grande how it
all really connects I I see all
the pieces I'm just not hearing
at that there really all
connected and people are
understanding that.
What the Mr chair of the the
combined effort and focus of
what what you are trying to
accomplish in and
I guess changing the capital
outlay approach is one area
and and and making it set up set
up so that your your there's
also their support the the
navigational side.
to get in to it whatever capital
outlay system there is for water
wastewater stormwater
watershed improvements all of
those pieces and Ms
the the the so so that they're
of everybody knows the rules of
the road and then do the
regional water planning at all
the different regions that would
also help the state engineer
design specific water rights
regulations that for those areas
we have the authority to to
customize the doctor put it that
way but to to
to modifies traditional
that ministration Education
procedures and in order to match
what the the regional entities
want to do in the future with
their their their water
resources while still complying
with prior appropriation and all
that all of those sort of things
but we we do have all the tools
in place it's just a matter of
getting everybody educated
through the planning process and
then also through the the the
navigational front end if you
will giving them the tools to be
prepared to come into capital
outlay or or for transport or of
the with the with the group this
that gets set up through some of
the investigations that I think.
The LFC is looking up to design
a of of of of a method for
everybody to to follow the rules
and then that fits into the
federal options it's it's not
just this five years of the of
money or a or a money that's
available to us these federal
programs are gonna go on forever
the the state revolving fund is
going to go on forever so we
want to we want to set everybody
up with this great opportunity
to be in a position to take full
advantage of all of those
resources well beyond this
decade you know going forward
and then but but by
incrementally getting everybody
up to a level where their
infrastructures in good shape
they've got the of on going
plants with their drinking water
and water rights compliance all
that stuff is in place then then
they're going to be in a
position to just follow the
procedures for future needs so
their systems expand or or you
know the state grows
economically and and by
population Google will be
positioned ourselves very well
for that.
So so along with that and and
please because we're tying all
these pieces together
and and this is just a.
A snippet of what we're dealing
with but capital outlay right
now as I see it is still not at
the level that needs to be in in
Senate district eight with three
million dollars supposedly that
it's going to be appropriate or
could be used to authorized
there's a there's a billion
dollar requests five hundred
million right up front and then
the other five hundred million
dealing with the fires and
floods it we're we're piece
Mealing things and we continue
to do that so I really believe
the prioritization coming
directly as we deal with water
definitely needs to be at the
top and so that ties in
everything from our parks and
and what we're doing with the
environment and so forth so.
There is one to seven basically
I agree with you on your point
there about this kind of piece
Mealing things
and then
compose
Well suggestions that regard but
the the same issue that you're
bringing offering comes up with
the ICO time with our safety
projects we have a very large
number of relatively small in
many cases capital
appropriations forsake is
invariably those appropriations
are never sufficient to to even
a fraction of the work the
safety is think that they're
getting the money to do and they
invariably we're just being able
to have to go in there and work
on these long to organizations
of state Hey for this amount of
money you can do this one thing
and it it basically just part of
what they need and then there
kind of constantly coming back
in it maybe doesn't even
ultimately solve the problem so
that you know that that the
issue of the we recognize and I
think it's probably the same
with a lot of other projects
that are out there
For the for the I see and then
for the water task force in the.
Another of recommendation that
was there it was it's further
down the list of what we have
was really looking at the
regional water planning a statue
for the State Street Commission
and trying to to recognize that
it had met its purpose which
back in nineteen eighty seven
was to protect really New Mexico
show that we needed our water so
that other states including the
taxes could come in and
appropriate right and that there
was a need with the New Mexico
we did that
so we've been working with a
number of the water task force
partners on a of water Security
Act regional water planning
Security Act and the idea with
that would be ultimately to kind
of follow some of the
recommendations that are coming
out of the water task force here
to create maybe a smaller number
of regional entities that work
to identify problems in their
areas potentially address some
of the local public welfare
issues which I know northern New
Mexico has been a huge issue
historically but then identify
projects prioritize projects and
then bring them through the
Interstate Stream Commission we
would then report that the
legislative committees and then
also to the state agencies of
the highest list of priorities
you know all those parties and
these entities then would also
for the money that they receive
have the ability to help
implement a little bit like the
call is seeking to do under
Senator Hemphill still and so
that bill hopefully will be.
Will be dropped to a pretty
quickly but it's one way of a of
seeking to try to address these
issues another just suggestion
in this wasn't from the water
task force that came I think
from Silvercity and I this is
from me being a firefighter long
time ago so city in this
regional kind of a project is
kind of like a mutual aid fire
department right here if you
have these multiple different
groups that are all you know
individual fire departments and
they don't have a a way of a
working together there's always
places that these drop in you
have a emergency medical aid
situation and people say well
that's not our area And somebody
stuck there right well if you
have agreements about how you
all work together in those types
of situations you can you can
use those and we we do that for
fire departments across the
United States actually if you
could potentially do that in
these types of of color regional
settings also silver is.
Definitely doing that in the
grand calendar year they're
helping all of those different
parties and trying to find ways
to make things fit together and
then back up in fact they're
going to be collectively passing
a new GPA the really addresses
this new project approach here
in the next couple months I
think so.
Session that would have how do
we tie in the multiple use uses
of water in communities so here
we're trying to take care of our
animals for trying to take care
of the sick as we're trying to
take care of domestic water use
all of the infrastructure as
we're dealing with it how do I
how do we tie in the multiple
uses particularly let's say if
we have Storrie lake and there's
the need for domestic water use
recreational water use
agricultural water use the state
parks the the the all all of the
components throughout New Mexico
and we're very unique in that
sense because we really try to
multi task and that's not going
to be upon tied into this but
maybe you can help me a little
bit to better understand that as
we move forward as well.
The I think the same approach to
apply on on getting the
governmental units together and
no the question is you know you
know we we can help facilitate
work at story they can with the
city and and and the story like
project folks and the federal of
the wildlife refuge the state
park
game fish as well as involved
but.
But but that's a small example
of how if you if you get the
everybody together and the
crisis is kind of driven at
right but but whatever the
reason they're they're willing
to to pull together and and come
up with how do we optimize our
resources in light of the crisis
in light of the possibility that
we may be getting more debris
flows coming in and the state
stepped up and helped by a
private entity fix there
anything again because we had
some of thirty to deal with that
but we we don't have the
authority to fix their canal for
them so we're gonna look for
federal money maybe some of this
money that's coming through of
four of the disaster relief can
help on that end and then if
they fix some other problems
that the the the the that are
there and then that that
actually saves water with the
pipeline and it or a line
handout lows during the the
could could enter to the benefit
of of the city of they get so so
all of these really of.
For Regina and and also short
term needs can drive you know
this needs a regional planning I
think can help get us to that
point throughout all of the
state where we know
the end entities can can benefit
from sitting down together and
talking about the the the call
crisis of reduced water supplies
as we go forward in the future
helping to drive these priority
efforts to re inform you to you
all about what they're seeing as
their priorities and then that
helps drive your decision making
with their cap even your capital
outlay locations can fit into
their if they if they need a P.
R. to get into the system will a
perfect use of capital outlay
from from a representative or
senator could be just give one
of you know give them a piece of
your a couple of years to get
that PED are the and then there
there that helps them get set up
to get into the system for
higher level and funding to
finish the project completely so
that the some of the things you
and I have discussed before as
well.
The Mr chairman thank you I
think I just want to put you
back on what the state engineer
said I I I think we we learned a
lot of we want where a lot of
the holes were in in in the case
of the currency cap canyon fire
and and some of the issues with
the story late and I I think we
learned some lessons there and I
you know I I I I'm I'm not
springing this on you I I I've
talked with each of you I think
individually about this about
taking those lessons and start
looking forward so that we are
less reactive and and and for
more act rather than just being
reactive.
The issue as we move forward
regardless of where it's at in
any part of the state is the
coordination the
regionalization but then also
the the real.
Demographics have to be
understood and has to be the
data driven information and and
is that adequately being shared
with all of the entities as we
move forward or is there still
talking about lessons learned
and how we're gonna move forward
is there still the need for more
and and I'm thinking of if we're
gonna be looking at bills how do
we go ahead and make this more
concrete so that as we tied
together there's going to be the
implementation otherwise it's
going to be we're having the
discussions and it's great Andal
along again for the next two
three years but what we really
want to do is to be able to go
back to the communities in
indicate here here's that
process in the plan will always
take input but we definitely
want some some very constructive
outcomes.
Any any thoughts on because
we're going to like I say we're
gonna try to go and finish up at
that at ten ten but maybe maybe
and wrapping this up as you take
a look at the list are there any
final thoughts that that you
have and I'd like to go to the
US a committee members and see
if they have any other other
thoughts.
Mr chair if I could just take a
minute you know on and I don't
think there's ever enough hours
in the day to have to deal with
this subject but it's extremely
exciting to me that we're able
to have this conversation like
this this is a whole different
approach to our water issues in
the state that I've seen in all
my time this is open
communication and looking for a
common solution because that's
reality.
There's not one side or the
other we're we're all on the
same team we all have the same
and go inside and this is
important one thing that that I
and I think
Our state engineer would concur
this water task force.
Didn't you just do a finite job
okay we had some to accomplish
we're done what it did is is
shined a light on the need for a
path forward in this on going
collaborative effort between the
agencies and between the
legislature and the local
communities so this is this is
the start of a long path but I
think we have got some good
steps forward
you know the next item down I
know we needed to finish up when
we talk about it's headed
produced water and it really
we're talking about water re use
and there's a lot of aspects of
that and it plays into water.
Quality water quantity
everything that we're dealing
with the issue is some of its
new concept to New Mexico not
necessarily new to the industry
but it is in New Mexico and how
we explore that and how we move
forward with.
Figured out how we can
potentially reviews created
produced water cut down the the
impact on on fresh ground water
usage how do we handle and deal
with brackish water working we
utilize it waste water you know
I had an opportunity to have a
meeting yesterday evening with
New Mexico State University
talking about the produced water
research consortium and we're
looking at other operations
other locations to potentially
uses as secure sites for for
pilot projects and
initiative has got a a
greenhouse set up over in two
can carry that is permitted with
a discharge permit from NMED to
study how to clean up wastewater
for use for for growing crops
for you know potentially toilet
to tap
The there's all important pieces
and they are coming together
they are coming together quickly
the problem realistically become
banned with inside the state
agencies to to pursue these
things.
Right
we are we're doing everything
that we can to to.
Pull together staff where we can
we're making use of
outside engineering firms and
things to fill the gaps that we
don't have one of that one of
the unfortunate realities we
deal with it is that a lot of
times.
We're tasked with showing a
result and then getting the
funding for the position.
And the problem that we that we
deal with I think in all these
agencies is there some
foundational work that has to be
done to move us to the next
level we can't do that
foundational work and last we
have the capacity and house to
do it so it's really you know
it's like growing a crop to get
EOG got a plant the state you
got invest.
First to see that you know down
the road and so just like we're
making changes this proposed
changes with capital outlay to
make it more efficient right not
to not to take it away not to
tell anybody how to use it but
to make it more efficient right
get more bang for each but same
thing in all of these agencies
and less we can invest up front.
We're not gonna be able to see
the yield that we wanted to back
in and that's that's probably
one of the biggest limiting
factors that we have
We you know when our special
appropriations request is pretty
substantial for the water
protection division the bulk of
of what NMED is looking for is
in that and it's incredible
areas like water re use it's in
Community revitalization as
we're cleaning up contaminated
groundwater from old dry cleaner
site sold mechanic shops and
things like that.
It's a significant amount of
money.
It's because we've identified
there's that kind of need to
invest said over the next two to
three years to do to get us
where we need to be with water
re use with with all of these
areas we have funding in there
for continuing to move for
developing a state permitting
program for surface water to
give US primacy over the the
permits the national pollutant
discharge elimination system
permits currently administered
by EPA we're one of three states
that does not have primacy and
it puts our
K. with whichever administration
happens to be in place up there.
We need to be able to have that
control in state we need to be
the ones dictating how we
protect our surface waters it's
big project you know we've not
asked for all the funding we
need to do that to to launch
that because we're two three
years out from B. and close to
launching that we're still it
still doing evaluation we're
doing the public outreach
because that's a huge piece of
anything that happens with these
changes is public outreach we
have to invest in that and and
so this is this is where we're
at we're in a position where we
need the up front investment to
get those long term yields
that's ultimately what we're
after so the the these are
points well taken what I'm gonna
do is we're gonna go on for
about five more minutes and then
from there allow some of the
members that I know they have
other commitments to go and take
care those so I'll let you all
use maybe three minutes of it
and then I want to go to the to
the subcommittee over one just
quick closing comments about
your appointment Senator
relative to the the the the
communities of interest and and
and and the spectrum of our
diversity in our state we cannot
afford to leave a rural and
tribal and the second
communities behind we we have
this opportunity where we go to
address.
All all all all of all of our
state
because they've been left behind
in the past so I just because of
that and I think our regional
planning process will help us
make sure that we do not leave
communities behind going forward
with the priorities.
And.
Okay
members of the subcommittee any
thoughts or ideas.
Sure all jazz I had another.
Auction a DH in another part of
the place the following guys not
that water in the most important
thing in the state of New Mexico
but I do want to tell you.
That the crossed HSD.
Collaboration and planning is
what we're looking for thank you
Mr chair.
We are very good at being
reactive.
We spend lots of money on a
brand well that needed to be
spent.
But it was a reactive deal if we
could have some long term
planning if you guys could get
together and say.
We need this and this agency
agrees with this agency in this
agency and we can move forward
with some planning so that's my
opinion and
Please accept my apologies for
not being here the school.
Thank you senator Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for your presentations
and well that might look I think
you all know because we're all
on the same both like we're
doing nine things of here we are
doing nine things have occurred
but I'm I'm I'm learning a
tremendous amount on this topic
it's not my normal swim lane so
I'm I'm learning a lot about it
I do like to drink water and I
do like water on my my land that
I own all in different parts of
the state and all that
so so Mister chairman I guess
more of a question for you I
think if it's alright with you
of so are we are we going to
move in some sort of a.
We have tons of water bills
every year I I worry that we
have tons of water bills every
year so I'm wondering if if you
put together some sort of a
unified package of things that
we want to see happen here
because it seems like we've
covered an awful lot of ground
in a lot of areas do do we have
some sort of a.
Of a path forward with some sort
of an agenda that you know just
starts checking off the things
that need to be done.
By what our experts here telling
us that Sanofi one address that
it's a it's a point well taken
so as we talked about this at
the onset it's together the
inventory have the conversation
moves in terms of reviewing the
legislation that either has been
introduced or it's being talked
about and then from there be
able to come up with some
recommendations what legislation
would not be duplicating the
efforts of the subcommittee and
then secondly to possibly have
and I want to call on the this
bills but those that would in
tail some of the other things
that we deal with and then to
also ensure that when we start
talking about the appropriations
act that the resources are going
to be in there to start to
direct us towards what the
experts are indicating that
their needs are going to be so
that's the evolution in terms of
the subcommittee's work as we as
we proceed.
She that Mr chairman and but the
only other observation that I
have is like I said this is not
mine my normal swim lane and so
I don't serve on the interim
water committees or any of that
stuff in the interim but in the
eleven years I've been here in
the Senate I've you know
reformed early education to
create a Department alleges the
broadband stop working and
cybersecurity you know I'm to
premiership and stuff like that
trying to reform state
government I worry when I and I
did show up at a couple of what
interim water committees by the
way just as a guest legislator
in the committee and
I was shocked at how many
legislators were part of that
committee also I'm wondering if
we might want to consider
shrinking that down into
something that's more so in my
business when I have a group
that gets kind of unruly and
what turns into a motley crew of
my opinion like that I shrink
that down to about three to five
people so we can actually get
some work done because it just
seems like there's just too many
ideas flying too many different
directions Mr chairman on this
topic and and that's just my two
cents and and if I may and I I
really appreciate that because
the modification in essence is
beginning here and so along with
that as we concentrate those
efforts it could be that the
interim committees then are
going to be focusing more on if
you will what we're dealing
directly with instead of
continuously duplicating a lot
of the presentations and in that
we have to find a way so that
all members of the legislature
have not only the learning curve
addressed but as we do move
forward they know exactly where
to go when it comes to the
issues that they're dealing with
as we've already heard from some
of the committee members they
came in and they had catastrophe
within their areas they they
weren't too sure where to go and
so that's going to be part of
the concentration of what what
this ideology is that we're
dealing with here with the
subcommittee I appreciate that I
just hope that we can I think
the reason we get so many water
bills that sound alike and and
do a lot of the same things
nothing wrong with that and
legislative process Mr chairman
but just seems to me like we
should have some sort of some
themes and go out those until we
get that one done and then move
on to the next one to see if
it's we're all over the place my
vote and if I may just in
closing on this side the whole
intent is to go through this
exercise so that
we're able to go ahead and take
this out as a practicing peace
to people in education and
health care and other areas to
indicate to people this is how
we could.
Do this to go ahead and modify
our processes and hone in on the
real issues and set those
priorities as we move forward so
thank you any other any other
thoughts thank you very much
Center for the if not thank you
all very much again for your
respect for the on going
conversation yes yes thank you
all for coming and Mister chair
Senators just a note on your
next meeting what we're talking
about sort of thousands of
cities and relevant legislation
yes that is needing as you
receive the extremely brief
summary of the all of the
relevant legislation yesterday
that's being updated to include
sort of what you're talking
about in terms of the
differences and similarities in
legislation where we can
consolidate resources where
funding mechanism separate
etcetera just we're just so
issues like that so that's going
to be the focus of the meeting
next week for the experts
I get a lot of land is really
cover resources anybody hasn't
checked out I would I mean I
just.
State would recommend checking
out the what we could use on the
finance side sort of like a
break down on the funding side
identifies it is between your
the recommendations and the LFC
recommendations so that the
finance committee when it comes
time to make those
recommendations and sort of
figure out where we need to pick
up the slack where our funding
is income from verses where
those that other costs are being
broken down to so for next
Thursday that would be really
helpful for the mission that
we're going for here
and yet again thank you so so if
I may just to go back in this is
going to good and H. me little
been dealing with it but when we
started with the D. W. I.
matrices many years ago when
Center Jennings and Santo Tito
Travis were involved in essence
what we're doing is we're
bringing together the pieces and
we're developing that so we can
see the differences but that's
how if you will the W. issue
started to us to have all and
it's going to be the same thing
with this process all of these
things that are there some
things may have to wait a few
years but the other things that
are really going to going to
make the difference hopefully
will be the priorities as we
move forward so that will start
to go ahead and be the put
together but it can't be put
together just by us it has to be
again as we've already heard
with the inflection of course
