and grants to libraries as well
as including funds to meet a
federal match for one point four
million and quickly I wanted to
put up the slide which shows the
twenty five broadband
communities were working with as
well as the reach or a book
mobiles around the state on top
of this you would also add the
book by mail program and
The library for the blind
services as well as all of the
online services so you can see
through the libraries we really
do have a statewide reach.
In terms of the arts program
there were one point three
million participants in funded
events two hundred seventy four
thousand children were reach
through various programmes and
services we provided
Thirty seven thousand
individuals with professional
development training which of
course during the pandemic as
many creative workers have
struggled to adjust
this is an incredibly important.
Nine hundred and eighty thousand
dollars in requests for
distributed to two hundred and
six recipients statewide and in
addition there was four hundred
and twenty thousand dollars in
cares funding through the any H.
that was distributed to forty
two organizations statewide
you're the executive
recommendation general fund is
one point four million of that
provides a hundred thousand
dollars for one point five FTEs
needed by the division restores
the two hundred and I'm sorry
the twenty thousand for a to the
military which utilizes art
therapy to serve veterans
dealing with PTSD and other
issues as well as including
funds to meet a an estimated six
hundred and fourteen thousand
dollar federal funds.
In program support we launch the
transition to a statewide
ticketing system this will
improve data collection and
revenue tracking currently the
department uses several
different systems and this will
be one system that will
eventually integrate with the
foundation membership program.
We also started a statewide
social media group to increase
the reach of our virtual virtual
programs and all of our digital
assets and we quickly move to
restructure our public website
in in culture dot org as a
gateway for online exhibits
programs and educational
resources so here you can find
everything from virtual tours of
exhibits.
Recordings of all of the virtual
concerts that we that lesson
plans for parents and teachers
and art projects for kids we
also completed the creation of
our facilities bureau and
awarded construction contracts
for two major projects as well
and this initiated a third of
replacement of a water system
fort Stanton.
Here the general fund executive
recommendation is four point two
million dollars and this
includes a hundred seventy five
thousand for critical staffing
needs.
I'm we also submitted an I. C.
I. T. request of thirteen
million dollars I won't spend
much time on this is I know that
this is about our operating
budget but I am pleased to say
that we have completed a number
of projects that were long
overdue for the department
including the welcome center at
the national Hispanic cultural
center in Albuquerque renovation
of the planetarium at the
natural history museum in
Albuquerque replacement of the
elevators at the New Mexico
museum of space history which is
critical is because if you've
been in that facility you
realize that you actually need
to take the elevator in order to
access the various floors of the
museum we relocated the windmill
that The New Mexico farm and
ranch heritage museum created a
landmark that makes the museum
easier to find and we issued a
notice to proceed for
construction at the New Mexico
museum of arts lot of
contemporary.
That concludes my presentation I
have with me today W. secretary
Schiavo next Iago CFO Greg
Geisler as well as you like in a
state librarian and with that
I'm happy to stand for any
questions.
I'm sorry madam secretary is
that are you done.
Questions from committee
members.
Right.
Senator Rodriguez thank you very
your question thank you Mr
chairman and good afternoon to
our cabinet secretary Garcia yep
all good to see you in
Kristianstad and the governor's
staff also I just have a
question on your presentation
thank you you did wonderful work
there's so much to.
Being done to the department of
cultural affairs I didn't
realize let me and ask you this
you're reading I didn't know you
have this reading program where
you do you have to search for
thousand families you mentioned
if I understood correctly in the
through the summer reading
program are these lessons like
in in culture history or what is
it with this reading program
tell me just a little bit about
it if you can I found it quite
intriguing.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Rodriguez members of the
committee I'm gonna turn that
question over to you like in a
so he can give you a complete
answer of everything that that
program offers thank you.
Thank you good afternoon Mr
chair members of the committee
Senator Rodriguez thank you for
the question when the COVID hit
last year we quickly transition
to an online summer reading
program normally we just provide
services to the various
libraries
and they provide their own
summer reading program but in
order to help them go online so
they could continue we created
the very first statewide online
summer program so this is
something that we tie into all
of the individual libraries with
so they run their own programs
and you
you know wonderful things within
their own villages towns and
cities.
what we provided is
some programming online and we
provided some prizes and we
provided online
online reading logs so that as
the children read they would log
their reading so they could win
a prize for the most part that's
a self guided so a lot of self
guided reading during the summer
we really encourage kids to
explore their interests and read
what they love but yes
absolutely there's also some
great educational programming as
well.
I hope that answers your
question thank you yes it does
thank you I'm very happy that
you do is that ongoing like
every year that you do this or
and I know the issues that you
do it look differently because
of COVID but I wonder if this is
something you have almost every
year for kids to the library Mr
chair Senator members thank you
for that question as well
It is now it is now it's been so
popular that it's we are now
making it a regular summer
online program so that all of
the libraries even if they have
trouble doing an online reading
program for themselves can join
in the the statewide one as well
so yes absolutely it's been a
big success and we we certainly
will continue it thank you thank
you thank you for that
information and thank you
secretary also thought have Mr.
Mr chair US senator members of
the committee from I also added
that another thing I didn't
mention is we did launch a
summer book club through the
historic sites which was also of
mine about with another reading
program that we did through the
department that wasn't
affiliated with the summer
reading program.
Right thank you so much great
work.
U. S. senators Senator Campos
and then Senator Rodriguez your
chair.
Thank you yeah.
All right thank you very much Mr
chair thank you very much of
Madam chair of Rodriguez for the
opportunity to discuss some of
the issues and of course I want
to part you madam secretary and
your staff for the ongoing work
done over the years for with
very little resources as we
continue to move well some of
our great that historical
attributes forward
a few questions and they're all
going to go ahead and lead us to
how we can better coordinate the
use of the resources and part of
it is as we deal with something
that is very significant to me
and that's a long what was the
deal with the sensibility there
and for some areas which is the
most reliable project or moves
into now what we consider the
our educational center at the
walkway Tricia tree you might
say well gosh how how do we
really are working these kind of
programs of their highly
educational and then it moves
into of course the resources
that you use last year or during
this period of about seven
hundred fifty thousand Senator
broadband resource.
Hundreds of the commitment that
that you made there as well so
that the question that I have
and the reason I'm.
All but in all these things
forward yes here we have of the
economic development the state
is very significant to the
future of New Mexico and that
brings in our projects like the
Boston Red on the project and
then we have as we tie in the
environment in projects like
this issue is educational center
Rockley country in Santa Rosa.
And so as we tie that together
particularly through the use of
broadband of the documentaries
and other resources available at
our colleges and universities.
How can we better utilize our
resources going into the future
as we try and broadband
education and the use of the
resources that we have and
broadband because today we're
talking about broadband being at
the base of everything that we
do and we want to I'll
definitely be prepared but in
order for us to go global and
then to return back to of the
optimum levels of tourism
hopefully is going to be the
coordinated effort can you tell
us briefly what you anticipate
that future to be over the next
few years with the use of
resources and leveraging knowns
so that we can get as you will
our our message out local thank
you.
Madam chair Senator Campos
members you asked a really good
and and very broad question so
I'll be trying to breathe be pre
from my answer I think there are
a couple of different ways to
ensure your question I think
first of all the vast expansion
that we've seen in to online and
digital programming through our
museums and historic sites will
not go away that must continue
on it's opened up a whole new
trajectory for museums and
historic sites and I think there
are some exciting challenges to
be had about how about digital
content resides in the world on
its own created for that
environment and native for that
environment however exhibits and
programming on site reside and
exist independently and how
those to meet together so I
think that's one really exciting
opportunity that the that the
department has right now is to
continue down those tracks and
continue with that statewide
influence that we're now able to
have in terms of broadband we
enjoy a lot of close
collaboration of course with do
it as well as Indian Affairs and
PED in coordinating and and LFC
LFC have been very proactive in
in bringing us to the table to
have a conversation about that
and I only see that
collaboration coordination and
growing because as we know with
broadband you know once you get
that infrastructure into a
community it lowers the cost for
all users around the community
and so we're very much
interested in being part of a
statewide solution that
leverages all of those resources
towards broadband
I think the other part of the
conversation that you're asking
about though is also the
collaborations that we have with
the office of outdoor recreation
with PED and even internally so
that that real life content has
also been reaching into multiple
areas and so we enjoy a close
partnerships with those agencies
and we also have an internal
education and outreach committee
that is designed to get the
division's working together
better so that we can take.
All stories that go not just
specific to aside but statewide
so we tell the story about us
Redondo through multiple sites
so we tell the story of the
communal rial through multiple
sites so we tell the the story
of space exploration and
exploitation in New Mexico
through multiple sites so I hope
that starts to answer your
really important and very broad
question in a way that's
tangible for you.
It really does and it goes to
show how you're thinking about
what this future is going to be
and and you bring up one of the
very important projects and
that's the Camino al so as we
move forward in terms of what
that means I know we just heard
resources last year in trying to
start to promote that but
they're still on the the
documentation that is how does
this all become recorded and
then sure globally so it's going
to be the efficient use of our
tourism resources I know when
into their courses
Requested is very significant as
to how we can promote in their
communities other parts of the
country and of course our state
but in time it all together is
there that consortium now of the
various departments that are
utilizing broadband and the
available resources and I want
to go back a little bit because
and broadband as an example when
it comes to our educational
component right now all of a ten
million dollars that is
available I believe last year it
was only two million dollars
that was used in that was in the
area of education and yet we
have young people that are
needing Chromebooks and we have
if you will the connection at
the last mile is you will
utilizing the superset eight in
order to ensure that everyone
does have connectivity we want
to ensure that this is going to
be a period not wasted so we do
come out of it the pandemic we
definitely have utilized the
best resources to deliver the
best product not only for locals
but people globally which really
will enhance not only tourism
but our cultural affairs as we
move forward thank you.
Thank you for more on read your
column Senator cops hi and thank
you also can secretary responses
we have next our standard
they'll work and then we have
Senator Siah Correa here after
in your thank you madam chair
Preciado and secretary thank you
so much for being here and as we
talked to so much in the last
few years thank you again for
your continued support the
national museum of space history
it is adjust to a new report
quite frankly of the Alamogordo
Otero County area and and it
draws when up and running
properly in the elevators are
working it is running at you
know a hundred thousand people
more on an annual basis and and
we want to get back to those
numbers so just just a Madam
chair just say thank you for
your continued support.
From eighteen twenty years the
museums are very little command
to maintain the facility and and
it has taken really about ten
years to get us back.
Lacing windows air air
conditioning units the hello I.
elevators and so on so forth so
our our last will run right now
is to make sure that we have
some some updated and and very
interesting interactive displays
and and on all floors in the
museum and I just encourage
everyone if they have not been
to Alamogordo recently or or
ever to see space museum I hope
that you get a chance to come
and see that in the space
program for the United States
really respond out of Southern
New Mexico and and right after
World War two and and a lot of
this will will be depicted in
some of the the displace thanks
that you see all the way up to
where we are today with SpaceX
and so on so forth so anyway
thank you madam secretary and
thank you.
And madam chair for the time.
Thank you thank you.
Revert we go to committees that
pandemic actually bonding
interim committee meetings to
our word of our god remember
Reagan remember secretary can
say it all thank you very much
all right we move on to never
buy equity act your bill by at
are you there Madam.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary for that
informative presentation and for
the important work you do for
our families in New Mexico and
for children here I'm a mom of
four and we definitely utilized
to many museums are across the
state and library so thanks for
the work that you do keeping
those available to people in the
community I was wondering about
the two hundred and nine
thousand dollars and historic
preservation grants for the
communities of Santa Clara Las
Vegas Columbus Santa Fe and
Albuquerque it just sounded like
not very much money distributed
between those five communities
can you tell me a little bit
about how that money was
distributed and what was used
for.
This Madam chair Senator members
it is so that is supported
through our historic
preservation division it
utilizes federal historic
preservation dollars and is
distributed in accordance with
those dollars the details of
that I'm hoping my staff full
time at chain in here on the
chat and give me some more
details about it as I don't have
just happens the director that
division with me but it is it is
it is distributed in a
competitive way based on the
federal guidelines and really
the intent of that is to use
those dollars to leverage other
so well it doesn't sound like a
lot it can oftentimes leverage
additional dollars just like the
historic preservation tax
credits also can so it is a
small amount but I believe that
it has a significant impact
especially for the communities
and the projects that receive
those funds okay thank you for
that response I was yeah
particularly curious about the
villages Santa Clara I was
wondering if that went to any
projects in the fort Bayard area
yes if that's where that was
utilized that was just my
question there I know that that
the more Santa Clara's really
been working hard to preserve
the fort Bayard area I'm also
wondering about the the forty
six thousand people that you've
served on line for help with
tutoring is that available in
all libraries across the state
or just certain areas are those
volunteers or paid staff.
Madam chair Senator members of
the committee
Really quickly to your previous
question silo flustered because
I did get a quote at a little
bit of an answer for your
previous question which is yes
that money that historic
preservation fund did support
some construction at port Baird
right just so that question and
the tutoring services are
actually available online
through the state library and I
will let state librarian in like
any give you the details about
how that works.
Habilis and one last question
you received a four hundred and
twenty thousand and cares Act
funding and it went to forty two
organizations statewide what was
what did that money go to pay
for.
madam chair senator members of
so that money Kate when out and
ten thousand dollar increments
for operating and I'm a pandemic
relief that money was a flow
through so we are the designated
agency in the state for national
endowment funds and so that when
out in accordance with the
endowments guidance on that so
there were criteria that had to
be not including having been a
recipient of national endowment
funds I believe with the two
year period I will say you know.
I think we funded something we
were only able to fund something
like thirty two percent a
request so the demand in the
need for that funding is
overwhelming and we had to turn
down you know approximately
seventy percent of applicants
for that fund but it general
operating okay thank you madam
secretary is there a list
somewhere of those communities
that were able to access that
cares Act money.
Madam chair senator members I
yes I would be happy to get that
list you so that you have it and
can see which organizations
receive that okay thank you so
much madam chair secretary.
Thank you thank you I yes we do
have one more Senator Burt out
you'd spoke earlier but your
hand is still up so I wasn't
sure if you had another question
but I'm gonna go to senator
optimistically scientist first
and if you have a question for
the second time Senator Burt
I'll go to you next thank you.
You're going I just.
Are we on we go blank here say.
Senator Gonzales are you there
so yes we go yeah okay
Thank you again looking to
expand on the outdoor recreation
secretary.
Madam chair Senator Gonzales
members I yes so the department
of cultural affairs how's that
the seats on the outdoor
recreation Council and we
participate in all of their
meetings explain opportunities
right now we're particularly
focused on the opportunities
presented along the Camino route
as well as for our historic
sites so captured more director
historic site serves on that
committee and coordinates with
doctor office on relevant
projects.
Thank you for that and of madam
chair and the secretary of at
the beginning you also mentioned
about all.
Of your materials being in both
languages Spanish and English so
is that for everything or that's
just for some of the materials.
Of madam chair senator members
that was unfortunately we
weren't able to achieve that for
a hundred percent of the market
distributions we will look to do
that in the future we also want
to add
some and some of the native
languages were appropriate for
the content.
Hey very well chair just very
briefly sharing with the Senator
but.
You know our two sons went to
the program but the science camp
there for twelve years they do
the sequential it was just a
very very nice experience in
know so I really recommend it
very highly and it was so very
well done and something that
some very strong part of our
state thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you very let me see I
think five hundred rupees
hand downside of the yet another
question I don't see any other
hand if I'm missing somebody
please to get my attention but I
don't see the hands up here
Secretary I just wanted to to
comment maybe it maybe question
maybe just a comment about that
the fact that your department
specifically under the exams and
historic sites dropped by forty
percent.
in the in the number of people
that came to visit it seems I
because if you have four hundred
and ninety one thousand people
that visit now in twenty twenty
during the COVID then it dropped
forty percent from the previous
year that's a pretty significant
draw I didn't realize it was
that big I know that we almost
shut down everywhere but that
one particularly is forty
percent and then also when
you're fees you went down twenty
seven percent so you know that
that's a lot of money to lose
the one year considering the big
responsibilities that you happen
the magnitude of the area that
you service using Ms and
cultural centers and a lot of
areas in the state.
Thank you for working so hard
and getting so much done with
the less resources that you have
to do it with so I don't have
any other questions
I will say thank you and I'm
looking down one more time my
list before the move on to the
next right nope thank you very
much and that you take care of
yourself and stay safe and we
can move on now to the
department of corrections.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Alan right and LFC fiscal
analyst and I am doing this
afternoon I only certify other
staff secretary of the
corrections department and Diego
Jimenez the executive budget
analyst and I'll note for your
reference that the corrections
department is agency number is
seven seven zero.
I'm going to briefly review some
of the most significant
differences between the
legislative and executive
recommendations before handing
it over to Diego and secretary
for their comments and I'd like
to just note for the committee
that HSC has not yet heard or
taken any action on these
recommendations.
I'm primarily going to be
referring to the high level
general fund summary that on
page eleven of your packets but
all know that there's also
details suits discussing the
differences between
recommendations on pages three
to ten of your packets and
additional information can also
be found on pages sixty one to
sixty eight of LSU's volume one
to ninety eight to three of five
of volume two and fifty six to
sixty one volume three.
Overall the legislative
recommendation from the
departments the departments FY
twenty two budget is three point
six million dollars lower than
the executive recommendation all
these differences are in the
general fund the agency when it
submitted its FY twenty two
request actually requested a
four point two percent reduction
in general fund revenue compared
with FY twenty one total
decrease of thirteen point eight
million dollars the executive
recommendation for general fund
revenue was flat would have Y.
twenty one well the legislative
recommendation is one point one
million dollars lower than FY
twenty one but is ten point two
million dollars higher than the
request.
The largest program in the area
where there are the most
significant differences between
the recommendations is the
inmate Management control
program or I'm back and that is
outlined on lines one three
twenty eight of the high level
general fund summary on page
eleven.
Recommendations anticipate
significant reductions in prison
populations it will also result
in reduced costs legislative
recommendation estimates the
department will realize at least
nine point seven million dollars
in savings for the executive
recommendation interest rate
savings closed up five point two
million dollars and this is
outlined on line eleven of the
general fund high level summary.
I'd like to note the prison
population to significantly
decrease over the past couple
years which is why we're
starting to see these really
significant savings because of
how the department is has
distributed its population is
actually already realized
significant savings in FY twenty
one it was just able to transfer
eight million dollars that was
originally budgeted for private
prison contracts instead covered
increases in the medical
contract costs.
So the medical contact is
another area where it is
different significant
differences between legislative
and executive recommendations
the agency's contract has been
significantly more expensive
than was initially projected
primarily because it's based on
Medicaid managed care
organization per member per
month rates and also
significantly increase since the
RFP.
The sins of the justice but in
different ways the executive
recommendation adds two point
seven million dollars to cover
these costs and that's on line
twelve the high level on the
other hand the provided
recommendations suggested HSD
renegotiate this contract to
save at least three million
dollars you'll see that
reflected online thirteen.
The primary concerns regarding
this contract is that it
requires the department to pay a
premium costs based on a minimum
number of inmates but the actual
prison populations have been
significantly below those
minimums for quite a bit now.
Renegotiating contractors like
actual populations or to use
minimums closer to those actuals
at least could result in
significant savings.
Recommendations also reallocate
savings to address other
priority areas throughout the
department as a few things are
both recommendations supported
increases of different sizes
online sixteen you'll see the
executive recommendation
includes over five hundred
thousand per person increases in
I'm at legislative
recommendation into space agency
will recognize significant
vacancy savings in this program
you'll see that reflected online
sixteen.
But it also redirect those
savings help support six percent
salary increases for
correctional officers and that's
online seventeen.
Online twenty two you'll see
that both recommendations
include more funding for
facility maintenance and repair
the executive recommends one
point five million dollars and
the legislative recommendation
is three million dollars.
Legislative recommendation
includes about two point six
million dollars to expand
evidence based programming
inside and outside president and
you'll see that reflected on
lines twenty twenty one I know
high levels for programming
inside prisons and forty nine
fifty for programming outside
prisons the executive
recommendation includes about
six hundred thousand dollars
expand evidence based
programming outside prisons
that's in line forty nine.
There's also a few significant
areas that are only addressed by
one of the recommendations for
the legislative recommendation
allocates one point nine million
dollars for per diem rate
increases for private prisons
and that's in line eighteen and
also it's one point three
million dollars to expand the
agency's recidivism reduction
division and that's in line
nineteen those are in the
executive recommendation.
The executive recommendation
also allocates one point four
million dollars for supplies and
miscellaneous costs which is on
line twenty three and that's not
included in the legislative
recommendation.
I'll turn it over to Diego for
his comments thank you.
Thank you.
Okay thank you your next thank
you madam chair the I think Mr
even did a thorough review of
the differences so I have no
further comment at this point
thank you.
You're good to see you thanks
for all the work he did for many
years for us to do.
Right.
What we're we are who do we have
any questions
Before we no one here let's see
I'm gonna go first to the
cabinet secretary here if there
are no quick questions that the.
I have Senator Campos you do
want to ask you a question right
away Senator or do you want to
wait till the cabinet secretary.
Thank you very much I'd rather
wait to hear from Kevin
secretary thank you.
Thank you very much already then
we have the cabinet secretary to
for that here are you here
looking for you on the screen
and this went a little blank
here so let's see Secretary
different are you here yes I'm
here madam chair thank you all
righty that you can proceed with
your presentation thank you all
right good afternoon madam chair
I don't see Mr chair anywhere in
the group and and and Senators
it is an honor to present before
you today I'm a company
virtually today by members of my
team and I would just ask for
all of you to put your hand up
when I call when I called you
out there but deputy secretary
Karen can director probation and
parole Melanie Martinez our
health services chair Mister
Owens Austin Gandhi.
Our behavioral health bureau
chief Dr Wendy price.
Our acting it administrative
services director ed Smith and
Eric Harris in is our public
relations manager he's not
visually president because he
will be operating our slides a
little bit later.
So we were just to keep our
presentation chair and make sure
that we focus on the budget the
for new members of the committee
I just want to extend myself to
you if you're interested in
learning more about the agency
your about me please reach out
to me directly anytime this
agency oversees eleven present
institutions seven of which are
operated publicly four of which
are operated privately we also
manage.
I probation and parole regional
offices where we supervise
approximately sixteen thousand
people on probation and parole
in forty six district offices
that are located throughout the
state.
I also like to extend a a very
big thank you to Diego Jimenez
our DFA analyst into miss Ellen
right in our LFC analysts to
really put in so much time and
effort in preparing their
respective presentations and
recommendations for us so here
I'm I'm here today to seek your
support in supporting the
executive recommendation.
When we were developing our FY
twenty two request the economic
outlook for the state was
different than what it is now
and I have to make some very
very difficult decisions and
what we did at that time was we
were reducing expenditures by
six point eight million dollars
and then also a general fund we
are in the general fund and we
also propose a one year seven
million dollar revenue swap with
fund balance in order to
preserve that amount in the
general fund for the state in
December we learned that the
economic outlook was somewhat
better and at that time we were
looking at a flat
recommendation in the executive
budget compared to our FY twenty
one levels which was very which
spared us those cuts and those
those swaps but the LFC
recommendation recommends a
three point six million dollar
cut the low our FY twenty one
levels and it redirects millions
of dollars away from the
necessary functions of our
agency towards initiatives that
will stifle the creativity that
is needed to continue to
innovate and reentry education
vocational training and in
behavioral health.
Some of my primary concerns with
the LFC recommendation it is a
three point nine million dollar.
Shift away from what is
currently funded vacancies this
is the item that mystery been
mentioned as raises for
correctional officers.
Now conceptually I really
appreciate that I mean it would
be wonderful if we were able to
give pay increases to all of our
staff members but in reality
redirecting this money which is
specifically for funded
vacancies would prevent us from
recruiting correctional officer
cadets correctional officer
specialist probation and parole
officers behavioral health
therapists inside of our
institutions case workers and
many other valuable and
necessary positions ultimately
it would create an imbalance
among our staff members and one
thing I always say but one thing
that really was very.
It was a very big situation
during the pandemic was
recognizing what makes an as
essential staff member who has
to show up to work and
realistically we learned that
every single person who works in
an institution is an essential
staff member all of those people
have to be there and every
single one of them in a
different way contributes to the
operations of a safe
institution.
Additional concerns
I'm also really involved safety
life safety issues my first
priority always is the staff and
the people that are in our care
in our institutions and the LESC
recommendation cuts not only the
critical positions that I just
mentioned but also it redirects
the million dollars away in
salaries and benefits for
probation and parole officers to
implement an assessment that
essentially is redundant we have
an assessment in place that
looks at risk in needs for
people who are on probation and
parole and in the recommendation
it's looking at doing a bi
annual assessment which which
really isn't access to what
we're already doing as far as
making sure that we're aware of
the risks and needs of the
people that we supervised.
also because of three point six
million dollars and then the
redirection of approximately
five million dollars to what's
referenced as ongoing
maintenance and repair and
theoretically increases towards
programming and reentry but the
cuts in the multiple re
directions severely will affect
basic services and they will
leave no room for building a
true and functional reentry
division.
When I came into this position
and twenty nineteen I found that
there was a reentry and
recidivism reduction bureau it
really was being treated like an
afterthought.
So I elevated this bureau into a
division level they brought in a
director of reentry and she'd
she had the ground running I
mean she just immediately
started working hard to change
things and making sure that we
were focusing on the reentry
needs of the people that we
serve whether they are in inside
our institutions are whether
they're people that we supervise
in the community so I she began
to move towards community
outreach and external program
expansion the pandemic hit and
the safety of our populations
really became the big issue and
you know unfortunately at that
time and in even remains the
situation to right now we have
to close our facilities to non
facility staff members but this
did not stop us from pushing
forward in our reentry efforts
we found ways to implement
programming virtually remotely
but my focus on the bike safety
needs of our facilities made it
such that I did not make the
deadline to modify the structure
of our budget program codes we
are doing that now I will be
submitting for the creation of a
reentry and recidivism reduction
budget code that will enable the
agency to formally shift
resources to this vital area and
solidify the division the
reentry division for years to
come regardless who is serving
as secretary.
In practice we are doing this
work already we have combined
many of the efforts of our adult
prisons division and are
probation and parole staff
members so that they could focus
efforts on pre release planning
programming that begins inside
and continues after release.
And exploring other ways to
leverage potentially federal
grant funding and technology to
improve and increase services in
education vocational training
behavioral health and
certifications in all of these
areas.
Additional merging of duties in
our reentry division and our
corrections industry division
are focused on ensuring that our
business ventures through
industry are accompanied by
educational components that will
enable people to prepare for
their release with employability
skills real deal credentials and
by working to improve the
quality of life for the people
in our care for other
incarcerated persons even even
those that won't be eligible for
release.
So with that I will I will turn
the floor over to Mr ed Smith
who will walk you through our
slides and then I'll speak
briefly to you before we we go
for questions thank you.
Thank you very much Secretary
okay your there we go there's a
presentation okay.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes I can now thing going on the
wire but it go back on now thank
you good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee we
have it just a brief line slide
presentation that covers some of
the highlights of several other
things the secretary just
mentioned and a couple of things
I'd like to mention along the
way so we'll start with the next
slide and it's just the overall
executive recommendation from
all funding sources it's three
hundred sixty three.
Almost a half million dollars a
few adjustments or for some
other state funds that are going
away in the agency but generally
it's at the FY twenty one
general fund plus are requests
for transfers and other revenue
sources on the next slide you'll
see the differences between our
FY twenty one operating budget
in general fund to the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation the executive
recommendation is about a
hundred fifty six thousand
higher and program support and
I'll mention a couple of items
for that a couple of minutes the
inmate Management control
program the executive is four
point seven million dollars
higher than the LFC
recommendation and and community
offender management the LFC is
about one point three million
higher so overall the executive
this Alan mentioned in her
opening remarks is three point
six million higher than the
legislative finance committee.
Next slide so the overall in
program support you know both
both recommendations supported
our request for transfers and
other state funds you know the
met secretary mentioned at the
time we had submitted a budget
that was quite tight but we
tried to comply with cuts you
know what with the economic
situation in August so we had
submitted a budget with a for
about a four hundred and fifty
thousand dollar general fund
decreasing program support well
when things turn around for
we're getting better in December
the executive said that they
would keep us flat.
So they kept the executive kept
the lower amount we had
requested that shifted those
funds to the inmate Management
control program for some budget
support as Alan mentioned in the
beginning but this is the issue
here is with.
They're reduced budget we
submitted a four hundred fifty
thousand which was are you
getting is a tight budget the
LFC cut that budget an
additional one hundred and fifty
six thousand beyond are are
ready budget cuts we as
submitted.
On the next slide and program
support you'll see a couple of
the issues that we're gonna have
with this budget next year is.
One
It LFC recommendation cuts are
other costs even below what we
had submitted in our budget
request where we are we had self
imposed about a hundred and
seventy five thousand in cuts
and R. four hundred category so
we're pushing almost a fifteen
percent decrease after many many
years of fighting for to get the
increase the other cost category
increased in this program for
because of the central office
complex expenses here you know
we jet General Services
Department doesn't assist us
with our building maintenance
here.
With you know five or six
buildings here we take care of
all those ourselves so these
additional cuts are going to
cause severe hardship on program
support.
if we don't get the executive
recommendation we're definitely
going to be looking to need some
program transfer authority to
help out program support.
In addition there were some
accounting changes at the
department of finance where all
our I. T. maintenance contracts
moved thank you go back one side
real quick are.
The department of finance
shifted all the I. T.
maintenance contracts from
COVID actual contracts category
the other categories so right
now is the LFC recommendation
sets.
We have a hundred thousand too
much in contracts that would
need to be moved to the other
costs in order for us to step
all those contracts on July
first so
we either need a judgment there
will be submitting a bar on July
first to move money for those
contracts.
So the next slide please.
as a secretary mentioned you
know.
The executive recommendation is
much more supportive and it may
management control program as I
mentioned a minute ago is the
executives four point seven
million dollars higher.
In the LFC.
Recommendation and then on the
next slide you'll see just some
of the but what's the secretary
mentioned in some of the budget
movie but our real concern in
this program is in other state
funds and the other revenues
that we generate.
When the pandemic yet in the
economic downturn kind of hit we
saw some major hits to some of
our revenue collections in this
program overall last year.
Had a four thousand four hundred
thousand dollar shortfall in our
revenue collections basically
due to some large distributions
from the oil and gas royalties
in the penitentiary income fund
and pretty much for the whole
spring we had to cancel all our
inmate work crews because of
COVID.
Now full year for FY twenty one
revenue estimates we're looking
at about a one point four
million dollar revenue shortfall
in this program due to the
pretty much no inmate work crews
this year and the oil and gas
distributions were run at almost
six hundred thousand hello our
operating budget this year what
was budgeted so.
That's kind of our in FY I right
now but as you know with this by
the both recommendations you
know we may be needing some
support with you know revenue
replacement next session just if
these budgets end up Titans
revenues don't come in.
So the on the next slide you'll
see the corrections industry
program is pretty much self
sufficient both recommendations
supported agency request which
was slightly below FY twenty one
and that was just due to GST and
do it right decreases for next
year.
And then finally our next two
slides are the community of
vendor management program.
And as I mentioned the LFC
recommendations about one point
three million dollars higher
include include some more
contractual money for.
Excuse me our community
corrections programs and then
you know the major issue here we
have again that will go into
next year is revenue yeah we
have declining fund balances you
know over the years we've used
fund balance in this programs
operating budget we've used four
point nine million dollars to
support the new offender
management system and I think
one of our initial
appropriations since two
thousand fifteen or sixteen for
this program was four point nine
million well the other revenue
shortfalls is severely hit this
program as well when COVID hit
you know a lot of probably a lot
of our clientele so to speak
that we deal with were some of
the hardest folks had you know
in the lower income brackets and
lesser jobs and you know the
probation and parole fees have
really gone down we were about
four hundred and thirty thousand
shortness program last year in
revenue collections and we're on
pace for FY twenty one to be
short about nine hundred fifty
thousand in revenue collections
in this program which.
I mean it in the dollars that
we're all used to talking about
nine fifteen nine hundred fifty
thousand doesn't sound like a
lot but this propranolol to bat
two point five million dollars
in programs easier so that's
almost forty percent of their
revenue we expect the not
collect this year so and if that
carries forward into next year
will also have revenue issues in
this program so just want to put
that on your radar as well.
So.
Finally before I turn it back on
the secretary would just like to
mention that I know of in I
guess in the LFC volume three
that's got a table of amount of
dollars transferred out of
salaries and benefits for all
the agencies last year that
the FY twenty operating budget
column actually contained I
guess the FY nineteen budget
numbers so.
For FY twenty our salaries and
benefits did go up about ten
million dollars over the
previous year due to the salary
increases in other increases we
had FY twenty so that number is
about ten million dollars higher
and rather than three and a half
percent transfers out it was
three point two percent so just
wanted to make mention of that
that we did notice that and with
that I would turn it back over
the secretary for any additional
comments you may have thank you.
Secretary Tafoya the federal
right there we go.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes I.
So I'm I'm here today to
respectfully request your
support for the executive
recommendation I do want to just
make one notation I noticed that
during the presentation of of
miss miss raven she noted our
some statements about the
medical contract and so I just
want the committee to be aware
that yes that is certainly
something that is on my radar
something that I know that we
need to look at however in the
middle of the pandemic is just
absolutely not the right time to
do that I also think it's
helpful to know that the
contractor has stepped up and
they've really helped the agency
by performing tens of thousands
of of COVID test throughout this
process and they also helped us
to administer vaccinations to
our staff members are not in a
small number of inmates so it's
something that we will look at
it's just not something that is
appropriate to look at at this
moment in time I'm so the
executive recommendation
ultimately it provides the funds
and the flexibility to maintain.
FY twenty two at the FY twenty
one level and with that madam
chair of my staff and I will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much cabinet
secretary to for that okay we're
going to go on to Senator Campos
you had a question and then we
have Senator Steinborn and I
don't see let me see if I see
any other hand I don't see any
so far and I'll keep looking
Senator Campos you're next thank
you very much of Madam first of
all for your your courtesy
during this particular hearings
I and I really applaud the work
we're going and ensuring that
thoughts and ideas that our
insurance professionals are
being brought forward madam
secretary you I just really
applaud the work you continue to
do on behalf of our corrections
and my line of questioning is is
going to be as I have with on
previous agencies and that's
going to be the the long term
we're we're we're gonna actually
goals in here before I get
started with some of those
questions again going through
this COVID process and being in
close communications with
member center various facilities
I know with the community spread
in the work that you had to do
to minimize if you will that
spread within our particular
institutions it's been very
difficult for you and as you
move forward moving eight
million dollars to take care of
the Medicaid managed care.
Within our facilities
in all reality may not be enough
as we continue to move forward
but I would like you to use
comments again briefly
what you anticipate with that
are COVID nineteen of course was
not sure what that future needs
but how you're handling is you
will not only the safety of us
inmates but also of the
correction officers.
Their intended to manage
to get a pandemic within our
facilities.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Campos it certainly is a
challenging situation
I will I will say that it's been
we've seen a steady decline
we've seen a steady decline in
the range of of a positive cases
throughout our facilities we
even just from one week to the
next are positive are positivity
rate has lowered significantly
in the beginning of the pandemic
we instituted some very basic
safety precautions procedures
are every single facility every
shift every staff member was
being temperature checked and
screened when they entered into
the facilities we need then
provided masks to our inmate
population and our staff next
step was then to mandate the
mandatory using and wearing of
the masks in all facilities at
all times.
We also made some significant
modifications in our probation
and parole field where we
enabled officers to conduct home
visits with people the
telephone apps where the person
on supervision would walk
through their house and sort of
show off how they were doing to
the person on the screen so we
really try to be creative in in
things like that we as I
mentioned before closed our
doors to visitors volunteers and
and so forth and we really felt
like that was a necessary step
in order to minimize the amount
of contact that inmates were
having with the outside world in
general
we believe that made a
significant difference and we
really didn't see act positive
cases in our facilities until
may and we saw cases in one
facility in our Otero County
facility
that we believe that some of
that had to do with some of the
movie that was taking place on
the US marshal side of the
building and then we began to
see cases in state facilities
are later on and we started to
see really significant increases
in our institutions but they
directly correlated with what
was happening in the communities
and we were able to show by
community what are infection
right look like due to the
elevation of community spread
and we saw that that
consistently everywhere
so it additionally and I I think
I've mentioned this but I I
might not have so we also
started to do some really
extreme surveillance testing and
then also separation of people
at intake Act transfer and any
other time that there was a
potential new introduction of
somebody into a location where
they hadn't been so for example
any court transports that we're
still taking place typical
practice would be they pick you
up at the facility they return
you back to that same facility
we modify that process early on
so that a person who went out to
court would have to.
The return to our intake center
where they would be separated
for a fourteen day period and
tested before we would let them
out into a basic population we
did it we began fifty percent
surveillance testing per week of
all of our staff members in
facilities so every staff member
was being tested at least once
every two weeks and our inmates
were being every single release
every intake every transfer
we're being tested as well we're
still doing that in order for a
person to return to work we
required to negative tests on
after they've been positive in
for the inmate population we do
also require a test now I just
want to be clear that that's an
extreme access to not only CDC
but D. O. H. guidelines in that
they they're the the
recommendation that they had put
out but it came out later was
that after fourteen days of a
person was good to go and speed
be integrated but we didn't feel
that that was a risk that we're
willing to take and so as a
result our numbers are
significantly lower now as far
as positivity than what they
were and as of right now to day
seventy seven staff members
active throughout the system
positive and ninety three
inmates act positive throughout
the system we also offer
vaccinations to every one of our
staff members in facilities I'm
not everybody accepted the
vaccination but we vaccinated
everybody who could be
vaccinated and then in our
inmate population with the
access of the the doses we
vaccinated all of the
individuals that were seventy
five years and above and anybody
who had a severe medical illness
so they have to be at risk of
severe illness if they
contracted the virus so I mean I
I definitely think it will be an
ongoing situation fiscally the
medical contract will definitely
need to be looked at.
but as I mentioned this is just
not the appropriate time because
we are hoping that as more and
more people get vaccinated and
we start to see changes that the
health department is talking
about with respect to herd
immunity and so forth that will
be able to open our doors to
visitors and up treatment
program providers again and that
we will continue to see these
rates drop and drop and drop on
madam secretary of course that's
the reason for the question
because it's still no and that
as we move forward something
that you have a good handle on
and we have to move forward and
that he was forced not only
inmates and are you saying that
our communities as well and and
as I've talked to families on
the outside of these facilities
that is in one of their major
concerns and again I just
logged into to do working very
closely with the CDC work with
that the O. H. and all the other
applications in providing as you
well our state Bayern.
To get into the the bigger
discussion now and but twenty
eight years ago I was selected
in state funding so all we
traveled around the country and
we visited many of our our
correctional facilities and what
it means I made them western
really work at the reintegration
of our inmates back into society
and that dealt with everything
still does from behavior health
which is part of our mental
health all the way it says it
will help the employment of
these are trades if you will be
education and with your
longstanding experience in
corrections are you continue to
deal with that at the local
level in fact that some of our
needs and Springer as an example
to show that not only your
passion but also your service
insuring that there will be the
right thing the last move
forward but this session of the
the the global level then coming
into the national level now is
what are we gonna be dealing
with our correctional facilities
and and you know where the trend
is it's going from the private
institutions moving back into
the public institutions but in
New Mexico as you indicate we
have for those private
facilities and we have not only
being always we have the inmates
we have the programs there's
been a lot of work at your
direction I'm sure that we can
be very productive.
Rates are released but in moving
forward can you start talking
about what will it sure looks
like for New Mexico.
I yes madam chair and senator
Campos it's a big it's a big
subject I I've been of course
following that that house bill
that's out there house bill
forty I spoke in on it
it's something that in in
concept in conceptually it's
something that we agree with
right but I think there's
there's limitations in that bill
that prevent things like for
example leasing a building from
a private contractor who owns
the building or engaging in a
relationship with a private
contractor in order to build an
institution that would replace
other institutions and then of
course in the conversion that we
did of the clean facility in
twenty nineteen we saw with that
extra cost that fiscal costs
would be so conceptually we we
think that it's it's it's a good
thing to be able to move away
from corporations making profit
on incarceration of people.
From where from my perspective
though that is something that
has to be done in a way that's
fiscally intelligent and does
not negatively impact other
initiatives of the state and we
know approximately after having
done the work that we didn't
play in
in a situation where there's a
dual ownership or of a contract
between a county or local
entities.
Vendor the private company on
that in order for the agency to
take over an institution and we
have to negotiate leasing or
purchasing or things that nature
all of these things of course
very expensive and I think that
it would be important for our
budget to be in a place where it
could support those initiatives
without having any kind of
direct impact on other services
like education funding early
childhood and other things that
are really important to a state
like ours.
So I'm moving forward I think
that the smart way to do it is
to figure out where we can make
those changes figure out where
we can reduce the size of
existing contracts that are just
for bed like lease space like
some of our contracts function
and to possibly review whether
it's possible to convert the
only when it's a responsible to
convert
and it and it's a another thing
that I I think that we can do
meantime and it's something I've
talked about quite a bit without
one of our private vendors is
restructuring contracts so that
we are adding a treatment
program for program
participation components into
how they get paid or how they
get fined or maybe a combination
of both in fact you can be
reached out to one of the
vendors we learned that no other
state has sought that type of
relationship contractually and
so we're working right now to
see what we can do about re
writing
existing contracts to shift the
focus of what they do and do not
get paid for I think that's
where we'll be moving forward
because we have to figure out a
solution that finds a means time
fix while working towards that
long term fix of being able to
make that shift fully but
without negatively impacting not
only the state budget but also
the many communities that
currently
I at their economy has quite a
lot to do with the existence of
those institutions in their
community and and senator of
course with Santa Rosa R. G. CCF
facility being in your in your
area you know what a significant
impact that it makes so we would
not be looking at closing those
large facilities but figuring
out a way to do what we did in
clay in in some of those those
communities when that's possible
where that's possible.
We appreciate the the response
because it it shows that you're
putting a lot of thought into
what the future of corrections
is going to be in New Mexico
sign in as an example in Las
Vegas they have the at the rand
building we're looking to go and
see if we can establish a
recovery center how do we
continue to deal directly and
triangulated miss you will
ensure that the services are
being provided facility wide
Senators and continue that
facility as well as one and
Hamza bin existence for over
twenty years and so we know that
there's the established our
presence of our providers will
services but then the other
issue that comes into mind is
the this whole issue of
oversight and that as I move
forward with part of the concern
by individuals is do we have the
adequate oversight and and then
some of the thoughts and ideas
that span well let let's involve
the Attorney General more in
that but you may talk a little
bit in terms of what you're
oversight is and then as we move
forward if they are going to be
any of those changes that you
make considered someone I might
say what is this has to do with
the budget as you can see with
the whether back in resources
that we're considering setting
to directions you need more
resources and and as a person
who lives this every day I want
to ensure that their
correctional facilities are
programs and then of course of
the plans for reintegration the
compensation for our
correctional employees that is
all going to be a line and right
now that's where you're headed
and that's where you need the
support but if you can talk a
little bit about that issue as I
as I mentioned.
Thank you madam chair and
senator Campos yeah those are
those are definitely issues and
concerns and and I I'll address
first the oversight issue in our
private facilities specifically.
So everyone of our private
facilities has a state contract
monitor employed inside the
institution that person is
directly responsible for
monitoring and overseeing
compliance with the contract
that person also will submit to
our agency and that's how we
figure out where to find how to
find which entities
within the contract what what
what areas where they're not
meeting what they need to be
meeting so I mean these people
are on site every day on site
they have the same level of
authority as awarded has to sign
off on things and to check on
things and these are direct
state of New Mexico and MCD
employees that are inside of
those institutions so that's
first and foremost our our main
our main item
I know there's quite a bit of
legislation out there right now
with things like conducting
additional checks of the the
private facilities and other
things like oversight of the
agency and I think that there is
a balance that can be struck I
mean ultimately we're beholden
to the taxpayers New Mexico we
perform a public safety function
where in we administer or carry
out the orders of that the court
gives for people to serve time
and it's my goal to try to make
it so that people who do have to
spend time in institutions in
the state of New Mexico leave
better off than what they came
and that's definitely not
something that I had seen when I
entered into this role and and I
think sometimes it's some
facilities do it better than
others and we're really working
hard to standardize the way that
we do things but also focusing
on making sure that individuals
are looked at and their
individual needs are looked at
I believe that we do have quite
a bit of oversight now though I
mean the LFC conducts.
variety of of audits I it was
something we talk about a lot
but we also are fully accredited
by the American correctional
association
not I think it was last year we
received an award from the
American correctional said
association being only one of
two states that have fully
received accreditation for all
things related to pria as well
as ACA in every single one of
its institutions are Academy and
are probation and parole offices
was it a big a big situation
because it shows that we take
that oversight very seriously on
a seven additional contract
monitors we have a centralized
oversee your area that monitors
the activities at all the
facilities and then for
consistency purposes even our
public facilities have oversight
bodies that maintain the basic
standards in the things that we
have to do and make sure that
we're complying with in order to
meet the needs of our
institutions and ultimately to
fulfill our obligation to the
taxpayers so moving forward I
think that there's there's
always a way to figure out how
an agency like ours or or any
can work closer with places like
the state auditor's office the
attorney general's office to
improve or increase oversight
and and it's something I'm
certainly willing to have more
conversations about but I also
think it's important for this
body to know that we have a very
very robust constituent services
office we're we have of people
that are directly dedicated to
working just with victims of
crimes victim services people
are can are committed to working
just with the family members of
people who are incarcerated and
then we have additional people
in that office whose sole focus
is just to take any question
from anywhere and make sure that
we're very quickly responsive to
the.
Click and and any increase that
they have of our agency thank
you continue and I really
appreciate the discussion
I.
We just need to continue with
with our dialogue as we move
forward you can reach me on my
cell at five oh five four two
six seven three five seven and I
put that out there because this
whole issue of corrections and
the future of what we're doing
dealing with our it's something
that I want to be directly
involved in to to to make those
improvements one final question
and that's going to be regarding
compensation with our public
facilities and our private
facilities are is there.
The disparity between the
compensation and benefits
between the two and if there is
what we do to try to bridge that
gap so the correctional officers
within our private facilities
are paid as much if not more
than and then also consider the
public facilities as well.
Madam chair and senator Campos
there is certainly a disparity
in budget I mean private entity
doesn't need to provide the same
level of retirement benefits
that public entity does so I
think everybody here knows that
the state of New Mexico has one
of the best benefit packages
nationally to its employees as
far as post post retirement
benefits we have very strong
benefits package for things like
medical care and so forth a
private entity they they offer
certain things like that but in
different forms and because we
have three individual private
vendors I I mean I couldn't
speak specifically to what one
or the other does that might be
better or worse than another one
as far as the pay is concerned
we do know that there's an
approximate a difference of
about three dollars per hour
between correctional officers
that are employed in a private
institution verses a public
institution
That and and what can we do to
to to change that so we're
actually in conversations right
now with one of our vendors.
Because we worked hard in some
of that shifting that we did in
in our own budget to make sure
that the staff members in our
facilities say facilities who
had direct contact in isolation
quarantine units intake
facilities transports of COVID
positive people Hospital actions
and so forth we have to pay
which was fifteen percent
for every hour that they worked
in one of those various areas
and we're working with one of
our vendors right now the main
issue for us or not I not issue
but demand I guess for us in
working with the vendor on those
funds is to ensure that every
dime that we give any of the
vendors for things like hazard
pay goes directly to the
correctional officer not to some
you know corporate account or
what have you and that's the
type of thing that we're trying
to work out now we're
specifically talking about
things like hazard pay and when
we do have those conversations
about CPI or what whatever it is
that we're talking about with
our private partners my first
line of conversation always in
those meetings is what
percentage or that does all of
this money go to the
correctional officer because
that's what we have to know we
have to know that the individual
staff member in that location is
the one receiving the benefit
not the Cup not the corporation
in any form that's always what
we strive to to figure out and
and just one last no on on CPI
you know in in twenty one and if
I'm wrong correct me but we did
give CPI to our contractors we
had one contract that was in the
process of negotiation and we
didn't include them but three of
the four received a CPI and when
we were facing those really
intense budget cuts during
special session and in
preparation we had to look at we
do we cut that do we do we roll
back this CPI that we gave
Where can we figure out how to
save this money in order to do
what we need to do as far as
meeting our obligations for the
cuts and that was something that
we we thought was important that
we didn't touch because we knew
that those CPI funds were going
directly to officers and are
moving forward any time that we
have conversation about CPI it
will always be about where does
this distribution go and doesn't
directly benefit the people who
live and work in our
communities.
Thank you very much madam
secretary and just in closing we
start talking about their
classification and some of the
other issues but we'll leave
that for another time but again
I just a part of you are on the
work that you're going to all
your staff we're gonna move
forward together when we start
talking about the analytics but
this is gonna look like they are
for the future here in New
Mexico I will continue to go
ahead and be an integral part of
it again thank you very much for
your responses thank you very
much chair members of the Senate
finance committee.
Thank you your cabinet secretary
at we're gonna move on to
Senator all right lord senator
Jeff Steinborn.
Thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
can you hear me OK.
We can okay great albeit with a
mask on.
Fund
madam chair good to see you
Secretary good to see you a
question for you I I know that
it's been a big challenge when
people get out of prison to get
their voting rights restored and
there's there's been legislation
multiple times and.
I have a constituent who was
released in the eighties to just
as a problem getting the records
from permanent corrections to
the secretary state such that
people literally introduced
bills to try to mandated so I'd
like to hear from you know what
a.
What you're doing to help kind
of us move without that problem.
Sure thank you senator thank you
madam chair and senator
Steinborn members
I'm I'm actually I'm really kind
of excited that you ask that
question again this is a another
one of those items that has a
legislation out there
House Bill I believe it's
seventy four I specifically
addresses voter voter rights and
procedures for for people with
felony convictions SO two things
in the interim session and for
for awhile my staff and I met
with secretary of state to lose
all over because we wanted to
talk with them about how we
could help them eliminate the
issue that you your friend
experience what was happening
and and I think I'm I'm I'm not
gonna say it's not still
happening because we definitely
have some challenges with the
the the age of our computer
system but we we were sending
them data once every week and
then it was creating this lag
time for them and so we try to
figure out a way where our
computer systems could talk to
each other and in the I. T.
people figured out that that
wasn't possible yet so we're
trying to figure out a way where
we can literally send them files
every day to what degree that
successful we don't really know
but we feel like it's not
terribly successful because if
it was then there wouldn't be a
need for this house bill that
that that that madam chair
Chasey introduced so with
respect to that unit we
recognize that there are several
items in that bill that require
administrative processes for our
agency for the corrections
department but we are doing so
much work already pre release
when a person's getting out we
immediately apply for Medicaid
for them we are we have done a
lot of work to get with the tax
and Representative department to
see what we can do to eliminate
some of those barriers as far as
getting identification and so
we're really happy to be able to
be in a position where we can
help them by by doing that
registration before somebody
gets out of prison institution
we hope that that legislation is
successful.
And we believe that it will
significantly streamline the
process and hopefully will
eliminate some of the red tape
that exist right now and makes
it difficult for people to vote
we saw a lot of positive
feedback during committee
hearings on that bill where
folks were talking about how
community engagement change
their life and so we're very
happy to support that bill.
Thank you senator.
Yes thank you and that this is a
constituent who reached out to
me about trying to get their
voting rights restored and
you're right it the community
engagement being able to do
something positive was
incredibly important and for
everyone's benefit anyone
someone leave the presented
serve their time they're legally
that entitled to vote again.
And so it is a way that the way
that people can contribute.
But you know madam secretary did
you say you were excited but at
the same time the problems still
exist and and we need a bill to
fix it and I'm a little troubled
by that just because
you know that these are these
are right I guess that they're
entitled to and so and so I'm
not sure we got our districts
yeah so I'm not sure what what
why we even need to build
capacity to fix this problem and
and and what we're gonna what
you're departments gonna build
it affect the.
I'm Mr chair madam chair Senator
Steinborn so as I understand it
after having communicated with
the with the sponsor and with
our our honorable secretary of
state it sounds like there's a
lot of procedure involved right
now that exist in law that
requires a person to go to a
county clerk's office and there
are a lot of steps in between
that don't involve our agency
and and it created some some
would just sounded like it was a
lot of layers of bureaucracy and
complications from one clerk's
office to the other procedures
in in one office that we're
doing really good in one county
and not really working out in
another county and so it's my
understanding that this
legislation helps to eliminate
some of those requirements for a
person to actually go to a
county clerk's office but that
they can get registered through
other means and those other
means are are ones that are
agency staff will participate in
prior to release.
Okay well madam chair I mean And
secretary I know that bill is
been introduced in the past and
I would hope that regardless of
whether or not it passes that
you know right now anyone can
register to vote online.
And it's.
And I'm sure that this more
challenging when someone's being
released because they have to
have a.
Residents in an address to be
able to use to get registered
but
nonetheless just a.
Hope that is something you would
be committed to restoring voting
rights and you know irrespective
of whether a bill passes that
that you all will work out
improve system that people are
forgotten and and.
Then they have to contact your
state senator to get those
rights restored.
Yes I'm good.
Madam chair representative it
absolutely does thank you.
Our thank you madam secretary
and and thank you as well for
your efforts on recidivism and
and those would also be a legacy
program that you're putting in
place that hopefully we will
also get done New Mexico used to
have the highest recidivism rate
in the region and I I don't know
if that's still the case but
But most people of course do we
present to go back into society
and we have every interest in
the world and having them have
skills and be productive and so
it's just a good investment for
us to make and their success so
appreciate what you're doing in
that regard as well and we'll be
watchin watchin that as well so
thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary.
Thank thank you.
Thank you Senator I or you know
you brought up a very good point
and very good questions it's
something that Sir away stays in
our mind and we hope it can be
resolved and sand
it's about freedom again and
then about having already having
that paid your dues and and you
know you're out and you should
be able to at least vote fell in
registered about so thank you
very much in cabinet secretary
let me look at my list here I
don't see any other hands so.
Sure thank you senator.
Sorry I can't raise my and I
don't know what happened.
Madam secretary just had one
question about the president in
requests and where did we end up
I know we're negotiating for the
state to to lease that facility
and and take it over where did
we end up
during this year in time of the
facility and in requests.
Mr chair on madam chair thank
you for the question you know
it's something that we were just
talking about and trying to
figure out whether it was
something that would be
beneficial financially or
otherwise and in that particular
situation with the structure of
that specific contract it is not
something that we found had an
immediate benefit for the state
and we will continue to work
with that vendor if that's
something that becomes a
possibility and just our for for
everybody's awareness we are
really exploring a lot of
different options throughout our
system right now I believe is
mentioned a bit earlier in the
presentation but our populations
are right now at an all time low
and we are trying to figure out
creative ways that do not affect
any local communities or and
also save the state money but
make the agency more efficient
and and at this time that
particular a negotiation or
renegotiation was not something
that was going to be an official
and in fact it was only going to
have a strong on a positive.
Our outcome if that facility had
been at full capacity for a
sustained period of time which
was not the situation when we
started
having that conversation.
Madam secretary I guess I'm a
little confused because my
understanding that you guys had
entered into the lease
negotiations and gotten really
close in the lease negotiations
and and the state kind of backed
away but that's.
One side of the story the other
side of this story is is how are
you gonna replace facilities
this day and age of what they
cost.
What that.
Massive
Capital replacing bring
infrastructure for president up
to par.
Mr chair that's that's that's
kind of the big dollar question
and it's one of the things that
I had mentioned as being one of
the things at one of the items
that very much concerns me about
a current bill in circulation
right now is that it would
prevent us or any other
government body from entering
into an agreement with a private
prison vendor for construction
purposes for building and you
know what what what we seen in
the past is that to governor a
government body will enter into
a contract to the private
contractor because they can get
the money the alone to build a
new institution
and then we lease it or there's
some sort of an agreement with
the county and bonds of what
gets paid off in a different or
or over time that's not
something that would be possible
if that legislation were to pass
it's I think it definitely
creates an issue I don't I don't
see a realistic situation where
a government body can fully fund
construction on its own of the
other brand new institution I
mean we know that that that
that's hundreds of millions of
dollars so I think that's
something that will need to talk
about more moving forward and
there's there's lots of ideas
out there on how we can
potentially consolidate
institutions and you know of
course we have deferred
maintenance at all of our
institutions some need more
maintenance than others and
we're we're just trying to
figure out right now with the
best most fiscally responsible
method will be given our low
population and based on whatever
it is that the sentencing
commission is able to figure out
as far as projection projecting
future incarceration rates and
whether we will expect to remain
at these low levels and be able
to cut our capacity or whether
it will be necessary for us to
maintain the the number of beds
that we have at this time.
So madam chair madam secretary I
guess my question goes back I
guess I really don't understand
how helping operating in leases
on it's my understanding that
the lease was was a hundred
percent maintenance and all and
operational within the lease
of the building across the state
other than the lease payments.
And so our cost savings.
For maintenance and operation
which we can't maintain our
presence right now which is sad
to say
there are people in need air
conditioning and and they they
need they have the.
And president is not a rock
highlighted there is need their
and so we have to be more
efficient but.
I mean all watch that billing
jacket but I mean the
operational side in the
maintenance side are two
different.
Two different scenarios
but we're gonna have to be very
careful in how we perceive would
present because we built as an
and I'll how many years and our
prisons are old and and private
industry has built them because
of the need in the market and
now let me may be going away and
an option to lease should be
something that the state should
be I believe looking at strongly
in order for cost savings and
and that will also save us
capital money and so this I
don't want to take anything off
the table because we don't know
what's going to happen then and
so I appreciate you always
watching out for the dollar
party set several times so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
Mr chair you thank you Kevin
secretary I don't see any other
hands here anymore so let me
just say you have Secretary down
now I cannot imagine the work
load and the work that you have
and I I want you to know that we
see clearly what you do with
your staff why thank you I also
noted the need to request a
great passion request you made
for us to approve the is that
your budget because of the act
the budget reductions to ban not
shown to the LFC and so we will
take a good look at that as we
press the I just want to get
announce not gonna walk away we
thank you so much for your
presentation and all your staff
of course the governor's staff
also that's all I have Mr
chairman we're down for the day.
We are done tomorrow I don't
know what time we're gonna one
of the for tomorrow so we go on
the floor and.
And.
Yes no I just cut off on the
screen here and we're going in
at eleven tomorrow where you
find something else to cut off.
So we we won't have a committee
meeting on on the floor well
we're gonna try to re schedule
an intake up some I know that
people want to get back PED.
We're gonna schedule ma'am and
we are going to reschedule our
the state police are public
safety because what happened
this week they asked remove
those important agencies I think
we need to hear
So we may have to expand our
time for to get a few more
agency presentation then over
the next couple weeks or so.
If you need or you want to hear
another agency or something
maybe reach out to the analyst
inserting each question answered
if not
in we as a committee money here
separate agency or another
agency let me now okay thank you
guys and you know you're
chairman I just thought Senator
and Senator Hemphill who ran
into her hand went up here you
didn't show up earlier are you
there Senator do you have a
question thank you madam chair I
just wanted to Mr chair I was
just going to clarify that we
made on the floor tomorrow at
eleven thirty.
Thank you.
So we won't have a committee
just to just to verify that and
I do apologize for the bill one
thirty time on the calendar
it's.
We have a situation where we
send it to them down to the
clerk's office to be printed and
then come out changes stuff in
the system so we're keeping an
eye on it we will start every
day at one.
And try to get there is done as
early as we can so thank you
guys I'm gonna day I think we'll
see everybody tomorrow.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr thank you very much
of Madam chair.
Thank.
