I don't know the reason but it's
not going to be
Senate bill three seventy seven
will not be here today either.
For the subcommittee we're going
to stick around and John should
have sent you a draft in some
languages language and the and
what's in reoccurring and not
recurring on the bill so you
guys can review that.
And I think will here Senator
Stewart.
You are up with Senate bill for
the Senate substitute for Senate
bill forty.
So I go ahead.
Yes go right ahead you explain
the subs to yesterday.
Committee members if anybody
needs that
Thank you in I mean the the
substance been here and so
Make them just to double check
do we have anybody for against
the bill with the subs to bill.
That Mr chairman members of the
committee at we received now I
did not cry other than that
people that commented yesterday.
Okay.
Questions from committee members
Mr Chairman.
Senator Candelaria it is just
following up on your last
statement I haven't received a
an email yet from Mr Casper it's
regarding three seventy seven so
if if if if if they can get that
that be great and I'm done thank
you.
Perfect thank you center rolled
will double check and know that
he did run across the house to
verify something now I'll get
that to you guys or is it all
just as well thank you.
No questions from committee
members it's supposed to be over
Senate bill forty.
I don't see in our what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Moving to pass.
And on the substitute itself
right.
Mr.
Senator Rodriguez said the first
part of that all right cut off
here it's an interesting
promotion on the substitute
itself for Senate bill forty yes
that that.
The motion and and the second by
Senator Candelaria second by
Senator Rodriguez any objection
to the motion or have we've
Colorado.
yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
But before we do that I need to
make sure that we're making the
motion correct.
Senator Candelaria so we're
making a do not pass on Senate
bill forty in a do pass on on
Senate substitute for Senate
bill forty correct Mr chairman
correct so that is a motion to
make sure it's correct
had I get.
Go ahead and call the roll sorry
for that.
Senator Burt.
Yes.
Pass Senator Burt passed Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond is excuse no over there
I'm sorry Senator Diamond no.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share no.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn has not come
in our Senator Woods no.
Senator Woods now.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator Munoz yes that is you
have Senator Burt left he he
passed away I'm sorry past
Senator Burt yes I'm gonna vote
no thank you.
So we have four no six yes and
one excuse.
Mr passes.
Thank you madam pro tem you do
have a due pass created.
Thank you so much committee
members.
Thank you Senator Woods are you
ready for a Senate bill forty
nine and you do have an
amendment correct.
I do not have an amendment to
that bill at all I checked at
your office this morning and and
they didn't have an amendment
for the bill.
this bill is the bill that was
on the the Senate floor and we
pulled it back into your
committee Mr Chairman this bill
is it allows municipalities and
any size to provide financial
assistance to retail businesses
using their own G. R. T. laid up
funds I can't use any state
monies whatsoever right now the
current population is capped at
thirty five thousand this makes
it such that any.
Hello do you have any size can
now use that their money not
state money their money for us
to attract retail or to expand
well retail that's already
there.
And it allows state provide
financial assistance to retail
businesses located in
unincorporated portion of the
county and it Roose removes the
restrictions that state funds
can only be used for a project
that is more than ten miles from
the closest municipality with a
population of more than fifteen
thousand.
And again it it allows for the
rehabilitation are remodeling a
building not just the
construction which is under the
current law.
My use of a qualified immunity
and that pretty much it's
explains it Senator Candelaria
and I have had some discussions
and our.
I know that he will probably has
some some input on this I have
with me today
I don't know where there's
Senator step on X. is on the
call or not she is a co sponsor
Senator Griggs is also
co sponsoring this.
But I have with me Mr Mike Morse
of the more of Clovis as an
expert witness and I have a Mr
John Ryan as an expert witness
Mr chair.
If you want them to to talk on
the subject.
So we we did get an amendment
but we just got it about.
Twelve thirty ten till one have
you had time to look at that
amendment.
Have have we sent that amendment
out make them or.
Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez who's the amendment
from.
Senator Candelaria.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I have the amendment
to be able to share on screen
I am I'm sure but I can at the
committee secretariat that was
sent out.
It was not sent out.
Okay.
Sir would that we've all the
time line correctly for you to
get that amendment so you have
time to review it you want.
I tell you Mr chairman it's it's
like this.
You were graciously allowed me
to come into your committee but
this bill.
Senator Candelaria and I talked.
Outside the Senate chambers and
he said that he would try to
bring that amendment forward I
would be happy to look at is
amendment for sure and see if
it's a you know I can I think I
can recognize where they're I
see it but friendly or not.
So are we can have Senator
Candelaria just explain this man
real quick.
What is your preference Center.
I would I would prefer him to
explain his amendment.
Okay senator we have do have
some public comment well they're
emailing that amendment now in
in the school of public comment
and then we'll come back to that
amendment they can go ahead and.
Mr chair members of the
committee and it for public
comment on and act bill we would
be more indications of
about that they stand back in
support we do have data from at
the note that on the line.
Okay.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico eight via the statewide
association about.
As agents of the state do stand
in support of the legislation.
We believe providing greater
latitude to local governments
and the expenditure of their
local funds will utility to self
determine.
How to expand those funds to
better reflect the economic
development needs of their local
communities so we do stand in
support thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee at that yeah.
All we received at in terms of
required for public comment on
this bill.
Thank you.
Thanks Nathan
Senator Candelaria you wanna
explain your amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Essentially to amendments.
That I'm I'm request of the
committees that synchronises.
Okay.
So this is
This is the second amendment
that I was at I was planning on
proposing to the committee this
deals with a separate issue
regarding broadband and the fact
that.
Local governments nor the state
as far as I can tell have
prioritized broadband for
purposes of Leda.
and this process for the
requirement.
That the state do some things I
prefer not to address this
ammendment now nation because I
think the amendment Senator
Woods is asking about is the
first amendment which apparently
is not made it down and I'll
note Mr chairman that the the
drafters did not draft that
amendment using the correct
terminology as was included in
my request so I think we're
gonna have to redo that second
amendment anyway but the first
amendment I think this is the
issue Mr chairman.
Senator Candelaria I addressing
this ammendment.
I'm addressing I'm addressing
the amendment I'm gonna offer
that should be in the committee
but was not the one that was
just put up on the screen.
And this is.
In the committee we don't have
the other one.
Well I think Mr chairman and I
guess I'm trying to say I can't
vote for this bill.
And and I only this bill has the
votes on the floor unless unless
we come to some discussion on
this first amendment so we can
use that I mean I don't know
I'll do whatever you guys want
I'm just trying to explain the
amendment Senator Woods is
concerned about is not the
amendment that was just so I can
explain what that meant dust or
I can not and whatever you guys
want.
During her I think I'm I think.
can have your.
Why not as we know that how do
we don't know where we're at you
then that was the inner courted
Britain's bill as of today so
I'm you may be a good idea just
to hear what it's about would
you all have a Frank.
We need to deal with this
ammendment first since we
already have cable and somewhat
anymore that we don't have
then we can deal with that next
and so so the amendment that was
just some of the committee I'm
gonna withdraw as as I mentioned
Council Service was instructed
to drafted using very specific
language the drafter disagreed I
said no please use the language
I constructed and the drafters
and done a version that included
language that is incorrect so
I'm gonna withdraw this
amendment that was just on to
the committee at this time.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator Woods.
If if if there I would rather
come out of this committee with
some kind of agreement if we
need to roll this bill.
For a day.
To come up with that.
Some kind of a a draft that that
it we can at least work at at
would be satisfactory to me.
Our our at your pleasure Sir.
Yes just to let you know I I
sent a copy of the proposed
language
to Senator Woods and and Mr Ryan
and others so there's no attempt
here to side swipe anybody I
just I don't.
The time coming from the fourth
quarter Lujan is that's what the
problem is I think right now.
I think the amendment had to do
with the size of the
of the of the town the
population of the town is what
the man was so so
You know I I I I understand
where he's coming from but we
still need a written amendments
so if you want to roll it we
can.
Senator Woods I think it's best
that we roll and get your
amendment on so we don't end up.
Putting amendments on the floor
and and spending the day there
if you're fine with this role
that will put it back on the
agenda for tomorrow Senator
Candelaria and center which
could you will check on that
amendment make sure it's we'll
be here trying to get to us in
the morning so we can get it out
to people I know that council
maybe backed up but
just for committee members so.
Will move on then
Sir what what you'll be back on
the gender first thing tomorrow
and and thank okay that's
thank you.
John de Antonio state engineer
you with us and then the.
The analyst when.
Yes Mister chairman I'm here.
Okay.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members this is Caitlyn won the
legislative finance committee
I'm joined by Dr Andrew Miner
from DFA he's going to help me
present to answer questions on
the budget for the next few
agencies we're going to start
with the state engineer this is
agency code slide fifty you
should have some bullet.
And I'm just going to give a
brief overview of the
recommendation that was adopted
by the house appropriations and
finance committee.
Again at five fifty the state
engineer I as chairman you said
we have state engineer John the
Antonio with us and also I
believe Interstate Stream
Commission that director rob
Schmidt Petersen.
So for the agency as a whole HSD
adopted the LFC recommendation
and the recommendation from
general fund is black with the
FY twenty one operating budget
as well as the executive
recommendation the
recommendation increased all
other revenue sources by a total
of one hundred and seventy two
point four thousand dollars
primarily in federal revenues.
Water resource allocation
program the recommendation
adopted by HFC increased the
budget by seventy six point
seven thousand dollars from
other transfers then revenues
budgeted in person and other
costs for increased insurance
rates hardware and software
costs and the.
In the Interstate Stream compact
compliance program the total
recommended increased is was one
hundred thirty one point nine
thousand dollars primarily due
to an increase in federal
revenues.
At the recommendation also re
prioritized funding from
contractual services to personal
services and employee benefits
in line with the agency's
project expenditures.
In the litigation and
adjudication program the
recommendation is a flat budget
with the re prioritization of
funds
from actual services to other
costs for software licenses
vehicles supplies and equipment.
Finally and program support the
recommendation included one
hundred thousand dollar or one
hundred thousand dollar
reduction in other transfers to
minimize use of the agencies
Trust Fund implanted in the
person budget due to decreased
employee benefits costs.
That concludes my presentation
on last and you have anything
you'd like to add and then we'll
turn it over to state engineer
Dantonio.
Thank you afternoon Mister
chairman committee members
Andrew Miner here thank and I
have no additional comments at
this time so I'll go enter over
the state engineer yeah.
And you are always waiting for
you to make a comment I have
haven't heard one yet so maybe
make cuts that maybe that might
help the budget or.
Mr state engineer go right
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sure
to screen with you are you able
to see that Mr Chairman.
No.
Not yet.
We do have your presentation I
think I think it's coming out
now.
Representative is.
Division I had this right just a
second ago
Okay let me just let me just get
into it and and and Wells or
things one of number one just to
let you know thank you for your
next Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Eighty two.
Then you may be pulled your your
calendar.
Okay just on this.
It's for some reason it's not
working here.
On
this so Mister chairman may just
go on with the presentation
trying to read.
We're going to go.
Okay jazz.
We have to do with it with us is
my general counsel Senator Smith
Peterson is the director of
Interstate Stream Commission
I've got the my general counsel
Greg ridge lady the general
counsel for Interstate Stream
Commission area singer John
Romero is a rapid water resource
director Jeff Graham are
programs or director and and
Charles Thompson are damn safety
bureau chief again in case
there's questions we.
Deeply into Mr Chairman this is
what we've been dealing with a
couple of emergencies and I
believe our of the the problem
with with this with this state
New Mexico and the state
engineers office is we've had a
big water supply shortages in a
critical critical component the
public health and safety issue
of we have severe droughts
that's required of direct water
inspection by the state engineer
water masters in multiple river
basins which included the Rio
Grande Rio Chama New Mexico
state line is the number is
seven one of and the game is
rubber also enforcement actions
against illegal diversions over
divergence at and we do have
seven district offices around
the state New Mexico we have
focused on domestic well
permitting and other Water
Rights use permits with Mexico's
offices open just to make sure
that there's there's that
presents that we have in the
field and and the the field
associated with water master and
activities so that we can
respond be responsive to the
public the the other aspects of
the Interstate Stream Commission
has operations across the a
creek you know last of the
reservoir and Los Lunas silvery
out of the fusion so very mental
revision which is because this
thank you a significant presence
so that the the cycle that in
spite of the of the warm
temperatures and lack of water
supply.
We have a really bad drought
condition within the state of
New Mexico when we look at the
numbers and the on a tour which
I'm hopefully you're seeing my
presentation out of there is a
There were about a hundred
percent of the state is what we
call a D. one to D. four
category eighty two percent of
the state is entities created
the for and fifty four percent
which is the really dark colors
that you can see are at fifty
four percent of the state is
injured extreme drought the task
force we match of on February
the ace of the drought Task
Force spring south science and
policy experts together to
provide updates and
recommendations and is the final
authority in declaring drought
emergencies which is typically
done in the form of an executive
order on December the ninth and
executive order was issued by
the governor declared a state of
emergency and that's important
to securing because a governor
drought declaration there is
money that becomes available
seven up to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars for each
eligible of qualified applicants
and that's got a copy of to a if
there is a recognized a drought
or emergency there's got to be
surplus on appropriate money the
general fund and hopefully it
just gets it has up to folks
because we're going to be enough
a dire situation as we move into
into this year one just focus on
our staffing challenges because
that's one of the key areas so
that comes costly gets a grant
and I want to point out that we
had forty seven recruitment
actions initiated in twenty
twenty which is stating at
apercent or workforce of one of
the problems we have and and
because we have.
Relief agencies are under a
hiring freeze which requires
approval with the exceptions of
the recruitment process is time
consuming and labor intensive
but multiple layers of approval
of requirements from job
advertisements and hiring
application takes probably
almost up to two months in and
you've got an approval to fill
positions that could take up to
a hundred twenty days we have a
four step time frame in which to
hire of folks we also have an
attrition rates and one of the
things that sort of gets of I
think a little bit miss
Canadian communicated is that's
you know we have the LFC spaces
snapshot of our agency back in
September and shows that we
have.
Twenty funded vacancy positions
at one point seven million
dollars or somewhere around
those numbers the reality is is
because we have.
Ways that are lost during the C.
during the year we had
retirements and through it
Christian close to a ten percent
interest in right but we
actually hire into our our key
areas we have it's hard to make
up that ground that middle both
there despite its twenty twenty
recruitment actions of pacing
losses seventeen of the twenty
five hires during twenty twenty
where internal hires resulting
in about fourteen FTE decreases
staff to handle regular workload
which is much less of than we've
had in the past and and an
interesting.
Interesting fact is that when I
state engineer several years ago
we had fifty eight additional.
impositions and our workload
today is probably as busy or
busier than it was at ten twelve
years ago and that's really of
concern for for our agency of
the other piece of it is when we
hire of and because we have to
do the internal hires it's a
direct result of seventy one
percent of our employees are
below the mid point so when we
have we have important hires
that include professional
engineers legal positions are
the I. T. field it's very hard
for us to compete against our
everybody flow salaries and so
we want to and you double hires
and it's just hard for agencies.
Such as ours to catch up with
those issues.
Next this is the and it is a
program right down from
We have four programs water
allocation program which is all
of our technical people or one
rights division offices are damn
safety worries in conservation
bureau of the biggest program
here you can see we have thirty
vacancies those of those folks
to do daily daily processing of
applications you look down the
rest of our program Interstate
Stream Commission program again
if they can up all authorise
vacant amounts of because you
have six people here litigation
education program and our
programs support the numbers
speak for themselves Mr chairman
but we're we have sixty
vacancies are twenty of them are
actually funded but that's the
problem that we have in the in
the long time it takes to hire
and a big turnover rate we have
my concern is we have thirteen
additional retirements are
probably happening this year
with people that have in excess
of twenty years experience so
we're there's a brain drain
going on essentially and it's
hard to retain and recruit
additional talents because of
that.
Let me.
I was gonna do this one quickly
critical to our operations is
the specials and all the house
bill two has gone through we're
really concerned about this
first item up here those seven
hundred fifty thousand for for
our state water planning efforts
all the climate change bills and
everything that's before us
within this legislative session
we need to get funding for for
the Interstate Stream Commission
and I will go with those more
detail on that we did see the
latest version of house bill two
which which shored up this
funding for interstate
litigation with taxes of the New
Mexico again the importance of
this Mr chairman is that if we
up if we don't
we we're we're really reliance
on the specials besides our
regular budgets and in the trust
funds that I'm gonna talk about
right now we have we have to
trust funds that we we taking of
critical part of our operations
out of the funds are
deregulation works construction
fund and the improvement of the
Rio Grande income fund we've got
a couple of tables in your
packet that show that okay this
is the easiest way to show at
the revenues of the fund
balances to grant you can see
that in FY ten we had over
thirty million dollars in that
particular fund it's been a
decreasing the over the years
let's take a big hit and we'll
continue to take a break at the
end of FY twenty to FY twenty
three it's it's anticipated that
both funds together will be
insolvent of based on the total
expenditures of pre increasing
to about twenty million dollars
in the revenues being less than
ten million dollars is a ten
million dollar gap there I know
you're you're basically
and Mr chairman if you look at
these funds that will go over
all these numbers that this is
the irrigation works
construction fund which is the
bigger of the two funds I it it
breaks down and the balances and
revenues what's highlighted in
yellow here is a recent of bills
at.
Asked the Legislature that have
taken additional funding out of
those funds that the that is
been used to fund the state
engineers office and the
Interstate Stream Commission of
the forestry Fund and yes thank
you have fun additional hands
that are in these funds that are
in that are of speeding up the
demise of the balances within
this particular fund are you can
see the improvement to the Rio
Grande income fund it's the
smaller of the two funds but
again an additional million
dollars going out to the
forestry Fund.
To go out there and so
really concern of ours and I
think the legislature has
recognize this twenty nineteen
general appropriations act we
were we were instructed to
present to the legislature a
five year plan covering a period
of fiscal year twenty twenty one
to twenty six so look at
reducing expenditures from the
trust funds for operations by
replacing it with general fund
revenue we were asked to come up
with a five year plan to replace
nine million dollars of of
general fund a way to get our
agency back off of this off of
those and the reliance of those
trust funds that plans been put
together Mr chairman I think
just with the the revenues and
the COVID issues that have
happened we're we're not there
yet it's going to take probably
a few more years for us to get
there but just an awareness or
everybody's
All information these funds are
extremely critical for us to
defend our state against the the
interstate compact issues and
other issues that we have in the
critical nature of our water
supply.
Mr Chairman I'm going to turn it
over to Paul Schmidt Petersen
and it's not about the impact of
that funding the fifty year
water plan of and this go over
just a few more slides the ready
for questions so misters
transmitters and your available
thank you John yes can you hear
me yes so Mr chairman members of
the committee I have about four
slides into go through very
quickly and these are all
related to items that were in
the executive budget request but
not are not in H. B. two and the
first one of those is the impact
not funding the governor's fifty
or water plan and let me be very
clear this is this is planning
for climate change and that
means really increased
temperatures and within two
priests temperatures as we've
seen in the last thirty years
you have changes in your water
supply evaporation transpiration
for plants additional kind of
stress on the system so we're
moving forward with that plan
and we will with the partners we
have but if we we do not get the
special appropriation request
this seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars
we're really gonna have to
reduce the amount of work we do
in the rest of that and so the
the the the first part there is
we won't be able to assess the
impacts on as many users so
they'll be less users that we
can focus on it will be triaging
that point.
We'll have a more limited
foundation scientific data we've
pulled together with New Mexico
bureau of geology and mineral
resources and expert team of
climate research is to help us
with this leap ahead fifty years
in the future temperature
continues to increase here is
how water supply water demand
changes across the landscape of
the New Mexico that is in fact
climate change and this is what
we're trying to do with these
elements you can see in here
there's a number of technical
terms consumptive your geisha
requirements for water use
efficiency so moisture deficit
the the goal with visited eight
we have been to try to bring
forward a lot of that
information that could be used
by our farmers our cities are
recreation parties are ranchers
and so on we won't be able to do
as much of that
and then the governor has
directed us to do as much
outreach it is transparent to
members a manner to possibly can
with public input we will do
that but the degree to that will
be significantly less and then
finally the end goal of all of
this is to assess we're we're
resilient to the expected change
we're we're not and what's
needed and what needed what's
needed could be operational
infrastructure institutional our
reserves that will necessarily
be reduced to in addition we
have been putting a very large
amount of our water planning
budget in the last year so to
the water data act initiative
and other related planning
efforts we won't be able to do
that because when we focusing
back at really on this leap
ahead which is critically
important.
next one is A. B. A. R. forty
that and it also additional
funding I think many of you are
aware about than John shows the
extreme extraordinary drought
that's occurring on the rate
goes
the Carlsbad irrigation district
as I understand that the first
allocation of water for this
year is less than that I think
is two to three inches of water
to their farmers and under the
two thousand three pickle
settlement agreements we have
the requirement when water
supplies are low when I won't go
into all the details of that but
I can to come well feels that
the I. S. C. put in place just
at the southern end of the
because Valley artesian
Conservancy district down by
that seven rivers well field you
see there so pumped water to the
river put more water in Brantley
reservoir and then increase the
supply for C. ID we have been
doing that since late late
October we've gotten about ten
thousand acre feet into the
reservoir it is far short of
what's needed.
This is an issue and simple
we're we're trying to use where
we historically would have used
trust funds and are using trust
funds to pay for these monies
trying to get
general fund monies to do that
to save our trust funds but also
backing things up if we need to
continue to pop allow BA our
story we received.
The house bill two has one
million of the two million
million requests in this and we
can get the B. A. R. forty we
think we need both of those in
order to be able to continue
meeting our requirements so that
settlement agreement thanks
John.
So the other critical component
in this is a B. R. authority of
that that relates to the
improvement of the Rio Grande
income fund
you can see on the left of this
there's a picture of amphibious
excavators working right at the
top of elephant Butte reservoir
word at six today opening up
sentiment plugs the plugs the
river channel off and reduce the
amount of water that makes
themselves and you that has to
negative impacts of directly
first one is on supply at
elephant Butte reservoir
for use downstream and they
often get irrigation district
and the el Paso water
Conservancy district also for
recreation at elephant Butte
reservoir we have been building
and maintaining this channel for
twenty years now it is by far
the most important element we
have for water deliveries and
savings under the Rio Grande
compact we have a very large
accrued debit this year our
budget has five hundred thousand
dollars in it which will be
enough to do a little bit of
work we had a BA are in place
for another five hundred
thousand to do additional work
we believe that that that money
is critically necessary to
continue to maintain this
channel John next.
Then the last piece of this is
we've had another B. A. R. in
that that wasn't in the house
bill two in would like it to be
an included and that's
associated with our work down in
southwest New Mexico under the
Arizona water settlement act and
I want to make it clear this
money is not for building
anything associated with the New
Mexico unit of the central
Arizona project the fact it's
exactly the opposite is putting
projects on the ground in
southwest New Mexico that help
those local communities an
example of that is a pleasant
and ditch that you see on the
right which is a a line channel
that was put in place with his
nine year money the I. S. C.
approved a number of projects
damning has one more work in the
area of if you look Valley on
singer geisha diversions and
then our efforts to get shovel
ready projects moving forward
are all dependence on this
budget of forty request are
offered at forty and and if
we're to move forward with any
of those projects this authority
is needed I believe that's it
John.
Thank you Mr chairman we are
ready for questions.
I think I can click thank you
guys thanks for the
presentation.
We have anybody's hand raised
up.
See anybody's hand raised.
No questions from committee
members Mr Chairman.
Senator Woods go right ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman I notice
you
gentleman that you you talk back
to the state engineer you talk
about the force group but.
Did that go to the state for
sure where did that go.
Representative Wallace
Sir Senator was.
I get it right when you said
that.
It did go to a to the state
forestry Fund yet of energy
minerals natural resources.
Is that Mr chairman and
misstated you there is that I
see it four years in a row on
one place or your general in the
other place.
Is that could be taken out from
now on.
Is is that way that legislation
was written.
Goes from the irrigation works
and and from the Rio Grande
income fund both.
Your chairman Senator was this
is Ralph that's correct it's it
will be taken out annually and
goes into a different pot.
Even if even if it's not
expended it doesn't come back
into the trust funds so it's
available for use for watershed
rehabilitation work and will
compound every year from one
million from each of the
irrigation works construction
fund and improvement of the
rebranding comes.
Okay.
What.
What do you so yeah I realize.
So I I I sympathize you for you
for that.
even though it is going to.
what is what she had restoration
what should have been a long
term but
It's not going to the what the
fund was created for.
So.
I notice you had read version
here.
Of the.
We.
Two million two hundred and
forty one thousand dollars.
Mr chairman the center was I can
now I can answer that issue so
enough.
Yeah
FY of we actually did the only
about that actually was reported
was about a hundred and thirty
six thousand dollars that was an
expired special appropriation
there was also about seventy
three thousand that was unspent
general fund that was part of
the operating budget for program
support so that in total is two
hundred nine thousand the rest
of it is is from Capitol
reversions small capital
projects and reversions to
various types of funds so it's
it looks a lot worse than it is
it's not it's not relative to to
our operating budget.
Mr chairman and and just Mr
state engineer Mr John did be a
total why.
These capital funds that these
capital projects you were
talking about were you the
financial agent someone on that.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
Senator Woods yes we're often
the fiscal agents for a lot of
projects that that the money
probably shouldn't even come to
us there's a lot of safety of
projects obviously and safety
and others but we we gets us on
that would more all of which
better be a sense to the
division of local government DFA
or others that we want having to
we have problems kind of getting
it through
To file expenditure.
With that with that being said
Mr chairman and.
State engineer.
Is a common problem that you
have most every year were
someone runs a bill and and and
R. or gives capital outlay money
to a project and the project is
not shovel ready and they they
declare you all is being the the
financial agent is out of our
reoccurring.
Thing that's happening Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman center was it is
it's most of them are are are
given to us appropriately but
the other the other side of it
is that we we have very few
person to deal with those
projects just as an example of
the prior year we had sixty
seven capital projects as they
give projects that came to the
agency we only have two people
on that's their full time job
and they they have to make sure
that that that funding gets
disbursed and that and the
projects ready to go and so I
would say up it happens to us it
happens to the New Mexico
environment department and
others stand up it would be nice
to have a sort of a clearing
house or maybe larger funds in
smaller smaller projects in
larger projects you know the
water just for deals with some
of but yeah a lot of income to
the agencies without any funding
or support of administratively
for us to get those through and
a lot of them are wrongly
directed to the to our agency
that should that should be given
to us.
Well I I found that very
interesting.
Mr chairman as.
By the bill let the other bill
I've got that set in your
committee.
Yes that that might be a good
idea to hear it too so of.
Thank you Mr Dantonio I
appreciate your your comments
and thank you for the
information thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you center was I don't see
anybody else on the list
John I want to ask you some
questions.
We have litigation and water
litigation money everywhere we
have it within vitamin
department we have that with
what is the twenty general we
have it with you.
I don't know why we can't build
a consortium or a department in
the state that would handle all
this instead of scattering and
out throughout agencies with
five million there five million
here three million there in not
not
all combined so we're all
working at a one center can you
tell me why that wouldn't be
possible.
Mr Chairman thanks for the
question I think.
Are part of it is and and I'll
just take the taxes The New
Mexico litigation the Supreme
Court but as.
R. that you know you have really
two components of litigation
you've got the legal suit
obviously and you've got a lot
of technical support that's
necessary
for to support to the the legal
arguments that are being made
and so when we look at
And so let me let me say one
thing from the from the outset
Attorney General Balderas and
our offices were really shoulder
to shoulder since I became state
engineer again a couple years
ago and we've put together the
best possible I think St
strategic case that we can and
that wasn't the case in the
prior administration there were
some differences between the
state's legal are in the
technical are and I think it was
it was giving taxes kind of a.
Hand up on on the litigation
piece of it since we close ranks
we've coordinated our our costs
requests or funding requests.
What last year we operate off of
kind of a clumsy M. O. U. which
was hard to to make sure that
we're changing funds funds and
paying our experts and they
never experts and we coordinated
closely this year to make sure
we had as many as sixteen or
seventeen contracts that are
technical in nature that we're
overseeing and and and the
Attorney General overseeing more
legal support in legal cases
associated with it so number one
I want to say there's no
redundancies and what are
requests are are we we feel like
we have a really an extremely
strong case against the state of
Texas in the United States I
think that's because we've are
we've of you know the
legislature's appropriated money
and and with this year I think
it's a really good message as
we.
To the hearing arguments on on
March the ninth and the the
litigation the actual lawsuit is
scheduled for July of this year
it makes some sense because it's
so involved you have those those
really.
Into the legal issues that that
we're dealing with a long with
the technical issues the
modeling efforts the technical
experts are required all and all
the analysis that we have to do
on the on the technical side so
I don't think there's a
You know any other way to do it
in that high level that
litigation it's a matter of I
think it's really important that
the AG's office and state
engineers office are really
working closely together to make
sure we're not again we came to
down to any of the funding that
we're requesting.
Thank you John and but.
At some point in the water
litigation and we all know this
water tourney's sue and twenty
years later they're still the
same student make a lot of money
off that basically smother New
Mexico's rural northern New
Mexico.
for the amount of water because
southern New Mexico's in that
air geisha district and I I
think people really don't
understand that New Mexico but I
wish there was a way but I'm
kind of getting tired of putting
five million here and by million
there never really getting
anything in and do we have the
best attorneys
well.
In court and and you're gonna
have twelve attorney sitting on
that side of the bench from
Texas.
And we're gonna have three or
four over here in the.
I mean if
you've ever walked into trial
had to sit in one the you want
to make sure you go in with a
team and in I don't know how
really actually gonna win that
lawsuit do you have any thoughts
on that
well I do Mr chairman I I think
we're.
We're not much better legal
position of in the state of
Texas United United States are
we have some excellent attorneys
that are working with the
attorney general's office of it
and you know I I think more than
the other side to point out is a
liability the state New Mexico
if we were to lose and you know
when we came in here we saw
numbers thrown around it the
state could be of.
Liable for up to a billion
dollars we think we've greatly
reduced the medication risk
associated with that based on
the work we've done to discover
we've we've done with the AG's
office leading that efforts and
I feel very good on our chances
there's there's a court
appointed mediator that we've
been talking to as time gets
closer to trial.
Will likely see and they'll be
more pressure on settling this
particular case of but Mr
chairman I think of the money is
more than Wall Spence based on
on what the downside could be
and we so that with the request
that we have for the legislature
this year there's about six
point four million I think for
the attorney general's office
and five point three seven five
four our office that we're
putting New Mexico in its best
position to be able to be
successful both in the
litigation track and it because
of the mediation of the
mediation track of one more
thing I'll say is is we've got
the the modeling this is
sophisticated modeling that's
required for us to base our our
our legal arguments and our
technical arguments on some
sound of Science in Alice's from
our integrated water models that
we have down at Rio Grande or
Rio Grande that encompasses the
entire project area of and the
the state of Texas in the United
States do not and we feel very
strongly that that's something
in our favor end up at the
expense of giving any free
discovery to the state of Texas
up this stopped there Mr
chairman for a.
Or my of my discussion and
Mr Schmidt Petersen is is
intimately involved too and so
You might want to add a little
bit but Mr chairman of that's my
answer on that.
I think I'm good John I I just
some of those things we never
really get clear intelligent
rules and.
In nobody really wins a lawsuit
said lawyers
My only other question for you
was are you know you asked for
the bar authority right.
And then if we give me a reason
why would invent a barked order.
Mr chairman I do not know if
there was a reason I am I have
to defer to Mister Peterson on
that one.
Or the.
Mr chairman John I would
actually prefer to Jeff pram I'm
not sure aware of a rationale
for that.
German this is Jeff Graham
programs support director for us
the I. N. C..
Members are the answer to that
question is I I don't believe
that we are made aware of a
specific reasons that are not
being included.
The recommendation of oil.
We'll find out why that's an
interesting question when they
and I bought our ability and
reasons they're they're giving
and I think you guys deserve
that answer
just so you understand.
Excuse me.
I think that's all the questions
I have.
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised.
Thank you for your presentation
and we appreciate your time and
today and in the presentation
thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you.
Secretary probes are you with us
and.
When you want to start off with.
Energy minerals.
Yes thank you Mr chairman so
answer and I will present the
Energy minerals natural
resources department
recommendations diss agency code
five twenty one again you should
have a bullet in front of you
and as chairman has said it
happen as secretary Sarah
Cottrell Propst is here as well
along with some of her division
directors.
That House Appropriations and
finance committee adopted the
LFC recommendation for EMNRD but
also added
six hundred and fifty thousand
dollars on top of the LFC
recommendation that this
happened just in the last few
days the bullets that you have
we're prepared and provided to
you ahead of that actions are
not reflected on that document
but I'll explain them as we go
along so the LFC recommendation
for general fund revenue was
three hundred and thirty five
point eight thousand dollars
below the FY twenty one
operating budget and then as I
said in HSC if six hundred and
fifty thousand dollars in
general fund revenue was added
on top of that for a net
increase of three hundred and
fourteen point two thousand
dollars or one point four
percent over the FY twenty one
operating budget.
At the executive at recommended
a general fund increase of two
point one million dollars to
support positions and other
costs related to climate change
initiatives at both
recommendations were the same
for federal and other revenues
and reduce the use of fund
balance by eighty one percent
like the agencies projected
revenue declines in the state
parks and oil conservation
officials.
In energy conservation and
management the recommendation
adopted by HSC it reduced this
programs budget by one hundred
eighty nine point one thousand
dollars including a five percent
general fund reduction in a
decrease in federal revenues
expected by the agency the
recommendation increased
personnel funding and reduced
contractual services and other
costs.
In the state forestry division
the recommendation reduce
general fund and other state
revenues initially by a total of
three hundred and eleven
thousand dollars relative to FY
twenty one at that reduction was
offset by an increase in federal
funds for a net revenue increase
of forty one point two thousand
dollars initially and then in
HSC another two hundred thousand
dollars in general fund was
added to help reduce the
agency's retail previous that
divisions at they can see rates.
In the state parks division the
recommendation increase general
fund revenue by one hundred
fifty thousand dollars and
included a net decrease in other
revenues of four point six
million dollars due to
significant declines in self
generated revenue resulting from
the state park closures related
to COVID nineteen.
The general fund increase in the
state parks division is
recommended for park maintenance
and improvements.
In the mine reclamation program
the recommendation included a
five percent general fund
decrease that is offset by
increases in federal and other
state revenues.
In the oil and gas conservation
division at the recommendation
initially reduce general fund
revenue up by fifty two thousand
dollars less than one percent
and included a net reduction in
other revenues and fund balance
of two point two million dollars
due to an expected decline in
the balance of the oil
reclamation funds and the
remaining increase from HFC
added three hundred thousand
dollars in the person category
in that program to fill vacant
positions related to
environmental compliance and
enforcement and finally and
program support I your bullet
document says that general fund
revenue was reduced by one
hundred fifty thousand dollars
but in H. F. C. dot budget
general fund was captured last
and no decrease in program
support coming out of HSC that's
all I have and you would you
like to add anything.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members that came with
a good job of explaining the
recommendation secretary here
does that six hundred and fifty
thousand that was added back up
up the original recommendation
so with that I will turn it over
to the secretary for her
comments.
Madam secretary area.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you so much for the opportunity
to present to you today I have a
short presentation and I'll
share my screen here.
It's really nice to see all of
your assets thank you again you
just heard a very clear overview
of the differences between the
LFC recommendation and the and
executive recommendation I I do
have a couple of colleagues
hearing kids I thank you for
helpful to answer your questions
Matthew love also from our
administrative services division
as well as I state forester
Lara McCarthy state parks
director Christy to four at an
oil conservation division
director Adrian Santa that are
W. secretary Todd Leahy is on as
well and our agency is as you
know it is essential for the
economic security and
advancement of our state we are
energy resources our forests are
mining activities and
reclamation industry and our
parks touch every single corner
of the state and so we have have
that privilege but also that
responsibility the executive
recommendation proposes modest
but strategic general fund
investments to fill key
positions across the division.
Every single every single part
of this
it does not request any new
positions rather we're seeking
to fill existing positions that
you have previously authorized
the LFC recommendation
originally included that hundred
fifty thousand dollar cut and
program support we're really
grateful that that was added
back so now the resting state
coming out of the house for
program support is a flat and I
graduated and that is that we
really appreciate that being
added back again are executive
approach is to rebuild the
agency are so key to
diversifying new Mexico's
economy and advancing the
state's climate resilience and
listening ourselves for for the
future and to capture
opportunities that we think are
coming are with the Biden
ministration coming into office.
Energy conservation and
management division we develop
and implement clean energy
programs to promote economic
growth and environmental
sustainability and highlights in
the last year include convening
a working group to implement the
grid modernization roadmap act
that this body passed in twenty
twenty this draft policy white
papers are available for public
comment on our website right now
they've also been processing tax
credit certifications for the
new solar market development tax
credit that passed last year and
the the additional investment of
a hundred and forty four
thousand dollars called for in
the executive rack would staff
the division and increase their
ability to meet the challenges
of climate change readiness
while maintaining the quality of
work that they already do and
that's fully staffed division
would allow us to better
leverage federal dollars process
hundreds more tax credit and
help diversify New Mexico's
economy.
In the state forestry division
division we promote of the
management of healthy
sustainable forest and watershed
for future generations including
wildland firefighting last
summer as I'm sure you all know
we had a really long fire season
one of our longest that we've
ever had and then the storm that
we had last week notwithstanding
New Mexico is currently
experiencing a pretty mild
winter leaving most of the state
and drought conditions and and
we anticipate another really
intense fire season the summer
so the executive budget give us
the tools we need to face those
longer fire seasons I'm and we
would be able to at still
roughly six of nine currently
unfunded positions with as the
house did add two hundred
thousand dollars back so that
helps and fill up and fill up a
little bit but it's important to
try to reach reach the full
executive track of possible.
In the state parks division this
photograph is from Wellesley
simmering canyon in the past
year has emphasized that the
importance of our park staff and
our readers and and the
importance of the out of doors
to New Mexicans in the executive
budget invested people prepare
us to where they're needed most.
The mining and minerals division
it is a has a mission of
ensuring the responsible
utilization conservation
reclamation and safeguarding of
land and resources affected by
mining and both budgets have a
five percent general cut plan
cut unfortunately but there's
there's no difference to those
pastor these are some so while
Turkey is that one of our land
reclamation.
The oil conservation division
promotes the balanced consistent
and transparent regulation of
the oil and gas industry to
protect human health and the
environment and the OCD could
reasonably expect to fill
approximately four of the
unfunded vacancies of the full
executive recommendation is
approved the house did add back
three hundred thousand dollars
here which is which is really
appreciated
yeah we're firm believers that
this industry can be incredibly
productive in New Mexico while
operating responsibly and in
order to ensure compliance we
need staff and upgraded
technology to do our job the
work with that industry.
And finally programs support
this ensures that the
programmatic divisions have the
legal and administrative
technology and policy support
needed to fulfill their mission
and this is where one of the
areas with the biggest
difference between the LFC and
exec rack we did get a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars back
here to stay at a flat budget
for program support but
investments in this part of the
agency are are really important
and we it means that we have
better federal grant management
capability it means we have
faster purchasing a contract
processing faster responsiveness
to data request and and records
requests from constituents and
the media and sometimes some of
you the new OCD's permit fee
fund for example that we set up
with your help a couple years
ago you we've we've worked
wonders with that program and so
improving efficiencies here
programs support and really
staffing it appropriately every
single division in the
department.
So finally I just want to do
that I I think it's a wonderful
it's a wonderful department I
have I'm blessed with incredible
colleagues we have dedicated
experts in this department who
always strived able hire and
executive budget recommendations
would provide the the staff and
resources to support that
mission and to achieve even more
ambitious goals just like a
directive thank you so much Mr
chair I'm glad to answer
questions from the committee.
Thank you madam secretary I know
it's been a long day Senator
Candelaria I know you did text
me so.
Your first on the.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary thank you so much for
The presentation I have to say
at the onset I really appreciate
the format in how you laid this
out broken down by division and
provided a clear comparison
between the half action the LFC
recommendation of the executive
action that I just hope everyone
had six a note from that within
four days it was really easy to
understand exactly what's going
on Mr chairman I I guess the
questions I want to ask the
secretary of focusing around
state parks and.
You know what I'm gonna say I'm
just gonna say something I've
been struggling with which is I
don't think we get as much out
of these assets economically as
we could as a state
and.
I'm wondering madam secretary
What is your what is sort of
your assessment.
Of our strengths weaknesses and
opportunities when it comes to
our state park assets
and then I may just have a few
follow up questions from there
specifically about the budget
for the state parks.
Senator Candelaria thank you for
the for the question about the
parks their incredible in our
staff is just and an
unbelievable job this year and
that's part of the strength of
the park system are the Rangers
usually they're members of the
of the local communities are
often born and raised and the
you know and everything from you
know do you I laws and and I had
to do to mask mandates and so
the work of the work incredibly
hard we are spread then it can
be sometimes hard to recruit for
vacancies and some of the more
rural parks in particular and
the the funding is tough you
know we we rely on a pretty
small percentage of general fund
for that budget and then have to
you know try to estimate what
visitation and camping will look
like I'm in the year ahead for
the fiscal year ahead and you
know for for FY twenty one we we
were way off the mark and that's
nobody's fault it's just we had
a pandemic and so we were not
able to safely open or safely
and duly opened for most of the
year and we were down you know
between July of last year in
December we were down about one
point five million dollars and
health generated funds so it's
hard to part of planned and hard
to know which vacancies you can
fill when you're what your real
budgets going to be and our our
final slide on that our budget
for FY twenty one and it will
higher on some of those fund
balances and we figured out
pretty quickly that we just we
we we were not going to.
Reasonably be able to spend
anywhere close to what had been
authorized and appropriated for
us because the money just wasn't
gonna we've been trying to be
good stewards we try to build in
FY twenty two budget that
sensible on both within our
means but it certainly
I'm clear a long term funding
would be helpful for parks low
on your question with the big
question yes Mr chairman I guess
getting into the nitty gritty
that Mr chairman I appreciate
that madam secretary from up it
can inform us sort of there's
the operational side of the
budget which you've addressed I
guess I'm also consists of
interested in learning more
about the capital needs and
capital improvements because
like I said I think you know
with the legislature's working
very hard to to portion lean
into this outdoor record Kanemi
concept when we have billions of
dollars of state park assets at
our disposal right to to
actually you know.
Really invested and make a key
part of our state's economic
future right our natural outdoor
assets and so I guess the the
question is from a capital
perspective does the department
do you have kind of a process
assessments are a list of
capital needs or improvements
that the department like to make
at these different assets and if
so
does the department have
currently any.
Stream of capital revenue to
support those sort of capital
improvements or you dependent
upon sort of severance tax bonds
an annual appropriations for
that Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria I'd like to turn to
either either by phone or SD or
Christy Dr to Fauria yes yeah we
always have an a list of on
going capital projects improve
the parks the approved visitor
experience whether it's water
and wastewater or installing
solar panels are installing self
pay kiosks to minimize the face
to face contact our staff have
with visitors I and this time of
of the pandemic so we are we're
always that you know always
trying to stress those capital
dollars but at Matthew do you
want to start.
Chair thank you Secretary.
Mr chairman members of the
committee basically have the
capital projects for state parks
what we try to do is there is a
five year infrastructure plan
that state parks puts together
and that is looking at it from a
statewide perspective eight in
that statewide perspective we
look at what are the major needs
and prioritize those leads
across the state a lot of really
what we have is water waste
water issues that we need to
address across the across the
state basically how we how we
look at the funding is we do put
in our the ICAP requests for
water and wastewater and regular
building infrastructure across
the state for all state parks we
also have the G. G. R. T. funds
that come to state parks that we
use as our state match
requirements to offset the B. O.
R. funds and all WCS federal
funds that we receive for
infrastructure projects within
state parks so that's kind of
how the process is in the
funding that we have that's
available and looking at it is
it enough to do all of the work
no and that's why we have to
look at that five year plan and
and prioritize those needs to
make sure that one we have
enough state funds to support
the federal dollars and the
requirements of those dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary Mr Lobato if I could
impose upon you I really
appreciate it this is your
office madam secretary consent
at least to me at a copy of the
current five year plan and
really appreciate being able to
read through it because
the students are released the
follow up question I understand
Mr chairman that under existing
law department can bond against
its governmental gross receipts
tax revenue for capital projects
at the state parks I believe
there is that a mechanism
correct that is correct we can
go in front of our NMFA and
request loans also help with
some of this infrastructure work
I'm again it is going to be
dependent on what we can support
three G. G. R. T. but yes you
are correct.
Mr Mr chairman I'll leave it at
that I I think you know I'm I'm
just sort of foretelling a
little bit for the coming in
from you know just this
leadership decides to allow me
to continue to chair the NMSA
committee I think I'd be really
great to have a presentation
this interim on financing and
the structure the revenue
structure both operational and
capital for the state parks but
more than anything I think it be
good to get stakeholders
together and start having a real
conversation about what is the
vision we want to achieve for
our state parks and we want to
see a twenty percent increase in
visitor ship next year from
surrounding states you know are
we leveraging our tourism.
Investments to support these
assets are we you know are we
duplicating efforts with this
outdoor recreation office for
how do we better coordinate so
I'll leave it at that I think
it's going to be an excellent
conversation because I do
believe Mr chairman that in
addition to all the other
announcements this cop this
division manages which are very
important oil gas or a I want to
get applied to make sure that we
understand another very
important asset this department
manages is our parks and as long
as I'm here I hope to be a voice
for them a little Snorlax if you
will so thank you Mr chairman
and I thank you madam secretary.
Mr chair Senator thank you very
much and I also want to
acknowledge that director to
flee a has announced her
retirement effective at the end
of the fiscal year and after
twenty five incredible years and
our parks system so we'll be
looking for a new director Sally
so please help us out absolutely
thank you madam secretary.
Thank you senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary so I want to touch on
three things here one is forced
to one is mining in the other
one of course is oil and gas
because well you're in oil and
gas business we want to you're
not as is everyone else who
lives here.
But let me start with forestry.
I've been troubled for I don't
know Google decades on health
for states are are managed in
America today well we're we're
we we believe that we ought not
touch anything.
and then we turn around and say
gosh we need affordable housing
well.
If we cleaned out the bottom of
the forests than we would have
of particle board that we could
then put up on walls and we
would have to by force we could
make wells with.
But instead we seem to just want
to burn down.
so.
To me our our money time effort
would be much better spent in in
force management of actual
management which means clearing
out the bottom of the fourth so
it doesn't burn at such a
temperature that it sterilizers
the ground around it.
Are we moving anywhere near that
were.
Or we just gonna let our force
continue to burn down.
Mr chair Senator chair of the
forestry division every year you
know how six funding and then
deploys funding for forest
thinning and we work with the
Forest Service on our prescribed
burning which helps minimize the
risk of catastrophic wildfire on
on federal lands and this year
we hope to to bring before you
that in the house right now I
build a house bill one at one
house bill fifty seven which is
the prescribed burning Act and
Senator with the co chair on
that on that bill and that would
help align the laws of the
incentives and New Mexico to and
enable more prescribed burning
on private land as well we
really haven't seen enough of it
happen on private land we know
that this is a really important
tool for managing fire so that's
gonna be coming to you as well.
Health.
Madam chair of Mr chair and
madam secretary or whoever is up
there now
I think we we talk about
Growing the economy and things
like that I I I I really think
that forced.
The forced can do multiple
things force used to be that
that's what the the national
forests model was but
I think we can sell a lot of
that Romero we don't have to we
don't have to use state tax
dollars to pay for we can sell
it there are people that would
love to to go out there and and
clear that for us.
If they didn't have the ability
to to turn that the the little
stuff in the particle board and
the big stuff and to by force.
And we can still the news our
management to make sure that
they weren't as clear cut the
forest because I don't want to
do that either.
And then that helps with
watershed issues so you know if
you burn the burden forced down
the water just pours off it so
fast and locks up the rivers and
lakes and does us no good.
So I would I I actually honestly
believe that people would pay us
instead of us paying them to do
this of which got it we just got
to come up with the the plan to
do that and so we're I would
like to see us go is is how do
we allow people how do we
encourage people to.
To make the drugs for affordable
housing without doing damage to
the force long term damage forth
we're doing long term damage to
force today.
the second one is mining that I
want to touch on.
I was looking for here a minute
ago somewhere in my mind I I I
remember course I could be wrong
that of the rare earth minerals
I think there's fifteen or
eighteen rare earth minerals in
the world of that that half of
the rare earth minerals are
right here in New Mexico.
Mineable.
we have the the greatest
concentration of rarest medical
minerals of anywhere in the
continental United States.
But I would not mind.
and so we have called for one
and but most of our table do we
use in solar panels and in
winter months and your iPhone of
come from the Republic of Congo.
In their being dug out of the
ground by little kids and
whoever else which shovels and
picks and then the other teeth
fall out more turns blue and
they die.
American mining is far superior
to that.
And again I think we could we
could really turn this into an
economic.
Asset for the state well if we
if we.
money to those where earth
minerals and so I would
encourage that because I think
again this this becomes a money
maker
for the state as opposed to an
expense and at the same time we
are.
Our technology is a lot better
than a kid with a shovel.
is so I think we can do it far
safer it's far better for the
world in general and it's
certainly far better for New
Mexico if we would look at those
and like I said I was looking
for here.
What I was looking for I can't
find.
Then course finally oil and gas
I see you know you talk about
oil and gas could be a good
partner will.
They offer a good partner they
pay for everything right now and
in and the damage to our
environment of.
I I think it's mineral minimal
considering the the value that
they bring I know that just talk
about the methane and all those
kind of things of they're
working so hard.
To clean that up
just everything since the
beginning of finding oil to
today has been an improvement
it's been an improvement on how
we find it it's been an
improvement on how we develop it
it's been an improvement on how
clean it is.
And.
Again I think that there there
needs to be a ballots in in for
whatever reason I believe that
as this as a world but certainly
as a statement nation
we have lost the balance.
Yes I want clean air and clean
water but I also want to live
indoors I want to freeze to
death in the dark there's a
balance and so I would just
encourage us to not have a.
A negative of adversarial
relationship with any of those
with forestry mining or
especially oil and gas
the oil and gas guys want big
Farmington and want to destroy
Farmington this is where this we
grew up together our kids are
here our grandkids are here our
parents were here all the you
know so we have multiple
generations of oil and gas
people right here in Farmington
we don't want to destroy.
So it just bothered me when you
said that they could be I just
indicated adversarial attitude
and I think that we need to be
more loving to that.
Mr chair Senator Cheryl never
forget your I heart fossil fuels
to you Sir that you were to our
Farmington oil and gas that are
hearing on the waste rural and I
you know I certainly didn't mean
to if I use the wrong or right I
apologize I we've got a really
collaborative relationship with
the oil and gas industry you
know from big to small at you
know throughout the wastrel
development process and we we
appreciate the collaboration and
I have a picture of that you are
with that short term use against
you if anything ever happens
thank you Mr.
That Senator.
Senator I think you may need
something more like a raging
Tripp T. shirt and the I heart
teacher.
Senator would you are next thank
you Mr chairman.
Good to see you this morning
madam secretary.
I notice here on your Budget
overview here.
That you said that you got the.
Well just take one of these
recommendations others choose
Executive recommendations
because what I'm talking about
is the same on both when we
start talking about federal
funds I'm assuming that most of
those are all in gas revenues or
am I wrong on that of Mr
chairman and madam secretary.
Mr chair Senator Woods it's nice
to see you too I IT and so are
federal funds come it to almost
all of our divisions get that
from our federal funds when oil
and gas we get funds from EPA
for our underground injection
control work and also for
plugging plugging wells on BLM
land in forestry we get
significant federal funding for
a variety of topics but
particularly for wildland
firefighting our mining and
minerals division receive
federal funding for abandoned
mine land reclamation and B.
energy conservation and
management division receive
federal funding through the deal
we I'm for the state energy
program and and so some of these
are programs that year after
year have a pretty consistent
and reliable pretty consistent
reliable source of revenue
others that you know depend on
waiting grants and those kinds
of things I should also mention
that in parts you know we do
have some revenue that comes in
from our partners at some of our
parks are managed on your what
reclamation property for example
and also the land and wildlife
conservation funding that we are
administering so it's it's a
mixed bag across the department
but we yeah it's very important
to us.
Okay Mr chairman and madam
secretary that brings me to the
question of the other funds
where were they coming in for.
I think you're gonna get the
best answer Mr chair Senator
Woods if Matthew answers that.
Thank you Secretary I Mr chair
members of the committee
basically the other funds for
the the largest piece of other
funds is going to be the sub
generated revenue coming from
state parks that's going to be
your camping your annual they
use they use of fees that we
collect the other areas that we
do collect other revenues this
seat or other sources of funds
is going to be coming from taxed
rats are for G. G. R. T. funds
are that's in state parks you're
gonna have the oil.
The oil reclamation fund for OCD
that comes from taxed right and
that we do have permit fees that
we do assess in the and M. D. R.
mining and minerals division as
well so that's the largest
pieces that were those other
state funds sources are coming
from.
Okay well thank you for that
that's that she's quite a bit of
money.
I am surprised that the major
part comes from state parks.
So
I do appreciate that I do notice
that you did have quite a
recreation.
Like six million dollars.
And the year before you had a
ten million dollar revision.
What would someone like to speak
to that yes certainly Mr chair
and Senator Woods we tend to it
which it always looks a great
portion of that I believe is
from a wildland firefighting
program and when the state is
reimbursed from the feds I which
can take quite a long time we
the process for us putting that
back you know with the state we
don't get to keep that EMNRD we
we revert it essentially back so
that that is usually a huge part
of it Matthew I don't know if
you have any more refinements
that are that.
That was a lot last year.
You're you're correct.
Mr chair representative
committee yes I reversion chance
to chance to look really high
and basically what we've done in
the last three years is we've
modified how we are showing our
reversion on our annual audit so
it's a little bit more clear for
anybody who is looking at our
audits and and and looking at
how the financials of the agency
look to separate what is.
Read versions off of what we
will call our operating fund to
the agency verses reversions
that come due to wildland
suppression which is coming from
the emergency fire I and so it
the emergency fire fund usually
comes in at around five to six
million dollars per year and so
therefore you're usually seeing
a total reversion out of the the
HSD anywhere from you know seven
to ten million dollars but the
majority of that is going to be
out of that fire suppression
efforts that we get
reimbursements back and that
reversion actually goes back to
that fire the to the emergency
contingency fund that the funds
come from.
Mr chairman and madam secretary
and Matthew so that is the fund
that these are a lot of these
volunteer fire departments
Get reimbursed for some of their
efforts on wildfires.
Is that right that is correct
right so we do have
what we do have on call
firefighters that we do call out
for wildland fire suppression
efforts they are paid out of
that fund anything that comes in
it is on the call sheet aspect
all of each fire to determine
what and who is responsible
whether it is the federal
government local governments or
the state in the anything that
is determined costs that are
coming from the federal
government or local we seek that
reimbursement when that
reimbursement comes back that is
reverted back to that
contingency fund so basically
what ends up happening from the
expenditure side is we from our
costs and we pay that three
executive orders on and then we
get that right reimbursement
back and it goes in as a
reversion at the end of the
year.
Okay.
Okay.
Well
I appreciate that information I.
I
So also run into another bill
about fires plant in trees and
okay good stuff but.
Anyway.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
thank you madam secretary thank
you madam.
Forster state for sure let's say
your picture I don't see you
know but it did so your pitch
thank you.
We're all in visible on the web
Senator Woods Senator Diamond
you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam secretary I do want to
touch on just a state parks for
a little bit the state parks do
we have to route New Mexico.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
it's nice to meet you
thirty five state parks in New
Mexico thirty five state parks
and how many of those state
parks remain closed to some
degree now under the at COVID
closures.
Mr chair Senator Diamond none of
the parks are closed due to
COVID we have a couple of parks
that have seasonal closures or
for maintenance it's.
See I think it's three or maybe
four
other than that state parks are
currently open for day use for
New Mexico residents
we expect and we're talking with
the governor's office about
taking a next step towards
opening further for perhaps out
of state residents perhaps some
camping as lead COVID numbers go
down but that's certainly
ultimately the call that the
governor makes in consultation
with us and state parks and the
department of health.
And could you tell me of all
those thirty five state parks
what's your number one revenue
generating state park.
Mr chair Senator Diamond it's
either Navajo or elephant Butte
I know I'll think it's got to be
close to your heart it's
certainly one of our biggest.
Chrissy do you have that yes Mr
chair Senator indeed Ezzell
compute and Navajo lake state
park there they're pretty close.
In between LA thank you and
Navajo can you give me a
percentage of what they
generate in comparison to the
revenues percentage of the
revenues that they generate up
all thirty five parks.
Mr chair Senator Diamond I think
we need to crunch the numbers on
that just as we just discussed a
part revenues are pretty
complicated but I think you're
talking about self generated
fees for camping and day use and
everything so we can we can get
that for you okay I appreciate
those numbers and I think I've
seen a lot what's interesting to
me is that Navajo and actually
elephant Butte lake is is the
number one generate such a large
percent of the revenues of state
parks and yet when investment is
made and how the funds
distribute back to our state
parks it's very disproportional
so you're number one largest
revenue park out here House
bathrooms that are inoperable
there's no parking impact the
the the trash facilities are
often not maintained they may
have the worst roads we've seen
in southern New Mexico so my
question is for parking to
generate so much revenue how do
we then invest back in that part
to continue to receive revenues
from this part what what are we
doing wrong out here.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
I'm I'm discouraged by your your
concerns and I'm glad to talk
more with you about them you we
are investing quite a bit in
elephant Butte state park we
have on going capital
improvements there now as well
as a Kaby lake and so you know
we certainly is Christy director
for a mentioned we have a
statewide five year plan for how
we invest and and capital
projects and prioritize around
the state and we can certainly
sure what we are committed to
sharing with senator Candelaria
with you as well what is the
percentage of each part
how much they they generate in
revenue and then how much goes
back out to those individual
parks for maintenance and and to
maintain those facilities
because it's very clearly that
there is disproportionate I know
that our community has for
several years now I hosted many
community events and try to try
to kind of plead with our state
parks out here to put some
investment back into our lake
because I can tell you that this
like right here is the number
one driving force for the
economic at the economy of
Sierra County
I also just want to make the
point that Sierra County with
thanks to the good work of our
of our health departments here
of our county leadership was the
first state to be classified as
yellow over a month ago so we
put it together rating and yet
this this park still remains
closed for overnight guests
which is the only way no one
travels telecommute if you don't
have a place to stay and so it
continues to be a ghost town the
the
Secretary Dantonio can tell you
that we don't how much water but
we have a whole lot into beach
right now and what should see
campers out here that that dine
in our restaurant and Phillip in
our gas stations have not been
here now for over a year and
there has been no effort from
the state park to to do anything
different to reopen this lake
and I think it's funny that
during a health pandemic we told
families of four we're going to
be out in the middle of nowhere
on a boat that they really
couldn't access are there are
slides for quite a while as you
know it was closed completely
and then right now we're open
today use regardless of the of
the downgrade that we're getting
are COVID because of our great
rates are like still only
remains open for limited daytime
Hughes you must prove that
you're New Mexico citizen and
you may not can't hear it hasn't
done anything yeah I mean it if
they didn't even for what's the
phone here that hasn't made a
single dent into the economy the
business is here many of which
are in health and you have have
gone under as you know and will
never come back so to say that
the elephant Butte this town in
this community is a ghost town
is an understatement and and and
I just want you to realize how
important this number one state
park is to not just this this
community and to Sierra County
but to all of Southern New
Mexico and so we have been
working hard as you may now to
get this lake back open
and we're kind of getting the
run around from the executive
that that's a call to be made by
the state parks and we still
cannot get even with the health
department is allowing our
restaurants to open our schools
are back in we can get the lake
though.
Mr chair Senator I just want to
be clear that the public health
order governs what parks can do
it's not up to the local and
it's not up to superintendent
around or any of the staff there
you know it's a statewide.
Statewide directed right now
about two years and again I I
really I would yeah I'm hoping
we have good news stand because
we were ready at our staff ready
to welcome people back but it's
got to be safe to do so we're
we're actively working on that
but thank you for your thank you
for your comment in in madam
secretary I understand that this
is not you know you personally
are not dealing with this but I
do know that we had state parks
are able to open at a limited
capacity when their health order
with their red yellow green
rating isn't the same and so I
think that what we're needing as
an advocate within the state
parks that when our ratings went
to yellow we needed a
cheerleader and champion out
here to work with us to see if
somehow that we could be a
little more flexible in allowing
businesses open back up here in
our state parks.
With that said I just like you
to carry that message back to
elephants it health and beauty
leadership here we have that we
have leadership within the
community we have your your your
representative your senator here
and we can do whatever we can to
invest in this state park we are
committed to helping you guys in
any way and and we need to get
this lake open just like we need
to get schools and just I need
to get our businesses open every
business in New Mexico you can
give us authority to open our
business it doesn't matter
because the draw is this is this
lake would still remain shut
down so if we could if we could
count on you and and the
leadership out there to you to
help us get this done would sure
appreciate it thank you madam
secretary.
Thank you Senator Diamond I
imagine the secretary will be
looking for some capital outlay
from you.
Along with some junior money to
help us navigate the issues at
the state park madam secretary I
don't see anybody else on here
on the list
I just had a few questions
anything we missed in your
budget or anything that you need
to wrap up follow up with the
questions that were asked to do.
Thank you Mr chair I mean I
think we owe us a follow up to
Senator Candelaria and glad to
share that with the entire
committee if that's helpful and
we also to follow up to Senator
Diamond and I'm glad to do that
you know I think again the the
remaining gaps that I see from
what the house has has has added
you know would be in the program
support area energy conservation
and management division and then
there's some some small pieces
for a OCD and state forestry so
that's kind of the way I I see
what's left on the table for
your consideration I know you
have a lot of considerations
thank you.
Thank you thank you did receive
some money in the junior bill so
that may help to look quite a
bit we know that there's money
there for you and you can your
agency my concerns again go back
to to my district and number one
you can't regulate a lake that
is on a sovereign nation we've
had this discussion before of
the governor and then need to
realize that.
because on a sovereign nation
you can't read people Oscar
Mayer or how many people show up
with guns and small arms and
everything else of realize that
during the shutdown spring is
coming you will need to get the
parks open.
People want to get out people
need to get out
there and the fishing camping
whatever they need to do and and
well it's not under your control
and we're under some regulations
keep an open mind.
The one thing I do want to get
back to is is getting that
helicopter pad back in in blue
water
it's an issue when we have snow
it's an issue for people to get
out I don't know why I was taken
out but that was a prior
administration
what show was airing any help
you can give us on that I don't
see any other questions thank
you know it's been a long day
appreciate your time in the NMAA
circle back around with you once
house bill two gets gets over to
make sure that we're we're where
we need to be in the state.
So thank you madam secretary
thank you Senator and Mr chair
and at message received on the
parks and will it we can do here
thank you.
Thank you.
I think we have next the I don't
know if they remain need today
to the fish and Wildlife for
what happened with that piece of
legislation that would track for
that might get you still gain
Department have you been at a
name change and restructuring
your next and so this land you
on the star soft with the game
and fish.
Yes Mr chairman I will add the
state's agency code five sixteen
again you'll have some bullets
and I will briefly go over what
was approved by HSC for the
department of game and fish
before turning it over to
director Sloan so that if the
adopted the LFC recommendation
for the department of game and
fish which was the same as the
executive recommendation and
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget just as a
reminder this department is not
receive general fund
appropriations but is funded
with federal and other state
revenues such as a thing that
shows like the.
The total recommendation
approved by HFC for FY twenty
two is forty one point nine four
million dollars consisting of
fourteen point ninety eight
million in federal funds and
twenty six point nine seven
million dollars in other
revenues it includes twenty
three eight point nine six
million dollars for personal
services and employee benefits
four point two million dollars
for contractual services
thirteen point six million
dollars for other costs and one
hundred and eighty two point
three thousand dollars for other
financing uses the only change
from the FY twenty one operating
budget is a slight re
prioritization of funds from
personality other costs to
contractual services to align
the budget with the agencies
projected expenditures I and I
also just have a no on hear the
FY twenty ending balance of the
game protection fund to the
agency's primary revenue source
which funds most operations was
twenty one point nine million
dollars and the combined ending
balance all the agencies funds
was forty seven point twenty
million dollars and you have
anything you want to add.
Thank you Mr chairman
recommendations are the same so
I have no further comments.
Thank you.
Mike are you with us director
Sloan Mr chairman.
All right did they rename you
today to fish and Wildlife for.
Awesome because our.
dear bounty here what what I
don't know what they were doing
over there and what happened
with that bill you want to touch
base with just one second.
Mr chairman of course that bill
was tabled on our order for
both.
Okay thank you that's why I have
a smile on your face I'm
assuming our.
Do you.
Okay.
Go ahead the directors long.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for the opportunity to visit
with you today thank you this
line for a presentation on the
interest of reducing Sampraday
occupier Market Street as you
know the department is an
enterprise agency relying solely
on license fees and federal
grants to fund the activities
that we undertake so we are
therefore careful stewards of
both our financial and our
wildlife resources.
During the pandemic we created
innovative online resources to
meet the needs of New Mexicans
as they increasingly seek solace
in the great outdoors also
continue to sustainably manage
the state's wildlife and habitat
resources for the benefit of all
New Mexicans.
We believe that the flat budget
recommendation before you will
allow us to continue to deliver
innovative services and manage
wildlife and habitats across the
state.
Legislative stand for any
questions.
Thank you that was rather quick
you don't have anything else to
add in your presentation.
Mr chairman I'd recordkeeping
grief and since the LFC and exec
match schools appropriate.
Senator Diamond.
Your hand go up and disappear R.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
director Sloan I appreciate your
comments this morning I I watch
the committee hearing today and
and I too am I'm pleased with
the results of of what came out
of conservation today I do have
a couple questions
this last October the
legislative finance council
published a report that was a
little bit what I what I
consider a little bit critical
of game and fish implying that
your agency really caters to non
resident hunters and private
landowners through the plus
programs and in fact I responded
by submitting an an op ed on
might my opinions about that but
can you go into a little bit of
detail for this committee on the
plus program just to be brief
and its role in wildlife
management.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
So I mean starting at the very
beginning.
Statutes seventeen three
fourteen point one requires that
the directors are partner game
and fish commission landowner
permits for lawful taking about
Canaccord regulation the state
game commission.
Not approximately forty year old
statute
is I believe an effort to try to
acknowledge the benefits
provided by private land to al
and so over the years that that.
those regulations have changed
to a point where now.
We are we divide up public and
private land and allocate
licenses across those
It's just hard property tell us
you're not muted.
Based on the number of our.
Food water shelter that's our
stop and so what it does is it
provides a way for the state to
our knowledge the contribution
of private landowners and for
LFC to benefit from those
properties.
Thank you thank you director so
it's an incentive program when
people have private property we
incentivize them to care for the
state's wildlife it seems to be
pretty pretty effective you and
I know the public land hunting
opportunities are primarily
given to resident hunters in
fact if I look over these
numbers it looks correct me if
I'm wrong but it looks like a
hundred percent of all public
land cow hunts go to residents
is that still correct.
Senator yes okay and it also
states are that a hundred
percent of hunting on state game
and fish properties are for
residents only is that still
correct.
German Senator yes okay and in
if if this race correctly it
says a resident hunters also
receive over eighty for eighty
four percent of all remaining
public land hunts do you still
think that's about accurate
Mr Chairman Senator yes then I
would have to commend you for
doing a very good job of making
sure that our residents New
Mexico hunters still have still
have a lot of hunting
opportunities out there let me
ask you a question how if we
switch to fishing do residents
and nonresidents pay the same
amount for a fishing license in
New Mexico.
Mister chairman Senator not.
What is the difference between
those that we charge our out of
state fisherman compared to our
in state.
Chairman Senator I I believe
that we charge in state
including stamps and everything
between twenty five and thirty
five dollars and our state's
closer to fifty.
That about twice as much in our
our fees would you also say
though that the out of state
revenues are generated from out
of state hunters are are
important to the game and fish
budget and can you explain how
how and why.
Mister chairman Senator yes
those are non resident revenues
are very important.
LFC for example of the eight
million dollars that the license
the rates for conservation
across the state six million of
those come from the sale of non
resident licenses.
The other factor to consider is
that higher non resident
licenses allow us to keep
resident licenses at a lower
cost we were to reduce the
number of of non resident
licenses we would potentially
need to increase fees on
residents in order to maintain
the same level of revenue.
Right SO three force three four
so that budget our revenues are
generated from out of state
hunters and yet we continue to
be able to find so many hot
hunting opportunities you could
argue more hopper opportunities
for our instate hunters and that
is a very delicate balance and I
know that New Mexico is a model
on how to do that so I commend
this game and fish department I
also want to tell you one thing
that you left out when you gave
your introduction is that this
agency continues to be the only
agency that is not dependent on
our general budget so you were a
self sustaining agency in itself
in which you generate the on
your own revenues
and and yet when in my short
time here on the Senate it seems
like every other bill is in some
way that we need to like stick
it to the game and fish
department and and I don't know
why when I feel like we're doing
such a great job of keeping that
balance allowing our in state
hunters to have plenty of come
hunting opportunities without
jeopardizing important revenues
that are brought in and and
those revenues can actually be
found I believe that they're
they're captured in the tourism
budget is that correct important
part of the tourism budget is
that where you're revenues
accounted.
Mister chairman Senator now our
revenue comes directly to our
agency but I'm sure there are
ancillary benefits of non
residents coming buying fuel and
staying in hotels it's our.
You're right director right out
your your your hunting revenues
of course are captured your own
budgets the impact that that
hunting and and the overall
brings is is capturing the
tourism budget which which is
commendable anyway I want to
thank you Mr so and we've done a
great job you have some really
key employee employees there
that also continue do a good job
and I just I just appreciate
your good work here time for
today thank you.
Germans are thank you.
Senator Gonzales.
Well thank you Mr chairman of
the number so well secretary of.
I was going to ask you all.
You too will you do have
restrictions on your cash
balances that correct.
Mister chairman Senator that is
correct.
Okay
me before the members because
this is something that's always
like flight because it's high
you know of all what are the
uses and you know what can your.
What can you use those funds for
not.
From Mr Chairman Senator we have
such a line funds we have the
game protection fund which is
our largest operating budget and
that and I guess I should
preface this with.
When we receive money by right
percent legislation with the
state and federal law those
license dollars allow us to
access.
Federal dollars as long as they
are not what they call diverted
for some other purpose so as
long as they're used for gaming
purposes.
We get we're eligible to receive
those federal funds are that
this one mentioned earlier we
have our game protection fund
which is where the bulk of our
license dollars go and our we
use that for operating and
managing wildlife and habitat
across the state.
The big game enhancement fund
there's a smaller fund that's
used specifically to benefit big
came out here Sheet� those types
of species capital project funds
is exactly what it sounds like
we transfer money from game
action on in the capital fund to
direct large scale habitat
projects maintain pressure trees
the variety of those kinds of
things.
Have done management fund is our
news from the staff right you
purchase when you buy a license
and those dollars are spent
improving habitat across the
state.
they came depredation damage
fund is gonna stamping I think
came.
Our license read stamper on is
used to mitigate damage on
private property records it's
hazing animals building fences
those sorts of things.
The trail safety fund is related
to the off highway vehicles and
it is generated from the sale of
stamps it is the one fund that
can be.
Taken from without impacting our
federal funds.
Sykes Act funds another stamp
that is required for anybody who
hunts or fishes on the el amor
forced service Landon knows
funds are used specifically to
do habitat projects on those
federal lands.
Share with wildlife fund is a
fund where you can check Office
stamp on your box on your tax
refund and that will donate
money to the Department which is
then used First Nations that
generally are under funded so
generous non game species or
species of greatest conservation
need.
And then the bond interest in
retirement fund a small portion
of the set of licenses goes into
a fund and the department
however the commission has the
ability to fund up to two
million dollars Sam done in a
very long time but we do use
that fund for capital projects
generally for improvements at
hatcheries.
So thank you for that Mr
chairman and all secretaries
postal mail what is the balance
right now.
the balance of the entire fund
yes on.
Right here.
Current balance is forty five
point six million dollars.
Okay thank you very much so the
last part that I have and thank
you for that review.
It is so with the governor's
initiative on the outdoor
outdoor economic development
outdoor recreation so any of
these funds be able to be used
for that.
Mister chairman Senator I
believe our our role in the
outdoor recreation industry is
supporting from hunting and
fishing activities improving
habitats so that wildlife can be
abundant and these are dropped
for both hunting fishing and
wildlife watching and so again I
our funds have to remain in our
Fund in order to be eligible for
Our federal funds so that's.
No directly available proctor
recreation no supporting outdoor
recreation through habitat
improvement wildlife restoration
yes.
You mentioned one of the most
trails is that correct.
Yes that's the the trail safety
prime which is generated from
the OAG registrations.
very well thank you thank you
very much thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you I don't see anybody
else on the list center will
just.
Is waving his digit Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I know that you know where I
live over in eastern New Mexico
and it's it's mostly private
land there and you know we we
raised quite a few antelope and
deer over in that country.
Yes just kind of something for
the committee to think about I'm
gonna ask you a couple questions
here what are which are very
this to me and you but I'm going
to ask them as if I didn't know
what I was talking about.
Mr director.
I've got a water tank with the
whole loan it over there that
that'll break out of.
how much do you pay for repair
that water thank.
Mister chairman Senator we don't
think.
N. ensure I had some metal open
through a fence and shared her
pretty good gap in it.
What do you pay for retirement
finance.
Mister chairman Senator we
generally don't pay though if
you made a depredation claim we
could work with you on fencing
materials.
And and
misdirect your.
I'd like to hurt some those are
available there at the end for a
lasting for one of those.
can I get that for free.
Mister chairman Senator now you
have to purchase a license over
the counter private land.
Okay so.
So the water.
Find the C..
Read the protection.
Hey.
Is that about Rep stacks up.
Mister chairman Senator the
wildlife are held in the state's
trust and so they don't belong
to any individuals yes that is
correct well I I just I thought
that's what it was but I just
want to make sure thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir Woods I don't see
anybody else's hand raised
director I I just have a few
issues and.
At some point we're going to
figure out how to get into your
fund.
So that we can all benefit New
Mexico.
The not just the game bench
but we have been hearing a lot
of complaints about officers
writing citations for
trespassing or came violations
and then they get those people
into court in is part of the
settlement in court they require
them to make a donation to a
fund.
where in statute does it says
that that the gaming fish can
negotiator Attorney to to make a
donation into fun instead of
being charged and why is that
happening.
Mr chairman I probably don't
have a good answer for you I do
know that it does happen and
it's it's part of the plea
bargaining process but I I I
don't believe it's anywhere in
statute.
It.
It is a voluntary donation to
the operation came through Fund
which then goes back out to
anybody who
Provides information related to
parking.
Yeah and and I'm not so sure
that that's a good negotiating
point for to go to the game fund
that the game in fishing in
Goshen eight in.
with whoever I I think that
needs to stop immediately if
it's gonna go it should go to
the state and there's a
violation then the money should
go to the state in in the game
and fish department's attorneys
or whoever the prosecuting
attorney should not be required
to go to that fund maybe they
can make a selection of the
funds that they choose since it
is a penalty.
And not try to send it all to
the game fish because that
violation.
I think that's a concern I'm
hearing
There is a lot of trespass in
New Mexico and I think it is a
fifty dollar fine for
trespassing on property on
private property currently a lot
of your complaints come out of
that.
so I'm I'm thinking about
increasing that number
and I think it's about time it's
nineteen sixty seven it's so old
it's it's a minimal the cost to
go to court is five times or
twenty times the amount of the
fine
how many of private trash
processing of prosecutions does
a game and fish have.
Annually.
Mr chairman I don't have that
that number at hand but I do
know it is relatively higher
certainly not as high station
without a license but it is one
of the more frequent ones can I
get that number created like.
Thank you could you get that
number to us and see what the
total collections and the total
settlement.
maybe through the courts into
those funds are
That are directed to the game
and fish as part of the.
The bargainer Madam whatever you
want to call it.
How is the gain Department what
is your capital across for the I
haven't seen that less from the
governor yeah.
It may just have to go in the
house bill two so you may get
left out because the governor
hasn't Senator capital numbers
at which we're trying to get so
we can work through so the game
department get left out of the
capital and what would be
requests for capital.
We have a million dollar request
from the sex acts Fund one point
five million dollar question the
big game enhancements Fund
Five hundred thousand dollars
from the bond interest
retirement fund and I believe
two point five million from the
sex act.
Directors don't tell me what the
psych SEC Fund is because.
I'm very with acting.
Mr chairman the sides Act
funding is the fund that you
have to when you Lujan crash on
federal lands for service and be
able and you have to buy that
stand and then also the
supervisor group works with the
Forest Service and BLM and the
game fish Department the
gentleman where expanding funds
for habitat improvement on those
federal lands.
Okay.
That's about it just.
Anything else you need to tell
us that you're missing.
Mr chairman I think you've
covered it up I'll get you those
numbers us and as I can't.
Okay thank you for your
presentation today we appreciate
your time and have a good day
thank you to.
Sure Garcia I think you're with
us
and
when you want to start off.
Thank you Mr chairman so we're
on HSD code five thirty nine now
the State Land Office
commissioner of public lands
Stephanie Garcia Richard is here
to make some comments on the
agency and before she does I
will just very briefly again
review some bullets on the
recommendation that was adopted
by HSC at the recommendation
from LESC it was the same as the
executive recommendation send no
differences there again both
were two hundred and one
thousand dollars we slowed the
FY twenty one operating budget
in line with what the agency was
projecting in terms of revenues
and expenditures so the total
recommendations for FY twenty
two is nineteen point four
million dollars and a reminder
on revenues here the State Land
Office is funded solely from the
land maintenance fund which
derives its revenue from
activities on state trust lands
that do not permanently deplete
resource which is grazing fees
right that way on the sales
renewable energy and business
leases balances are planned meet
in stock Fund in excess of the
budgetary reserve are
transferred to beneficiaries at
the recommendation includes a
prioritization of re
prioritization of funds from
contractual services and other
costs to personal services and
employee benefits that's all I
have Mister chairman unless the
and you're has anything you'd
like I'll turn it over to
commissioner Garcia Richard.
Thank you Mr chair I have no
further comments alternate to
the commissioner.
Surprised.
Thank you commissioner with us
I'm here thank you Mr chairman
thank you whenever you're ready
commissioner okay great I
actually have a power point to
share with you all
I don't think I can be as fast
as director Sloan but I will try
to be.
Fairly brief.
You gotta give me a chance to Mr
chairman whenever I can I like
to brag on the good work that's
done by all the hundred and
seventy employees of New Mexico
State Land Office on behalf of
our twenty two beneficiaries and
the taxpayers of New Mexico
because we estimate that we are
saving the tax paying household
in New Mexico an average of
about fifteen hundred dollars a
year in savings in tax savings
by just our our operations on
our twelve million acres of
state trust lands.
So before I begin with my budget
request Mr chairman I just
wanted to remind of the
committee that this is so funded
agency the money we use for
operational budget is derived
from the money we generate from
development of our our lands on
your behalf
I already talked about the
savings to the New Mexico
taxpaying families but we also
of course
exist for the benefit of our
twenty two beneficiaries the
largest of which is public
schools and then of course our
universities and hospitals.
I just a few of the priorities
my key priorities that we've
made some progress on
Definitely of laser focus on
harnessing our state's renewable
energy potential creating more
out direct opportunities that
are protecting our lands and
holding companies accountable
that you the state trust land so
that the
the bill for sort of cleaning up
that land is not last.
To taxpayers to to put to put.
Recent accomplishment that I
wanted to highlight highlight we
are set to hit another record
breaking billion dollars in our
revenue this year of our schools
hospitals universities I signed
over eight new wind leases
with our projected revenue for
those leases are totaling eighty
eight million dollars our
Representative program has
become even more vibrant yes
more REC access permits being
issued a greater access and
capping opportunity sports
people and we've made
transformational slide strides
in developing new tools to
provide appropriate oversight of
the acres we manage and when I
skip ahead here in just a minute
you'll see a sample on slide
seventeen if you've got The
presentation in front of you I
have were using satellite
imagery to identify trespass
Bills and you people dumping.
So Mister chairman of COVID just
like everywhere else COVID hit
us hard State Land Office it
impacted not only are
beneficiaries and their revenue
but our legacies and so we
really worked hard to
proactively implement an
emergency shut in rural that
allow oil and gas companies to
not be penalized for temporarily
shutting in their old oil wells
we collaborated with businesses
to make sure their projects were
prioritized moving forward and
we.
We gave.
We all these forgiveness Mr
chairman but we did allow folks
to have payment plans for these
payments are you know because
they're they're revenues were
hit hard and and we did not want
them to go under on our account
and we are even achieving fiscal
savings in these tough Financial
Times and you'll see that with
our budget request.
But we still face some pretty
tough challenges ahead
the pressures of the oil and gas
industry are are showing us more
than ever that we need to
diversify our revenue and that
priority is even more pressing
need to ensure that bonding
levels on current infrastructure
on state land art appropriate
levels so that taxpayers don't
get left holding the bag on the
answer that cost and that's what
brings me now to our budget
request we are in fact
requesting a one percent
decrease.
In our base budget.
That is because we recognize.
The land office assists the
general fund with with funding
that you all don't have to find
elsewhere when we generate that
revenue we understand that not
only the general fund but also
small business also our industry
here in New Mexico a really in
dire circumstances because of
the economic downturn because of
the pandemic
both LFC and yes they are in
agreement about that that budget
request we do in addition to
that have a small C. two request
for computer programming and for
those of you who have been on
this committee or the LFC for
any more than one term you know
sort of the ongoing saga of
upgrading and modernizing our
computer program for our revenue
generation I it's called on
guard at the bottom of the
screen there you can see what it
used to look like another
modernize screen is is how it is
has been upgraded we just very
successfully completed the
upgrade at the beginning of
January and now we are seeking
additional funds to really
To really tailor make this
program so that for example
we're not calculating interest
by hand the program to do it for
us that will save lots of time
and ensure accuracy.
The range we are so proud of
because we entered office with a
pretty severe vacancy rate we
have tried to keep it at single
digits right now I believe or
about about a ten percent
vacancy rate and we we have
really prioritized ensuring that
we have people of the land
office to serve in fisheries to
serve our less fees were
Services kind of you know our
bread and butter that's what we
make our name on so we need to
ensure that we have quality
people in those positions so I
just have to give a shout out to
my
HR director and assistant
commissioner of HSD that she has
really just put the pedal to the
metal in terms of ensuring that
we.
Have folks hired up and we have
a full team.
Here are earnings your bike here
I'm sure there will be questions
on our revenue projections and
so we will answer those as they
come Mr chairman.
We like I said before are seeing
now two years in a row of record
revenues and if you can look at
this part of the state thirty
two percent so third essentially
of total lifetime slower
earnings State Land Office
earnings were actually generated
in the last five years and
seventeen percent of lifetime
earnings in the last we talk
about revenue from the land this
is like over five hundred
million is a great number well
now we're record breaking
billion dollars so we're very
proud to chairman and the people
at the statewide office work
very hard to make that a
reality.
Here is our royalty production
numbers of month over month year
over year.
Top you see oil production and
then and CF of gas at the bottom
I can talk in detail about any
questions that committee members
might have on what we're
projecting in terms of our
production forward.
Our renewable energy projects.
At one thing to note on
renewable energy Mr chairman is
that all because these projects
are have a lifetime of of thirty
five forty years a lot of the
revenue was not realize from
these projects until some of the
help years.
Mr chairman we are really trying
because we only have about one
person per million acres on the
ground to really watchin steward
and make sure we are protecting
state trust land we rely on
things like satellite imagery
this is just a sample of the
particular damage to a site that
was seen on satellite imagery
over the course of a couple.
We have increased our ability to
identify trespass we have
actually generated revenue from
those from those cases and so we
are really trying to ensure that
that folks who use state trust
land are accountable for the use
of.
There's a trespass revenues Mr
Chairman.
And division so when we came
into office there was a forty
five percent vacancy in this
office.
I it had been decimated just by.
Folks you know education folks
not not wanting to to be there
and so we made our one of our
number one priority is to build
back this division.
Because not only do we draw
revenue from from audits but
this is a way to ensure that the
beneficiaries are getting every
single dime that is do that from
state trust lands and so we are
very proud of the work that this
that this team has done in
bringing back revenue to the
land office and working with the
oil and gas industry to ensure
that accounting is accurate and
we've got great relationships
with those folks who may go out
to field audits and they open up
their books basically to us and
and we all work with them to
ensure that what they are
reporting what they are paying
to the land office for their use
of minerals is accurate.
These are commercial activities
COVID did see a slight dip in in
these revenues but but we are
still going strong it's it's
kind of funny you know our
rights of way department is
almost as though they didn't see
a pandemic because they kept are
they kept moving along and in
terms of
processing and prioritizing
rights of way approvals a so
folks could could get out there
and and do the business they
need to do on state trust fund.
Mr Chairman are supplemental I I
hope that it this slideshow was
I did too two members if anyone
would like to request a copy I
can certainly make that
available but
That's the essentially the rest
of that slide show.
Was revenue distribution
distribution but budget your
type a map of these lands in the
Permian basin and us some detail
around our remediation and
restoration projects for FY
twenty.
So with that Mr chairman I will
stand for questions thank you so
much for the opportunity to be
here today.
Thank you commissioner were
enjoying having you we do have
the slide presentation in our
packets and they were emailed to
everybody so we should have
those if they have any questions
they can circle back around with
you I don't see anybody's hand
raised.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you commissioner for the
presentation and the information
I'm just curious you stated that
you started out with a forty
five percent vacancy rate and
you'd get a lot of work to build
it back better obviously and you
reduce that to less than fifteen
percent I we have heard a lot of
presentations today where
secretaries have talked about
having these really high
turnover rates what were some of
the strategies you implement
said to be so successful with
that well thank you so much for
the opportunity to read on my
staff Mr chairman and senator
going to have hello
so I would say that first and
foremost the Land Office is
unique because we have this
built in mission okay so we we
are mandated by our state
constitution to raise revenue
for beneficiaries and it's like
we don't argue about what our
mission is because it's put
forth by the constitution and so
everyone that works at the Land
Office has a very strong sense
of mission.
That is actually evident in our
attrition rates we have an
incredibly low turnover rates as
state agencies go and this year
even in particular I I can pull
that up in just a second might
major director my HSD assistant
commissioner did did send that
over to me but but in comparison
with other state agencies
the land office is a place where
people come to work and work for
a long that's that's one thing
you all at the state legislature
have allowed us to incentivize
some of those hard to fill
positions especially in the
southeast part of the state
where we need to on the ground
we need you know our field folks
out in the field there are
doing.
Investigations those kinds of
things and and you all allow us
to incentivize their rate so we
we have used we have availed
ourselves of that and the final
thing I would just say is that
we have this incredible
individual the land office we no
Romero who really made it her
mission to build back at the
agency because she gets to spend
a lot of time in human resources
she knows.
That goes to morale.
To not have people working sort
of like to jobs and being paid
for one she knew that are
beneficiaries would be better
served the trust would be better
served so she truly made it her
mission to like Walmart spoke
with with announcements and that
and act and
hiring actions and and so we
just I mean we've you should you
should see our operation it's
it's pretty incredible that that
was a primary priority for us I
would say.
Well Mr chairman and
commissioner you've obviously
obviously done a great job so
you must have a wonderful
wonderful agency good working
conditions so I applaud you for
your efforts thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman Ben madam
secretary I also see that turned
listening on so thank you both
for joining us today.
Questions mainly from my act
community so under the new
federal administration there are
some legitimate concerns about
federal regulations that
threaten the oil and gas
production in New Mexico and I
realize that initially it's just
going to be on on federal lands
but the long term potential the
tech has on state lands and
specifically to my district if
that threatens agricultural big
yeah I culture could show up on
those agricultural lease to kind
of try to balance out any lost
revenues that you may have from
oil and gas I just wanted to
give give you a minute to speak
to those concerns from our ag
producers from from my district
in this area.
Thank you so much I Mr chairman
and senator and and thanks for
mentioning my staff that's
that's on with me today I I did
not introduce them so I have two
deputies on with me turn next is
the deputy of public affairs
joining me today and certainly
Stewart is the W. appropriations
so I'm very glad you brought
this up because actually this
was part of the hearing that
this committee did on just what
the impacts to New Mexico would
be on the federal executive
order on I think we.
And
let me just committee right now
that that I have no intention of
sort of balancing the budget on
the backs of our adequacy is and
even if the commissioner wanted
to they would be able to and
this is the reason be axes that
we charge our lessees are
actually set in a formula in
statute that basically averages
beef prices cal cattle prices of
forage index for eleven western
states.
And then the of our our and
formula takes the fee from
that's calculation for the past
couple of years Duffy has
actually gone down we're
thinking that drop pressures
probably have impact to that C.
so so thankfully for our for our
ag producers on state trust land
of their fees on on on state
basis actually under now
we don't have any intention and
and you know.
We look at diversification and
and building up our revenue as a
multi pronged approach we would
never sort of put the alternate
pressure on to one industry to
do that because we we really see
that that that nothing.
And I said this multiple times
in in public settings nothing
will make up for the billion
dollars that we enjoyed oil and
gas at this time.
So it's going to have to be
multiple.
Our diversification
And revenue generation
approaches thank you I
appreciate that commissioners
you can understand moratorium
kind of set panic not just of
the oil and gas industry but it
you know in directly to the I.
community so thank you for
taking the time to address that
and I think you guys both your
for your service and your good
work.
Thank you Senator Diamond I
don't see anybody else's hand
up.
Mr chairman I I may just
quickly.
Yes go ahead I do have my right
I just didn't want our out land
commissioner commissioner power
plant leave before I say hello
and thank you for her thank her
for her hard work so I just want
to say thanks for all the great
work we we miss you in the house
but
You're being there and for your
presentation and all the great
progress that you're making
thank you very much.
That's all I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you.
Commissioner of the you have
some language that your question
from the executive and the
answer to expand the bond
recovery proceeds can you tell
me about that.
Yes Mr chairman so the state
land office has been given in
the past a five percent.
Just sort of across the board
borrow forty we're concerned
that as we start calling these
bonds and and maybe they some of
them have to be held in suspense
before their spent about what
sort of cut into our five
percent of.
Budget adjustment language that
that you all have already
afforded us so that's that
that's the reason for the
additional language Mr chairman.
And then you're asking for one
point nine million in other
costs where those other costs Mr
chairman let me turn it over to
the deputy of operations to
restore it to give you more
detail.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee simulates Stuart W.
operations I'm what's your
question with regard to the
other category or what was the
chairman were you asking about
Wayne in your presentation said
you had some reprise our
stations of contractual services
all another person in one point
fifteen million for person
funding two point six million
for contractual services and one
point nine million for other
costs I wonder what those other
costs.
Mr chairman so which that
basically has to travel
in the other category that we
would have our auditors
and
go on it has kind of
administrative costs for
vehicles
you know the computer then all
of those things basically what
we're doing is we're we're
moving around within the budget
categories in taking money from
other and putting in salaries
and benefits to prioritize the
hiring and retention of souls
as the commissioner mentioned
our employees are our top
priority so
diverse categories generally
used for.
I understand the category but I
mean when she some of the things
you describe what that be in
person funding contractual
services but the one point nine
is pretty well spread out so
maybe give me a break down of
where the one point nine is
going exactly.
Others for you Mr chairman I I
think in general Mr Stewart
answered the question but but of
course you know I mean.
You are budget expert you know
that PSB is for salaries
benefits contracts we have the
number of those the Land Office
and we have an effective entire
Line item that goes to our.
Restoration and remediation
contracts to do work maintenance
work on state trust land so the
the other category is more
travel supplies we do a lot of
outreach Mr chairman because of
the.
The trial instructions we were
having to do a lot more
I'm soon online on.
Social media and you know those
those are have and subscription
cost to them.
We actually had to get a larger
soon subscription for some of
our public meetings and so those
those are some of the cost Mr
chairman but we can certainly
provide you with the line item.
This is Kaelin may I jump in
sure I just wanted to make sure
you knew in the bullets that I
have there the one point nine
million for other costs as well
as the amounts listed for the
other categories those are just
the amount in the base budget
there were not any increases in
there so I just want to make
sure you are aware of that I was
not suggesting at and that there
was an increase in those in
those costs but I'd be happy to
help the agency or just send you
directly what I have about what
some of those line item costs
are as well and if I could also
address your other question on
the language that was
recommended by the executive I
also wanted to make clear that
the LFC recommendation that was
adopted by AJ it's the house
that language in the bar thirty
eight section of house bill two
we did not think it was
necessary to have it in both
section for and in the barn
Authority language I it's really
a question of exceeding the five
percent limit of our authority
so it is in house bill to just
in a different section.
Okay that explains why I see
that different I thought it was
categorised differently in the
other one in the more language
will will have discussions and
appointments.
Okay thank you commissioner we
appreciate your time.
Secretary McAnally are you with
the site yet there you are Mr
ready ready go.
Thank you is there analyst yes
and sign it.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee it's
nice to be here with you and I'm
glad that this is your last item
for the afternoon.
The CAC.
My name is Karley kicking and
the analyst for the workforce
solutions department for LFC
also on the meeting is Simon
Miller with that DFA and of
course our cabinet secretaries
set a cabinet secretary
mccamley.
workforce solutions department
the HSC adopted the LFC
recommendation.
the LFC and Executive
recommendations were identical
except for the budget for their
labor relations division.
The LFC overall recommendation
is one point five percent lower
than the agency's FY twenty one
operating budget but it does
include a five percent decrease
in general fund revenue.
The executive recommendation is
point six percent lower than the
FY twenty one operating budget
and included a three percent
increase in general fund
revenue.
So over eighty percent of the
department's revenues are
derived from federal funding
spread across the department I
division's the labor relations
division is the only division
nearly a hundred percent reliant
on general fund revenues.
The LFC recommendation holds
general fund revenue flat with
the divisions FY twenty one
operating budget versus the
executive recommendation
includes eight hundred and nine
thousand increase in general
fund revenues for the division.
the other thing to note about
the budget is that a workforce
solutions is transferring its
federally funded apprenticeship
program from the labor relations
division to the employment
services division this transfer
is reflected in a two million
decrease and other transfers and
a hundred and fourteen thousand
decrease in federal funds in the
labor relations divisions with
the corresponding increase in
the employment services
division.
And that transfer includes
funding in the personal services
category of three hundred
seventy three point seven
thousand four FTE and two
million for requests.
Both of the recommendations
include a transfer of one
million dollars from the workers
compensation administration fund
a hundred and fifty thousand or
a hundred fifty point five
thousand is going to the
unemployment division and eight
hundred forty nine point five
thousand is going to the
employment services division
and I'll turn it over to Simon
if he has any comments in other
ways so that secretary mccamley
take for.
Yes
hi good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee again
my name is Simon Miller and I'm
an analyst with the state
like Carla said that the agency
took the LFC recommendation and
the only difference between the
two recommendations was in that
labor relations division which
is P. seven seven six the LFC
recommendation was about eight
hundred thousand less than the
executive recommendation
the executive recommendation and
included that additional eight
hundred thousand for more
investigators analysts and
lawyers within labor relations
division to help them improve
their timeliness of
investigation and enforcement
activities excessive caseloads
in that division have made it
difficult for them to achieve
their performance targets so you
know the the the additional
money in the executive
recommendation would help to
make this case loads more
manageable and improve the
timeliness of investigations and
determinations for New Mexico
workers so with that I'll turn
it over to secretary mccamley
and thank you for your time
today.
Thank you Simon secretary
mccamley are you ready yeah Mr
chair I just.
Power point and up if I go
through that real quick.
Thank you so asked was spoken by
the folks in in the analyst
level are are big issue in terms
of state appropriations because
most of our divisions are funded
at the federal level our with
our labor relations department
and we are asking for some more
help in this regard
needs more investigators to help
with both our our human rights
issues and all are waging our
public works project but the
real.
Big deal for our department as
we help with another employer it
is we have one lawyer for the
entire division whose job it is
to pursue all of the claims in
court we have for people who are
found to be violating minimum
wage and public works wage loss
and so we really need help in
that regard that's why we're
asking for this for FTEs the to
investigators the analysts and
extralegal person as they said
most of our funding for our
other divisions comes from the
federal level we're just asking
that stuff state fairly flat in
that regard we have gotten some
increases in our unemployment
office because it's done on a
formula and obviously a lot more
people on unemployment now I'll
talk about that a second.
One thing I do want to point out
where we are going to try to
save some money moving forward
is we are engaged in some
conversations and this was going
pretty hot heavy pre COVID and
we expect it to come back in to
play as we go into recovery how
do we do a better job in
communities making things more
efficient and effective in terms
of buildings can we co habit
Tate with other state agencies
which will not only save us
money on rent what was will
allow us to have constituent to
come in with similar types of
issues not have to drive across
town for similar type stuff so
we're working with DVR we're
working with tennis over HSD and
some of the other state agencies
to try to achieve that goal that
that's one of our big priorities
that will actually save us
money.
We general questions about the
page that backlog that's one of
the issues that we see a lot so
I just want to go over that
second we've got Dave Williams
and from our weeds in our
department on answer any
specific questions you might
have about this process however
when we first got into this
office a couple years ago the
process was not very organized
and those were the numbers that
we had as of last year as we
look to spend last year
organizing our systems as you
can see that this year we've
done a better job of delineating
where specific claims are in the
process and we're actually
pretty satisfied with how this
is going obviously there's more
to do and we need to get that
backlog down and get people
investigated on time but we have
really look to see how do we do
better in terms of our our
efficiencies in processes and
you can see here and that and
this one really were a backlog
is in our backlog we're going to
go with is those top two numbers
those are the things that we
have control over so the cases
that are currently waiting
investigation with an
investigator and those that are
kind of in are on deck circle so
as you'll see that number those
combinations right there
actually less than a thousand
and when we were coming before
your last year we're almost at
the two thousand level so we're
making a lot of progress there
the other categories you see are
things that we don't have
control over you know if they're
in a legal jurisdiction have to
wait for the courts to decide
you know obviously they're going
to do that post investigation
stop we actually started the
process with the United States
department of labor trying to
get their folks to help us out
taken the investigations that
they can do and we're actually
gonna be starting in March
increasing their caseloads and
we have a process to do that dad
can answer any questions should
you all had any questions on
that specific issue.
When I was up for you all last
week Senator which had some
questions regarding the
unemployment trust fund so want
to address that real quick and
I'm sure some people will have
questions regarding that as you
can see.
Starting in earlier parts of
this year the unemployment trust
somewhere very very healthy
levels and then COVID hit and
the amount of money we had to
draw on that went down by quite
a bit as you can see from this
chart in front of you we
actually hit zero that we can
step ten right and how to start
borrowing from the federal
government or to pay claims in
November thank you very much the
legislature for working on
passing those twelve hundred
dollar additional benefits that
came through we actually had a
little bit of money left over
read about fifty million dollars
left over that reverted back to
the trust fund and until last
week we were using that money to
pay for standard claims instead
of borrowing we had to start
borrowing again last week so
that number at the bottom that
two hundred six million one
hundred ninety seven thousand
number that you see as of today
that number is.
It is about two hundred eleven
million correct.
That is correct that K. two
hundred eleven million acts we
just sort of borrowing again now
we do have two and a half
million that is being reverted
from the rental assistance
program that you all had an
appropriate money for this
reverting so we'll be able to
draw about half a week worth of
claims off of that we are
borrowing again.
Going on to the next slide we
did have a trust fund working
group over the fall to kind of
talk about the situation
understanding where we're at
and.
There's about three scenarios or
a combination thereof that can
be used to help with the
situation the first is that the
state has a revenue scheme put
into play to raise revenues to
help refurbish the trust fund
the second is what other states
have kinda look that is to say
we're gonna let the federal
government raised they're what
we call food attacks the federal
version of the unemployment
trust tax and if we don't pay
off the debt by the end of next
year by November next year
they'll start raising their
taxes point two percent per year
across the board on employers
to make the whole as we need
that to pay off our debts there.
However there could be some help
coming in the form of the next
stimulus bill at the federal
level I will say that though it
has moved in I think it passed
the house last night we still
don't know what that's gonna
look like we were hoping for a
loan forgiveness or frankly
unemployment specific requests
at the federal level doesn't
look like we're gonna get that
it does look like we're going to
get an extension of the interest
free period so as we borrow
money means you not to pay
interest back on it for whatever
time that they give us and it
does look like they're
discussing block grants for the
states.
There are two big factors in
those block grants number one
how much is it and and how much
is it going to come in New
Mexico number two do we have
permission to use it on
unemployment we did with the
cares Act but we really feel
uncomfortable commenting on that
further and so we figure out
what's in the federal bill or
they could give us nothing now
we do think that that hopefully
we'll get some block grants but
once again we'll know when that
passes the Senate.
Wanted to give you a quick
update on we up that is the work
force
opportunities act the
innovations and opportunities
act.
Work workforce solutions
department is is responsible for
overseeing for workforce boards
throughout the state and
according to an LFC.
Or you all got in the fall there
needs to be a better job done by
these workforce boards and a
whole host of different
categories and as we look into
our economic recovery those were
always important other really
important critical because we
need to get to a point some
point or get New Mexicans back
to work so our state workforce
board has been engaging in a
process where they're getting a
lot of input in and they're
going to be hopefully giving
recommendations to the governor
and of April early part of may
on how to realign those boards
and we have a process that we
want to thank the LFC very much
for the report that they did we
thought it was very thorough
very well research and we're
actually using some of that
information in our
recommendations to the governor
we have W. secretary go on a
monthly a quarter of a on the
line to talk more about that
process if any of you all are
interested.
I did also want to talk about
that in the family's first
coronavirus Act we had about a
five million dollar
appropriation that was given to
us
we also had increases for
unemployment in our regular
formula funding for that process
but we we are requesting that
we're able to keep that money
goes away at the end of the year
but we've had a request to
extend it for another year we
want to keep that in our back
pockets should frankly anything
crazy happen and we've got David
Roybal who is our S. T. director
to talk about that or any other
specific budget issues I have
including our penalty interest
funds.
We do want to keep some of those
penalty and interest funds in
our back pocket I know that
these are generally been
transferred by the legislature
into our regular operations
funds but we do need some money
in case we do have to pay off
the interest that we are going
to have for the the funds that
we borrowed from the federal
government and we're gonna need
about three million dollars for
that unless Congress extends the
interest free period.
The other problem that with that
is if they extended through
August interest is always doing
in September so there's a strong
possibility if they don't then
renew that provision again in
the late summer we would have to
pay that interest so we're we
really want to keep this on our
back pocket we can't use any
federal funds to pay that off
and so we really want to keep
that districts pay interest Mr
chair that is our presentation
and I would be happy to try to
answer any questions and you
don't have.
Thank you Mr secretary
These changes screen I don't see
anybody's hand up right now.
Senator Rodriguez should look
like you had some interest.
Mr Chairman Jacob.
Senator Candelaria go ahead
thank you Mr chairman I I don't
I can't figure out how to raise
my hand of mines and Mr chairman
thank you and Mr secretary thank
you
Regarding unemployment.
And first.
What's kind of the status of the
federal enhanced benefit and at
this point.
When is it scheduled to lapse
and under cares Act to a
Congress right now is there an
additional extension being
contemplated Mr chairman Mr
Senator thank you for asking
that
this stuff gets very confusing
so let me explain this and if
you have questions please don't
hesitate to ask because
there are so many new programs
that have been added it can get
confusing so let me start with
the cares Act the cares Act
there were three federal X.
three federal programs that were
put in under that.
The first was pool the pandemic
unemployment assistance I will
say that unemployment as a whole
hasn't been updated policy
programmatic Lee since it was
put in in the nineteen thirties
and one of those differences
that we have now are are Kanemi
between then and now is that we
have a lot of folks that are
self employed pool was the
program that was put into place
to help with those self employed
folks so when it was passed by
the cares Act had thirty nine
weeks of eligibility.
And unfortunately if someone
would say musician or a barber
and ran out of their thirty nine
weeks of eligibility they would
run out in the middle of
December that program ran out
the same thing was with the P.
E. you see that was an extension
to the standard unemployment
program which gave people an
additional thirteen weeks of
standard unemployment on top of
their twenty six weeks that they
normally get to get to thirty
nine weeks total which is
equivalent to creating a and
then there was the F. P. you see
which is the additional six
hundred dollars a week on top of
the weekly benefit amount that
everyone got that ran out at the
end of July.
So the all of that expired at
the end of the year.
However Congress did pass as you
pointed out Mr chair Senator
Candelaria the continued
assistance act that was you know
cares Act to for what I believe
you're mentioning that again
people an additional thirteen
weeks of creating a and P. E. U.
C. as well as an additional
three hundred dollars per week
F. P. U. C. the eligibility for
that started the week ending
January second which is the week
after that the other stuff
expanded extended expired excuse
me the problem is there were new
programmatic rules put in those
pro those policies and so we had
eight wait for rules from the
department of labor to come out
before we could figure out how
to do it do we had to right
those into our I. T. program so
we were able to open those
programs up a couple of weeks
ago so people who had expired
their claims before the end of
the year we're able to reopen
their claims backdate their
claims and start getting money.
Moving forward.
Those three programs run out the
week of March thirteenth.
And so so far what we're seeing
from the proposal that passed
the house was that both creating
a and P. E. U. C. so the
programs for the self employed
and the extension of the
standard programs run through
the end of August and that there
is a four hundred dollar F. P.
U. C. added per week on top of
people's weekly benefit amount
now we don't know if that's
going to be done or not but
those are the proposals that are
put into place and what folks
have been talking about on the.
Mr Chairman do you have yep Mr
chairman secretary what are the
projections for the fund is
suing Congress does that.
does the extensions that you've
described what are what's the
trajectory of the fund balance.
So there there's two inputs that
go into that the first is taxes
are frozen through
the end of next year pretty much
for folks because of the Senate
bill that was passed in July in
the special session last year so
our inputs are not going up
because the taxes have been
frozen so you generally the way
that the formula works the
higher the people on
unemployment the more more taxes
go up to help pay for that
that's not our situation however
Senate Mr chairman Senator the
the good news for the fund is as
more people get out of their
standard programs they exhaust
their benefits they move into
these federal extensions where
the federal dollars are paying
for their claims and it doesn't
come out of the state funds so
as an example we were paying and
towards the end of last year
about ten million dollars a week
out of our state out of our
phone we were borrowing ten
million dollars a week to pay
for those state obligation since
we have not left our fund.
Think what we're down to now is
between five and six million
dollars a week will know by the
end of of this week where that
is since we just started growing
again but that shows you the
kind of evolution of people as
they transfer out of the state
funds into the federal programs
we're still paying on they're
still getting their money but
it's coming from the federal
government and not our state
funds so that we I don't we
don't really have projections
that it's going to depend on how
much we can open the economy how
much people come back off the
system on how much business can
recover that's really what will.
What will need to see to really
make some good projections on
where the funds.
Mr chairman thank you for that
and Mister chairman David.
So how so I know at the height
of the pandemic and and let me
say this Mr chairman I think
second to the secretary of
health the sheer weight of
keeping the state working just
fall on your shoulders Mr
secretary and I think all of us
you and your staff of very
heartfelt thank you and I mean
that because.
The W. S. and and unemployment
has been just.
Is that such an important piece
of this of this effort in this
puzzle
so at the height of this I
understand the Mexico had about
a hundred north of a hundred
thousand.
Act claims or what what is the
number peak at for number of
unemployment claims in New
Mexico act Mr chair Senator in
June we had over a hundred and
fifty thousand when you combine
all the programs okay I'm
getting too so as of today Mr
chairman what does the
enrollment looked like when you
break it down by just state and
what exhausted the state and are
now just on the federal
government's dime.
Mr chair and senator I got those
numbers specifically for you as
of today so as of today.
People receiving payment from
the state are at twenty nine
thousand nine hundred fifty six
that just went down below thirty
thousand for the first time in a
long time.
And there are three federal
program for people getting the
money right so thirty thousand
nine hundred and thirty three
people are receiving go up
that's a program for the self
employed nineteen thousand two
hundred and ninety are receiving
the key E. you see which is the
first extension from the cares
Act that once again just got an
additional thirteen weeks and
twenty two thousand two hundred
thirty three are receiving money
from the extended benefits
program that was on the books
already from the Great Recession
Mr chair and senator that's the
bill that you all passed to help
us clarify last week so we get
the language to keep that
program going so as you see Mr
chair and senator the vast
majority of claimants are now
receiving money from those
federal programs and not state
trust so is it fair it would be
fair for me Senator I mean miss
Representative secretary what is
there for me and this policy
making role to draw the
assumption that over the next
two quarters though the leading
edge in our fund is gonna start
slowing down as more of those
people transition to be federal.
So on the federal balance sheet
as opposed to the state that our
burn rate and thus the rate at
which we're gonna be going into
debt should slow down over the
next two quarters relative to
what we saw at the beginning of
the pandemic.
Mr chair Senator relative to
that yes that is an accurate
statement I would caution that
though with two followers the
first is we had ninety six
hundred people are so on our
employment rules are on our
unemployment rolls the week of
March ninth I believe it was in
the before the public health
order if we still got thirty
thousand people on our standard
claims a still three times what
we had before even though it's
coming down I would also say
that it's going to depend on how
many businesses are able to
start and then continue because
we have people that are going to
work and coming back they're
still gonna go back on that
standard program until they
fixed it exhaust their claim so
Mister senator I yes I think
that your prognosis is correct
but those would be the to Cobb
yes I would just that's okay
that's absolutely correct and Mr
chairman and and maybe if I can
Mr Secretary I appreciate the
the insights you gave us on the
on the status of the federal
bill the the the one pending
before Congress because I think
this is the kind of.
It's it's kind of the the the
million dollar question or
rather one point six three
billion dollar question I keep
asking myself which is the let
the appropriate role the
legislature appropriating those
funds.
We're in a timing situation
where we may very well and a
regular session before Congress
has actually said that money to
the states and you know I would
certainly Mr chairman I think I
think the missing piece of this
puzzle long term is
you know and we can all have
this discussion but I think
ultimately Mr chairman we would
be well served in taking three
or four hundred million dollars
of that money and just
reimbursing the U. I. fund and
the and and and no one's taxes
have to go up
you know but we can have that
discussion the appropriate time
I do want to ask a question a
follow up the Mr chairman of the
secretary regarding so I'm
getting
I'm getting a lot of
a lot of folks reaching out to
my office about notices they've
been receiving from DWS about
overpayment of unemployment
benefits and.
I was doing some research in
light of that.
And Mr chairman I understand Mr
secretary that the federal
government has or is already has
granted the department and all
state agencies with authority to
forgive at least some types.
unemployment overpayments and so
I guess the question I have for
you is you could perhaps
describe for us what is the
nature of the federal discretion
that's being given right now to
forgive overpayment and does the
department intends to avail
itself of that discretion so Mr
chair and senator the answer to
your second question is yes but
let me explain how that's going
to work we we do we want to make
sure that we're taking advantage
of all the opportunities that
the federal government gives us
to provide some help to New
Mexicans however our time line
is the issue so.
With the continued assistance
act which was that bill that was
passed that had the over payment
waiver provision in it there
were two other big programs or
for the first for those
expansions and new programs for
the P. U. A. the P. U. C. N. F.
park that was our real focused
at the beginning of the year
because we had a bunch of people
that had exhausted their claims
and we need to make sure that we
got the money where we could
that just got done.
We are in the middle of working
on the second program from that
bill which is the M. E. you see
that's mixed earner unemployment
conversation and what that is
Mister chairman Senator.
Is that when they put what in
place.
What they did not foresee and
this is once again I would say a
relic of an antique unemployment
policy is that we have a lot of
people that do a lot of
different side hustles in order
to make it in this economy so as
an example.
Let's say I'm a massage
therapist Monday through Friday
and I I work as a contractor and
make the majority of my money
that way but a couple of
weekends a month ago work as a
W. two employee at or at a
grocery store.
That grocery store.
Income will allow me to get
standard unemployment because I
made just enough money to get
that but maybe at a low amount
per week maybe a hundred Bucks a
week.
We have to through federal
regulation put them on that
program first before we get them
in the pool now what the
complaint has been from a lot of
these folks that have these
mixed wages is that Hey this is
unfair I get most of my money as
a contractor why can I not then
get what my friends are getting
that are full time contractor
employees and so in in an
attempt to try to help even
those skills a little bit the M.
E. U. C. was put into place and
that will allow people who are
on the standard program but can
show that they make a good chunk
of money as contractors to get
an additional hundred Bucks a
week and we're working on that
getting that one rolled out we
should have a press release on
that on Thursday.
The next thing for us is really
trying to figure out this over
payment process and so Mr chair
Senator this is where it gets
complicated the federal
government just last week told
us that this over payment.
It's for any poor person who's
had an overpayment so even if
you had an over payment last
year and you may have paid that
off they're going to allow those
folks to put in a waiver that's
a lot of people Furthermore
because of that we're gonna have
to figure out a way.
Not just to wave an overpayment
that could be for someone who's
got one right now but also we're
gonna have to figure out a way
to pay people back so it's going
to be a little time before we
can get this rolled out because
we want to make sure that as we
get a system in place for these
over payment waivers we number
one have a system in place for
us to take those those requests
in be able to sort them on
organizational level have the
staff to look them over and then
have the ability to communicate
back with all the claimants and
then get them their payment so
Mister chair Senator I don't
have a timeline on that when you
are folks just started working
on how we doing that this week
but the answer is yes we are
going to bring that out and and
as soon as we have a time line
will make it public I will also
say though Mr chair Senator on
that one anyone that feels like
they don't want to wait that
long can file regular
unemployment appeal if they feel
like they're unemployment is is
not fair and they want to
contest it and they can go
through our regular appeals
process on.
Thanks Amanda certainly look
forward to.
To get a more information as the
department rules that out then I
guess I turned to my last series
my last issue Mr Chairman which
is the the legal part if that's
and I just want to put a plug
for everyone you know it doesn't
benefit either the business or
the employee or anyone in the
process when the regulator was
supposed to do the investigation
make the decision is under
resource especially when they're
the real the regulator's going
up against sometimes law firms
that have tremendous amounts of
resources behind their clients
not mine obviously but others
you know fit into that category
and and and so I want to put a
plug in Mr chairman I know
sounds like the house didn't
really give us all that much
room
to show work in the budget but
that being said this is one of
those areas we're talking about
an economy that works for
everybody this is an office that
deals with discrimination
complaints in the workplace and
and and really in public life
and in business on the basis of
race and gender sexual
orientation and all protected
classes and also goes after
those businesses that are trying
to basically
cheat the system by paying sub
wages and trying to get an
unfair advantage in the economy
but paying their workers last so
I I I really you know I've
noticed Mr chairman is not
criticism anyone but I've
noticed.
After being on this committee
for several years that the.
The legal dispute resolution
functions of department seem to
always get really ignored or
overlooked or underfunded year
after year after year and I'll
tell you what work what we're
concerned about a positive
business environment the number
one thing that will turn off of
business is there interactions
with the regulator if we're not
going to invest in world class.
Well staffed well resource
functional dispute resolution
process these that we're not
really committed to a good
business environment so that's
my soapbox but I I hope that we
can certainly on our side do
what we need to increase the
general fund for the legal
division at DWS the amount of
claims that they have and the
amount of folks that they have
able to process them it doesn't
even come close just signaling
that we're serious the
legislature in funding those
efforts it just doesn't so thank
you Mr chairman Mr secretary as
always I appreciate the clear
gaps understanding you have of
what is an incredibly
complicated fast changing
part of our country right now so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr secretary Mr center thank you
very much for the nice words.
Thank you Mr secretary I don't
see anybody else on the list I
know senator Candelaria did ask
a lot of questions that I I was
concerned with so looking at
your sheet here.
We're actually under funded by
about roughly six hundred
million we look at the two
thousand nineteen members
wearing five hundred forecasting
we are fifty million.
We two hundred six million to
the feds today so we're roughly
under water roughly six hundred
million to get us back to even
I know we're looking hard at
that
how quickly would you need those
funds
Just in case something happens
and and forgive me for a minute
but
Trying to double zoom and I
don't have that hello yet.
The feds are gonna really going
to give us any forgiveness on
this and then what we expect in
the next cares that.
And I know you touched on some
slides.
Mr Senator we've been advocating
for specific unemployment help
either with requests for with
loan forgiveness that does not
look like anyone wants to take
it seriously I know that my
compatriots on the country as
well as myself have been arguing
that pretty strongly I know the
US chamber of commerce has been
arguing for fairly strongly but
it doesn't look like that's what
they're going to do it is
looking and once again this is
all prognostication I want to
say anything until stuff is
signed sealed and delivered but
is looking like they're going to
have more block grant type
strategies like they had for the
cares Act we don't know how much
that's going to be at obviously
the house had a certain number
that could probably will change
in the Senate at the federal
level and we don't know what the
provisions are in that bill that
will allow us to pay for what so
in the cares Act they did allow
some of this to go to you I
trust funds we want to make sure
that that's on the table we've
advocated for that but we don't
know where it's going to be at
some Mr chair Senator I'm sorry
I can't give you any other
information other than the house
passed three hundred fifty
million in assets now I think
those permissions are in there
but that could change.
The billion sorry three hundred
billion first I was gonna say
three hundred fifty million RMB
a little bit.
Thank you has your agency set up
any increases yet based upon.
The what do you I find is that.
I am hearing from some of my
constituents early on that you
guys to ten out some numbers
with increases and and know that
we had a bill to hold those did
we get that result yeah Mr
Senator about seventy percent of
the businesses out there
actually didn't see any change
at all in their in their taxes
there were some businesses that
actually saw their tax rates go
down and there were few that saw
their tax rates go up there were
two reasons for that number one
the formula.
bases there the tax rates on the
amount of attack the amount of
people they have verses their
overall revenue and that was one
of the provisions the other one
it was probably more common was
that we stopped the look back in
March.
Some businesses actually still
laid people off before March and
so those numbers are still valid
according to the bill that was
passed and so if I'm an employer
that that let some people go in
January or February that would
probably increase our taxes for
the formula and so that's really
what we're seeing for the most
part for people that saw their
businesses grow up but I will
also say Mr chair Senator there
is a process by which people can
have their there right looked
over again if they if they think
that it's not right and they can
I can send you the process for
that later if you'd like you can
for that to any of your business
is you're looking for and we're
leaving that open that's
generally we've got like I think
it's a forty five day period but
because of the situation we're
leaving that open to allow folks
to get to us if they think that
they want another look at their
tax rates.
Okay.
I think that's important
I think as we move along and
maybe as we move along later in
the session and we see what the
feds reaction is we may bring
you back to make sure you update
us and where we need to be with
house bill two and house we need
to do for the US funded and how
that moves along thank you again
you know thank you for your hard
work you're one of the most
important people in the state I
think ten players and continue
to people really I mean you make
a difference in their lives I
mean at all like it some of us
employers you know but it it
actually does help a lot of
people and I just know that that
people in my community and and
help create the I and and and I
appreciate that.
The work you're doing we don't
always agree but you know you do
good work Mr chair Senator thank
you very very much that are very
very appreciate the nice words
yeah.
So thank you for having to share
that taxed me here today in in
your presentation and just for
committee members real quickly
should we received the email on
on three seventy seven of with
all the language in the draft
anybody that's not on had not
received that let us know so we
can get that to you.
We want to try to get three
seventy seven out to moral as
house bill two will cross over
tomorrow hopefully as we move
along during the process and
then that what that bill will be
out of our are here and we will
be getting to work on house bill
two tomorrow I may want to visit
with you want to wander two one
two and in that house bill two
and how we do that.
Senator you had your hand up.
Yes Mr chair so I have of this
new email it's got hand written
notes on it.
Well on on Senate bill three
seventy seven but I don't know
what they mean.
twenty twenty two and then I
can't read what's below that.
Aside for it.
Yes John maybe shouldn't back an
email are shooting but I think
believe that's reoccurring and
non reoccurring language in the
bill and we're trying to to
separate those we just need to
make sure.
That.
David yes some that I seen come
live now we'll get you the
answer to that and and it's just
got to be a split for
nonrecurring because people put
in the money and nonrecurring
and they put money in
reoccurring and that may be the
difference in between twenty
twenty one and twenty two in on
reoccurring and that maybe hand
written it's in drafting right
now the language is is correct
there's no grammatical errors
it's just how we divide the
reoccurring in on reoccurring so
maybe that subcommittee can meet
tomorrow to review it people
want to make sure that projects
are there we scrubbed it several
times with the LFC and Senate
finance and we're hoping there's
no mistakes but this is the
first time doing this and so
there may be one or two.
Okay well Mister chair I just.
The four A. O. C. I don't know
that Alexandria Coliseo Cortez
needs anything to do with this
bill so that's why I'm confused.
Senator you're reading too many
Ackerman's.
That's the that's the courts.
Less box twelve more a Senate
finance.
Thank you.
Thank you
so we'll try to House Bill to
becoming oversold our committee
work will begin you're gonna be
getting a lot of requests the
house did not leave us a lot of
money to play with the in house
bill two.
And so we be prepared for your
phones and emails to get flooded
we'll be getting a lot of other
bills so
The former senator said there's
a good boards count now.
So there's no money the there it
house bill two is still in the
house they can go over there and
amended on the floor all they
want and and do whatever they
want but once it comes over a we
will have the mantra sorry nope.
And we'll see where we go from
there so thank you guys I think
we're wrap up with presentations
I did get one call from homeland
security over the weekend we may
need to hear them a little bit
on the transfer of the.
Fire marshal's office to them.
Q. homeland security and I just
want to make sure everybody's
aware that issue because they
did transfer the fire marshal's
office but no back office staff
attorneys lawyers.
whatever you whatever the back
office stuff stuff was so we'll
have to scrub that look at that
I think we're good then any
other questions.
I think we're just seeing guys
come on the floor.
And the call thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you.
