Thank you so much for the
opportunity to address you
today, uh, the, the chief of
staff for the PRC and I were
asked to consolidate or do a
couple of things. One, present
on the intersection of economic
development and energy, and
energy and economic development.
And then jointly present our
budgets as that as it relates to
that. So we've, we've provided
you with a presentation from
which was the previous
presentation from yesterday, you
have those, but we've as trying
to be reflective of what the
staff and the chairman have
asked us to do. You, we've
provided you with a new
presentation that we did last
night.
So that's what you see at the
top.
Um, and we'll go through that,
uh, together and then allow you
questions uh if you want to
pivot to more specific budget
items that we didn't get to
because of our effort to really
tailor this to what we were
asked. We're happy to jump to
that and have those
conversations as well, but we
wanted to be reflective of what
uh the chairman asked us to do.
With that,
Um, my name is Rob Black. I am
the secretary designee for the
economic development uh
department. Um, I'm honored to
be here and I will throw it over
to my colleague who will uh
introduce herself and uh the
PRC.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members, very excited to be
here. My name is Choya Corey.
I'm the chief of staff for the
public regulation commission,
um, that means the commission
gets to sit as hearing um
deciders, judges in adjudicated
matters and set the policy for
the agency and as cheap as staff
I'm responsible for the day to
day operations of the agency,
including budget and staffing.
So we're really excited to be
here today to talk about this
precipice that we're on and the
whirlwind.
at which the PRC is the center,
uh, regarding all kinds of
things happening of importance
to the state. So excited to talk
about what we do.
How the utilities play into this
and uh answer any questions you
may have.
So next slide please.
You want us to give you, well,
no, you don't have a computer
there so they can't have
control. Good. Perfect. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
So just jumping into the thick
of things, um, economic
development has the potential to
benefit everyone and I am
talking specifically from a
utility and consumer.
Point of view, and that is just
the basic fundamental of utility
regulations says that utilities
get to earn a return of their
investments, so they get the one
for one back or there's they,
they're supposed to get the
opportunity to get that one for
one back, and then they're
supposed to have a reasonable
return on that. So let's say
they're supposed to have the
opportunity to earn $10 for
every $100 they spend in an
ideal situation after the
adjudication, they would get
$110 back.
So why that, why then does
economic development benefit
everybody, because if you take
that as the amount that they're
supposed to earn.
Then, uh, it's divided by
customer. So you're talking
about a per customer recovery of
that $110. Well, when done
right, adding new customers in,
and I am talking very simply
here because we're talking about
a not simple concept. So I'm
glossing over much of the
details, so please excuse me,
but when a customer comes on,
especially large customer with
high demand, if it's done right
to neutralize for those
incremental costs caused by that
new customer, then the per
customer
Uh, share of that $110 goes
down. And so as we're talking
about economic development, as
I've been talking with Secretary
Black and some of you in this
space, that's what we're keeping
in mind is if we can do this
right, we're large customers pay
their fair share. They also help
everybody else out on the
system.
So next slide, please.
Back in October, the commission
issued a bench request to the
utilities and anyone interested
who was willing to comment on
this. And it was a, it was an
inquiry into utilities and their
role in economic development.
They asked a whole bunch of
questions, uh, of which if
you're interested, we can get
you the details, but the long
and the short of it was
essentially what are you seeing?
What's preventing you or what
are you seeing? What are you
doing? If you're unable to make
those
service, uh, connections, what's
preventing you from there? There
was a lot of questions, but
those are kind of the hub of it.
This chart, which you're seeing
here is a collection that our
staff did of the responses to
that from the 3 big utilities
and um I want to say a couple of
things about this chart cause I
think it's helpful, but it needs
to be read in the right context.
First of all, there's no
standardization for this
reporting yet. So the utilities
kept track for the utility, um,
it wasn't at anybody's
direction.
So each one kept track a little
differently, and this table
shouldn't be used to compare
utilities. Instead, uh, what I
think it's useful for is to
understand, uh, kind of the
universe of the, of the issue
and what we're seeing. So, um,
This chart doesn't mean that EPE
is doing better than SPS or PNM
is worse than
EP. It doesn't mean any of that.
These are numbers to take in
that context.
One of the challenges that um
came out of that inquiry, is
that
Each utility and co op for that
matter, has a unique customer
footprint and therefore has
unique characteristic
characteristics of its rate
base, um, and needs for
addressing that growth. Um,
There's no doubt that we're
seeing a huge increase in demand
in new load requests to our
utilities, and I want to
highlight SPS's Delaware Basin,
uh, the numbers that we've seen
there says that between now and
2036, we're expected to see that
load quadruple. So the amount of
load we have now times 4 is what
is being expected in the next 10
years alone. So certainly a
challenge that we're all facing
together.
Next slide.
So it's my turn, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, and I'll, our high
level, uh, this is for the group
and for some of the the new
members, um, from the economic
development department, these
are the issues, these are the
areas and divisions that we have
within the department. Our
mission is to improve the lives
of New Mexico families by
increasing economic
opportunities and providing a
place for businesses to thrive.
Um, from our signature
signature.
Which focus on growing
economic-based jobs, um, to our
New Mexico Main Street program
to the Healthy Foods financing
and technical assistance
programs to outdoor recreation,
creative industries division,
film office and our Office of
Science.
strategy, science and
technology,
economic development is working
directly with industries and
businesses all over New Mexico.
Um
These divisions have a lot of
moving different a lot of moving
parts, for example, with outdoor
rec, um, the trails Plus
program, there's our outdoor
equity program, um, we also have
3 state agencies that are
attached administratively to the
department and that's the um
border authority, the Spaceport
Authority, and the Office of
Military Base Planning and um
since I've been in the role,
we've tried to take a much more
active role in supporting and
engaging with those uh
administrative ads.
ly attached uh divisions in
order to support them and make
sure that we're aligned uh
working together on issues.
Um
So if we could go to the next
slide, I'll get into the, the,
the kind of energy conversation.
Thank you. Um, and I, I wanna do
this through a bit of a
Uh sample or an example.
Um, and one of the reasons I
want to use this example is
we're getting, and this gets to
some of where a lot of the low
demand is coming, not just in
the Delaware's got its own uh
demand needs that are, that are
happening, but I've probably
have a dozen different companies
interested in building.
Uh, data centers here in New
Mexico.
Um, and when we think about data
centers, we do have the meta
data center Facebook data center
that we can use that as as an
example of what that
can look like.
Um
Lida helped make that project
happened
in the state, the state, uh,
through the investments of the
legislature, uh, in the LEADER
program, made a $10 million
investment.
In building that um Facebook
Data Center.
As an example, in 2015,
The village of Los Lunas earned
$11 million annually.
Or GRT.
Last month alone.
Uh, it was 3.9 million in one
month.
Um
What you will see.
As you, as we talk through this
is that um the impacts.
Overall, to the, to the village
now.
All that can't be attributed
just to meta.
You have Amazon that showed up
there. You have uh other
activities Nexter is built, uh,
a, a major solar farm between
Berlin and Los Lunas.
But I would argue that when you
have a fortune 10 company.
Locate in a community,
especially at data center. What
you see is a hub develop around
that.
And that's what's happened in
Los Lunas. And so it's driven
investments in restaurants and
supply and hardware in housing,
uh, in those solar farms and
what we're seeing now is more
and more data centers wanting to
build
Behind the meter
And I'm sure we'll talk more
about that, and that means not
on the grid, but uh, behind,
behind that meter and building
out solar, wind, other
technologies to power those,
those data centers.
And so when you start to get
that advanced energy investment,
then you're also starting to
look at where we have companies
talking about desalinization
efforts.
Um
You get a whole range of
investments that come in with
that data center.
And when you look at the
Impact
To GRT.
From Meta Facebook over the last
10 years, um, and this again is
this one, this number is for the
state of New Mexico. This is the
state's portion of GRT over the
10 years, and this is the delta
from that base year of 2015. So
it's
In 2015, we have the delta
amount of 11 million and then
you go up to the the the delta.
That one project.
Brought in $198 million in GRT.
If you can conclude the hub
effect that was created there.
Their leader program for the
last 6 years.
was $154 million.
So, we do think where you make
these large investments and you
can do that effectively, um, you
could really have an impact.
And I'll see
This company here.
Uh, these are
The shine Pet Food Company
cheese Munchies. I got these at
the uh
The
Santae Chamber of Commerce event
last night. It's also a leader
project.
Where again, we're supporting
businesses here in New Mexico.
So with that, I wanted to kind
of use that articulate the, the
example of, of the impact that a
data center can have.
Both to the state and the
village where the community. We
can go to the next slide,
please.
But the data, the, the energy
requirements are massive for
these new AI data centers.
Um, we're talking about 500 to
600 megawatts is what most of
them are telling us they need.
To give you a sense of the scale
of that.
Um, that's as, as, as
articulated there are between
240 and 600,000 residences is
what that would power.
There's 960,000 residences in
the state of New Mexico.
So 2 data centers of that size.
will be the equivalent of every
residence in the state.
So it is exponentially different
of what we're trying, what we
would need to scale to.
To be able to power uh the, the
requests that we're getting here
in the state. And this is not
just New Mexico, it's, it's the
entire country.
Um
We do have some very effective
tools, uh, to support this, um,
again with Lita, with Jip, with
um the ability to do
Uh
IRBs, kids, so we have, we can
be competitive if it's something
that we have a regulatory and a
policy environment that we want
to support.
But I would argue that we should
look closely at data centers.
There's a big impact on the
energy side.
But as we think about how we do
rural economic development.
I think you would be hard
pressed to find something that
has been more impactful than
what's happened in Los Lunas
over the last decade.
When you're talking about
something outside of uh the
greater Albuquerque area.
So, um,
And we are getting inquiries
from all over the state.
For folks who are interested in
locating these sort of centers.
So that's just one context of
the data or the energy requests
that we're getting, um, there's
obviously companies like
Ebon and Maxion who are also
have significant energy demands,
uh, you know, they're building
wafers and chips. Those are,
those are energy intensive. So
again, high demand industries
where we're getting into these
high tech jobs that we want to
create here in New Mexico.
So with that, um, I think we go
to the next slide.
And back to my partner.
Thank you.
So
Across the nation, uh, utility
regulation tends to be pretty
similar. Each state has its own
quirkiness, uh, maybe that's the
word to use, but
principles of utility regulation
have been established since the
inception of utilities. There
are natural monopoly, meaning
that market forces don't work on
them, so you can't expect uh a
competitor come in and drive
down the price to motivate
efficiencies. Um, that's the
point of regulation.
So utilities meet growing
demand, um,
Both on the planning side and on
the regulatory side, and we'll
talk about both very briefly.
When a utility has the need to
build uh a a component of their
system, whether it's generation
or maybe substation or some kind
of uh distribution line. They
have certain thresholds for day
to day operations that goes into
an accounting and we deal with
that in, in rape cases. Um, when
we're talking about big
generation, they have to come in
and apply to the commission.
For a concertificate of
convenience and necessity, or
CCN. Those are for the big
projects and right now under
statute those uh approvals by
the commission have to take
place in no more than 18 months.
Excuse me, 15 months, it's 9 +
6, but again, 15 months is the
maximum that the commission can
take for that. Many of the
utilities upgrades system
replacements happen in what's
called a 440 filing, that's uh
PRC rule for
40, I think it's 17.3.
I don't remember the citation.
Um, probably not important for
most of us, but that is a more
um routine filing. It's a notice
that they're going to be
building this thing and it's a
um
It doesn't go through the same
process as a CCN. So what we're
seeing is CCNs can take up to 15
months, 4 40s can take a much
shorter time. That's for a
smaller project. And then
there's a third thing that uh
utilities do, and that's called
a purchase power agreement, and
that's when they go out and they
buy long term uh power from
another generation source, and
those have a 6 month timeline
per commission rule.
Because of the nature of uh the
utility industry. Utilities are
planning on a twenty-year
horizon. Um, it's a twenty-year
planning cycle. They come in to
the PRC and file what's called
integrated resource plans. Those
have 3-year action plans that
happen between, you know, so
that we know what the next steps
are supposed to be for getting
to the 20 year horizon, um, when
done well,
An IRP lets the commission and
the public know what to expect
for load growth?
What resources are expected to
be needed to meet that load
growth.
What the action plan is that the
utility expects to take to meet
that load growth, um, and
There really shouldn't be
surprises then, because if done
well, that IRP is comprehensive,
it's thorough, and it gives
everybody insight into what's
coming.
What's happened recently is this
massive and rapid growth has
caused all of us to have to
pivot, sometimes unexpectedly,
um, and so we face challenges
altogether to get this, these
systems on the grid. So as
Secretary Black mentioned, what
happens then when a utility
can't meet those those requests
for service will again, I'm
oversimplifying the entire
utility regulation scheme, but
the long story short is the
either go somewhere else that
can, or they decide to build
behind the meter. So
individuals, including
corporations can build their own
power supplies as long as
they're not providing it to
other people. They're not
selling it. They're not being a,
a utility themselves. And when
that happens, you remember I
talked about how economic
development can benefit everyone
when they're building their own
generation, it doesn't benefit
everyone. It doesn't contribute
to the capacity of the grid. It
doesn't help spread the cost of
the utility infrastructure.
And so, um, it serves their
purpose. It gets them the power
that they need, but we it then
doesn't extend necessarily to
the rest of the grid.
So next slide please.
So back to that inquiry that the
commission did.
Uh, there were a fair number of
takeaways and I believe there is
more work coming on behalf of
the commission, but I wanted to
highlight 4 things that we heard
that were pretty common across
all responses. Now, we did
receive the 3 responses from the
3 big electric utilities. We
also received a hand, uh, more
than a handful of responses from
interested parties, everything
from large customers, we heard
from the gas company, our own
internal advocacy staff analyzed
it. We heard from individual
large customer.
like Walmart, um, but these kind
of were themes that we saw
throughout. So the first is
supply chain shortages. What
keeps utilities from meeting
these growing demands, supply
chain. Uh, that's not unique to
New Mexico. We're competing with
every other utility in the
country, every other state,
trying to get resources here so
that we can build um substations
and transformers. We saw in
those responses that we, the
utilities were seeing up to 20.
60 weeks for auto transformers
and 200 weeks for high voltage
circuit breakers, those are just
the supply chain.
Supply and demand indicates that
soon the supply chain should be
freer because if there's a high
demand for this, we expect to
see more supply.
We haven't seen that yet. So
that's a
Hopeful thing, but not something
that we can bank on. Also, we've
seen the response that labor
market is providing some uh
deterrence or inability to meet
these demands. That's because
new tech means new tech jobs and
as we're getting into grid
modernization and putting new
technologies on the, on the
grid. That means we need people
to be able to do that. And so
it's a labor market thing. Uh,
we recommend strong and we're
trying to build at the PRC
strong relationships.
with universities and trade
schools so that we can prepare
our next generation of uh of
workers to be in these high tech
fields and help with the
advanced grid technologies.
One of the big things that we've
seen in these responses was the
limitations on load forecasting.
Now, this is twofold. First of
all, you can't plan effectively
if you don't have a good forward
looking model. So it's really
imperative that the utilities
are really dialed in on their
load forecasting. One of the
other things we also heard was
the PRC doesn't have the
resources to do its own load
modeling, and then it's
absolutely true for as long as
I've been involved in uh
utility work, which is more than
10 years now. The, the only
people really who could run
their their own models or the
utilities. And so that, um, adds
to this complexity is that
everybody has to rely on the
utility models.
The last piece, and this is the
piece that's made it back to my
ears the most, is that, oh boy,
utilities can't meet these
demands because of regulatory
lag, because the commission is
taking so much time, they can't
do anything. Um, and I will own
that there are there is room for
improvement in our procedures,
in our processes. I am currently
undertaking a um
Motivational journey with our
staff to make sure that we are
doing everything we can to be as
efficient as possible. Um, but
what
I also um think is that there
are many opportunities to
capitalize through this load
forecasting so that there are
fewer surprises. Um, we have in
the last two years, very proud
of our staff, excited to be part
of this team. We have seen CCNs,
remember I reminded you it's a
15 month deadline. We've done
those CCNs in less than 7, or
excuse me, around 77 months.
That was the last P&M CCN they
came in for a certificate of
convenience necessity, they
paired it with a PPA purchase
power agreement, 2 different
deadlines. We did both of those
same case in about 7 months. So
we really are looking for
opportunities at the commission
to cut through that red tape and
really make a meaningful
difference in the length of time
that we are considering cases.
Um
And again, my, my note says the
commission needs the ability to
do its own modeling.
I already covered that. It's
really important. It will help
with um efficiency and help with
this planning process.
Other recommendations that the
commission got that I think is
useful as we're thinking about
this regulatory context is, um,
That utilities need right now
believe that they need to have a
hard customer on the end of that
development in order to apply to
the commission, that's
definitely something worth
talking about. And then also
recommendations came in limiting
the scope of the cases. Uh, if
you're familiar with utility,
Cass sometimes they are massive.
I'm talking like 15,000 page
records, um, just a lot of
information pouring through
those doors and so if we can
focus those cases, make them
smaller, more digestible at a
single time that came out, that
was a strong recommendation from
our inquiry.
And then last but not least, I
gave you that chart. I said it's
not a comparison because it's
not standardized and each
utility collects information the
same way. One of the other
recommendations that came out of
that, um, inquiry at least, and
these are all preliminary
recommendations because there's
more work to do, but that is,
let's standardize some of these
reports, so across territories,
people who are developing the
economic development folks can
look at a report and know what
it means and SPS's territory or
PNM's territory or uh
Socorroelectrics territory. And
so standardization with the
information is also going to be
really important as we move
forward.
Next slide.
So it's, it's my turn again, Mr.
Chairman, and, and what I'll do
is on this slide, I'll focus on
some of the initiatives that
we're working on this year that
align with uh with the chief of
staff mentioned, and I want to
thank, uh, Mr. Chairman, I want
to thank Senator Padilla for
being a bill sponsor on a couple
of these bills. One is a, a, a
um economic development
department built around site
strategy site readiness
strategies.
Uh, that bill will allow us to,
to, um,
Identify opportunities for
development around the state of
New Mexico. Antiguous lands, 20
acres or more, 50 acres or more
single landowner, and then do an
analysis of what that land could
be used for. We will work with
cities, counties, tribal
entities, private owners to do
that site characterization work,
and then give you, give an
analysis both to the
legislature, you'll have this
for capital outlay, but to the
local communities, we think this
is what the site could be best
used for based on its access to
rail or access.
these various things and up at
various markets.
If you make these types of
investments, you could get this
land much more developable.
That's one of the things we,
when we're, when, when these
companies whether it's a data
center or uh a warehousing
facility or manufacturing
facility are looking for a place
to locate. We have very few
places to market or to sell here
in the states. So we want to do
this site characterization work.
What that leads into, once we've
done that work and we've
certified the site as a
strategic economic development
site. There's a second bill at
the senator's carrying uh around
utility pre-deployment and the
idea is that, um, and this gets
to uh what Choi was mentioning
regarding this concern about
utilities deploying
infrastructure prior to an
individual customer being
identified.
So if we've done the site
characterization work. So this
site is a strategic economic
development site in New Mexico
and Sandoval County or in Donana
County.
Um, that utility can take that
certification to the PRC.
For an expedited 6-month review,
6 month review period.
To analyze whether or not they
would like to approve that
deployment of capital prior to a
customer, an individual customer
being identified.
And then allow for a process.
Following that
Or that investment to be
included into the rate base
eventually. The concern is from
the utility side, if they build
that to the economic development
site.
And there's not a customer there
that day.
That they didn't because of
accounting have to write that
off, and then you lose the
ability to put it into the right
base.
So we want to create some
regulatory security that allows
them to pre-deploy. And what
that does is you the uh Choi
mentioned the, the
Difficulty with supply chains
and all of those other pieces to
get that equipment done. If
you're waiting till you have a
customer identified at that
site.
And then go through the
regulatory process and then buy
your equipment and then
Build your equipment.
You're too late. They're already
going to Arizona or or Texas.
So we need to be able to
pre-deploy to be ready to move
dirt faster. So if we can get
to, you know, a year or 18
months instead of 3 to 5 years,
where much more competitive with
these sort of investments. So,
That's the utility
pre-deployment piece and, and
the third bill that we will be
bringing forward is a regulatory
uh transparency bill, uh, where
we will require the state,
that's RLD but as well as local
and county organizations that do
planning uh permits,
construction permits, uh, and
licenses and inspections to
report every quarter.
How long it takes for the
average time from an application
to determination to make that
decision.
And we're gonna publish that on
RLD's website so that Los Lunas
will know how long it takes in
their community, but so will Rio
Rancho, so well Farmington.
And we can say, well, why does
it take this long in 11
community and not another.
Allows us to be much better and
much more efficient. So those
are some of the things from EDD
side working to make all of
these processes more efficient,
Mr.
Uh
No, I was just OK. I wanted to
just offer uh thank you to the
secretary. I wanted to let the
committee know that Senator
Brandt also signed on to the
site readiness bill. I want to
thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, yes,
just about to wrap up and, and
At the top of this chart, you'll
see areas within our Office of
Strategy, Science and
Technologies that we are making
direct investments based on uh
the, the dollars that the, that
the legislature that this
committee and, and House
Appropriations gave us last
year, uh, and trying to move the
needle on some of these hard
questions. So making it a pilot
program around event around
advanced synergy, um, on water
treatment and advanced energy
technologies. We're doing
analysis of the what.
Advanced energy sectors, we are
most competitive for in New
Mexico and what are the things
we need to move to become more
competitive in those areas
because it is an area that
we're, we're leading around the
country. So those are the types
of investments thanks to the
legislature, the EDD is making
currently.
Thank you.
Next slide.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I will
be very quick.
We were told when we came before
the full committee in November,
um, to throw out our initial
request and come back with a
vision for what it would take to
do all the things that the PRC
uh is being asked to do this
session, and I was putting
together a list of what that is,
and it's everything from
economic development to
decarbonization, energy
transition, grid hardening,
trade ports, rural development,
energy affordability, wildfires.
Those are just off the top of my
head what the PR.
is being asked to do this
session alone, uh, as well as
all the stuff that we're already
doing, working on doing more
efficiently. So this is it. We
put together a, a vision.
That would take um an increase
to our staff. It would take an
increase to our base operating
budget, specifically, um, an
increase to allow us to have a
complimentary hearing room,
building on the building that we
will be moving into shortly. Um,
Total 20.1 million is what our
ask is to make this an agency
that can keep up with all the
demands that is being put on us
and to help move these cases
through more swiftly. We heard
nearly 400 cases last year.
So we're uh very proud of our
price per case, um, and we think
that it's a good investment.
Happy to answer any questions.
OK, we'll stand for questions,
Senator Steinborton, I guess you
can be first and is next and.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good to see you both. Thanks for
coming back.
Um
Kind of curious about these data
centers and um hearing how much
demand we have, I can understand
how much demand there is
nationally, internationally to
create an AI is just exploding
and
You know, that's a big deal.
Understanding a little bit
though about how utilities work
in the state of New Mexico and
how infrastructure is financed
just for basic education for the
public infrastructure, as I
understand it, tell me if I'm
wrong, Miss, Miss Corey, that
utility infrastructures,
utilities need more power
generation. They basically
Spread that amongst the rate
base, and that's how new
infrastructure is, is built.
That's how rates end up going up
for consumers, and that's why
one reason why you want to do
demand side management of
Clean energy and things that
keep us from building new
infrastructure because then you
don't have to.
Hey, the utility to build more
infrastructure. So what I'm a
little worried about that I
guess I lost some clarity on is.
With new data centers as much,
you know, in your chart, you,
you show that a new AI data
center is enough for a
population of uses the same
power as 240,000 to 600,000
homes.
Which would be 10% to
You know, 25, 30% of this whole
state.
If we build that amount of
power, is that basically they
have to be paid for by all the
other ratepayers.
And how much does that data
center shoulder that cost that
is being incurred from that
operation.
Mr. Chairman, I'll go first and,
and I'll let them the
The, the smarter person answered
that question. Uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator, um, if, if I think if,
if, if it's structured properly.
You're actually uh spreading
that, that infrastructure cost
among
Because we have a lot of
upgrades we have to do. We need
to upgrade to smart meters. We
need to do a grid that can go
both ways. There is a lot we
need to do on the energy
transition.
Economic development projects
that are large economic
development projects can help
fund that infrastructure
improvement, um, so again, when
done well, it does that. What
we're hearing from a lot of the
developers who are now
interested because the other
thing that they're desperate for
is, is quickly moving quick.
And so that's why they're saying
uh for fairness or not to the,
our regulators in the room,
they're saying we don't want to
go through that regulator,
regulated process. We're gonna
build the, the solar, we're
gonna build the battery storage
on our own. We want to build a
micro grid to do that. We'll do
a microgrid to support the, the,
the campus that we're building.
Uh, with the idea that if we
build it to the standards of
what an IOU could then take
ownership of that they would
then perhaps sell that to the
IOU later, but they're looking
to build that infrastructure
themselves.
Uh, is how we're hearing it a
lot now, each deal is gonna be
different, but that's, that's
kind of what we're, we're
hearing, Senator.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
There's a couple of principles
that we can look to already to
help with that. And so the first
is generally uh cost causation,
which is a buzzword in the
regulatory world, which means
the customer that causes the
cost should be covering the
cost. Now, it is not a perfect
formula, uh, and so we're always
working on that. So that's the
first thing. The second thing is
we have an example in the
economic development rate
statute about requiring
customers for economic
development projects.
To bear in the statute, it's
called the incremental costs. So
the cost that's additional for
bringing them onto the system.
So we have a couple of ways of
looking at this to help mitigate
those costs to consumers.
Thank you. Well, Mr. Chair, I'm
super concerned about this. I
mean, after learning more about
it, I think.
Um, the other thing, first thing
I looked up when you started
talking was how many jobs are
created by a data center.
And as I understand, I'm sure we
create a lot of jobs building it
because it's a massive site, but
that it's actually maybe you
create 30 jobs ongoing, that's
just what it said online, but I
don't know if you have a
different number that says
anything different than that,
Mr. Secretary.
Sure.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, we're
in the 3 to 41 in the 100s in
meta right now, not counting
construction.
That are permanent employees. So
then you also have the, the GRT
increase into the community and,
and then those ancillary
businesses that come in and
support. Yeah, well, Mr. Chair,
300 to 400 is very different
than 30, right? And so where
does, where does that, I mean,
that's real data.
Um, so that matters, right? How
much it's worth it to us. But I
do think, you know, the other
concern like, let's say we
Build massive infrastructure as
a part of the utility to serve
that company.
Well, what if that company
leaves?
Who is paying that rate then
over the 30 year life of that
infrastructure that the PRC has
to approve. So personally, I,
you know, I think if they could
build their own utility
generation to support that,
that's a way better deal for
Citizens and ratepayers.
Than being stuck with Bill
potentially or even shouldering.
Any part of it. Um, I mean, you
know, contributing to the cost
of it, but I think that we
should not largely be giving him
the cost. So just some
principles that I would look
towards, um,
And you know, like El Paso
Electric, you know, they're rate
base or some of these other
utilities is, you know, gonna be
spread out far beyond the people
that are benefiting directly
from that project, you know, in
that community in terms of
economic development and
spending in local shops. So then
we're asking someone really
that's farther away to, to
subsidize that. So I just wanted
to just share those concerns,
um, as we chart our economic
development strategy and how,
what are the parameters maybe in
which we negotiate these deals
so that we are protecting the
Mexicans in the process.
The other thing I want to just
ask about is I know we passed
the LEDA bill, Mr. Chairman,
like a couple of years ago.
To allow up to like 50%. I don't
know if it was GRT or what it
was, it was 50% of
Like the cost of the project we
could give in LIA or does this
ring a bell with you or is this?
You wish, right?
Senator, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, um, uh, I should have
also said this is my 4th month
on the job, so I'm, I'm so with
that said, my recollection is
that was uh was done in a
special session um and it was
done as a way to help support
the additional fab development
at Intel as one of the models of
the type of investments that
that amendment could do, but I
apologize, I don't remember the
exact details of it, and I could
certainly get back to you.
Well, I just bring it up because
it wasn't tied to any company,
which is also one of the great
mysteries up here legislating is
there's always somebody behind
everything we do, but it's not
disclosed, which is something
else I've been advocating for,
but, but it was, it was an
economic development deal and
you felt like, OK, there's a
deal behind here that we're
trying to help, but what I was
concerned of was of course, by
giving away, not leader, maybe
it was GRT I think it was Lita,
but of course it would take that
amount of lita to be able to do
it. Like we would be kind of
giving away a lot of that
economic benefit.
of building it, if we're giving
that much away and it was also
the local government having to,
and it was for all projects. So
as we talk about economic impact
with these things if we're
giving that much away on
everyone.
If we don't have that many jobs
and we're creating all these
utility rate exposure for
everybody. It just all adds up
and they're like, well, what
kind of a benefit? I know we're
getting the benefit, but
I just, I'll flag that for you,
Mr. Secretary. There's another
tool in your tool chest here.
And I think we passed, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator, again, I,
I would take you back to um the,
the comment I made regarding
Um
The Meta event from the meta
project. That was a $10 million.
Contribution by the state.
Uh, and again, above baseline in
20 from the 2015 baseline.
Just for the village of Los
Lunas, above baseline, it's been
$144 million in taxes,
additional.
To the village.
189 million.
to the state. So for a $10
million investment for that sort
of return.
I, I, I mean, I don't see where
you can get a better return, so
I, I would argue, uh,
respectfully that I think if
we're doing this right, um,
we're, we're paying for those
projects. Absolutely, Mr. Chair,
the details matter and those
details are impressive, so I
don't dispute that and it sounds
like a great thing. So.
They're all probably a little
different, and it just depends
on the details. That's all I
have, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you.
I think that was for projects
over 300 million or 100 million
and they got the GRT deduction.
I remember Center.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and thank
you uh Mr. Secretary and Madam
Chief of Staff, outstanding
information. I think that we're
just absolutely taking a couple
of steps in the right direction
here, um, on the uh site
readiness, utility, um,
redeployment, uh, the quantum
stuff, uh, all very, very good
moves, um, New Mexico, you know,
needs to have these sites ready,
otherwise you're absolutely
right, uh, companies look, they
want to make decisions yesterday
in some cases. They get that
that funding and that capital
made available to them, and
they, they
want to put a shovel in the
ground, ASAP and if we're not
ready, Mr. Chairman, we're gonna
get bypassed and this is ideally
going to help us to get uh get
in the front of the line at
least. I mean we'll get
selected, but everything else
that we have going on, and I
like you, Chairman, I have
clients of my own that come into
New Mexico. We send them over
and we, we, and they, they have
a visit with the economic,
they're always shocked at how
much we offer here in New
Mexico. But even with all of
that, it's tough to make a
decision if they can't put a
shovel in the ground and start
with the facility to actually
operate.
their business and what have
you. So I just want to give you
kudos there. These are moves, I
think in the right direction. On
the um power generation, power
transmission, this, that and the
other, um, are we proactively,
Mr. Chairman and, and Madam
Chief of Staff, are, are we
proactively looking at like new
innovative, are we going out and
saying our utilities.
They are doing everything they
can to bring power online, but
I'm hearing it's also like a 36
month.
You know, slog through the.
Desert trying to get power to my
building. So, so once your, your
neighbor sitting next to you
right there, once he gets his
work done,
You know, I can't turn the
lights on, and that's a problem.
And uh so are we looking at
innovative things like like
mobile power storage, um, you
know, uh, on these data centers,
there's they're very creative
ways to build these now, um, so
that they don't use the kind of
power that that that we're
talking about here, uh, two data
centers using the power for all
of the homes equal to all of the
homes in New Mexico right now.
This is, this is amazing. We
need to be fully aware of that.
What are we doing proactively to
to sort of look at all that new
technology, that new innovation.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
The PRC in the last two years
has been actively working on
modernizing our processes to ask
those hard questions of the
utilities, because we're on a
fine line, we can't get in there
and manage the utilities.
That's, uh, that's not
regulation so instead what we're
doing and the commission
themselves has been, have been
very active in this space and
our staff is is starting to rev
up its engine to ask these hard
questions, he utility, why is it
taking so long?
What are you doing? What's your
plan to address that? Are you
trying new technology? And then
we're grappling with the
question of should ratepayers be
on the hook to try out these
untested utility, uh, these
untested technologies. So it's a
careful balance, uh, that the
commission is trying to strike
between pushing innovation,
trying new things, making sure
that we're responsive to the
growing demand and also watching
out to make sure that we're not,
uh, funding that technology, bad
investments.
etc.
Well, Mr. Chairman, and I, I
guess I kind of have to just
kind of call a foul on that just
slightly because I, I, a lot of
these technologies, they are
tested, they're being used next
door, uh, there'd be bless you
again, tender Vice Chairman, um,
but, but they're being utilized
all over the country, all over
the world. Uh, we're sort of the
ones that are behind on this
stuff. So I I I just want to say
that, you know, I don't, I don't
know that we should use the term
untested, uh, but do we have
like a directed focus anywhere
in either one of your areas, I
guess I'll just drop, drop this
Mr. Chairman.
of you that are proactively
looking at, you know, we know
that we have a site readiness
problem, so now we have a plan.
We know we have this utility
pre-deployment, you know, we
have that, so now we have a
plan, but proactively looking at
things like and and not just you
uh um um uh just the power
generation or power, water, I
mean, all these, do we, do you
have anybody proactively looking
at new innovative creative ways
to, to put that behind us also.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
for the question. Yes, we are,
uh, leaning in on with our
Office of strategy, Science and
Technology. Um, we have, uh, we
have pilot technology
demonstration projects currently
going in uh water treatment and
advanced energy. One of those
was a partner uh public private
partnership with the Mexico
State University. We're building
a desal hydrogen facility on on
campus. Um, we have additional
investments, um,
Again, grant programs and pilot
programs looking at how we fund
these sort of advanced
technologies and they're
competitive, uh, and really
seeing what are the technologies
that can move the needle on our
imaging transition and that our
New Mexico companies that will
stay here and grow here.
Yeah, I mean, uh, what does that
mean?
I think they're printed all my
bills back there is what it is.
So, and then on, on, on the, Mr.
Chairman, I'll I'll stop now on
the quantum uh piece. Can you
tell us a little bit more and
I'll, I'll just direct this one
to Mr. Secretary. um, these two
items is anything related to the
workforce on either one of those
items because I think we're
gonna, we could potentially run
into a barrier with having a
qualified workforce for all of
that quantum.
Technology that's going to be
coming in. I mean, we need a
chair in tech in quantum physics
at our research institutions. I
think that's how far we
absolutely need to go to make
this work for us.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, this
is actually a great story to
tell in New Mexico, and it's
part of why, um, I think you'll
be bringing these quantum bills
forward and we're uniquely
competitive to win the race on
quantum computing.
Um, for years, uh,
I send National Lis has had a
quantum.
Fab behind the fence.
And there's been a partnership
with UNM's Advanced computer
engineering program at the PhD
level.
Uh, where those PhDs are able to
get access and work on that
quantum fat.
That it meant that UNM is
producing the best quantum
doctoral candidates in the
world.
And so I'm at the level of the
doctoral side, we have, we have
a conference uh in uh Nora
Sackett, who's behind me, helped
lead this with uh the governor's
team and UNM uh in September, I
believe, in September, October,
uh last year uh on Quantum, and
we had 9, I think 9 different
companies from all over the
world come.
All of them talked about.
The, the UNM graduates, they
have in their companies at
senior levels.
We are actually leading on the
high level PhD.
Uh, as in us MIT Stanford, you
know, we're, we're, it's not
above them.
Comparable
And then CNM is working on a
Skills trade program or quantum.
The thing about quantum that is
unique.
is to make it work, you have to
get it really, you're getting to
0 °C basically, really cold.
And so you need plumbers, pipe
fitters, HVAC, welders that,
that the, the true technical
training programs are really
important and a lot of the jobs.
So it's kind of a sweet spot for
New Mexico. We've got the trade
skills and the PhDs and that's
where quantum fits. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and, and I
just, yeah, I'm glad you're
thinking that way because, yes,
the the doctoral trained
individuals for the quantum work
that we're gonna have coming to.
That's one thing.
But there's technicians, there's
all the CTSO stuff you talked
about. All that's just as
critical, so I hope we're
focused on that. And I'll wrap
up now, Mr. Chairman, and just
wanna again thank Senator Brandt
for signing on to the site
readiness bill and on the
quantum bill, Senator Souls is a
big part of helping me get that
done too. Thank you.
after tomorrow sender once it's
time clock.
Senator Woods.
Thank you for your presentation,
Mr. Chair.
Miss.
Must be getting confused here.
I'm pretty easily confused, as
you know.
A one year
One ear I hear things like uh
We need to electrify
transportation sector.
I hear we need to electrify all
our heating and cooling.
We need to electrify our
industry.
We're talking about
physics.
All this stuff I hear about, I
hear about AI.
Every bit of the hosing
electricity if I'm not mistaken,
Mister Chairman.
Am I missing a boat here
somewhere?
is, is, is.
Every one of these not talking
about putting more wire in
there, are we going to be able
to push electricity without
putting water in the air.
I don't understand.
And, and the biggest part I
don't understand is
Somebody, you got to pay for
now.
There's comments that
We don't wanna do this.
That is sooner.
Because it might cause
somebody's rates to go up.
But if we don't have the data
center.
To bring in some
Some, uh
Aid to construction.
What you will require.
In your necessity for
construction, I believe, Mr.
Chair, that's a good question.
Just to kind of explain what uh
uh necessity for construction.
kind of go to that a little bit
of step or two.
Please.
Mr. Chair, it's a pop quiz, um.
So a contribution in aid of
construction helps. I was
talking about cost causation
earlier. It helps ensure that
the person who is going to
benefit from that construction.
Has skin in the game puts puts
money up. You can think about it
if it also happens with
residentials when they're
building a line to their house
from the main line. They have to
do a contribution in aid to
construction because they're the
ones that's benefiting from
that.
That's true. And also,
If they say they're out in the
country somewhere.
And they get a line and they pay
for the big part of that line.
To get that done.
And if someone comes in behind
them and will sit tie in that
line, isn't there about a
10-year period that they
actually get to recoup some of
that cost.
Mr. Chair, subject check. I, uh,
I think that sounds right. I
would have to check and get back
to you. I may be, I might be out
of your wheelhouse here and I
apologize to you for that.
But what I'm trying to get out.
If we don't want, say that we
just want New Mexico to be a
stagnant as it is today.
It never grow any, you know,
we've grown.
8 years of the last 12 years.
Our average growth is 4000
people.
Over the last 12 years.
Now, if we want to stay that
stagnant,
And not have anybody industry
come in or anything come in.
But I'm having a problem with.
Is how we gonna electrify
trains?
Transportation
If we don't want anything
happening here.
So, who's going to pay?
Because what I understand, every
50 miles on an interstate,
there's supposed to be a
charging station.
I don't believe there's enough.
Grid along those interstates.
To actually do that right now.
So if we're going to have to
increase the grid.
Along that interstate to do that
because they say if we electrify
the trucking industry, we need a
charging station every 200
miles, and that's big waters.
So who's going to pay for that?
This year
The question.
You, you, you know all of it.
Let's see, let's hear it.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator Woods,
uh, that is a good question, and
I think it will be dependent on
um
A variety of factors. One is,
uh, just be frank.
We're having to change at the
federal level, obviously a new
administration. Uh, they're
gonna have different priorities
and so how, how we can pull
federal dollars for that sort of
infrastructure will be different
than than what it has been
previously. I think that's
something that we that needs to
be assessed. Um,
As, as far as the public side of
that there, there's obviously a
lot of uh interest from a
private sector side, um.
Uh
Tesla builds a lot of their own
infrastructure charging
infrastructure to support that
uh their their vehicles, um,
where they build, you know, if
Tesla's building trucks, will
they be the ones helping to pay
that, or will it be subsidies to
support it? I don't know the
individual uh how each one of
those sort of
To answer each of the or all of
those questions. I think it's a
fact of a variety of factors of
how that would get funded.
Well go ahead if you got, yeah.
Mr. Chair, Senator, the, uh, the
short answer, I mean, there's a
lot of details to that answer,
but the short answer is these
upgrades are coming to the grid
with or without the data centers
with or without the large
customers. We are looking at
capacity hosting analysis with
each of the utilities. We're
talking about congestion in
residential neighborhoods that
require significant investment
in the grid and so the answer to
your question is
everyone else.
Um, who's currently on there.
OK, let's say, let's just do it
by user fee.
Let's do it by us. Let's do
charging stations by user fee,
Mr. Chair.
8.
Now think about that.
It cost $80,000 to put in one of
those fast chargers is what I
understand.
Let's just use that figure just
pull it out of the air.
I was, let's start with a
realistic number, roughly
600,000 depending on how quick a
charge you want.
And, and if you need a
Uh
Am I seeing some distinction
with the transport that matches
the
The three-phase power that you
needed to do with the rapid
charge. So just average amount
of 600,000.
And I'm getting an odd shake
from DOT back there. OK, so if
it's 600,000, let's do it by
charging fee.
So what will it cost that
average guy to charge.
To not only pay for his
electricity, but to pay for the
facility too.
It's gonna be more than the cost
of the vehicle or the
Or the thing charging.
If they have to pay for it for
the next 10 years.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Ciner, it is lucky that
Secretary Cer is in the house,
uh, and might be coming to
testify to you later, uh,
because he might be better
positioned to answer that
question. I don't have, I'm not
trying to put you on the spot.
Uh, what I'm trying to make a
point of it is
Electricity infrastructure is
paid for.
A socialization.
And that's a sad word for a
Republican to say, I know. So
make note of it everybody.
Republican said socialization.
But you have to socialize
certain cost.
In order to get it paid for.
You have to charge a lot of
ratepayers in tax law we call it
diversifying or spreading the
The, the cost over more people.
That's exactly what the PRC
does.
The BRC determines what
ratepayer will pay for what
life.
That's their job.
The, the certificate of
necessity.
It issued to a utility when a
utility can prove.
That it's an necessity to build.
A line
A transmission line. That's a,
that's a term that they use.
There's a lot of things that
they have to go through.
To receive this certificate of
necessity and then they can go
out and start their, their right
away work they can start buying
materials, they can, but you
give them.
The ratepayer that they can
collect.
Return this money from.
And so when we start talking
about an industry like a data
center.
It's gonna be a big low, and
it's gonna take a big old wire
going to them.
But look him in charging
stations at my feet off that.
Go to.
And they're gonna pay a big
piece of it over here.
Because even if they generate
behind.
The meter
It's still not generating 24
hours a day.
They still have to have a
backup.
If they're going to operate 24
hours a day and I'm pretty sure
those data centers operate 24
hours a day.
So
Before we just pitch everything
in the dirt.
Before you pitch everything in
the dirt, let's think about how
Electric i grids, not operate,
but our financed.
And it's a big deal, and I think
that's what you're trying to
bring forward.
That we need to think.
Outside the box here.
Because how can we build that
bigger line.
That bigger carrier.
Out from the generation,
whatever the generation is,
because we always have those
spots that don't want it in
their backyard.
Right? It's been in the
newspaper right out here. The
one in my backyard.
So if we're gonna do that, we've
got to figure out how to build
that transmission.
And the PRC is the one.
That, that is a key mover in
that. The, the request that I
have, Mr. Chair, and this is the
last thing.
The request I have.
Yes. Now, what statute might we
need to change so that we can
get ahead of the game and try
to, to build a, uh, a little bit
above that necessity in order to
get those loads out there, what
we have a business coming in and
they have surety that they will
get electricity, Mr. Chair.
I will be quiet. Thank you, sir.
Senator bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
think we've had some really
interesting questions, uh,
especially from Mr. Senator
Padilla who has, um, you've
talked about electrification in
some different ways and I think
we've even heard from you, but
the one word I haven't heard is
nuclear, and I understand that
Meta and Amazon have built
nuclear facilities in other
states that
Perhaps think about their power
grid and how they expand
economic development differently
than New Mexico has, um,
historically, so is that part of
this grid improvement that we're
talking about and site
readiness. Is there any
discourse around that at all?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
I think the, the announcements
that were made were around SMR
small modular reactors.
Uh, and, um, we actually don't
have any of those deployed yet
in the United States. Uh, the
goal is, uh, I think the
announcement one was with Google
in Cairo's power, which actually
is a New Mexico or they do their
R&D here in New Mexico at Mesa
del Sol right over by Senator
Padilla's office, um, and
they're a great New Mexico
company, uh, but they, their
plan is I think to deploy in
2028 or 2029, uh, is, is what
the the announcements that I
that I saw were.
So we're still a ways off from
the from SMRs and that's got to
go through a federal approval
process, um.
But, you know, that technology
is, is, is really interesting
and as you look at the
difficulty of base load, uh, as
we transition and we have much
more intermittent power like
solar wind, um, we need to
figure out how we stabilize that
grid in a way that allows for
as, as Senator Woods mentioned,
uh, that this data center to go
at night or our lights to be on,
uh, and so thinking about how we
balance that load will be very
important in SMRs.
Uh, or certainly being
considered as part of that.
Thank you for that. And, and Mr.
Chair, the other thing that I'm
hearing is a little bit of a
nebulous answer around risk for
the payer, the ratepayer in New
Mexico and what that really
looks like, so when you sell a,
a site when a company comes in
and maybe we've on, on the front
end paid for that development,
that pre-development of that
site is the ratepayer getting
some kind of rebate. How, how
can we insure, Mr. Chair, that
we're isolating.
The lowest paid workers in the
country right here in New Mexico
from that burden, that
additional financial burden.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
Each case is examined, um, I
wanna say microscopically, some
cases get more scrutiny than
others, but the PRC and our
staff takes our job very
seriously, and that is to look
at each application on a utility
brings in and figure out is
there subsidization happening,
so is one type of ratepayer
supporting another type of
ratepayer. If it is, is it, uh,
reasonable and just because
we're charged with making sure
that
there's safe, reliable,
affordable service, uh, within
the bounds. So, um,
Each time we have a filing,
especially filings that seek
cost recovery or set rates.
Those types of questions are
asked, and so it's hard to give
you an answer kind of
universally, other than to say,
one of the reasons why I have
this big ask in front of you
today, budget wise is to make
sure that we have the staff on
both sides of both the advocacy
side and the advisory side of
our agency to make sure that we
are looking at that and
considering that in
the big picture.
And Mr. Chair, is there
standardization for the term
reasonable and just.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
The
The short answer is sort of.
Which is the lawyer's answer.
I'm sorry. Um, it depends on the
type of application, the types
of rates, what, uh, the history
of it is so.
In some instances, yes, we, we
definitely know what's unjust
and unreasonable and in some
other instances, no.
The terrible answer I know.
It kind of is, Mr. Chairman.
I, I, I'm, I'm brought here by
the citizens, right? And, and in
my own district, District 21 on
the Paseo corridor, we're
looking at improvements to um
what PNM is offering there in
that district and they're
talking to us about additional
load because of um not just AI
but electric vehicles and homes,
etc. which actually was not
received well in my district. So
as a business coach, I like to
see.
The detail because I'm hearing
just a very nebulous answer that
if I were running a business or
guiding a business owner to make
really solid decisions, um, I'd
wanna see just a little bit more
than kind of sort of.
Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair,
Senator, I would really love to
sit down with you and show you,
walk you through one of our rape
cases. My staff and I can come
in and help you, um,
See what I'm talking about, and
I can give you an example of
both instances where there is a
yes and there is a no, and we
can, we can get you all the
details that you could ever
imagine. I'd be happy to set
that up. Great. I would welcome
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Linder.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Woods, he kind of stole
my thunder there.
So
I just want to go back to the
charging stations for just a
second. So when, when we develop
the
Automobilele, who put in all of
the gas stations throughout the
United States.
I would, I would venture to say
it's private industry, right? So
I, I don't understand why the
government, we think we need to
put in all these.
Yeah, we're forcing it down
people's throats, you know, to
do these charging stations, and
it's a little raw with me
because we're trying to build a
new, a new store in Farmington
and one of the regulations is
gonna be put into charging
stations and
Because of that, we're probably
not going to do it.
It's just too expensive.
For what we're trying to do. So
that, that was just one comment,
Mr. Chair.
All right, so I do have some
questions. Um, thanks for your
presentation and the
standardized um graph, I think
that would be very important to
us if you could standardize
those questions, um, because we
don't really get a lot of
information off of that, which
you, you already alluded to.
And then my, my next question is
Los Lunas, why, how did they
pick Los Lunas for the location.
Sorry, am I putting water was
the number one choice because
they needed cooling and Los
Lunas had the availability of
water rights to cool their.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That
was before my time, so, um, I
think those decisions were made
probably 2014, 2015 time frame.
Um, and I, and the chairman
could absolutely be correct on,
on that. I wouldn't doubt it for
a minute, um, there were a
variety of other factors that
they had available land that was
contiguous, um, they had, uh,
there was a deal that was made
to allow for the transmission
line to move wind power. They
were very interested in
renewable power to offset the
load. So there was a deal that
was structured where a
transmission line from eastern
New Mexico delivering wind, wind
power to the facility.
was part of that deal. Um, so
there's a variety of factors
that made it work for them at
that time, um, but I don't know
that like.
couldn't tell you the exact
reasons for the site selection.
All right, thank you. And, and
another question I would have
is, well, the reason I'm
bringing that up is because um
I'm from San Juan County.
We had to close our San Juan
generating station. So we
already had the power grid
there.
We host most of the water in the
state of New Mexico.
And I just kind of feel like we
might have got overlooked. We
have the property, uh everything
that's been listed here today,
we have up there. And so that's
my question is why does it end
up in the middle of the state
instead of up in one of the
corners.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, that
actually clarifies a bit, um, I
mean, one of the things that,
and this is really important for
economic development again as we
think about rural economic
development.
Access to fiber and redundant
fiber is essential.
So when you're thinking about a
data center, right, you need a
lot of capacity to move that
data. So, um, making sure that
we've invested as a state, uh
working with our private sector
as well, make sure we have um
Strong fiber networks, and if
you look along I-25 and then
along I-10. There we have a very
we're very good fiber in New
Mexico that runs that helps
connect nationally.
And so, um, if you're if you're
thinking about some places that
you could easily do that where
you've already got that existing
fiber capacity. Those are areas,
um, but that's, that's one of
the key factors when you're
thinking data centers that
they've got the fiber
connectivity.
Great, thank you.
And then kind of switching.
Switching just a little bit on
how many jobs does this create?
And again, like um Senator.
Steinborne was talking about
not.
Not the construction, although
we all like those jobs.
What's, what's this?
The, the number of jobs after
that, after it's built, we're up
and running.
What's the number?
Senator, uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator, I, I will be happy to.
Get you exact numbers and we can
work with with meta as as again
for this case study. I know
they're in the 300 to 400 is
what my, my last information was
that our ongoing jobs and then
there's still, but they're still
building, they're still doing
construction there and they're
looking to build additional uh
we we heard recently, um,
And and I'll tell you a little
bit about how that works. So,
uh, and I was fortunate enough
to go uh when I was the
president of the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. We went
down and did a tour of the site
and um
They have multiple buildings.
I'm not even sure how many,
let's say 8. I'm just making
that up, but 8 buildings. By the
time they're, they're, they're
they're still in construction.
Within about 3 years, the chips
in that in one of those
buildings and those all of those
thousands and thousands of
computers are need to be
replaced.
So they're replacing those
computers.
All the time.
Um, in silver and upgrading them
to more efficient and more
efficient, more efficient chips.
So that's part of where you have
this ongoing workforce. It's
constantly improving and
upgrading the systems, um.
And, and then, uh, whether
that's again it creates this
broader dynamic. So, um,
The water usage of data centers
has gotten much better, uh, the
ones that we're talking to
today, many of them are closed
loop systems, um, but there's
still a need for water, uh, and
does that pair in with the
opportunity to do desalinization
programs, uh,
So, you know, building out if if
you're doing on-site generation,
that's another uh added job and
added technology that
accompanies that, that, that
investment. So then you start to
get that hub growth.
That really starts to change
that dynamic of a community
besides just what sits within
the four walls of that data
center.
Right, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
last, last question, this is the
easiest question you're gonna
get today.
How many staff members do you
have?
Right now
And are you at full capacity?
Your department.
moment.
Economic development, sorry.
Oh, I'm gonna make the switch
out.
101 will be following this
presentation.
Sorry, um, after bar authority
for cabinet secretaries.
Uh, um, Mr. Chairman, I had to,
uh, confer with my uh deputy
secretary, Isaac uh rash, uh,
um.
And
Uh, we believe we what I was
told is we have 74 approved
positions.
And about 68 that are currently
in place.
OK, Mr. Chair, the reason I'm
asking that question is because
you're asking for an increase,
right?
Did I read that right?
I'm sorry
Mr. Chairman, uh, we, we are
asking for some of our positions
to be um that were funded via
federal grant or one time uh
revenues to be turned into a
permanent dollars for, for those
funds, such as an outdoor
recreation division is one
example, um, but it's not a,
it's not a new approved FTE.
It's, it's a permanent funding
tied to that because they were
one.
Time funding that allowed us to
have those hires.
Hm
Thank you both.
Thank you. You know,
How's New Mexico gonna grow?
That's the question.
I'm gonna ask this in the
audience. How many have been to
Phoenix?
The football game to sporting
event, to concert, right?
I mean
How are other states outgrowing
us with
Electrification, right, across
the board, go to Phoenix,
Scottsdale and from.
North Phoenix at Happy Valley to
To Casa Grande.
Industry has just moved in
there, whether chip
manufacturers, whatever they
are, right?
And, and we have to set New
Mexico up. When we have a
problem that Mesa del Sol or we
don't have power, we don't have.
Overpasses in in
They're not willing to invest
unless they know there's a
return on on this on the
infrastructure, right?
And the ETA was just basically
designed to
Improve
Uh, P&M's bottom line so they
can get sold out to the Spanish
company, I mean.
Any business guy can see that in
the forecast is I voted against
it, and you could see that thing
coming clear as day, and, and
that was designed to help one
company get rid of stranded
assets that were, that were
costing a lot of money and, and,
and to be able to sell to.
Another company, it's simple
math.
Um
That's the question we're
sitting here trying to decide.
How do we, if we want economic
development and electrification
is, is the number one thing
they're gonna ask you, right?
What kind of hospitals, what
kind of schools, we missed the
report yesterday, the lady had a
pretty good report started on
what the quadrants were and what
the reasons people, and it's
really quality of life is
driving a number bigger number,
right?
Than anything else, and so how
do we do that in New Mexico, but
the election, the companies are
not going to do it. I mean,
You talk to uh
What's the one on the east side.
yeah.
Hm
Excel.
They're not really that
interested because their bases
in the Midwest.
Then you don't have to say it, I
can say it cause they can fire
me or whatever they want.
Right? PNM is the same way,
they're not investing unless
there's a return, right? And
we're gonna have to take it upon
ourselves if we really want
economic development. We really
want to grow as a state and we
really wanna tie in community
solar. We want battery backup.
We want to head in this path,
because we don't have any more
generating in New Mexico, other
than the one at Demming, which
is natural gas, I think still
exists. Am I correct?
Mr. Chair, there's still 4
Corners power plant, which is in
the on the Navajo reservation
which you have no control over
it.
Right.
You can correct me if I'm Mr.
Chair, uh,
My memory says that PNM is still
in it, so we have control over,
I think it's a 15% share.
Not much, but
It's there, right? That's the
conversation we're having today
is how do we fix this problem
unilaterally. I mean, you go to
the oil and gas fields, there's
not enough power to do what they
want. We sure like spending
money in this budget, so if we
want to do that, we got to
figure out a way to how to help
them. We gotta figure out
Senator Cos may not know this,
but there's a data center going
into his and AI data center
going to his district.
Right? That's completely
different than what everybody
just described.
An AI chip generates heat at
100. I had to learn this at 138
degrees, right?
And so they don't want to go to
hot temperature climates. You
don't want to go to southern New
Mexico. They want to go to the
northern climates, everything
north of I-40 where they can
pull 80, 90 average summer heat
and cooler chips that are
generating 138 with air coolers
and not water.
And they want all the solar
fields to go with them, and they
want backup battery to to tie
into that whole entire system.
But when you get one,
You get 5.
Right?
Look what happened at Meta.
I mean, do we have down there,
Mr. Secretary?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I don't know
the answer to that off the top
of my head.
Mr. Deputy Secretary, do you
know that answer?
We're gonna have a crash course
in
And that too, but where you get
one, I think they have 4 or 5.
Where you get one, they generate
more and they flock to each
other, right? And they combine
that growth and I mean.
Sure, I'd love to have a data
certain money and they looked at
grants, but they cho chose
another location which I don't
know if I'm allowed to say
towards the north between.
Las Vegas and somewhere.
And, and so they're, they're
wanting to come.
First, how do we electrify them,
right?
How do we electrify Maxion
solar. How do we make that
successful? How do we make
Las Cruces successful, right?
But
If they're not willing to
invest, we're gonna invest.
And they're not gonna get the
Get to recover their costs.
We're going to become partners.
And, and we're gonna recover
costs. I said this on the floor
today. I love oil and gas,
right? But you're making money.
My job is to make sure the
state's making money cause
that's where the chairman of
finance does, and, and so you're
gonna, you're gonna help us
along with that or, or we're
gonna
included in the net profits,
that's a message to the.
Electric companies.
We have to all go on this
journey.
And if we don't go on it.
We're never gonna grow like
Phoenix Flagstaff, I mean.
I live on the Arizona border, so
it's shorter for me to go that
way than another way. We're
never gonna grow like other
ones.
And so we got to figure this out
as we move forward, forward.
Um, Troy, let me ask you
something in the exact correct
in, in the LFC rec we have a
difference of roughly.
Remind me because I had them
print it for me.
You can just
I don't think you'll have it in
the book.
You know that our, our LFC
analyst.
Tell me your name again, remind
me.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Julisa
Rodriguez and I'm the LFC
analyst.
So you're asking about the
differences in PRC and the LFC
for the PRC.
The executive recommended
221,000 more general fund than
the LFC.
And what was the total budget
increase over that
year.
Yes, so the executive is
recommend recommending a 4.8%,
while the LFC is recommending a
3.1% increase.
OK.
You know those differences off
the top of your head from the
PRC request and there's two
different ones. There's one
before.
And after.
the recommendations with the
PRC requested. Correct. And
there is after we took their
budget and took their budget
request and there was a
supplemental that was a
difference. Yes, so the two
recommendations you have in
front of you for the PRC both
the LFC and the DFA one or
executive one, are based on the
initial.
Request that was submitted by
the agency in November. Since
then, the agency has or has
prepared documents to support a
new request. Um, and so some of
the differences
Of the new request.
I guess for the PRC and the
initial recommendations are
mostly in staffing, um, so the
PRC requested, but um,
Growth funding for the community
solar division, um, as well as
staffing for the technical
advisory division and the Office
of General Counsel, um.
And some of those positions were
not initially requested back in
November.
OK.
So you want to go over that
some,
yes, thank you, um, our original
request that we submitted in the
fall was 11.1% increase in the
general fund for a 10.7% overall
increase, uh, after we spoke
with the full committee, we went
back for a and and really
figured out what it would take
to do everything that we're
hearing swirling around the PRC.
We think a 26.4% increase in
general fund for 22.7% overall
increase. Those increases are
for 17 new FTEs, um, including
a, a community solar division,
as we mentioned, as, as our
analyst mentioned two FTEs, uh,
in the new commissioner
technical advisory division and
also support in
Our existing divisions to make
our processes that much more
efficient, as I said, 400 cases
last year. That's no small feat.
Also our uh amended request that
we came back with our vision,
our vision requests includes
200,000 in the 400 categories to
ensure that we have adequate
facilities to hold hearings for
those 400.
cases that we hear every year.
OK.
And do you think is this the
last step in professionalizing
the PRC.
Mr. Chair, I think that this is,
um,
Probably the big one.
There's plenty more including um
making sure that our source of
funding is stable. Thank you. I
saw the bill dropped this
morning, um, based on utility
fees. There's also a lot of work
to do. I, I, I've been telling
you for this is the 3rd year
now. I very much believe in
doing more with what we have, so
this is not just all this is not
a request instead of we're also
focusing on efficiencies within
the agency. So, yes, I think
this is the big step.
To professionalizing the PRC.
And how much more do you think
is needed after that?
Well, Mr. Chair, uh, depends on
what my commissioners tell me,
um, but I feel very confident
with this growth that we can be
ready to tackle the challenges
that are coming to us. Last
year, we got 13 new positions,
uh, which put us at about an 18%
vacancy rate and as of this
morning, we're down to an 8%
vacancy rate, so I feel
confident that these positions
are fillable. It is doable. This
request, while it is our vision
request is also request.
we've really thought hard about
to make sure it's also doable.
And then have you moved when or
when are you moving into the new
building that that we did and
where are you at with that?
move.
So anybody that wants to know if
there's a nuclear attack. You
need to go to the PRC in the
basement. There's a nuclear bomb
shelter.
With wire covering the holes of
the pigeons don't fly in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah,
that's a description of our
current building. Um, we call it
the chicken coop because there's
literally a chicken coop down
there to keep pigeons out, but,
uh, we anticipate based on our
conversation this past Friday
with GSD and ERB. It looks like,
um, ERB is gonna be vacating the
building sometime this spring,
and then so sometime in this
calendar year, we are very
hopeful that we're gonna move.
Now the struggle that we just
learned about on Friday is GS.
is telling us there's no money
to redo the building. What makes
me worry is that we're gonna be
moving from one inadequate
building to another, and so, uh,
we've talked with GSD and they
think about a million dollars to
renovate the building to make it
worth, um, to make it fit for
our needs. Now, even with
renovation, that building is not
going to handle a hearing room.
There's one conference room in
it, but there's no hearing room.
Um, again, quick work over the
weekend after we learned.
From GST we, we did all kinds of
work over the weekend and we
think with this additional
200,000 into our base operating
budget in the 400s, that should
be very adequate for a hearing
facility which actually kills,
excuse me, which actually does
two things. Um, one, it allows
us to have adequate hearing
facilities so that maybe even we
could have more than one hearing
at a time since we have a full
contingent of hearing examiners,
but the other thing it does is
provide a security so that our
public hearings can be fully
public and our staff can be
secure. We've had a couple of
experiences this fall. You were
lucky enough to see one of those
where we had some um,
Unruly public commenters in our
current building, they just
wander around with the staff and
everyone else, and there's no
security possible because of the
layout of the building. So, so
we do think that the uh the
additional 200 and the 400
category, the 200,000 in the 400
categories would be um
sufficient to make that vision a
reality.
So let me ask you this since
you've already have grown the
building that you never moved
into.
Have you looked at other space
that's available, I mean,
because if the space is not
fitting you, then.
I'm just throwing out ideas. I
mean, if it's not fitting you,
we're going to spend money, do
that, you should be looking at
every option, especially other
than that by PRC commissioner
shovels the line and dig a
basement and then they.
He is in the basement. Hold on
one second here, Mr. Chair, um,
when we learned when we did this
walkthrough on Friday and um
I was, well, I wasn't the most
friendly to be around
afterwards. The, the first
thought that came to mind is why
are we going to move into a
building that's too small for
us. Um, it was great when we
were looking at shrinking the
PRC, you know, transportation
left last year and at that time
we had a regular year over year
vacancy rate of 25, 27, 28%.
That's not the PRC that we are
anymore, so, um, we did look
around.
I'm not sure I've identified a
place that could hold all of us
and the growth that we need to
have, but there are definitely
options.
Out there.
Well, number one, explore those,
right? Because now we have the
ability and now that you
understand where you're headed
and what it's gonna look like.
I mean, staining another year
where you're at until they
remodel and then spending
another million and it still
doesn't meet your needs.
Kind of unrealistic. I mean,
it's not the way we should do
business, we should plan a
little while you outgrew what
you thought you were gonna be,
so you, you planned right, but
it changed. So I think that's it
for me, Senator, what did you
have a question? Just a question
of procedure when does uh
general services department.
When do they pay in their budget
to redo a building and when is
the agency have to pay. Well,
If it's a, the agency will
request the money for the
capital improvements in some
way, shape or form
supplementals, GST is the
contracting agent for.
The PRC to hire a contractor to
remodel the building that fits
their needs.
So they have to make the agency
request for what their needs are
within the department to remodel
a building and then.
Then it goes to GSD they're the
contracting agency that
Am I correct or Mr. Chair, what
we learned last week was it
needs to be in their budget,
which is why they told us no
because they don't have it in
their budget.
Well, I don't, um, I'm may have
been here long enough to know a
little bit different because how
would they know everybody's
construction means and put it in
their budget, so I guess that's
maybe agency hearings within.
EFA and then hearing that, so.
OK.
Thank you guys for your time.
Thank you. Uh, uh.
If New Mexico is ever going to
have a chance of changing water,
power, infrastructure, economic
development are going to be the
keys to making that change.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you.
Charles, are you gonna start us
off or who's going to start us
off?
We're moving
Well
Hm
Mhm
We're doing the bars next.
see that.
I
I'm John, tell us how you're
gonna go through these bars and,
and so we can help understanding
where we're at.
Sure thing, Mr. Chairman.
Mhm
You're gonna have to go to uh
LLC's presentation.
That's DFA's analysis.
Mr. Chairman, I believe, uh, so
John Courtney, deputy director
over at the Legislative Finance
Committee.
I believe you all have uh.
3 handouts.
Staff were providing.
One is just a quick um
PowerPoint presentation that
we'll start with to give an
overview of of budget adjustment
requests, um, and the processes
for those and then I believe you
should have 2.
Handouts of bars. One is from
LFC. This is a collection of the
monthly bar reports that
Members of the Legislative
Finance Committee received, I
believe we provided copies of
these to, to your, to your staff
in the past, um.
Mm
I apologize, Mr. Chair. It might
be helpful to just say one
sentence on our authority is
just because that's inside
baseball except for the new
people they may not know, and
that's kind of let him go over
how he's gonna do the
presentation and then we can do
that. Thank you.
Thanks. Thanks, Senator. So I,
I'll go through that as, as soon
as we jump in. Let's just orient
you to the handouts. Are you
taking control of the screen?
Are they gonna control the
screen?
Believe their control. I just
want to know so that we're yeah.
Um, so what's up on the screen
now is one of the handouts
you'll have that's all your,
your monthly reports from the
start of the fiscal year, July
of 24 to the last bar report
that we provided in December and
then there's a handout from DFA
on legal size paper, and I
believe this is um all agency
bars over 1 million. So same
information just looking at it
different ways.
So with that, Mr. Chairman,
let's go back to this
presentation. It's just a quick
Quick 5 slides, which you all
should have in front of you.
Um, so,
Uh, to your point, Senator
Steinbor, budget adjustment
requests bars kind of a little
bit inside baseball, what is it?
Um
Basically, um, it's a, it's a
process, it's a process in the
budget that allows agencies to
Move budget authority or move
money around after you all have
set the budgets. The um the uh.
Guardrails for that are set in
state statute, um.
Section 63232 6325, um, and the
actual spending levels or um
Uh
Further guard rails for those
bars are set in the GAA or House
Bill 2 each year, um.
Referencing uh section 4. This
usually appears towards the back
of the bill in sections 12 or
11, and we discussed those that
bar language, um, we will
discuss that in here, uh, at a
later date, I believe.
Um, so a bar can provide an
agency with the flexibility to
increase revenue, um, so if, if
they're bringing in more federal
funding or if they're drawing
money from a special revenue
fund, they can, they can
increase uh revenue, they cannot
increase revenue to general fund
though.
Um, bars can also, uh, are also
a tool to provide flexibility
for agencies between expenditure
categories, so, uh, salaries, PS
and EB, uh,
To contracts and um in other
categories and uh in previous
years, you've seen a lot of
agencies, um, basically moving
money.
Uh, vacancy savings from the
200s out into the 300s and 400s
contractual and other services
uh, for, uh, um.
For the use and and other
purposes. This year we're seeing
less of that, we're seeing
agencies giving a lot of out of
cycle pay increases we're seeing
agencies provide um uh.
Um
Those have cyclop pay increases
and also do a lot of hiring. And
so we're seeing less of those,
less of those uh transfers out
of the 200s this year then we
previously seen. Um.
So, again, we're still on slide
2.
Uh, bars usually in sections 12
and 13 of of House Bill 2 and
House Bill 2 typically
authorizes increases from other
revenues of up to 5% of budgeted
amounts.
So as far as process goes, when
the, when the fiscal year
starts, um, budget, uh,
adjustment requests are
submitted to DFA for approval.
One of the things that Andrew
can probably speak to this
better than I can. One of the
things DFA is checking is, are,
are they following the law? Are
they following that 5% um
Restriction. Are there other
guard rails that have been put
in place in statute limits to uh
to um.
Amounts for bar authority uh
that agencies are under um once
DFA approves those bars, they
send an approved bar over to LFC
and they give LFC a 10 day
review for that.
Now, um, based on state statute,
LFC cannot stop a bar, but LFC,
the LFC director his designee
can object to a bar that delays
the implementation by up to 35
days until a public hearing can
be held. One of the unique
things that that's happened this
year is typically during the
legislative session, DFA uh
institutes a bar moratorium.
They tell agencies, look,
We're, we're busy with other
stuff relating to the session,
um.
You know, no bars during, during
the legislative session. That
didn't happen this year, so
what's, what's the consequence
of that, if the LFC director or
designee does decide to object
to a bar. No public hearing can
be held.
Um
The uh the committee essentially
the legislative finance
community essentially dissolves
during the legislative session.
Now is, you know,
How much
How much do we actually have to
worry about something like that
happening? Well, it, it has
happened.
On
July 17th, Director Seli
objected to a bar from the New
Mexico Environment Department.
Um
As I said,
January 17 sorry, January 17th
can't read my own writing, Mr.
Chair.
Um,
uh, and LFC doesn't have the
ability to meet during the
legislative session, that bar
will, will go into effect after
that 35 day.
Um, waiting period.
So Mr. Chairman, I'll, I'll let
Emily move us to slide 4 and
talk about some examples of bar
language um.
Both, um, very restrictive and
very broad.
Before you do that, any bars
that come during the session. We
had an agreement not to do this.
It lasted for eternity.
Anybody that does a bar will
come in front of Senate Finance.
And then they'll have another
hearing on why they need bar
language.
And we'll determine in House
Bill 2 if we're gonna give it to
him. We can all work together or
we can work against each other.
It's a matter of respect.
We have a lot of things to do.
You have a lot of things to do.
We meet one time a year, so be
very cautious.
If you need a bar, you better
make sure that is.
Justified immediately. I don't
see any funniness in this
because
She could veto the budget
because we don't put bar
language in there, but that's
our authority.
And we're gonna, we're gonna do
that, so.
Those agencies, you work with us
or work against us and we'll,
we'll figure it out in a
heartbeat.
Good.
Thank you, chair. Um, moving on
to slide 4, some examples of bar
language that is in this year's
House Bill 2. we have two
examples of some broad bar
authority given to an agent and
less broad bar authority given
to an agency, so the difference
is you're gonna see it's
Less broad is more prescriptive,
and it identifies an amount that
is capped that an agency can
submit a bar to. So an example
is the administrative Office of
the courts may request budget
transfers to and from the other
financing uses category of the
court appointed special advocate
funds. We consider this to be
more broad because there's not a
cap of how much they could
transfer to and from the other
financing uses category and for
what purposes they can move that
money for.
Whereas less broad authority,
the public education department
may request budget increases of
up to $20,000 from the school
transportation training fund for
public school transportation
workshops and training,
including supplies and
professional development for
public education department
staff.
So this example of our language,
it gives a specific amount of
how much the public education
department can
Take from that specific fund and
for what purposes they can use
that funding for.
And moving on to page 5 chair
members of the committee, uh, we
do have some examples of bars
that were submitted since the
session did start are also bars
that were submitted in January
that were not included in any of
the documentation that you have
before you. So an example is the
Office of the State Engineers
submitted a bar for $65 million
on January 17th to budget
federal grants, and ideally, the
agency should request these
federal funds in the operating
budget, but sometimes federal
awards may not be anticipated up
to you.
Changing to page 5.
Oh, that's uh for this specific
um on this presentation, we
don't have it included in these
bar reports cause we don't have
a January bar report since
January bars are still being
submitted, um, we don't have
Oh you said page 5, so that's
what I was oh sorry, page 5 of
this slide and it's not included
in these documents up on the
screen. OK, um, chair members
with the 65 million federal bar
that OSU submitted, um.
It was to increase personnel by
1 million to cover 2 FTE. It
puts 60.3 million in contracts
and 3.6 million in the other
category for costs associated
with personnel such as rent
vehicles, supplies, etc. and DFA
approved this bar on July, uh,
January 21st.
The State Investment council
requested a transfer of 191,000
from contractual services to the
other category to purchase new
servers, such as providing one
new FTE with IT equipment, and
this bar was approved by DFA on
January 27th.
Another example chair is the
administrative office of the
court submitted a bar on
December 28th of 2024 to
increase personal costs by
$500,000 in contractual services
by 28,000 by moving a total of
528,000 from the other category,
and AOC states that this
transfer covers a contractual
obligation with research and
polling ink that will help the
agency develop a data analysis
tools, um,
Which DFA approved this far on
January 17th. So these are some
of the examples that have um
some bars that were not reviewed
by the legislative Finance
Committee and what you have on
the screen before you as John
had mentioned earlier, um, all
of the bar reports that the LFC
has produced for uh FY 25.
However, this does include
information for bars over
250,000, um, but if you look
through item by item, you will
see the amount of each bar and
what the analysts had specified
what the bar was supposed to be
doing.
Mr. Chairman, just to, just to
zoom out a bit, you know, you.
You all, you're working on the
budget right now and a number of
years ago, we made a the
legislature made an exchange.
With, uh, with the executive,
um,
Basically to treat performance
metrics for more detailed line
item budgets. Remember, I, you
might remember for those of you
that were in LFC in January, I
gave a presentation that
compared kind of a a budget from
20 years ago, an agency budget
from 20 years ago to a budget
from today. Today we're
budgeting on, on very broad
categories, right? 3 categories
for the most part, PSNEB
contracts and others.
Um, versus 20 years ago when you
were a line item, you know,
travel supplies, and it was, it
was very grainly very detailed.
And so the part of, I think part
of that flexibility is, is
Or part of the hope with that
flexibility is that the, the
need to move money around would
would be lesser because you're
providing more flexibility with
those large categories. One of
the things you'll notice in
this, in this somewhat thick.
Mm
Budget adjustment request report
is if you look at the first page
in in July 1st month of the
fiscal year, we got 73 budget
adjustment requests.
73 asks from agencies to, to
move money around, um, which,
which always surprises me
sitting on sitting on the budget
side. Um, but as Emily said,
you'll, you'll see some details
on, on bars in here and I'll,
I'll walk you if, if uh we can
scroll just through the through
the, the July report so you can,
you can see what you're, you're
looking at.
We provide um each month, the
number of requests there on the
left and the net uh budget
increase amount on the right.
If you scroll to page, uh,
The next page please.
And
So that's just a a summary of
that data from the first page.
And then if you'll scroll down
one more.
And this provides you with um
budget adjustments by revenue
source so general fund OSF ISF
federal funds and cash balances.
And then you remember I, I
talked about kind of that trend
that we, we follow from year to
year of agencies.
Transferring money out of
personnel for, for other
purposes. There's a, a chart
there too, along with some
highlights of of some of the
bigger or more significant bars
that that we see for that month.
And then subsequent to that is a
listing of for that month, all
the bars that came in that were
uh over $250,000.
And if you, you keep uh turning,
you'll find your way to August,
September.
Uh, and so on, Mr. Chair.
Injury you want to add anything?
Sure, um, good afternoon, uh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Iman Minor. I'm the
state budget division director
at uh DFA.
And uh we have representatives
from many different agencies who
are here to answer your
questions about bars. Uh, I'd
just like to add a few comments,
um.
I certainly unders uh so with
regards to the bar moratorium,
uh, that was done basically to
what has happened in many prior
years is that we do a moratorium
and there's like this huge
backlog of bars submitted by
agencies right up at the
moratorium deadline and we end
up uh processing bars, you know,
up through session for a lot, a
lot of times, um, anyway, so.
I can tell you that
operationally things have gone a
lot smoother this year with kind
of a regular workflow, however,
certainly do understand the, the
timing issues um inherent with
the uh the session that was
certainly not intentional on our
part and we're certainly willing
to uh work with the LFC to come
up with a, you know, mutually
beneficial uh solution for next
year. Um,
Just a couple other comments,
um, you'll see on the, the LLC's
report that, uh, you know, the
FY 24, uh, total budget
increases were uh 2.9 billion
and you know, on paper that's,
that's, that's a lot. Uh, but
just like a little bit of
context here, uh, of that. I
just point out like a couple
agencies, 1.2 billion of that
are budget increases to 0.808
million of that federal money,
the rest from the fund balance
and 700
80 million of that were bringing
over rollover uh authorizations
from the prior year. So new
budget authority in this current
year but bringing over, you
know, kind of old projects from,
from previous years and another
900, I think a little over $900
million is a federal increase to
to HCA. So with those two
agencies we've accounted for
$2.2 billion of that, that
increase, so, um, you know, it's
a very good topic but just
important to understand the sort
of context, um, and then moving
Here to this handout that I've
provided, uh, all of you. So as
uh John described this is uh
agencies who have submitted a
total of over $1 million in
category transfer, uh bars so
far in FY 25, we do have agency,
like I said, we have
representatives from every
Agency on this sheet, uh, here
to answer any questions you
might have over them. You can
see the, the effects that they
had, um, you know, whether it's
transferring from which category
funding source of it's, you
know, transferring in the
general fund like John said, you
can't increase from the general
fund, you can't do category
transfers or federal funds or
other state funds or etc. and
then a brief description and
then we don't also have, uh, I
know there's there's folks from
other agencies here, right, to
answer your question. So, uh
thank you for the comments and
And uh that concludes my, my
section.
And you know structurally some
of these things need to happen,
right?
No matter what, in the beginning
of the year, there's transfers
that need to have happened,
right? You describe some of
them.
But there comes a point where
OK, let's start looking at them
detailed, and if you look at the
history of them, you know, in
2019, 2020 that weren't as high,
and all of a sudden we got an
influx of money and we had to do
these bar transfers, well, OK,
that's good, but then the second
year they dropped, so that was a
good thing. Then they went back
up.
And then we saw transfers for
things like headshots.
New flooring that were out of
the FTE levels, which the
legislature appropriated for
FTEs and hiring.
Not, they didn't make the
request.
Mm
New parking lots, new air
conditioners, new.
Conference tables.
Pictures of themselves at $3000.
I mean, those are requests the
agency need to make in, in their
LOC budgets, and we can
appropriately place them.
Now, it may not all be on the
agency, we'll, we'll take, I'll
take some of the blame for it
too, some of it may be LFC not
booking them, right?
And that may be a lack of
communication, but
It's a two-sided show, but we're
gonna get a handle on them, but
I mean, the moratorium.
Was never discussed that they
were gonna discontinue that, it
was gonna happen. We had a big
Like in the press about one,
or statutorily, I think it's
still legal, but I mean, that's
a fight and and it's a fight
that's happened every single
year with that agency and you
know, just kind of fed up and
tired of that fight either work
with us.
We'll just
Figure out how not to give you
what you need or what you want.
In order to to.
Bring you into compliance.
Questions from committee
members.
All right, let's start then
Andrew.
Steinmore. Thank you
Mm
Uh, just looking at the chart of
the number of bars year to year
and seeing how in 2020.
Last year it went down to very
little, sorry, we're swimming in
paper, um.
But can you explain, and maybe
it's cause it's 2025, right? I'm
not.
Seeing the exact paper because
I.
Too much paper. Um.
Seems like it really went down
this last year, the number of
bars, yeah, that one right
there.
Thanks.
Yes, chair, Senator, this first
speech, this is all of the uh
the bars that were submitted in
July. So as you can see
throughout month over month,
that number of bar increases.
Yeah, so for December, for
example, in July there was 73
that were submitted.
Versus what we have in December.
On page 45, we have 306 bars in
total for FY 25.
306 total.
Being in 6, yes. OK, so, and
we're, you know, midway through
the year. So in reality we're
kind of
Similar to previous years.
The first
Um, I would say so for now, but
we are seeing as John had
explained last session, chair,
Senator, um, there was a bar
moratorium last session in
previous years, however, we have
seen, I think 13.
Requests for bars since the
session started a week ago, so
that could change since we are
now doing bars during the
session.
OK, that's all I have. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's just start with
page 5 of yours and is a state
engineer here.
I know you're, you're not new.
So let me ask you on, on the
transfer OSE for $1 million for
2 FTE. Explain that to me.
We're on page 5 of
The very first presentation of
the LFC, which they do not have
electronically, so you can't put
it up on the screen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate
the question. My name is Hannah
Risley White. I'm the director
of the New Mexico Interstate
Stream Commission, and I'm here
representing Office of the State
Engineer and Interstate stream
commission state engineer Liz
Anderson sends her regrets. So
I'm just looking at what you uh,
are looking at the, the only, so
first of all, I'd like to say
I'm very proud of the work
that's happened at Office of the
State Engineer and Innerstate
stream commission in the last
year to secure grants,
particularly federal funding.
for the work in New Mexico, um,
the bar list that I have in
front of me has over $70 million
in grants that we've received to
complement the work that we're
doing with the state funding
that we receive through you all.
So the only uh bar request that
we've received related to FTEs
is a grant um with Bureau of
Reclamation for $1 million to
fund two full-time positions
working in the lower Rio Grande
for the next 3 years. Uh, so
hopefully that answers your
question.
That does. So there's a federal
funds transfers and then the
rest of the 60.3 is federal
money transferred in, correct?
Yes, correct. Uh, we're really,
uh, again, proud of working very
hard to secure federal funding,
particularly for the work in the
Low Rio Grande, um, that recent
bar for $65 million is to again
complement the funding that we
received from you all in the
2023 legislative session to
tackle the significant water
management challenges in the
lower Rio Grande. We're working
very actively with uh Bureau of
Reclamation to identify how that
65 million will be utilized.
Largely that will be
infrastructure improvements,
stormwater management,
conservation efforts and
identifying alternate water
sources in the lower Rio Grande.
I should also say given the
federal transition, there is a
little bit of uncertainty as to
the future of that funding,
although I'm still confident
that that we'll receive the, the
funding. There is a currently a
hold on it. Um, that said, I
spent a good part of the day
yesterday working with our
colleagues at Reclamation to
identify next steps related to
that 65 million.
And that's a 2023 appropriation,
but you didn't receive the
federal funds to make the
transfer until 2024, correct?
Or 2025
we finalized the agreement with
uh Department of Interior, uh,
in January this year.
Through 2023 state funds.
Um, correct. So in the 2023
legislative session we received
significant uh special
appropriation towards that
effort. And honestly, I think
that that commitment from the
state is a large part of why we
receive the significant federal
funding for that effort, um,
that, that appropriation in 2023
showed real commitment at the
state level, um, and we use that
to leverage the $65 million in
federal funding to match the
state funding for solutions in
the lower Rio Grande.
And why was that done done
earlier pre-session rather than
wait till you're right on the
border of the 17th. I remember
what the day the session
started. Why was that not done
early enough, knowing that the
previous agreement stood in
place in the agency just went
ahead and did it. I thank you
for that question, Mr. Chair. I
would have loved for that to
have occurred earlier, um, it
just is a very cumbersome
process to navigate federal
funding agreements and uh as you
can imagine, we were working
hard to get it done in advance
of the federal transition. Uh,
there's a reason for the
timing there, but I would have
loved that to have been in place
6 months ago or longer. It's
just a long and cumbersome
process. Thank you. OK. Thank
you.
The Investment council here.
See him.
What about AOC? Are they here?
Come on up, let's talk about
your gym.
You'll have to turn, push the
green button, turn on the mic.
Good afternoon. We're talking
about the jit bar.
No,
you're the only Supreme Court
that has a gym. People will
realize you have a gym in your
basement over there, so I, I
just want to make everybody
aware that you have a gym.
that.
You didn't get the cookies, but
you got a gym.
Go ahead. Tell us why that
happened and, and what it is
for.
So the bar um.
Mr. Chair, the bar in question
is for 1.862 million which was
transferred into PS&B.
Um
As you may know, most of the
court's budgets are usually
line, uh, single line item AOC's
budget is not, um, so this was
an effort to write budget the
the um the funds in that um
department where we're gonna use
all available funding that was
in the 400 category.
To pay for existing salary and
benefits and it's just
Um, that's where we needed the
budget. We had to set the budget
up as it was presented in House
Bill 2, per law, um, so this was
just right budgeting that.
So did you make a bar prior to
PTO and we're gonna make the
transfer to PTO. That's, that's
my understanding of your
comments.
me of my misunderstood that
genre.
Um, no, sir. This was for um 400
crackja contractual services and
Kelly, you have a comment. You
moved it out of 400s, right? And
then back into the 400. No, sir.
We moved 1.6.
OK, you're talking about the
$500,000 bar.
Yeah
Did you do raises with that
money? What did you do with the
money? We need to know what
you're doing with the money and,
and explain to us why that was
done during the legis that was
done on 1228. The bar was
approved by DFA in 117, so
you're before the session it was
approved before or explain to me
where that money went.
The money was spent, uh, was
moved to pay for existing salary
and benefits, sir.
exist and so why wasn't that in
your budget request last year or
this.
In 2020.
5 to do that and we're 6 months
in there and we're moving.
Salary adjustments in the 1st 6
months.
So in FY 24 in house bill to the
jet budget had 250 in salary in
um contractual and 250 in other.
And the rest was in PS&B FY 25s,
General Appropriation Act at
over a million in um the other
category.
So we were just moving that into
PS&B to right, budget it.
We can pay for our existing
employees as to the timing.
You know, we just
We had to do several bars in the
beginning. This was just.
As we got to them, there's no uh
rhyme or reason as to the
timing.
To avoid any shortfalls that we
potentially would have the 200
budget.
So why didn't you request that
in the correct manner, correct
me if I'm wrong, Charles or.
You a
Why wasn't that corrected in the
correct manner so that the that
the bars wouldn't have to have
happened.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, I
I see that this probably goes
back to that theme that I
mentioned earlier where, you
know, typically we'd we've been,
we would see bars out of the
200s for other purposes. What
we're seeing more often this
year is
is out of cycle pay increases to
the magnitude of that or above
what the legislature.
Provided funding for last year.
Um, that, um, mixed with the
combination of uh.
Of hiring his
As
had
A number of agencies spend
themselves into a deficit in the
PSNEB category and then attempt
to cover that deficit with money
from other categories.
And we still allow that? I mean,
statutorily, can they do that?
controls.
Ideally, Mr. Mr. Chairman, I
mean you give them agencies bar
authority to move money between
categories. Uh, ideally,
They wouldn't be giving raises
that they couldn't afford in the
200 category, because that would
mean they need to take money
from elsewhere in the budget
that they said they needed
during the legislative.
Process
Um, but there's nothing that
would specifically prohibit
them.
Um, from being able to do that,
typically, EFA and SO would make
sure if they would make sure
that an agency has enough money
to cover the raises, so
We're not sure how
Agencies are able to give out
raises at there too.
I couldn't afford it at the
beginning of the year. Maybe
there's.
She's gonna tell us how she
explains the magic of
200 to 400 category.
So Mr. Chair, as I mentioned in
the FY 24 House Appropriations
Act, there was over 6 million
that was budgeted in that was um
set aside in the 200 category
for JI and FY 25, there was 5
million. The other million was
in the other category. We're
moving that into
The 200 category to accommodate
the expenses.
One second, for pay increases or
for what? For existing employees
salaries and benefits.
Or pay increases or for?
For a combination of both, sir,
we should have covered.
Correct me if I'm wrong,
Charles, when we do a 200 level
employee, we're covering salary
benefits at that level when we
fund those.
Why are we paying additional
salaries and benefits and you
making the transfer out.
And not just pay.
Let her answer that and I'll
I'll yield.
I would have to go back and uh
review.
Exactly what you're asking, but
My recollection of this bar is
to write budget the funding.
Which is to move the money, to
move the budget where we, we
need it, and it's not
specifically related to
Salary increases are out of
cycles. It's to cover the
existing cost of our folks that
are in there.
So you're seeing me underfunded
you in the 200 level category.
For some reason, there was a
switch between the two years in
in House Bill 2. I don't know
why.
Um, I can work with the analysts
now to make sure we get, get the
budget somewhat more if they get
the answer to that so we can see
what's going on.
In,
uh, thank you, chair, just real
quick, so thank you for all the
level of detail. So how do you
manage this, Mr. Chair, in the,
the next year because you, you
start out.
With a high salary. What, what
do you tell you have to be able
to maintain that for the
employee in the next year. How
are you going to do that if you
made these adjustments that
aren't budgeted originally
because that's how your budget's
going to be determined for the
next year.
Can you help us understand that
because that to me seems like
it's going to create a, a
massive employee.
Uh, satisfaction problem.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Padilla, what we'd like to do is
work with the analysts to make
sure the budgets are um
appropriately categorized in
House Bill 2 to prevent these
types of bars.
Uh, yeah, and, and respect, I'm
sure that that's, and that's
what I would say too. But, but
I, I guess I'm trying to figure
out how is this even allowed to
begin with because you're not
going to be guaranteed that.
So how are you gonna, how are
you gonna manage the employee
the next, you know, a year
later.
And, and you could potentially
I have the money to pay them the
increase that you gave them.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, we would
not be uh deficit in cash. We
would always make sure our, our
budget is appropriate to cover
our salaries and expenses and
our existing um contractual and
operating expenses. If we have
to do um budget adjustments,
that's the fix for the if, if
it's not corrected in House Bill
2. That's what I thought you
might say. Uh, I, I don't know
that that's the, the best way to
to do. I mean, that's, that's
actually, you know what, that is
not the way to do it. I, I got
to be respectfully.
Uh, would never do that in my
business. I just could not.
Bas an employee that I didn't
know for sure I had the ability
to maintain that raise I'd given
them.
Certainly this is not just for
races, it's, it's for.
Anybody that's getting paid from
that fund. The money is there.
expenses are as they are. We're
just right budgeting it, so
there, the budget is available
in the proper categories that no
one is facing any, any potential
of furlough or layoffs or
anything accordingly or future
years.
All right, I'm still not 100% on
that, but uh I hear you. Thank
you.
In the center sorry chair I
think Tru Hill. Senator Trull.
Hold on one second. Andrew is.
is judicial branch in the DFA
report.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, we provided AOC
because they are, they were the
only agency that uh met the
criteria that we were asked to
provide a report for, so, and
just as a reminder, courts have
the single line item budget, so
they do not submit bars and uh
the DA's would, but none of them
met the criteria.
They're not in your DFA report
that we have. Senator Trey Hill,
you're next.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman. I,
I will just, you know, I've come
from working in executive office
and I'm not gonna try to uh make
excuses, but I will say that
there's a little bit of
schizophrenia that happens.
around the summer, and that is
because you're submitting a
budget request for a budget
that's not gonna happen and so
in FY 24 summer, you're
submitting a budget request for
FY 26. While you're currently
living in FY 25, um, it's, it
can be challenging to like
project that far ahead and some
of this is because when
projections happen, you're,
you're limited to do that at
midpoint. And if all you
Higher our midpoint employees,
then you're in good shape or if
you hire, and that means that
they can do the job 100%. Um, if
you hire below that, you're even
in better shape. But if you
start hiring people that are
highly qualified, you're jumping
up way above midpoint in some
cases, and those are hard to,
those are just hard to figure
out, um, so I, I hear what
you're saying. I, I think, you
know, it's, it's not an easy
thing to do, but I will say that
I am
courage that money is going from
Or and 300 into 200. It was
really challenging when we had
to when we were taking 200,
which is personnel and moving
that into 300 for contracts and
400 for other. That seems like a
worse trend. So, uh, I'm glad to
see that in a lot of these, that
it's money going from contracts.
Particularly contracts in the
300 category into actually
hiring personnel. So thank you.
Well, now we know how to cheat
the system.
General Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, uh,
based on your comment.
So you have more cash than
budget.
Um, Mr. Chairs, uh, Senator
Gonzalez, no, sir, we just had
the budget, um, in the, in the.
In a different category than
what was needed.
The, the cash is unchanged.
We're just moving budget from
the 400s into the 200s.
Mr. Chairman, then the cat would
have to follow the budget.
To where you're transferring.
Yes, sir.
Very well, thank you.
So did you make the correct
request in LFC didn't follow
that, or did you be your request
was followed what you requested
and LFC did that. I mean, you
did that.
And that we're gonna play the
blame game right here now. No,
sir, um, Mr. Chair, I'd have to
look back to see what our
request was for uh Jed's budget
and FY 25 to see how it was um
um requested to see what the
differences were between that
and how it was presented in
hospital 2.
So we have a set of books,
Charles for 25 and 23, but.
I think they're looking for it.
I mean, we can, I'm honestly,
the legislature can be to blame
in this too, right? If we didn't
fulfill your request the way you
asked for it, but if you ask for
the way it was.
Then it's on you.
We're just looking real quickly,
Mr. Chairman, and come back.
Uh, it looks like the LFC record
for 25.
For salary and benefits was in
line with what
Uh, the 24 operating budget was.
AOC, so that's on the spending
side. We'll say that the AOC
budget, so on the spending side,
from what I can tell from our
volume two books is about the
same between FY 25 and FY.
24.
The big difference in AOC, which
is kind of unrelated to this,
but at the same time it's been a
challenging budget is this was
the first year that we're trying
to backfill all the different
The revenue that had gone away.
But again, that's kind of a
separate issue, but we'll dig
into it.
Uh, that budget comparison and
bring it back to.
OK, so I really want to know the
20.
5 questions.
See if they requested it that
way.
And they were lied a bigger
amount than what was
recommended, but the LFC
recommendation was in line with
what their FY 24, um.
A bunch of ones.
So they requested it that way,
we gave it to them that way. And
then now they made the transfer
because
You wanted it in different
classification, correct?
I'm asking the courts.
So again, uh, Mr. Chair, again,
I'd have to look back to see
because we were trying to get
some funding for the fee
elimination so we'd have to see
how much of that was
free-related and how much of
that was actual general fund. We
backfilled the fees with general
funds, correct me, Charles,
right? $13 million not all of
it, Mr. Chairman. There are
other, um, there was general
fund placed into other funds for
them to be able to use.
from non-recurring, but on a
recurring basis, they were not
fully replaced in, in year one.
And then may I add, Mr. Chair,
for the, for the GI funding, we
did not receive any increase in
general fund and FY 25. I don't
know what the
core automation.
Judiciary information.
OK.
OK, thank you. Thank you, sir.
Any other questions?
And you just make sure where I
mean.
We understand you got a
function. We understand that
there's some.
Functionality that can improve
efficiencies instead of giving
the backlog at the end of the
session, right?
But no one told us that you were
going to change the agreement.
Right.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I believe that
is correct. And and so when
there's an agreement.
Whether it's a handshake or
whatever, and we've always
operated in that deal and all of
a sudden we see these
adjustments come through.
I don't know who to blame.
Who do you want to blame?
We're making the agreement.
Mr. Chairman, I'm not interested
in, I guess a blame game. I
mean, we did, we did. I know the
blame is.
I think Wayne's listening, so
Wayne, we're just asking an
honest question.
We know it's a matter of
respect, right?
I mean, we can fix a lot of
things during the session, we
can help out, but I mean,
The bar authorities had just and
I've harped on these for 1 or 2
years now, Charles, right?
Why do we give them authority?
They, they do funky stuff with
it. They, they take it from
other categories. I mean, we're
trying to fix pay, we've been
working on that study for 2
years now. We had to fix all the
pay classifications and
environment department because
CWA was gonna
Go off on them and we fixed that
and they made the adjustments
and it seemed like the employees
are in the right alignment over
there and so we can fix some of
that stuff, but if if bars
continue to come through, and I
guess maybe we need to meet with
DFA and figure out how we're
going to do this during the
session.
Uh, and, and limit, um, it's.
We made an agreement and
somebody to live up to the
agreement.
So we gotta figure that out. But
I mean, I am gonna be very
cautious on bars. I mean, it
seems to happen a lot during the
session.
Um
And so
I'm glad there's nothing
criminal here.
Because I do have the attorney
general listening.
Mr. Chairman.
This report
Can help you with budget
development.
Because you can see if an agency
can live without money in one
category.
And
I would prefer it in a different
one.
Uh, that can help inform your
budget development.
If an agency is consistently
bringing in money from other
revenue sources outside of the
Budget development process
that's occurring in this room.
You want to be able to take that
into account.
As you're building an agency's
budget.
They come in in in the fall and
do a budget adjustment and
increase it, there are other
revenue sources and you'll,
you'll give them that authority
or you can choose not to.
You want to take that into
consideration with
How much you're getting them out
of the general fund versus maybe
that fund that they said
couldn't stand appropriations
for the things that they wanted.
And they're asking you for
general fund.
You can use other state funds
instead. And so that's how we
kind of use it and then there's
a stray bar here and there that
we feel is outside the bounds of
what you've authorized that will
raise a red flag to you.
But the vast majority of ours.
Federal funds or you've given
them authority to move money
around and then take that into
consideration and the budget
development process. Some of
these bar authority are frankly
about a holdover from solvency.
When you say we'll give you
maximum flexibility to figure it
out so you don't have to lay
people off.
Uh, and in, in this time period,
maybe we don't need to have as
much of that and start
tightening up.
So
Hopefully that's helpful for the
committee as you start digging
into budgets more.
Well, and it comes back to us
when we go into our local
districts and they call DMV or
whoever and they said, well,
they're not answering the
phones, right?
He just gave him money for more
staff and you know.
We don't know that they have
flex hours and they're off on
Fridays and they're going to the
gym and so the phones aren't
being answered, but when you go
to DMB or in the milk section of
the grocery store and you're an
elected official, you're gonna
get cornered somewhere between
there and the trick is to get
ice cream on your way in so you
can tell them it's melting and I
gotta leave.
But I mean, you, you agencies
don't see that.
I mean, we, we see it as members
going.
Everywhere center compos I bet
he gets caught quite more cause
his town's a little smaller and,
and so we have people to answer
to when the phones aren't
answered, when things aren't
getting processed, and then we
have to reach out to you and,
and so this is just some
justification, so.
Thank you guys for your
presentation.
appreciate it.
use your
We hope we don't see you again,
Andrew, but.
be rid of me, Mr. Chairman.
Wings listening.
All right, Mr. Secretary, you
want to do your budget now?
Economic development.
We have your budget up here.
It's not on the
That's why I was a little
confused, PRC did their budget.
Right, and she went over her
stuff and and I thought it was
supposed to be coordinated
together, but
I
Do you want to do it today or
no?
Senator, we're, we, we, we can
do it today. I, I was on
Confused about what was
requested of us and so we tried
to tailor our pre prepared, we
won't need to do it, but we're
ready to go.
You guys want to move out of the
room nice and quiet so we can
kind of continue.
OK.
Oh
It must be a touchy subject.
If you're, if you're not
comfortable doing it, I'm fine
rolling over if you're
comfortable doing that, I'm
good.
I'm sorry crashes a thumbs up or
thumbs down.
He can't really even show his
thumb. It's so small.
Um, it is a thumbs up, sir.
It's proceed.
OK, uh, good. Let's see, good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, my name is
Julia Rodriguez, and I'm the LFC
analyst for the Economic
Development Department.
Uh, before we get started, just
so you can know where we're
starting. You're gonna be going
to tab 4, it's agency code 419
and it's the economic
development department.
Um, while you get there here at
the table with me is uh the
secretary Rob Black, who you
just, who you've heard from a
lot today and also Joshua
Martinez. He's a DFA, uh, budget
analyst for the department as
well.
Um, so as the chairman likes, we
are going to keep a really high
level overview.
Of the differences between the
budgets. So yeah, you should
have a packet that looks like.
This, um, it's going to have
bullets and bullets in front of
it. It's gonna be called key
hearing issues. Um, it's kind of
a fuller packet.
I'll wait for you all to get it.
We gotta go ahead and keep
rolling. You got it OK.
So Joshua and I are gonna talk
about the main differences. I'm
gonna cover the recurring
differences. Josh is going to
talk about the non-recurring and
then we're gonna pass it over to
the secretary for his remarks.
Um, so on the recurring side of
the executive recommended
150.7,000 more general refund
than the LFC. Uh, so the
executive is recommending a 3.3%
increase while the LFC is
recommending a 2.7% increase.
Um, some of the main differences
are in um
Program support in the economic
development division as well as
the outdoor recreation division.
Um, if you go to the high level,
you will be able to see some of
the difference, but I'm just,
you know, quickly walk you
through them. Um, in
contractual, there is a huge
diff there's a significant
difference because the executive
recommended $600,000 more for
the New Mexico partnership
contract, so that would bring
the total contract to roughly
1.5, 1.6 million. The LFC did
not recommend an increase for
them.
Um, within the economic
development division, the LFC
recommended slightly more for
personnel, and that's because we
are, um,
Recommending to program officers
for the Office of Strategy,
Science and Technology, uh,
while the executive is
recommending just an
entrepreneurship coordinator and
some insurance increases.
Um, moving down to the outdoor
recreation division, uh, the
executive does recommend 95,000,
and that's to backfill, um,
funding that was previously
non-recurring for a marketing
coordinator position, while the
LFC does not support that or
does not include that in the
recommendation. Um, those are
the main differences within the
recurring budget. I'm going to
pass it over to Joshua to talk
really high level about some of
the differences within the
special appropriations.
Good.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
So I'm gonna start off with the
specials, um, the executive is
recommending uh 26 million in
specials where LFC is
recommending a little over 87
million in the specials.
Uh, some of the big differences
would be uh
There is the executive
recommended 2 million for
healthy food and financing
program where I'll see
recommended none.
Uh, the executive also did, uh
Recommend 20 million for the
leader uh local economic
development Act fund, uh, LFC
did not.
The LSC
recommended 25 million for a
match fund for economic
development, uh, we didn't
recommend any. They also uh
recommended about 800K for
research university team pitch
award pilot program. We did not.
Uh
The executive recommended 24
million for a site readiness
plan, uh LFC recommended 35
billion for that.
And LFC also recommended 10
million for trails plus.
And also 4 million for startup
grants, which are the executive
did not.
And those are the major ones.
Hm
Uh, Mr. Chair, and then on the
performance measures, we, the
analyst read uh consensus on all
measures and all targets. Um,
now we're gonna pass it over to
the secretary for his remarks.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'll keep my comments
very brief. You, you have heard
a lot from me today, but I think
there are a couple of areas that
I want to highlight, um, from
the, the difference between the
executive and the LFC and and
perhaps provide a little
insight. We talked earlier today
and I'll start with Lita, the,
the executive, uh, supports a
$20 million contribution to
Lita. We talked about the impact
that Ali investment can have on
the state uh earlier today with
the, the $10 million investment
that we made.
In meta, um, we anticipate, uh,
We're optimistic that we will
have a variety of opportunities
and, and to
Bring new businesses and grow
existing businesses here in New
Mexico in the next year. Uh, we
would hate to not have that as a
tool in our toolbox, cause that
closing fund is really, really
important for uh New Mexico.
The second, uh, item I want to
highlight is the healthy food
financing program, uh, the
executive recommended $2 million
you'll see did not recommend any
and it came out in the
conversation at our House
Appropriations commission or
committee meeting last Friday,
part of the rationale for that
was that there was a federal
grant that was given uh to the
healthy foods program, uh, and
the, so since they got the
federal money, they didn't fund
the state money.
But the issue is, is, uh, we did
get, we were successful in
getting a $3 million 5-year
federal grant, between 5
different organizations, great
organizations, EDD being one of
those great organizations, but
the reason we got and we're
competitive for that federal
money is because the money that
you as a legislature have been
investing in the program.
It made us it differentiated us
from other grants around or
applications around the country
and it uh allowed us to win the
federal grant, so it would, it
would, it's almost as if um
We're, you know, marching
towards us, we, we were leading
the game in the foregoing into
the 4th quarter and decided not
to put the quarterback back in
because we're winning.
Um, it, it undermines our
ability to continue to go
forward, so we would ask that
the LSC reconsider that $2
million contribution, because it
really is a program where uh
even last year we had um we
awarded 33 grants to the, the
healthy food financing fund,
there were 152 applications. Um,
so again, I think it shows that
we were able to recruit and
bring in those federal dollars
that the investments are
working. Um, and I know that uh
I'm gonna keep my comments brief
because you have
heard from me, so I will stop
with that, uh, Mr. Chairman, we
don't have to start budget cuts.
Senator Steinborn, I think
you're first, and then Senator
Tobiasson and then Senator Trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So this is
really unique because normally,
normally the executive branch,
which all these folks work for
request more money from us then
the LSC then the legislature
suggests in the budget. We have
a situation here where the LF
the LFC is recommending more
money in supplementals in the
executive, and these are um
evidence-based, you know, the,
the let's say finance committee
who does all this budget work
for us, tries to do
evidence-based.
You know, analysis of things
that are working and um we have
some things that are really
working well and I think that's
why, Mr. Chair, they're
recommending more money and like
replenishing the funds for some
really important programs that,
and I know the executive will
put a little bit of pressure on
their agencies to keep flat
budgets. So in this case, I, I
really hope we support the LFC
recommendation and some of the
things they flagged is $10
million for trails Plus. This is
a new program we've created, you
know, in the outdoor division to
fund trail.
across the state. And uh this is
huge. I mean, this is helping to
grow the outdoor economy, but
the number one thing citizens
report they want and.
State recreation or trails. So
it serves citizens first and
foremost in public health, but
then it's crucial to recruiting
more tourism and growing the
outdoor economy back what we
were talking about quality of
life things that help to grow
our economy. This is exactly the
kind of thing that economic
development folks.
when they move into a community.
So that's a big one. There's
others, I will say the marketing
person at the outdoor division.
I mean, it started back when Axi
Novice was a director. This is
like the most successful
marketing thing, like if you
could replicate that marketing
in any business or any division,
you would be lucky.
They have a new, a newsletter,
Mr. Chair for the outdoor
division and e-newsletter. It's
exceptional.
And so I think that's just me,
that position is doing so much
great stuff and has for years,
it's great. And then finally the
film division has had a really
flat budget and they would like
to get out and travel more and
do more stuff, and I see that's
part of this. I think that's
super important to grow the film
industry. They got to be out
there at the conferences and
promoting, promoting and um
they've had a really flat budget
and so I hope we support that
too, but I'll just leave it at
that. Thanks, Mr. Cha.
Thank you. uh, Senator.
license unless you want, you
want to respond,
Mr. Chairman, just a very quick
response, very quick response,
uh, and I, I, I appreciate the
senator uh mentioning the
marketing piece at Outdoor rec.
Uh, when I first went in, I read
the, I was reading their reports
and they're, they're long.
And I, that you know sometimes
you look at the industry best
practices that, so I asked the
team, I said, what's your open
rate? It's like 3 times the
national average. I mean,
they're killing it and so it's
like, great, keep doing what
you're doing. That's fantastic.
So I wanted to just give props
to them, but also to you from
commenting on that because we
really see amazing opening, open
rates on those.
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
just want to make sure that I
heard you correctly, so we
pulled back the 2 million from
the budget when you received
that federal grant and now
you're asking for that money
back because you no longer have
the grant. Is that the case?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Great question. Uh
No, so the LFC recommendation
took into account the federal
USD grant that was for healthy
food financing. So that's why
the LFC recommendation did not
include state funding for that
program. Um,
The agency still has, or not the
agency, the coalition still has
that USDA grant for healthy food
financing. They were just
wanting an additional
He's from the states, um.
Hopefully that answer your
question. Yes, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Center trail.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
I've got a question about this
healthy food financing program
also because I've had a group
come to my office, probably 2 or
3 times already asking for money
that they say is not in the
budget, um, their indication to
me was that they were looking
for like 430,000 and the money
would go through egg. Are you,
is this a duplication of
services or can you explain to
me what the, why is e doing
something?
funding it and why are you doing
something and we're looking to
fund it.
Mr. Chair, I'm actually not sure
if there is healthy food
financing funding going to the
ag. I'm gonna look at two people
next to me. I don't think they
know there, there is in the
healthy food financing for them
farmers to start up. There was
a.
You'll have to correct me if I'm
wrong, $3 million appropriation
or maybe less, they got it
stopped, they they're training
farmers to start this program.
The farmers are now making up to
500,000. Uh, they want more
financing to expand the program,
but we told them to go start
charging some fees, they're
making money and so expand the
program, um.
On your own a little bit, so if
I remember if that's the right
food financing, but that may be
a different one.
I know it's like a larger
package of like items that are
being moved through the healthy
financing. What I do, what I can
tell you is that in FY 25, so
for this fiscal year, the
economic development department
did receive a special, um,
I don't know the right word
through to grow for 200,000 for
healthy food financing. Um, so
the quest for this year was 3
million for FY 26. OK, thank you
and, um, Mr. Chairman, in
regards to the 525,000 at the
LFC recommended for business
incubators, how come the agency
isn't requesting that money.
Those those are valuable.
Tools in our tool
Um
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, the,
the agencies or the executive,
um,
Budget uh did not have that in
in as a recommendation. We do
have a recommendation around uh
funding an entrepreneurial
staffer to help support that,
but not specific to that, that
aspect.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
will just point out that the
incubators are already
established in our communities
and again, I, I know the
incubator that's just down the
street from my house has been
very valuable.
Um, throughout the years.
So I would
Just wondering why.
The executive didn't think that
was.
Mr. Chairman, uh, senator, we do
have uh an incubator program
that runs through our Jedi
program that does receive some
funding and support and does
training and support, uh,
technical support as well. So we
do do that through the Jedi
program.
Thank you. Thank
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Tinder Woods.
films for many.
And notice that you requested.
For a group
In insurance premiums.
Tell me about that.
Senator, I may have to help him
out. That is the shortfall for
the state agency for health for
healthcare premiums, the 134
million John Courtney paying
attention or 126 million, that's
our shortfall. That's what
they're requesting is a
shortfall on, on the health
premiums for
their agency, correct.
But
That's, that's right.
And that's the shortfall that
we've talked about, right,
where, where GSD didn't um,
well GSD did it, but HCA did it.
We don't have the correct amount
for healthcare premiums cost and
the costs are rising in the, the
premium costs are increasing the
costs we're charging the
employer and employee, and so
that's a definite shortfall on
their side that we need to fix.
Mr. Chairman, that, that's
right. So, so, um, I believe
it's HCA that made the request
this year since that program
moved over to HCA, um, also
notable is in the.
Uh, LFC budget recommendation,
there's 17 million for GST risk
premiums and, and some, some
other potential appropriations
for um for agencies that uh
Or running up kind of high, high
bills in terms of, in terms of
risk.
Well, I guess I'm not reading
this right. Maybe, maybe I need
to have some.
Offline
Conversation to understand this.
Um, this is
Essentially your biggest program
in it.
The film program.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, Senator
Thank you,
Mr. Cha, can answer that. Um,
The film division within the
economic development department
is not one of the largest
programs, um, a lot of the money
for the department actually sits
in the economic development
division, um.
If I'm into, if I'm
understanding your question
correctly.
OK.
I'm gonna have to study it,
chair.
Thank you.
got a homework assignment now,
Senator Woods.
Uh, tell me what we're gonna do
with the money in the
partnership. Tell me how many
jobs the partnership has
created. I want to see an audit
of the partnership's money and
that complete breakdown. I mean
the partnership I was actually
set on economic development, and
Richardson era.
In in the partnership was kind
of created then, but it was the
arm to help recruitment.
Who's on there, how much is it,
how much recruitment has it
raised, is it defunct, I mean,
it adds some bad operators
prior, I don't know who's
operating that now.
You mean the whole breakdown in
the detail of why you want
600,000 more and how you're
exactly gonna spend every penny.
Mr. Chairman, I think that will
be something I'll have to come
back to you on with the, with
that level of detail. I
appreciate the request. Linda
Allen is leading that
organization, uh, and uh we're
happy to work with her to get
you the numbers you're
requesting.
Audit numbers, please.
Thanks.
Any other questions from
committee members?
Thank you. Good luck in the
house.
Thank you, sir. Thank you. Give
us the take it away.
So I think I need to look in
here too. Thank you, sir, shoes.
Rob Blackwood.
John, you're, we're gonna go
over this so.
E Steinor is not here before he
walks back in and says, oh, we
need to go over this.
Did you start your framework?
Thank you.
You almost got to spend the
whole day in Senate finance.
Let's go.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
So, good afternoon again
everybody. John Courtney, deputy
director at LFC, and here to
give you a, a quick update of um
the actions being taken in house
appropriations and finance.
Um
So HEFC started off
much as wait before a new
member, so
You know what's happening in the
house. They're having hearings,
they're making recommendations,
they're going to start doing
this. So he's going to give us
an update.
I think once every couple days.
And to see what they're moving
and what they're changing in
budgets. So when economic
development comes in front of
us, they may or may not have
heard them.
They'll know, we'll know what
they did and that's our
information not to be public.
And so he'll give an update of
what they're saying in that
hearing the young gentleman who
used to be a regent is the spy
from the House Appropriations
over there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That,
that's, that's you want to
question real quick. Mr.
Chairman, I just want a question
to you. So are we going to hear
from the agencies after HAFC has
or before? We will hear big
agencies or deficiencies in
agencies unless that and I said
that kind of in our
organizational.
Zoom in word meaning.
If there's somebody you want to
hear or something you want to
hear, let us know so we can
schedule them.
Because there's, there could be
a scheduling conflict. They
could have bills, it's something
we have to kind of figure out,
but if there's agencies that you
want to hear that you're dying
to we tried to move to my annual
budgeting for small agencies
this last year. And so those
small agencies were either flat
or 1% increase.
Uh, there may be outliers
because when they're small, you
may give them one FTE and it may
be a 30% increase. And so he's
gonna kind of wrap up what's
been happening and then
And then every day we're gonna
kind of go through this and the
closer we get to getting house
built too.
The more information and then
we'll bring those agencies over,
right? That you want to hear
that still say they're short,
that have deficiencies or
supplementals that we'll have to
deal with.
Correct.
Yes sir, Mr. Chairman, that's
good, good table setting there
for the in context for this.
Um, so thank you Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um, so
HEFC started off their hearings
much, much as you all did, uh,
hearing an overview of uh the
consensus revenue forecast, the
uh overall recommendations from
DFA and LFC, um.
Of course, they, they heard the
feed bill as, as you did and and
passed that through, um, the
first, uh, policy area or agency
that they had up was public
school support 993, um, it was
uh a presentation from um Sunny
Lou, uh, LFC analyst John Senna,
uh, the, um, uh.
Director of LESC, um, along with
the uh the DFA analyst, uh, HTFC
didn't take action on that
budget. Uh, they did ask
questions, um, around some of
the um some of the proposals in
the recommendations,
particularly uh the Section 9 of
the government uh uh results in
opportunity fund appropriations,
there's a 150 million in the LFC
recommendation in um public
education.
Reform funding for a 3-year
pilots, so that that got some
discussion, um, along with um.
Uh, specific initiatives, uh.
Um
There was some interest in
piloting uh a program to support
homeless students, which I think
was a recommendation of LESC.
There was some discussion about
transportation funding which LFC
did a program evaluation on in
the fall, recommending um that
the uh the transportation
formula, um, just needs some,
some more time to work.
Um, that same day, uh, HEFC did
something new this year. They
heard, um, uh, basically a
consensus calendar, so there
were at least 8 agencies that
had the same recommendation from
DFA and LFC.
Um, those were the New Mexico
usually small agencies and some
non-general fund agencies. So
the New Mexico Compilation
Commission, the uh employee
retirement board, the Office of
Lieutenant Governor, um, the
public employees public employee
labor relations board, the board
of examiners for architects, the
Board of Nursing, the Board of
Veterinary Medicine and the
Cumbrous and Toltec Scenic
Railroad. Whenever there is a,
uh, the same wreck HEFC will
usually take uh
the executive rec, even though
it's the same, so they took the
executive for those, the only
real discussion that came up in
those agencies was that uh
similar to what we heard from
PRC today, the Board of
Veterinary Medicine, their,
their director came in uh after
the was appointed after the
request was made. Uh, she wrote
a letter to LFC in the, in the
fall which we uh shared with
HAFC um about some non-recurring
items that they, they believe
they need for their.
For their budget, um, both
specials and and supplementals.
Um, the other thing I should
note is that when, when HTFC is
acting right now, much as I, I
believe you, you all are, are
doing in some respects, uh,
they're acting on recurring
budgets.
Um, you know, we're they have uh
non-recurring information just
as you all are seeing because I
was a non-recurring different
sheets, but they'll hear
non-recurring separately, um, as
you all will I think on February
4th, so, uh, in about a week,
um.
Next up, they had the uh an
economic development uh overview
kind of policy overview. They
heard from the economic
development department where
they went with the LFC
recommendation, um, members
asked about details on jobs,
wages for Lita, uh, the duration
of jobs for JTIP, um, just as,
as you all talked today, there
was some discussion on the
healthy uh food financing
program, um.
After that, HTFC heard from the
Workforce Solutions department.
Um
Again, they adopted the LFC
recommendation. I'll say the
HTFC has been going with the
lower of the two recommendations
in in every case except for the
governor's office, which I think
is is tradition or, or if you
will.
Um, so Workforce Solutions went
with the LFC recommendation. uh,
there was some discussion about
pre-apprenticeship programs, um.
After the, after that, so
January 27th, uh, heard from the
uh governor's office, uh,
adopted the executive
recommendation, members asked
about how the office is used,
uh, previous, previous personnel
increases, um, that they've
received, um,
The
State auditor was also up um
where the LFC adopted the the
LFC, I'm sorry, uh HEFC adopted
the LFC recommendation. Um,
there are some, some discussion
in there about the the success
in the future, I think requests
that um
the state auditor made for their
audit fund to help with uh
smaller agencies that um don't
often have the capacity to do
audits on their own, and so, um,
you know, they've, I believe
they, they have a figure where
they've been able to push out an
additional $5 million in capital
outlay for agencies that they've
helped to get audit audits out
as many of you might, might know
the uh the executive issued an
executive order years ago that
would restrict uh
the agency that doesn't have a,
isn't up to date on their
audits, um, from receiving
capital funds, so, uh
I think that's a, it's a good
thing they've been able to to
break through, um.
The secretary of state.
Uh, was heard.
Um, where HTFC also adopted the
LFC recommendation. There are
some questions about increased
election costs, um, you know,
the, the election this year uh
cost uh quite a bit more than,
than previous elections did, uh,
so much so that um the LFC uh
approved on their, on their
January program evaluation work
plan in the program evaluation
of uh election costs um at the
Secretary of State's office, and
I believe that that
engagement letter just went out
to the Secretary of State
earlier this week for for your
LLC staff to to take a deeper
dive and and look at that. Um.
So Secretary of State when LFC
state treasurer's office, HEFC
adopted the LFC recommendations.
Um, most of the discussion for
the state treasurer's office
were around uh a baby bond
proposal that some of you may be
familiar with, um, it wasn't a
part of their, of their request,
but it did receive some
discussion. Um, the attorney
general was up yesterday, uh
where he asked for and received
uh the LFC recommendation, um.
Members did have some questions
about the feasibility of moving
to using consumer settlement
fund dollars, the Attorney
General has expressed that he's
interested in, in moving that
agency to be more of an
enterprise agency basically
existing on the
funding that's that's collected,
um, you know, consumer
settlement funds is, is one
revenue source, um, there's also
a relatively smaller revenue
source from uh Medicaid fraud
investigations that the Medicaid
fraud control unit is
responsible for the Attorney
General's office and then
finally, uh, last night the
committee heard the commissioner
of public lands, um, where, um,
the HAFC adopted the LFC
recommendation. LFC was at a 4%
increase overall.
Uh, the executive was at a 14%
increase, um, the, uh,
commissioner did ask for a
potential compromise to come in
around 6% which um uh chair
small, I think, uh, said would
receive uh some further
discussion. The, in closing, Mr.
Trey, the, the only thing I
would add to this is that, you
know, these are, these are
initial actions taken by HEFC
and uh Chamalls made, uh, made
the point or
Um
Try to promote the understanding
that there will be work groups
that may, may add or um uh.
Mm
End up on on a catch up cleanup
list for um for outstanding
issues for these agencies, but
as I mentioned with the
exception of the governor's
office to this point HTFC has
gone with the, the lower of the
two recommendations for uh for
general fund um pretty much
across the board.
They realize they can subtract
to, not just that right.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
I just wanted to mention that um
Oh
A few years back with a state
auditor.
We had an initiated to where he
would have interns.
Assist in the very small
municipalities or.
A sick yes for any of the small
groups on their audits.
And it seemed to have been
working very well, so I don't
know if that's still.
Happening or.
Part of that 5 million will be
to assist with that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator
Gonzalez, I, I know they've been
making progress on, on helping
with those um smaller entities.
I'm not sure if they've done
that through the, through an
internship program or, or other
means, but I can certainly find
that out for you and, and uh
give you an answer.
Thank you. The 5 million request
is just for new auditors and a
different pay level.
Then for external auditors for
the saint gizz or small mutual
domestics.
I read the budget, John.
Mr. Chairman, the, so they, they
have a number of, of
non-recurring requests to to
support that. One is 2 million
to the, to the audit fund, um.
And then 1 million to assist
local public bodies and
obtaining financial compliance.
So again, that's non-recurring
both the executive and the LFC
have something in their
recommendation for that. The
executives at half a million,
the LFC's at 1 million.
Um
Mhm
And then small bodies financial
reporting, um.
There was uh the executives has
half a million in for that in
the LFC does not have anything
in for that.
OK. Any other questions, Senator
Woods?
And this is, this is.
Maybe
something.
For you to look at for me.
Um
I've been
I've been contacted by the
office of the Medical
Investigator.
And they said that they are
requesting and, and just so
everybody knows.
Office of the Medical
Investigators under E and
Medical School.
And it's a very
Subcategory way down at the
bottom.
But as you can imagine, the work
they do.
Yes, is autopsies.
And constant crime that we have.
It is a constant.
problem we're having.
With them having uh not enough.
Prince of pathologists to do the
work they need to do.
And they say that the budget
shortfall is about.
One point.
$25 million.
So about 2 quarter.
billion dollars shortfall in
their budget because they're
supposed to be able to look at
about 250 cases.
And a lot of them are over 400
cases now.
So this is a, this is a
Along with their crime or, or.
Convictions, whatever you ought
to look at. And the other thing
That
I'm very concerned about, and I
read it in the newspaper.
Was uh the environmental
department talking about running
out of budget.
And not doing
They're their air quality.
Um
Permit.
And I'd like a little more
information on that.
Sure, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Woods, I, I can certainly
provide you or I'll, I'll go
back and check with our analyst
on, on that OMI issue on the the
Department of Environment issue
that you mentioned, you know,
that this is related to in the
previous I guess two topics ago
that that bar request that that
came in that um.
Uh, the directorily objected to
and I I believe uh.
Germany also um sent a letter,
you know, for, for a number of
years.
The Environment Department has
told us that that those funds
are can't be used for personnel,
can't be used for certain
things, and now they're trying
to use it for the for the
reasons that they had previously
told us that they, they can't
use it for it. I don't see why
they would come to a screeching
halt in their air quality
program, um.
Because of a um a marginal
increase, um.
So I, you know, I.
I
From the LLC perspective, I, I,
I don't think we agree that,
that any work would, would have
to be stopped if, if that bar
didn't go through, but I'm also
not sure that it's not gonna go
through for the reasons that I
mentioned earlier, you know, we
we're incapable of having a
hearing if, if we can't have a
hearing after 35 days, it'll,
it'll move forward anyway unless
the DFA uh decides to
changed their mind on approving
it, I suppose.
OK, well.
Those who are too concerned.
OK.
Environment Department find
somebody.
Last day or two, I don't know
what the dollar amount, can you
get that for us too and where
that money is going for the
fine. Yes sir, Mr. Chair.
I don't know what it was or who
it was or anything, but I know
that they find somebody. I mean.
Uh, how many times have we heard
the environment department come
in Senator compels and say,
That they short, they're gonna
close their doors every session,
right? We never have enough, we
never have enough, and it's
just, it's, we've learned his
mantra.
So
And, and I did tell him, you
know, you don't want to do air
quality then.
We'll just take your, move it to
another section of the law and
get rid of.
Mhm
Somebody's got to do the job.
They gotta do their job. If they
don't want to do their job,
then.
Hello, Mr. Attorney General.
That is behind me.
Well, I mean, they're paid to do
a job.
They have the money to do the
job just because they didn't get
an increase for whatever the
reason they wanted it, doesn't
mean you stopped doing your job.
Would that be fair for a state
policeman to say, oh, I'm sorry,
we didn't get fined, so we could
write citations. So I'm gonna
quit doing my job.
Uh, same scenario.
It, it doesn't work that way.
It's not the way we're supposed
to function, so.
I think we're adjourned. Thank
you. Update.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We're on.
Please.
