Surtax to the health care
affordability fund. Um, and the
reason for that is because the
health care affordability fund
has been funding some really
incredible programs.
The largest of which is a small
business development. Uh, excuse
me Small Business assistance
program that is helping, um,
6000 businesses and 41,000
employees received a 10%
discount on health insurance.
Um, Mr Chairman, I would just
stress that these are
Ah commercial insurance plans.
So these are plans that are sold
on the health insurance
exchange.
Um And Mr Chairman, I do have,
um, my co sponsor, Senator Korea
Hand Hill. Um, who I'd love to
make a comment.
And statement. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee and representative,
Um the reason this bill is
really important is it's been a
very successful program. It
helps small businesses,
employers, employees and low
income new Mexicans continue to
access to health care that they
need an affordable way with
that, Mr Chairman, we stand for
questions. Do you want to
introduce yourself? You have to
wait.
Mr Chair Combat from officers
superintendent in here for any
questions. The committee may
have here for your looks, You
may want to leave.
Do you have anybody in the
audience and support
Let's get one or two.
Zoom.
No one. Okay, Chair, Vice chair.
members of the committee. My
name is Alex Castillo Smith and
I'm a deputy secretary with the
healthcare authority, and we
stand in strong support of this
bill and thank the sponsors.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is John
Arango. I'm a member of the
board of directors of the Mexico
Medical Insurance pool.
Are
Mission is to ensure that people
that otherwise cannot purchase
health insurance in New Mexico
have a place to purchase it,
namely from
The pool.
Ah, what we've discovered over
the years is that the major
impediment to people buying and
health insurance in New Mexico
is the fact that it's expensive.
We very much support this bill
because it provides opportunity
for small businesses and
individuals to which
Purchase high quality health
insurance.
Thank you.
Do you have an amendment on this
bill?
Reparative representative. You
have the amendment that your
amendment correct. You wanna
what I needed to hold
Anyway, We don't have a core. Um
can we do that without record?
Where is that state policeman?
I'm gonna borrow his Taser. Get
some people in this room. I'll
chase him in here.
We're kind of hung. We need one
more person.
We can't adopt the amendment
form or do we establish the
quorum this morning?
Well aware Compost. Padilla
Stein. Morning.
Just need one
Is he want to go around somebody
up?
Hold the fire alarm.
Is it includes chicken feathers.
Hmm.
I thought the state police would
get everything he was in his
cruiser listening because he
would have read it.
Children's services here. Thank
you. Can I have a motion to
adopt the amendment for
discussion purposes? Mr.
Chairman, I second it
Representing you on the explain
amendment. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and members, So this
amendment is a technical fix to
ensure that there is no fiscal
impact and fy 25. We had an
adopted an amendment and house
appropriations and finance. Um
and then it came to our
attention that the dates need to
be adjusted. So we're basically
adjusting the dates that were
adopted.
Um, in the house to make sure
we're not hitting fy 25.
Questions questions on the
amendment Senator
Questions on amendments seem
none can have emotion to adopt
them in you, Mr Chairman, I move
that we adopt the amendments
presented second that sooner one
seconds that back on the bill
questions on the bill.
Seemed done from committee
members can have a motion to
move the motion for do pass
Seemed done from committee
members can have a motion to
move the motion for a due passi
commanded by Senator Rodriguez.
Second by me, we call the roll.
Senator Bert
Senator Campos.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gonzalez? Yes. Gonzalez
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill
Center. Hemphill Votes? Yes.
center by the
senator. Sure, Senator share
votes. No. Senator Stein, born.
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez Yes,
Rodriguez votes? Yes, Chairman
Yas? Yes. Sports? Yes.
You have a do pass for that?
Thank you Have a due passi.
Thank you, Chairman representing
Lindsay, You want to jump in
there?
Mm hmm. Need to make sure that I
carry this on the floor
represents, so we begin to
explain it to people.
This is probably the most
important bill we're gonna pass
for the future New Mexico.
When you're ready, Mr Chairman,
Mr Chairman and Committee
members. Good afternoon, so
house built to 35 Capital Outlay
changes proposes a concept to
make the state's capital Outlay
program more sustainable,
meaning that proposes solutions
to the issue that has long
plagued the capital L. A program
in New Mexico as 2 53 53
apologize.
As we know the volatility of oil
and gas as a major funding
source for the capital Outlay
program creates a feast or
famine culture within that
program, and so in this
legislature as it was done in
last year's Senate bill 26 that
transfers excess oil and gas
revenue.
To the severance tax permanent
fund to insulate the General
fund.
House Bill 230 to 53. Excuse me
takes a similar approach to
insulating the capital Outlay
program, creating a base for
years to come.
House Bill 2 30 53 creates a
mechanism to turn today's
surpluses into future recurring
revenue dedicated for the
capital outlay program and for
capital outlay projects and I
have with me are experts from
the Legislative Finance
Committee staff to answer any
more detailed questions With
that, Mr Chairman, we would
stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members. I'm sorry, but let's go
to the audience. Anybody in
support
Anybody in opposition.
See none.
On June questions. Come to me
Maybe Mr Chairman second. Thank
you, sir. Motion for do pass
second by Senator share. I mean,
people.
Yes, Senator Rodriguez made the
most mean that she is a big
move.
This is where we're going to not
have to bond capital anymore. We
talked about hitting the bonding
capacity in the max per capita
This is one of the things that
has to happen Stephen Mexico, So
I want to pass motion.
Um
Another round.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes.
Yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Bradley.
Senator Gonzales Gonzales Boats.
Yes, Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill votes Yes, Senator by
the
Senator Scherer. Senator share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes, Vice
chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez
votes. Yes, Jeremy Munoz.
Yes. Sports? Yes. We have a do
pass 17 0.
Okay. Lets do Capital outlay. I
don't see Representative Dixon
or anybody. We may have to get a
member to do that.
We're gonna do Senate Bill 275.
Lane
Westwick.
So she is OK
Center Rodriguez. Thank you. I
think there's
An amendment I hear that will be
presented here by Senator Munoz.
I don't know if you have the
amendment.
I think he had to step out for a
moment. Yes? Yep.
And I think what I'll do first
is I'm gonna move the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Centerville 275 for discussions
so we can proceed. We have a
second just to move the
substitute for discussion. Thank
you. There's a motion the second
And anyone to post
Okay, so we're just moved the
substitute for discussion.
Senator. We need to explain the
bill first, right? Did you do
that? Okay. Okay. And then what
would you explain the bill first
and then the amendment. Okay,
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um, this
is the State Wide capital
Outlay Bill, uh, that we have
before us. And this bill
appropriates currently 932.2
million in General fund.
And 73.5 million another state
funds to capital projects
statewide. The bill includes
approximately $406 million for
statewide projects like for
example, state agencies higher
ed judicial and so on and 526
minute for local projects.
individual local projects it
also retroactively strikes the
requirement in last year's
capital Bill.
The projects funded with General
funding Cumbre 5% of
appropriations within the first
year of the funds, or the funds
will revert, which had cost a
lot of problems here. So this
would take care of that. And
with that, Mr Chairman, unless
you want more detail, um I will
leave it for discussion. Think
there's maybe an amendment here?
Uh, Nope. Nope. And so we do
have an amendment.
Senator, Do you want to explain
the menu? We want Mr Chairman
and I don't have the actual
amendment Substitute and the
amendment. You do, Okay. I just
have the substitute Bill. I
don't have the amendment. But I
can explain what I have in, uh,
in my notes for the move the
move the amendment, Mr Chairman,
you move them in it for
discussion purposes all second,
The motion any objection to that
motion.
Seen none.
Okay, moving this substitute.
first. You have to move. Okay?
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. All right,
so
So that's already been so any
objection to
that's correct.
Yeah, I was calling me and you
can blame that on her.
Thank you. All right? Yeah.
Yeah. Mhm. That's Valentine's so
we have
The motion and adoption no
objection to the adoption.
We're on the committee. Senate
Finance Committee substitute 1st
72 for Senate Bill 275.
But we haven't discussed the
amendment. Mr. Let's finish this
one up. Okay? Head as amended
any objection to that.
Seen none.
You don't have to do a roll call
right?
Okay, We're on the bill again.
Rodriguez.
We have another amendment.
Adrian, do you want to help,
Senator Rodriguez explained the
minute R Kelly, are you good?
You can. Okay. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. I can give it a stab
here and then Adrian can help me
if there's more detailed to be
explained, But currently the
amendment allows for $30 million
to be included in the capital
Outlay Bill General fund
appropriations, not as TBS Just
like we're funding every other
Appropriation in the capital
Outlay bill with General fund
dollars this year, so that we
don't have to bond and and have
that much debt expense, and this
would go to the Department of
Indian Affairs to prioritized
unfinished projects that have
been sitting there for for a
good while. My understanding,
and it has another
Part two this amendment and that
is 527.8 million will be moved
into the capital Outlay bill for
roads. Um, and this will be
severance tax bond notes, which
are sponge bonds kind of like
cash overnight.
Bonds, and this way we won't
have to incur that additional
expense for long term debt also,
and they will be moved from the
amount that was there, um,
already passed in the Senate
Bill 300, as Senator Munoz had
presented the bill as a sponsor,
and we will be putting it into
the Capitol Outlay Bill.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Questions on amendment.
Remove the motion for center.
Uh and I guess
I moved the amendment number
two is that 1 to 11 is a
substitute.
So I moved
Senate Finance Committee said
Amendment to Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 275 questions on the
amendment.
Seen. None can have motion to
adopt the amendment.
And motion by centers here.
Second base, Senator
Mm Pill or Senator Gonzalez,
either one
You have an amended Bill center.
Any questions, So let's go to
nobody in the audience is here
for this bill. I couldn't
imagine anybody would want to
hear about capital.
Anybody in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Nobody's
You're saying he died somehow.
Um Hmm.
I'll second that what you call
the roll?
Senator Bert? Yes, Bert votes?
Yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Brantley. Senator
Gonzales. Gonzales votes Yes,
Senator Hemphill Center Hemphill
Boats. Yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Scherer. Senator share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes, Vice chair.
Rodriguez votes? Yes, Chairman.
OSCE. Yes. German. Your sports.
Yes. You have a do pass.
On the amendment to the
committee. Substitute. Correct.
Did somebody say representative
Dixon walked in the room that
she was their ship? It was, but
You have to pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Mr
You said the substitute as
amended.
Or doing to 32 and 195 Year one,
both of them so
We're gonna do 232 as amended.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair we are
here to present to the
committee. Um, House Bill 232 as
amended. This is the LFC The
bill that lfc and DF worked on
in the interim.
Which creates an infrastructure
office.
Would you like for me to go into
more detail or folks Pretty good
with with that great anybody
here in opposition?
Anybody here in support?
U. N supporter opposition.
Okay?
You'll have to step up and use
the mic because
From committee All love. We all
love our transcription,
especially catch up Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Chelsea, Canada, and
I'm, the director of public
policy at the New Mexico Chamber
of Commerce. We support HB 230
to our research report driving
New Mexico's future identified
that infrastructure is one of
the key pillars that drives
economic competitiveness.
The creation of a central entity
to support the completion of
projects are supported and
needed. We believe this new
entity can help knock down
barriers that has presented the
completion of capital projects
like piecemeal funding, lack of
financial, technical and
administrative capacity and lack
of planning capacity. We
appreciate the leadership on
this proposal and urge you to
continue to support building up
infrastructure statewide. Thank
you.
Thank you. Question is from
committee members. Involvement
Move.
Right to
Any, Uh, second base, Senator
Hemphill.
Okay?
We got lots of seconds. Do we
have a third?
You call the roll?
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes.
Yes, Senator Campos, Senator
Brantley.
Senator Gonzalez Gonzalez votes.
Yes, Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill Boats? Yes, Senator
Padilla. Senator Scherer,
Senator Sherrod votes Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
Boats? Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chairman. Ah's Yes, folks.
Yes, we have a do past 7 to 0.
Thank you were onto the next
11 90 95.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. Um, I have
Miss Russell here with me and
Daniel were from the governor's
office. And we are here to
present house Bill 195, which
makes some adjustments to the
opportunity Enterprise Fund.
those that were identified by
the Opportunity Enterprise Fund
Review Board Policy Committee
and also adds a Housing
development fund.
To the program, and with that, I
think will stand for questions.
Anybody in the audience and
support
You're gonna say the same things
You said the last time. Okay.
Come on.
We have one on June.
Mr Weeks I seen you.
I just love how brave people are
on on the Internet.
Mr Chair members of the
committee again. Chelsea, Canada
Within Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, The chamber has been a
strong supporter partner and
advocate for the creation of the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund
based on successful work in
other states. We support
continued investments and
expanding the use of the fund to
help with housing development,
which is crucial for workforce
development. Voters agree. In
fact, at our annual business
today in Santa Fe event in the
last few weeks.
We unveiled our annual voter
poll survey when voters were
asked which two priorities they
believe should be the highest
when allocating budget surplus
funds. The third most popular
choice at 34%, was prioritizing
housing affordability after
crime and education. Thank you.
Good afternoon chairman and so
Westfall from the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
and we'll see this short and
sweet support This bill. It is a
smart bill. It's about
partnering with the private
sector to create and expand
affordable and workforce
housing. It has good guardrail
in place. We need more housing
and encouraging well vetted
partnerships with the private
sector to get it is just a win
win.
You're just support. Thank you.
I gotta hit the green button.
My name is Dan. Weeks. Um I'm
representing Bernalillo County
here today. This is a real
unique
Um, opportunity and I have full
confidence that the FAA will
handle this properly.
Housing is one of the biggest
issues we're facing, and I look
forward to working with the FAA
and the governor's office and
moving this forward. Thank you.
Are you? Are you a paid lobbyist
from the governor's office?
Mr Weeks are you paid up
lobbyists from the governor's
office, Okay.
Yes, ma'am.
Hmm.
My name is Laura Law, and I
served on the governor's Housing
investment counsel with
representative Dixon, Senator
Padilla and Daniel were walk,
and for a year we studied the
housing crisis in our state.
This funding is absolutely
critical to the production of
workforce housing in New Mexico
and I strongly encourage you to
give it careful consideration
and passed this bill. Thank you.
Heard from everybody on Zoom. I
think we're
Questions from the committee
member senator share
Please don't discuss chicken
feathers. No.
No, Mr Chair. I've got no flies,
No horses, no chicken feathers,
but
In seriousness, Mr Chair. How do
you envision this working? Mr
Chairman. The fund that's going
to be created will allow for two
things to happen. One is to
support infrastructure that's
needed for affordable housing,
and that is currently funded by
the Mortgage Finance Authority
so they can fund the vertical
construction but can't fund
infrastructure so that would be
one use of the fund. The other
is to fund Workforce development
housing that
Falls outside the limits.
currently of what the mortgage
finance authority does, so our
goal is to help support MFA and
then to do the projects that
fall outside of the M F a
purview. The Opportunity
Enterprise board would be
expanded under this law to add
to, um, to add the executive
director of the Mortgage Finance
Authority and then to add to
other housing experts.
So my assumption is that the
opportunity Enterprise board
will create a new task force
that will deal with the policy
setting and the prioritization
of the projects that apply for
this funding.
So
Mr.
Mr Chair representative.
Um
Why isn't this just a free
market issue of the price of
housing is going up. Then why
don't people build houses?
Because that's the way other
things work.
Mr Chair, Senator. I'm
represented Linda Cerrato. I'm
one of the co sponsors on the
bill. Um so what you have with
develop developers is there's a
lot of upfront capital necessary
to start building a lot of these
homes and, uh and so this would
provide that up from the up
front costs, especially for
these middle to your homes, and
so that would allow them to then
begin to build and then pay back
their loans afterwards because
of that, or otherwise.
Um, happy to turn it over to
One of our experts. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Senator, I think
specifically in this case, What
we're trying to do is is target
incentivizing the private sector
to solve this particular
problem. Um, there's a lot of
incentive right now in the
market for builders to build the
most expensive home possible,
and this helps incentivize
building entry level housing. It
also removes obstacles from the
current credit environment,
which has made infrastructure
funding really difficult and
then the cost of money very high
for log developments making
Them infeasible.
So thank you, Mr Chair and and
representatives. No.
Um
What is the Workforce house look
like
Hmm. Mr Speaker, Mr Senator or
Mr Chairman, Senator in this
case, and I can put put for the
language. We specify its, um,
proximity to work in the areas
and where economic development
is happening. I'm happy to turn
over to what we look at it kind
of globally as beyond this bill.
Specifically Mr Chair senator in
specifically in the legislation,
It defines the workforce housing
Unit as housing unit that serves
people, uh, over the current
maximum income limits for
affordable housing programs, but
at a below current market rate
level, so it's it will change. I
think, depending on the part of
the community or the state.
Um, where the need is that looks
different everywhere, but the
idea here is to incentivize.
This is a creation of housing
that doesn't exist right now on
the open market at the entry
level, so something that would
come in below what the current
entry level cost of housing is
So, Mr Chair. I, um
So are we talking 1000 Square
foot home, So we're talking
Ah!
Apartments that are 500 square
feet and 300 of them stacked on
top of each other. What
I still don't know what it looks
like.
Uh, Mr Chairman, Senator, Um
this really is designed to
include all types of housing,
um, and to meet the needs for
each different community in New
Mexico is, you know we have very
different needs around the
state. Depending on what
community? Um and so I think it
would really look very
different in Farmington than it
would in Albuquerque. Um, it's
really gonna be driven by the
needs and the local community I
think to achieve below market
rate housing costs. It's gonna
By its stage or have to be
fairly modest housing modest in
size.
Um, and in larger urban areas
would have to leverage economies
of scale to to achieve it. Um,
but this is really focused on
entry level workforce housing. I
think we all know the group of
people who, uh, make too much
money to qualify for our great
programs through the mortgage
finance Authority but still not
able to afford housing has has
exploded in the last few years.
and this is a direct attempt to
address that issue.
And, um, sorry, Mr Chair and
senator share just to sort of
put the point on that This
program complements the work
being done by M fa. It serves a
different population that next
population up so that we can
build overall capacity in
housing across the state.
So it's very complementary.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
think just
One more kind of calm, Uh,
comment.
So there's a there's several
neighborhoods in farming
Tonight. The rolled houses were
built 59 to 62 something like
that.
Uh, all single family houses.
They were all 11 1200 square
feet.
Um
There was a park in the middle.
There's school elementary school
wasn't very far from from the
junior high. There was a
Little, uh, What do you call?
Not a shopping mall, but a strip
of which there was the safe way
because that's where I shopped
and there was a bookstore and
there was a pharmacy and
whatever alcohol
In a row.
And, um
I don't think the government had
anything to do with that. And
those were all certainly
American middle class homes with
a little front yard and
Backyard. There was big enough
to play catch in and in the park
and all announced government had
anything to do so.
So why is the government have to
have something to do with this
one?
I know housing is expensive.
But what's the difference? They
didn't They didn't play before,
And if they're not playing now?
Um, Mr Chair and Senator, Um,
The response that I would give
is that we're in a different
time. We're in a housing crisis.
We know the state is short over
30,000 housing units, and we
have to incentivize and support
the efforts that are going on.
If we're gonna, you know, get
people into homes so that we can
reduce
Homeless population and provide
services. Um this is a tool that
we know will work.
Mr Chair, Senator, If I may add,
I'm you know.
The fact that farming can has
that is a is a fantastic
opportunity for folks in town.
When you look at southern New
Mexico and you look at Otero
County and other places where
you see a lot of economic growth
happening, a lot of the their
workers are living in El Paso
and driving into these areas for
work. So new Mexico workers are
actually living in Texas, and
they're getting the benefits of
these jobs. Mr Mr Chair and
Senator.
What this program would allow
and and incentivize and
encourage is more developers
looking at being able to develop
in these regions where we have
that need.
Well, I just, um, a This isn't
going to reduce homelessness at
all.
The people are truly homeless.
Aren't looking for this house.
Um, it might make it better for
people that are living in in in
their parents house because they
can't get out or
Whatever things like that, But I
just don't see that.
The homeless issue is a
different issue.
So anyway, Thank you, Mr
Senator Burke.
Thank you, Mr Chair and more
clarification will just
Give an example of what we're
looking at.
Um, places like towels. Ruidoso.
Um
Which are
Destination areas.
Uh huh. And oftentimes expensive
areas to live in.
In Ruidoso. Um, a lot of the
service workers living Capitan
Alamogordo, Carrizo, so and and
and community and
Every day because housing and
those are smaller communities
works.
Um whereas in right now, so it's
very hard to find.
That Santa Fe itself has this
kind of issue. Palace has the
issue and I'm sure there are
other areas of the state. And
that's just one example. I mean,
we probably need workforce,
housing and several areas but
for destination type and tourism
type areas. Uh, it is a
desperate need right now.
There is a stigma. Sometimes it
comes along with that, and
they've tried to work through
that.
Some communities can do that
Others have a hard time working
through that Ruidoso has had
three different locations and
because of community input, have
I am not decided to go there,
and now they have 1/4 location.
And then there is everything is
good they're going to build on
that.
So I don't know that clarifies
anything like that, but that
that might give a little
perspective to that second.
Actually, the question I have is
Um, these funds are separate
from the
Mm. FAA funds is that
As I heard somebody discussed
earlier. I mean, you can't mix
and match in combined funds like
this. You have to use one or the
other program and my correct on
that.
Mr Chairman. These these funds
will be separate from the
mortgage Finance Authority. The
M F A. These funds are actually
going to be held at the N M F A,
but they will be separate from
and they'll serve different
niches or parts of the housing
continuum than the mortgage
finance authority currently
serves so the, uh madam chair of
the
Criteria for applying for the
loans for these pretty blouses
will be somewhat different
because of the pots of money
that will be used. Is that
correct? Mr Chairman? Yes. Can
you can you distinguish
Give me a little very quick
Thumbnail about
Two different pots and
And and what they will provide
money to what kind of housing
That they will provide
Mr Chairman, if I understand
your question correctly, the
pots of funds being the mortgage
Finance authority and these
funds Mortgage Finance authority
operates probably 40 programs,
all of which deal with some
element of housing so they will
have different application
process is based on different
things here. It'll be similar. I
anticipate
To the way in which the
opportunity Enterprise Board,
which is the board that this
would, um, report to, uh they
currently have a program for
commercial development. And I
just hate it would be the same
thing where they would create
some criteria for how to
prioritize these projects. Um,
and then they would then send
that list of prioritized
projects over to the New Mexico
Finance Authority. And we will
then underwrite them and make
certain their loans that can be
repaid and things like that, so
it will be a competitive
process.
Um, and would take into
consideration the state the
needs across the state. So I
think that's my appreciate the
clarification on that. I I just
wasn't understanding why they
need for two parts. Um
I understand what Senator
sheriff saying, you know,
oftentimes private industry will
do this.
Although I know in some
communities again like weirdos
and Tallis, uh, in Santa Fe, Um
This level of housing is not
interesting. Any contractor
builder they make very little
money, if any on it, so there's
no desire to do this often times
And so this kind of feels a
niche than another kind of
private industry contractor
could not
Really feel and and I guess,
Madam chair. The last question I
have is
Can they kind of developer come
in and do multiple homes at one
time, Or does it have to be one
developer? One home at a time?
How does
Care, Senator. Yes, The
expectation I believe is that
they would have development and
so part of what I M F A is
expected to report back to the
FAA Oversight committee is how
many units and those aspects as
well.
Okay. Thank you for that. And
madam chair. I know that the
radio so project. I think it's
at least 50. It will be huge for
Rados. Oh, so those people don't
have to commute. It's a little
bit of a safety issue, um, and
also opens the door to more
service people moving into the
area when they have affordable
housing to accommodate the
increase in
In, uh, services that are needed
So thank you all. I appreciate
the information or something
like that. Thank you. Madam.
Jim. Thank you, Senator and
anyone else in the committee
That may have some questions
here. Let me I just wanted to
maybe make a quick statement
here that the um Mortgage
finance authority has taken on
an enormous amount of workload
in the last many years. It's
been intact for the 50 years.
approximately, and, um
During the years without
sufficient funding they have
taken on a lot of work, and
until recently the Legislature
through a bill that I passed,
and and we passed when you all
voted for it finally
appropriate some recurring
dollars. That is the one bill
that
Takes a portion of the bonding
capacity in earmarks for housing
that goes to the mortgage
finance authority to administer
through the affordable Housing
trust fund for the state. Um
The enemy FAA, which we're
talking about here and Marquita,
Thank you. And, of course,
Representative Serato and
representative Dixon. Daniel.
Um, it's is different. It is the
first time that the enema Faye
will be engaged in doing some
housing projects. That is not
what they have done in the past
This legislation here
Is enabling legislation for them
to proceed to do some part of
the aspects that perhaps, and
the mortgage finance authority
may have not done for several
reasons. One primarily because
of the lack of funding to tell
you the truth in the past, but
number two because there's so
much need
And we need to move as quickly
as we can. Because the longer we
wait
To effectuate a good housing
market. The more that need
builds up and so this here would
enable the N m F a market. Um,
because Marquita is there. I
have a lot of faith. As you
know, I've said it many times in
Marquitos work and by rule
Marquita will ensure through the
New Mexico Finance Authority
that
There is no duplication that has
been the biggest problem in the
biggest concern when we discuss
housing issues is that there
would be some duplication. It
was slow down the continuum.
That is not what we're here for.
We are here to ensure that the
other way around happens that we
move things out. And so in this
case because the New Mexico
Finance Authority
Has indicated how they're going
to be doing this by having the
mortgage finance Authority. Um,
work on the initial aspects of
the projects and then
Continue to communicate with the
N M F a to see how those gaps
perhaps that exist, maybe filled
in that being that, perhaps, um,
infrastructure. Um, that may
currently not be done by M F A
for various reasons, As I said,
primarily lack of funding, but
regardless of how it is, there's
some gaps in there that I m F A
and the New Mexico Finance
Authority have agreed to work on
and I think
This will go a long way in
getting up in these gaps filled
and so hopefully we can see
more.
More housing and more working
together with the mortgage
finance authority who have
really been the experts. This is
going to be an eight, enabling
legislation to start on housing
with the N M F A. But the M F A
has been working on it. This is
what they do for a long time.
other than not having enough
funding in the past. Like I
said, it's kind of delayed them.
Some
But but they still run with it
and do and I see Izzy and Robin
and others here. Thank you for
being here. Um, So, uh, I just
wanted to to indicate that this
isn't a good chunk of money
that's going to go into this and
I'm I'm happy. Thank you,
Representative Cerrado and
representative Dixon for working
on this. And, of course,
Marquita for working on it. And
I know Daniel, You're new. So
you just come in about what 23
weeks ago during the session, so
Thank you. But let me just say
that I hope that one of the
biggest things that this does is
Work together as two entities,
and that's what the Legislature
will be looking for, Um, for
with M F A and and I'm afraid
together to get more more
housing built and also not only
for the, um, for that population
that we call the workforce now,
which is the population that
many times does not qualify
because of the area Median
income
Um, the M F A in the summer had
through their board and the
oversight committee had
increased the area median income
eligibility to allow more people
to qualify. So now we have
nurses, doctors and many others
that qualify that didn't before.
So, um, this here? Um you know,
we'll augment more of that.
And hopefully we can see much
more development happening with
the emphasis expertise. Thank
you for that. So that's all I
have. Mr. Chairman. I think it's
a good a good program and in die
support that. Thank you. Thank
you one second, because I'm
gonna ask some questions out.
Think I'll be able to vote on
this?
On page 22.
Lying 22.
Says you can make up to 40 Year
loan.
That tells me that you're not
going to move housing in that
market if the loan terms up to
40 years.
So if you do it, let me give you
a couple of scenarios you if you
do a development
And you have a 20 home or 50
home track site, and you're
trying to hit in the one
eighties to to hundreds, right?
When each home is sold. Don't
you have a lien against the
improvements that have to be
paid off before that title can
be cleared for the title
company. Otherwise, there's a
underlying existing lien on the
whole subdivision.
How is that going to be?
I think Marquita shaking her
head. She knows what I mean. I
think I mean, you're laying all
the pipe and and all the deal
for the road, but you're only
selling one house at a time. How
are you going to release those
when those titles
And those title policies are
paid for that. There's a cloud
on the title and the developer
walks away.
I can't. I can't make money here
and affordable and in the
infrastructure is there there?
The homeowner is gonna have a
have a
Cloud on their title policy.
But Mr Chairman, I think the
specifics of that provision are
actually designed more for multi
family housing and the
availability of HUD financing
that goes up to 40 years. Um,
and that's more to keep it an
opportunity open for funding
certain types of projects. HUD
multi family financing can go up
to 40 year terms, and they don't
allow any subordinate debt that
has shorter terms than their
first mortgage.
And so that's the reason for
that provision. I think the
situation you describe for, say,
a homeownership subdivision. We
would have to approach it in an
incremental pay off approach.
and I think director Russell
could speak to that more
directly. She's going like this,
Mr Chairman, I think you know
the answer to that. Yes, and in
fact, we would have to release
the title to each of the, uh,
leans before they could be sold
to the homeowner, so it would be
incremental. There's a variety
of housing that's eligible for
funding under this, and so there
are different.
Visions that relate to
That element We don't anticipate
at all 40 year term for the
single phone homes that are
going to be sold, and as a
matter of fact, there is no
minimum. Uh um
Um
Amortization here there was in
the Opportunity Enterprise Act
initially, and we found that in
fact that that was serving as an
impediment to an efficient
return of the fund. So this act
this law before you, the bill
will both amend that out of the
original one, and it does not
have that provision here, so
we're going to make it a market
financing.
Okay?
Answers quite a bit. I don't
think I'll be able to vote on
this.
Um, I mean, this is probably the
hardest cost. I mean, those of
us that have built homes and
No. How many?
Nails exactly and how many
shingles and have done amount on
the rez? No, what we need
exactly, and we load containers
and say Here's
10,460 nails. That's what this
job takes. Here's 229 2 by fours
and 10 extra, and we count to
the count almost to the penny in
how you do that, Um
I just you, I mean,
It's great to build housing, but
all the housing that's coming
right now is all from large
companies from other states.
They're the large Florida
contractors, a large California
contractors that are all doing
this HUD housing and and you
know, they build the housing.
They keep the front for
commercial development. That's
where they pay back their their
costs. Uh
You know, it's not gonna be
quick.
I think it's gonna be quick
about this.
You still have planning and
zoning to go through. That's at
least who knows in Gallup.
I mean, we've threatened to
shoot the
Planning zoning Department
outlaw How many times
But I mean, it's not gonna be a
quick process. I mean,
I wish there would have been
someone company. I don't know
It's almost impossible to zoning
in every city, right?
I mean, depends with how their
zone and words owned and all
that. But
I mean, there's there's a lot of
road to haul right here. I mean,
You're not gonna see pop up of
100 houses or 100 apartments.
Within a year.
It's a year to plan.
It's lovely $10,000 a foot by
the time you put curb gutter
sidewalk utilities in there.
Running those utilities. I mean,
it is not a cheap and very risky
endeavor and for those of us
have done it right.
Sometimes you don't get a
payoff.
Sometimes you build and develop
And you just You're hoping you
break even depends how you do
that, and then the workforce the
workforce is going to be tight
anyway, but
I just caution everybody that
thinks past the $100 million for
housing, and they're gonna see
housing just pop up everywhere.
It's not going to be that way.
This is a slow
Process with a lot of internal
money to invest. I mean, just
the developers just to purchase
the land and then come to you
for the infrastructure.
Is a large portion of that loan
and guaranteeing that
I don't know how we're gonna
cross. You do that cross
guaranteed to the bank on on the
property to be second on the
mortgage from the bank Because
they won't allow it. You
probably the state to be first.
You'll have to be second. It's a
good idea and a good start. But
I mean
The struggles that that this is
gonna take is gonna take a lot
of time from IMF A so
I just want to make sure
I know Marquita. Your bucket is
is almost full of M F A. It
should be right at the lip for
you to come.
Mr Chairman will be increased
the size of the bucket
Well, sometimes the bucket falls
over when there's there's too
much in the bucket, and it falls
over. So
Um
Hey, I'm sorry. Go ahead. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. I think you
kind of rained on my parade. I
was just hoping that
If you weren't
I've heard somebody reports
about M F a taking a long time
because you've got a lot of box
checked.
If there was any way to expedite
this process to move it a little
bit quicker, But I understand
you know, you kind of your hands
are kind of tied by all the
Permits and things that you have
to get done to do this housing,
too. So maybe it's just wishful
thinking. But
There's anyway even to look at
that process on traditional
housing. Uh
To expedite this. It would help.
I mean, that's just one of those
reoccurring themes that we hear.
It takes a long time to get
anything done in New Mexico. I
am hearing that you know if
there's a way we can still
maintain a high standard, but
expedite that that would be a
good thing just to comment.
Thank you, madam joke.
Mr. Thank you, representative
and Senator Bert. That is
definitely one of the issues
that we spent a lot of time
discussing in the housing
investment counsel and we're
keenly aware of there is a
provision for the criteria and
prioritization in the bill, um,
to encourage our, um
subdivisions or political
subdivisions to improve their
zoning and permitting processes.
It is a carrot, not the stick.
Okay? Sure.
Anyone else from the committee
that we already call for people.
Anyone supporting the bill that
we do that earlier before
Cinnamon nose left? I don't I
think we did already. All right.
Thank you. Um, I don't have any
further questions myself. So
what are the wishes of the
committee?
We don't have a quorum. So okay,
I guess. Okay. Alrighty. So some
questions? Sure. Thank you. Yes,
you can proceed.
So I'm sorry I was putting on a
bill so I'm sorry I was running
late. How does this tie in with?
Mortgage finance Authority.
Thank you. We're all looking at
each other. Um, Madam Chair
representative. This will
augment and support projects
done by the mortgage finance
authorities, so we'll be able to
the new Housing Development Fund
will have two purposes. One is
to help fund infrastructure for
affordable housing. So those are
the projects, they'll they'll
fund the vertical construction
They can't do infrastructure so
we would be able to fund
infrastructure and the second
part deals with, um
Um, workforce housing so it
would be over the limits of the
homes that they currently are
able to fund.
So, Madam Chair or sorry. Yes,
madam Chair.
Representatives. Um
Marketed. Does this does this in
any way? Um
But, uh
Bypass MF a for approval of
housing projects.
Mr Madam Chair. No, this will
not bypass them. And I would
note that the mortgage Finance
authority replaces the state
auditor in this bill so they
will serve as a member is he
would serve as a member of the
Board of the Opportunity
Enterprise Review Board, and it
adds to other housing experts.
and so you'll have. What I
anticipate would be
A commercial project group and a
housing project group to help
select those projects. And we
anticipate working very closely
with the mortgage finance
authority to ensure that what
we're providing is more funding
or funding for more projects
rather than more funding for the
same kind of project. We really
want to make sure that we are
beside them and not competing
with him.
And Madam Chair. Representative
Dixon, is this building on what
you started last session with
the
Expect space.
Program.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator for asking that
question. Yes. Um, we have seen
great success with the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund.
This bill also contains some
edits modifications to the
program based on feedback. Yes,
madam. Uh,
Mr Chair.
Marquita. How's that working? I
can ask.
Mr Chairman, Senator, we have
completed one round of
applications and, um, the
That those projects are
currently still being
underwritten. We have had to
bypass a couple of them. One of
them was it two of them actually
were able to find funding from
other mm of a programs and so we
were able to put those in there
were under the second
application now open in mid
January will close in early
March, and we anticipate making
available the rest of the
funding sounds good.
Break. I moved to past Mr Chair,
Okay. Alright, There's a motion
on the floor for a do pass. Do
we have a second?
There's a motion. Sorry there's
emotion here for do pass, but my
understanding is that he can't
make the motion because he
debated it. But then I took a
break. Oh, I see. He said. Okay,
It's okay. We'll have Sandra too
clever. Thank you. All right,
You know, we'll second that you
want to second that senator.
Alright, There's a motion in a
second. Is there any opposition?
Alright Then we call the roll.
Right. Thank you.
Senator Bert Yes, Senator. Bert
votes? Yes, Senator. Compose
Senator Brantley, Senator
Gonzales. Gonzales votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Scherer, senator share
votes. No, Senator Stein born
Yes. Born votes. Yes, Senator
Woods.
Vice chair. Rodriguez Rodriguez
votes Yes, Chairman Yeo's
Eminem, Steen.
I'm just gonna recuse myself
from the vote.
So that's 42.
Absence.
So we have four in the
affirmative one in the negative.
And that's all it is.
4 to 1. You have to do pass.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members.
We're gonna have a hearing on
the next
Item and so representative you
want to jump in the seat was
burnt with voted with us only
gonna have a hearing. No motions
are going to be taken, Mr Chair.
When are we going to have a vote
on the bill?
Well, if not now, when we have
to talk to Senator worth and
what we want to do it.
So we're gonna have a hearing. I
do have to go to
Appropriations because Senator
Woods has a bill in there, and
he's
Struggling
Tender.
Just have hearing. Yeah, okay.
Then there, start again. Here.
Okay. Um, good to see you,
Representative McQueen and staff
here, everyone.
Let's see. Which one are we
gonna go on to? First We will
have the oil and gas development
royalty rates Senate Bill 24 is
that the one? We're going to
hear first church HB 48 because
it represents identical
They are identical there. I
can't hear you tentacle. There
are identical. They're the same
bill. Oh, there's the same bill
Identical. Sorry, can hear with
bouncing back. Thank you so
well. Go on, then to, um to
house Bill 48. Okay. How's that
that good there, Same
Thank you, Madam Chairman Chair
Matthew McQueen returned today
by soon Les Stewart, Deputy
commissioner of operations at
the State Land Office, and Craig
Bloom.
Assistant Commissioner for
Mineral Resources Hospital. 48
would increase the maximum rate.
Uh, in a given range, Uncertain.
Statutory state trust land
leases, it would make the upper
rate
25%, which would be comparable
with Texas and private parties
in the Permian Basin. So what
we're talking about today or,
um, really, You know, the best
tracks in the Permian Ah, for
other landowners, they're going
for 25%.
The state land offices currently
capped at 20%.
This will increase after the
leases came into operation.
With increased payments. Elaine
Graham permanent fund between 50
75 million a year, it could be
over a billion dollars over the
life of the lease. I would say
within size, it's a cap.
It's not a set rate increases
the range so it doesn't again
pegged. The rate only applies to
future lease is not current
leases.
And we really think it would
only apply to the best premium
tracks.
25% is a is a fair market rate.
Um, there's been some discussion
about
Well, yeah, well, things are
different in Texas or things are
different on federal land.
Um, I would note that the
effective tax rate in Texas is
8.3%.
The effective tax rate in New
Mexico is 8.5% of gas
operations. Those are
comparable.
And in fact, the New Mexico
statutory lease has other, um,
more favorable terms than Texas.
So currently, not only are we
charging allure royalty rate
But also we have more favorable
terms for the producer.
Um, this is not a tax
It's not a fee.
It's not a regulation.
This is charging a fair price on
an asset we own.
Something we hold in trust for
the beneficiaries of the Land
Grant Permanent fund.
And we actually have a legal
duty to maximize our return on
these assets.
And Manchuria if I might give,
uh, my expert chance to say a
few words.
Yes, Thank you. Yes, please
proceed. Madam Chair members of
the committee. I just wanted to
emphasize a couple of points are
lands were granted state lands
were granted by the federal
government for a specific
purpose, And that's to make
money for the school Kids are
public universities and
hospitals in the state. That's
why we have them. That's the
purpose of the trust.
What we're asking is simply to
be able to charge the market
rate.
It is a strange situation when
we are prevented from charging
what the market rate is when our
mission is to generate revenue
for the school kids.
Capacity. We are not asking for
an exorbitant rate. We are
asking for the same rate that
the oil companies charge when
they lease in the Permian Basin.
The Permian Basin is
The best oil play in the entire
United States.
20 the best in the world.
It is a local cost environment
for companies to produce oil
high productivity.
New Mexico has some of the best
formations.
Lea and Eddy County in
particular.
Ah!
There is no reason why we should
be putting these tracks up.
At a rate that is below the
market rate.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Next you want to say something
is in your name for the record,
because you know, for some
reason it felt it sounded like
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Next. You want to say something
is in your name for the record?
Because you know, for some
reason it felt it would sounded
like wasn't working. But, um, I
did hear you and others, but
this microphone was a little
low. You were good. Thank you,
Representative. Alright, Madam
Chair. My name is Greg Bloom on
the assistant Commissioner for
mineral resources at the Land
office and
I do not have any additional
comments. Alright. Thank you
very much, Greg. Um, because
it's a hearing. I'm gonna
proceed as if it was a ordinary
meeting. So I'm going to ask in
the audience. Um, anyone for
this bill, and then we are going
to ask for anyone against the
bill and anyone on zoom before
we go on to discussion of
questions from the committee.
So, yes. So that's good. If you
state your name for the record
and your comments
Answers. My name is Camila. FIBA
Leman. I'm with the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club.
These are publicly held natural
resources found on public lands
and the extraction of those
resources should go at market
rate for the benefit of the
beneficiaries. Who are our kids
and folks in the
Our resources are money. Thank
you. Thank you, Camila. Alright,
Next person, please.
Madam chair members of the of
the committee state Land
Commissioner.
My name is Joseph Hernandez and
I am with NM native vote.
I'm also a father.
Beautiful seven year old girl.
And, um, you know, I'm teaching
her about, you know the right
things are wrong things and just
thinking about this bill, you
know, increasing the rural T
rates to 25%.
And going to our school district
meetings about you know the need
for more construction money and
also seen the reality of the
head start centers on Navajo
being built, Um, you know,
Um, I urge you guys to vote Yes,
Because it is right thing. Thank
you. Thank you.
Next. We got two more. Okay. And
do we have anyone on zoom One
person on zoom forest.
Or didn't say Okay, Thank you.
Proceed.
Good afternoon. Um, members of
the committee. My name is Jordan
Kessler. I am with Yogi
Resources, which is an operator
in the Permian Basin. We are
here in partnership with the
State Land office. We view our
ability to operate in New Mexico
as a partnership. So we're here
in support of the State Land
office and in support of this,
bill, Thank you. Thank you. All
right.
Charles, You're next, madam
Chair members of the Committee.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity. Um, lobbyist with
NRDC Natural Resources, Defense
Council and earthworks. And, um,
in this case, um, just want to
quote representative, Um
Other floor of the house, saying
that this would make very
representative Townsend. Uh,
minimum very little difference
for oil companies that the
But I'll tell you the 25 to 50
million a year for public
schools. Tremendously important,
so it means very little impact,
if any on the oil business.
Huge impact for New Mexico
Students in schools, Please vote
for it. Thank you. Thank you,
Charles. We have anyone. Um, I'm
gonna ask before we go to zoom
because we're not sure if they
went on zoom is for against so
anyone in the audience that is
against this bill.
Okay, one. Will you come up,
please, and state your name
clearly for the record.
Okay, madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Winchester Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. We
stand in respectful opposition.
This will have a big impact on
smaller oil companies, not the
bigger ones. So for that reason,
we think that going from 20 to
25% is too much and it will hurt
our smaller producers who
operate on thinner margins.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
All right.
Anyone on zoom
You have the name for the
person? Richard Mason. Dick, are
you there?
Zoom. Yeah.
Madam Chair members of
Madam Chair members the
committee. Can you hear me? Yes,
we can hear you and then, um,
members of committee. My name is
Dick Mason. I'm a board member
and registered lobbyists for the
League of Women Voters in New
Mexico. The leak stands in
strong support of HB 48, based
upon two of oppositions. The
league believes that it's the
state's obligation to collect
revenues to fund services that
are generally state
responsibilities and I adequate
to finance the essentials of
government in education is
certainly
He's one of those. We also have
a position at the state
Legislature should ensure that
the state land commissioner has
the support needed to maximize
profits.
And maximize administrative
costs. What protecting the
environment and preserving the
long term value of the land? We
think SB HB 48. It's consistent
with both those positions so we
stand in strong support. Thank
you. Thank you, Dick. Alright
anyone else before we move on to
committee members?
Okay. Thank you very much for
your comments committee.
Any questions from the
committee? Time Board chair. Mr
Chairman. Good to see you here
and good to see the land office
here a long time colleagues here
and like Mr Um, tell us the rate
that royalty rate right we have
now, where is that rate?
Verse. Other
Extractive states, Texas and
Comparatively chair. Senator
Stein, born
Uh, yeah. On the house floor.
There was a lot of discussion
about different rates in
different areas, and there was a
list at one point recited, Um,
11, different Western states and
the world royalty rates and it
was argued that Oh, well, if we
go to 25 will be highest with
Texas.
And Madam chair represents.
Excuse me. Former representative
Steinberg, Center center. Um the
reason 25 would be highest for
taxes is because we share the
Permian with Texas States don't
have the same resource that new
Mexico has again. This is a
resource owned by the state of
New Mexico. But on the state
lands, you know, so that's why
Um, the royalty. The market for
this royalty rate is going at
25% in this area, and that's why
we would like to be comparable
with private landowners in
Texas.
Forgive just from education is
this bill only for the premium
madam chair.
So, ma'am chair. Um, Senator Sam
born. This bill affects certain
statutory state land Office.
REIT lease is it is a range,
though, so that Lee says 18.75%
currently to 20. We would
increase that to 18.75 to 25 and
different tracks are at least
two different rates.
So other areas of the state will
be in the range, but we would
not expect those to be a 25%.
So, Madam Chair. So the
permeability, which is only said
is is the hottest play would be
competitive with what we're
doing.
In Texas.
And the other texts are the
permanent. Mr Chair, Senator.
Sunburn? Yes, part with it.
Well, Mr Chairman.
Uh,
I think similarly, you said it
very well. When you said we have
a fiduciary responsibility.
We have a responsibility.
To, uh to charge a competitive
rate not to undervalue it, but
to be competitive to be
aggressive. We talked a lot in
this committee, Madam Chair Mr
Chairman about planning for the
future.
Well, this is a This is a
resource whose consumption is
going to decline over time.
We have a moment to maximize our
value as a state. I think the f
I R was very compelling. It
said. We would over up to 2050
collect up to a billion dollars.
I think maybe a little more than
that, potentially for schools.
So, Mr Chairman.
I'm sorry, Mr Chairman. I
apologize.
Mr Chairman. Now, Madam Chair
like the sound of that.
Damn chair.
We have a fiduciary obligation
to collect that billion dollars
and if not
I don't know that we can really
justify not doing that. I don't
see many producers here
protesting it because I think
it's a very profitable time.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
That royalty rate has it seen
any noticeable decline in
business and the premium in
Texas?
Because of that rate.
Madam chair. Uh,
Senator, I can let my expert
answer that to my knowledge. No.
These are highly sought after
tracks. Madam Chair Senator
That's correct. You know when we
talk with our Texas
counterparts, sometimes they're
kind of surprised that we would
actually be putting up tracks at
this rate because it is
One of the best places in the
world. I mean, just to emphasize
this point.
If the Permian Basin we're a
country
It produces more oil than
Canada.
It produces more oil than Iraq.
Wow.
It is an incredible resource
chairman when he was talking
about the budget the other day
said. We are not a posting, and
I could not agree more.
We have poverty. We are not a
poor state. This is an
outstanding resource we have and
we're simply asking.
For when we take a public
resource out of the ground and
we sell it.
That the school kids get 25%.
The company's still would get
75% of the value of that
resource by bringing it to
market.
Thank you. So, Mr Chair, I mean,
We have a financial obligation
to market these resources that
are competitive rate.
We're undervaluing it now that's
a form of corporate welfare of
the public resource, and we're
basically foregoing a billion
dollars of revenue.
I think
Um, given the shelf life of this
resource in terms of its global
consumption. This is a crucial
bill really appreciate you all
bringing it forward. I know that
we've been trying to do this for
a very long time. But now it's
just
White hot moment to do it.
And, uh,
And hope. We hope we do, Mr
Chairman and I hope we could
entertain a motion. We have a
quorum.
Bill has made it all the way to
this point.
But, uh
I'll just leave it there for the
moment. Thank you all very much,
One quick question for me.
Aren't the federal leases bigger
than the state leases. How much
do we get in federal revenue?
Compared to state revenue. Mr
Chair, Senators, um
If you're talking about under
the lease, Uh, BLM leases are
1875. And we're asking for 25%
currently under the federal
leases we get
A payment.
Royalty payment from the feds.
Hmm. What number is that? And
what number is the state royalty
payment on state lands. Mr.
Chairman, Um, the BLM royalty
rate. That payment is 18 75%.
Um And, uh, you know, we charge
20% up to from 1875 to 20%. I'm
not sure I speak a little louder
for me up to what? To 20% the
range so BLM absolutely is a
lower royalty rate. Um,
currently, and those leases are
caught up in lawsuits there.
Huge compliance costs for doing
business on federal lands. Um
So, so we're 2% difference than
the Fed's correct.
All right.
Madam Chair. Uh, I'm sorry, Mr
Chair. Whatever you I'm bad, Mr.
I mean, we'll confuse you were
all confused right now.
Apology's Vance's back and forth
the range that we charge is
between 1875 and 20%. So
depending on the quality of the
lease
And the quality of essentially
it's the resource and where it's
been developed. There's a
statutory and regulatory process
to go through and rank and
that's how you determine where
so that's why. When
representative McQueen said that
the Permian is going to be at a
higher rate than probably, you
know, in the San Juan Basin.
That's because the resource is
very different in both basins.
But isn't it a cost to get the
resources that you calculating
that?
Cost. You have a well, that's
only don't matter. Expert
You have a well that's only 500
ft Deep. I know there are a lot
deeper than that. But I'm just
gonna just for example.
And you have a well that's 1000
ft. Deep the cost to get that
500 FT Wells Cheaper than 1000
ft. Well, and so do you. Do you
calculate that in your lease
rates?
Madam Chairman. Jesus. Sorry You
can call him and we're fine. I'm
fine with Mr Chair. Confused,
too. I mean, it's been a long
day in the committee. Um, uh, We
do not charge different rates,
and actually, some states do
Texas does so Texas actually
charges under their lease for
different formations.
Um, We don't do that. So you get
our lease and you're able to go
at any depth and and, um
It's It's one of the areas that
new Mexico is more favorable.
What is the federal rate? What
is the Fed's charged them on
federal land to leave Mr
Chairman? They are between 18
and 20. The feds are at their
between 1667, 67 and 1875.
Wait, wait.
6.7
1616 point
louder for me. I'm kind of
turned on me. So 16.767
16.67
In 1875 18.
Unsure offshore and and in
Texas. They charge how much 20%
And I'm sorry, 25%. I'm sorry.
You're gonna have to speak into
that, Michael. Little bit
louder. Mr Chairman, they
charged 25% in Texas 25% and so
word. I'm just gonna say 18 is
our bottom.
Is that the only taxes they pay
or do they add glory? Um, and
what all other taxes they pay?
Mr Chair, Mr Chair if I may. So
for some this this isn't a tax.
It's royalty increase in the
world to race, but right cost to
to, uh, person. Right. So the
Texas they're paying a flat 25%
because there's no
They're called Mr Care. There is
a effective tax rate in Texas.
It's 8.3%.
In the Mexico. It's 8.5%, so
those are very close.
So when you add their 25% on top
of that, 832
And where it 16 to 18 Just call
it 16, right. And we add the 8%
were at
23 right.
8 1624.
24%
I'm just doing a percent tax in
New Mexico. 8% in tax in Texas
Take 16 and you add it.
Eight. That's 24.
Take 25 and you add eight.
That's 32.
Correct.
33. I'm sorry.
And so what? Other taxes to I
don't know, off top of my head
right now. Do we pay on top of
the
8%
On top of the 16%.
Because Texas is a straight 33.
In total. What other taxes do we
stack on top of that?
I don't know. I'm asking. You
can tell me anything. And I
believe you, Mr Chairman. I
think we're kind of so confusing
with some apples and oranges. So
it's all apples. They all end up
in the apple basket. So on one
hand, we've got taxes and you've
got as a representative
mentioned Texas charges about
8.3 and we charge 8.5.
Alright. This is based on an LFC
report June 28th 2023 That kind
of did a side by side That's
real estate taxes, its
production taxes kind of
severance, those types of
things, so that's where you have
comparability there on the
royalty side. Um, we would be
matching Texas at 25%.
Um, but a big difference. Our
lease is not
Their leases Gross. So when
you're adding up some of these
percentages, they don't It's not
apples and oranges. So if you
look at 2015 to 2023, for
example, in on New Mexico State
trust lands that deductions for
mostly on the gas side amounted
to $400 million.
If that was on the Texas side,
they were going to have to pay
that comparison chart that we
could see.
Uh, I'm just trying to
understand this. I'm sorry.
Uh, I'm just trying to
understand this. I'm Yeah. Mr T
reminds a little marked up, but
you're welcome to take a look.
I'm just trying to comprehend if
we're
Where the real difference is.
And, yeah,
Not a judge.
Okay?
And Mr Chair. They helpfully
color coded that so the green or
more favorable in the red or
less favorable, And if you look
at the Mexico column, there's a
lot of green.
Okay, but this is telling me a
difference on banning flaring.
It's not telling me
Then the gross proceeds 5400
active leases.
Vast majority minimum 25%.
And then New Mexico's royalty
rate. You have that 20%.
On the sheet. I'm just don't
know who did this Shoot. I'm
just telling you what's on the
sheet, So there's a 5%
difference. That's correct, Mr
dear, okay.
And then on the 25% in Texas,
they paying 8%.
Tax correct.
And on the 20% New Mexico pays
8% to
Right, even numbers.
Round the dead in Christ. Texas
pay any additional taxes. On top
of that.
They have corporate income tax
they have they have no real
estate taxes in Texas.
Correct. Um, Mr Chair. You're
beyond my knowledge of Texas
taxes.
I mean, that's where we got to
figure out what you know. I can
say my lease rates right here.
I can tell that one of my
tenants. Here's your lease rate,
And here's your cam charges,
right? They never really
understand what the cam charges
are. That's property maintenance
insurance, right? They never
understand the cam. So when you
build the final number, and
that's the final number, I'm
trying to say we're 20% and I
gotta add these numbers in here.
What is the total number across
the board if we're going to do a
comparison to Texas?
Mr Chair to use your real estate
example. Um, it's location,
location location.
And so it's not that we're
competing to bring drillers to
New Mexico. It's not that we're
competing with Texas is that the
drillers are competing for the
best tracks, and the best tracks
are in New Mexico.
Yeah, we know that, but but I
mean,
If we have, the best is the
state landed land office,
maximizing every single lease
every year or they're saying,
Okay, we're going to add
additional
10%
And then we're gonna add an
additional 10%.
In leases as we move along, or
they just seem all our lands
available for release today. So,
Mr Chair the premium tracks,
they're actually mostly least up
there like 99.2% leased, so
there's not very many tracks
left and this rate with only
apply the new leases.
So the are effective lease for
your effective royalty rate is
somewhere around 15. I think
because we have leases, you know
from 5060 years ago.
That are held by production. So
there's Lisa still in effect, as
long as the tractors producing
and they were let out at 12.5,
or, you know.
Earlier lower royalty rate.
So now you've got my mind even
working even harder. So if you
have 99% of your land leased and
we're we can't go back in text
him and we're trying to gain the
1%. What is a net worth of that
1% of land?
Compared to the 99.
Um
Mr Chair. If I'm understanding
your question your question If
you look at the F I R. I think
it's beginning in 2027 to
expected to be an additional $50
million in income.
Based on just that those few
tracks that are left and you'll
or recurring annual and we'll
return.
So, uh, 2027 50,000,020 28 75
million
Okay?
But I just I'm still need to get
to the question. I mean,
25% 33%, Texas, 28% New Mexico,
But what other taxes they pay?
That wouldn't be a cost. There's
on the gross are on the net.
They get the dust their costs.
I get that.
Right. But what other taxes they
pay? They pay like piping it
down the line. Do they painted
exporting taxes? I mean, what is
the total cost on one gallon of
fluid going,
Mr Bloom tried to answer that
for you.
Mr Chair. Thank thank you. For
that question. The the the 8.5%.
New Mexico additional tax rate
8.3 Texas rate that's coming
from an LFC reporting product
that came out in June of last
year 2023, and that's taking a
range of taxes from severance
tax.
Other taxes to create, um, a
comparison. Um, Mr Chair. I
think I see where your questions
are going and that is, Are we
going to make New Mexico too
expensive?
By leasing at a higher rate.
I don't think I'm asking that
I'm I want to know what the true
differences.
So I think I think that is all
in total. It's 33%. They are not
paying anything else And then we
have 28 were 28 and say there's
an additional
Um, just call it 5%, right?
Somewhere. 33. I just want to
know the total cost.
Compared Texas total cost. I'm
not trying to get to different
rate. That's what I'm trying to
get.
I mean, if Texas doesn't have
property taxes in Texas doesn't
have
Receipts taxes. I don't know the
oil industry not to know every
single little
Tax they pay. That's why I
pulled out my book when you
mentioned that Loc report, Mr Mr
Chair if I may, Um I don't know
every little single tax either.
I would say the this is the
Mr Royalties and T finances
report on the Who did this? I
think it's all see.
Based on an LSC study of
severance production in property
taxes, paid
In ratio to the text book value
of production, and that's what
had Texas at an effective rate.
So balancing those different
things of 8.3 and New Mexico and
ineffective rate of 8.5 just to
similar products, But
No additional tax anywhere else.
Then what's add the lorry? Um,
text is that the 8%
Yeah.
Mr Terry. I mean, you got me I
got have what I have in front of
me and I don't know
and property taxes.
I mean, I don't What is that?
How much is the ad valerian
taxes. Anybody know that Mr
Chairman, According to the L
explain it to me. I know I've
heard that word.
No, no, Mr Chairman, Um just
according to the LFC report on
this, it says that it's based on
the district of production, so I
would suspect that it it, uh, is
different, depending on the
county. I mean,
I'm looking for this report from
the land office. Mr. Chair. I
have a copy. If you would like
to review it and tell me what
pages on the find it right here
in the LFC Bible.
Hmm. This is, uh, document
called Money Matters analysis by
the LFC economist. That's a
great
That's analysis.
That's an L. C briefing. So
that's probably not in our
Okay. Thank you.
So, what is Advil? Laurie? Um,
taxes.
Hmm. Mr Chairman. That's the tax
on the equipment, the property,
the oil and gas in this Texas
tax that
Ah, yes.
I believe they do. I I can't
talk to Mr Chairman, all of the
different text taxes on the
Texas side. I mean, we're
relying on the LFC report that
did do a comparison in terms of
oil and gas production, the
various types of taxes, so
that's where we get the 8%. I
think the bottom line is
Ultimately, when you do that
comparison that lfc did at least
um, you know, we're
We're paying less in New Mexico
right now, even if we were to
increase it to 25% to match
Texas, Um, still
We would, you know, have a net
lease rather than a gross Lees.
I don't know what other
corporate taxes they may be
pain.
I don't know. I guess we're
gonna right. I just I just want
to make sure in total that we
were gonna do something like
this. That was
It's squared up.
But this is just the effective
tax rate.
On
In and property taxes is the
8.3. That's a total in property
and production, right And we're
8.3 without property.
I don't know how you figure that
so
We're gonna come back. We got a
problem in the capital Bill, so
That we're gonna have to amend
centerpiece.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I was
just, you know, looking here. I
think the Advil or, um for oil
and gas is
0.19% something like that. And
then you've got some other 3.75%
on the sales price. But outside
of that,
No matter what we would do here.
Mr Chairman and presenters and
representative
Which still only be taking 6.5%
of whatever we do for
The distribution, so it doesn't
really matter what we increase
it by it, we would still
dramatically improved the value
of this fund is that correct?
Mr Chair Center. Yes. So we're
talking about payments into the
land Grant Permanent fund.
Of course they you know, they go
into the permanent fund. They're
there for a while, they
presumably hopefully earn earn
money while in the fund and
ultimately there's increased
distributions to beneficiaries.
Yes. So chair and and
And representative and
presenters from the land office.
So essentially still, yes, 6.5%.
If we went up a quarter of
point, it's still only 61.5% of
the quarter point, So the fund
is just going to continue to
explode as it's done in the 12
years that I've been here is
that would that be accurate?
Um, Mr Chair Center. Uh, you
know, the land Grant permanent
fund is doing quite well as we
all know, uh because of the
activity and oil and gas, you
know, the severance of these
minerals is permanent and then
as it was explained to me
Because the severance is
permanent. That's why they go
into the permanent fund, you
know. Other type of leasing
activities don't go into
permanent fund.
So what we're trying to do here
is just while we are several
permanently severing minerals,
maximizing that return so we can
increase the permanent fund
which, of course, will pay out,
uh, for the foreseeable future.
And so chair and representative
and presenters from the Land
office site. You know, I have to
say that I carried the
constitutional amendment for six
straight years, and it was a you
know what one person kicking
contest or that was a lot of
fun. And then we came and
created the early Education
department. I sponsored that
from the very next year, we're
able to do the additional
So the reason I I give you all
that is, um
At what point do we start seeing
it decline the value into the
fund new dollars into the fund.
Do we have a projection on it?
Um, Mr Chair Center, The
Well, I keep hearing from
Chairman Small is that they
think the current production is
plateau owing
Um so
So leveling off. Um, you know,
we we all know Well, gasses,
Cyclical. Um, we don't expect it
to go up forever. We don't
expect us to to stay the plateau
forever. How long the current,
um
Good market last is, um, a good
guess.
I appreciate that. Thank you for
your comments, You know? So so I
guess.
Even with that, six years of
carrying that very
You know, around my neck
literally.
When was the last time we
actually made an adjustment to
this? I don't remember. I knew
it then. But I don't remember it
now. So Mr Chair Center in the
19 seventies.
And what's happened to
You know inflation Since then, I
never expected to have that kind
of data. But unless you do, so
it just seems to me like you
know, this is very timely
because of what's going on with
the peak in this particular
industry and also seems very
timely.
Based on the last time these
were adjusted was the year I was
born, I think, And so that was
51 years ago, and and this is
just way overdue. So
Appreciate your working on this.
Thank you. So we gonna vote on
this? I had to present to other
bills. I don't know. I think I
saw it and adjusted agenda.
We're not going to vote on this,
Um, you need to have some
conversations center worth, So
we have an issue with the
Capitol building told us a
number for roads.
And now it keeps changing so.
We're going to have to come back
in the amendment. You weren't
here that we put on
Has to be adjusted.
They told us a number. That's
the number we put. Then they
came back with another number,
and I was just informed Now it's
another number. So we're gonna
confirm that so we're probably
going to come back. Maybe.
I don't know, Probably when the
right when they go on the floor
or something. Go from there.
Alright, But do we intend to
vote on this? I'm just want to.
I don't know yet. I need to talk
to the floor leader and and see
where we're at.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks.
Okay. Thank you. Closing.
Tentative. Thank you.
Region.
