And toast thank you again.
I am Senator science grant
Hemphill from Silver City I
represent all of Grant County
catching County most of Secor
account for twenty eight thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman bill Burt
Senate district thirty three.
Including a big portion of it
you're only getting Chavis
County thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman good
afternoon Mister chairman
Senator Pat Woods group where
you Senate district seven and I
wanted to tell you Mr chairman
that I've got a bill that need
we're going to.
Senate Judiciary show if you
leave they may well that's where
I am.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
crystal diamond Senate district
thirty five Dogo Luna Sierra and
Dona Ana County thank you.
I am talking myself what I
needed nobody tells Senator is
also we are going to bring your
bill off the table probably
tomorrow are working on a few
things on the dollars
so be prepared for that.
Senate bill one twenty seven
Senator Lopez are you with us.
And so she's with us so.
Yes this is Senator Campos are
you indicated Senator one
services bill is that going to
be Senate bill one thirty three
is that is that the bill you're
talking Mr Chairman Senator
Gonzales is that the right bill
that you're more bill.
Yes it is Mr chairman.
And that it Mr chairman Center
Gonzalez if I may
is is that.
Okay with you if if if if we
wait until tomorrow right if if
there's some amendment being
worked on
you know I don't have a problem
but I'm prepared to go ahead and
move that bill today if
Leicester's there are some
issues that are being down thank
you Mr chairman.
The ball Senators.
The language with the jet engine
is is an issue and then I did
get a call from the governor's
office so let us try to fix
that.
I promise we'll get to it
tomorrow we'll have it all right
straightening should be good.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
that.
Senator Lopez for your your
Senate bill one twenty seven for
the members of the committee.
We did have a conversation
Senator Gonzales you're not on
mute.
We did have a conversation with
the secretary of health centers
grace in the CYFD secretary.
And so.
We think that we can adequately
fund this for duration and and
not have to come back and funded
with general fund in the future
it should kind of triggered some
so.
Is there any questions on Senate
bill one twenty seven.
But can have a motion for movies
to German.
Chairman.
So motion by Senator Campos a
second by Senator Rodriguez.
That we call the roll.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Burt.
a pass.
Senator Burt half.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria are you here.
Senator Diamond.
Pardon me Senator.
Please pass.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes
Senator share is not here.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you is just a Senate bill
one twenty seven correct I voted
yes on to pass.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
We just.
Senator Woods yes yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes.
Okay we had senator Byrd pass.
Yes I will yes at.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Diamond you pass.
Yes.
Yes.
So nine yes and to execute.
Senator Lopez you gotta do
passed motions of regulations
thanks for working with us just
so we understand that it'll be
funded and and we don't have to
worry about so thank you thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you.
Thank you madam pro tem you are
up for Senate bill seventeen as
amended.
A yes actually Mr chairman you
have a the Senate finance
committee substitute.
It was just looking messy we
didn't really have any changes
but we wanted to have people be
able to read the substitute we
we have made changes to part of
and I'll talk about that can I
talk about the bill a little bit
Mr chairman.
Sure let me Center couple she
want to make a motion for sorry
there for do not poke to that
past motion.
Respond to that point thank you
a do not pass on Senate bill
seventeen to do pass percent
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill seventy.
For discussion purposes.
Thank you Mr chairman this this
bill is an idea that we've been
looking at in the L. E. S. C.
the secretary of education has
looked at this and Mr chairman
the secretary of education is in
the waiting room if you will let
him and eventually so it looks
at family income it said some
place a family income index
designed to send a little bit
more money to those schools well
we're it's very high poverty so
economically disadvantaged
communities would receive just a
little bit more money it's a ten
million a year for several years
since the pilot well we're using
the education reform Fund
that looks at individual
students family data to
determine an index for each
school this bill would have of
the seventy one of our in its
first iteration it will have
seventy one of our districts
have schools in this category
there is a provision that no
more than ten percent of your
schools would get the extra
funding so we ensure that we
spread this funding across the
state so after our ranking the
schools then this bill would
give extra funding to those
schools that rank extremely low
or very low income.
Funds are restricted to evidence
based interventions structured
literacy evidence based map
construction professional
development tutoring after
school programs social emotional
learning programs they
accountability is that the
school districts and schools
must include in their education
plan there
How they will spend the funds
and that is so quick overview Mr
chairman if you would like to
hear from the secretary of that
I believe he's in the waiting
room.
Mr secretary go right ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman I want
thank the sponsor for all the
incredible work that she's done
on the bill to really strengthen
the bill on and make it a very
strong program that we're very
excited to implement at its core
this bill comports with the the
critical need to make sure that
we're getting educational
resources to the students who
need them the most and that we
are targeting them toward the
right evidence based strategies
that work to improve outcomes
for students this this
legislation does a number of
things that I think will will
strongly move New Mexico forward
number one it it provides an
additional mechanism for the
legislature to directly attack
the the difficulties that are
inherent with with concentrated
poverty in schools and to be
able to identify those schools
and get targeted funding out to
to those schools directly it
also doesn't important thing in
that it makes gives the
legislature the ability through
the partnership that we have
across agencies have more
precise measurements around what
what levels of family income we
have in a particular school and
we know that this is something
that was studied in the L. E. S.
C. and and it's something that
will put New Mexico really
forward for nationally as as a
way of a better defining out
where we have elements of
concentrated poverty poverty how
we're going to attack them and
third this is what state
government is supposed to do
working across agencies and
finding ways that we can
collaborate to come up with
better solutions to serve our
constituents I'm very thankful
for the partnership with attacks
and Revenue Department and the
Human Services Department to
help us come together jointly to
think about how we can improve
this service and and implement
this for the students on of the
state and so we're excited to
move forward.
With the possibility of
establishing that in law and
bringing this program to life
and so I'm
very happy to have worked with
the senator on this very
important piece of legislation
and look forward to your
questions.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
secretary Senator Stewart that's
correct for witnesses make them
do we have any public comment.
At Mr chair members of the
committee yes we do have public
comment on this bill
we received no indications of
opposition at and in support
with us we have
Gregory but.
Hello.
Hi my name is Gregory blitz and
schoolmaster filled with the
United States department of
education I am also a member
secretary to secretary
supervisory board and infants
and EPS we understand that many
educational barriers stem from
generational inequities and it
includes concentrated family
poverty this bill identifies
communities with the greatest
inequity determines the level of
need and add terms level support
that they need it provides
targeted wraparound supports are
using monies that have already
been set aside and that separate
funding this is an innovative
concept and adds supports in the
communities that needs the most
and gives a school communities
that direct state and where to
where to implement those funds
so I ask you and thank you for
supporting Senate bill seventeen
thank you next we have and I
Jack and.
Just how ski with the New Mexico
chamber of commerce.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senator Stewart and members of
the committee.
I'm Jack your calcium a
principal partner with
innovative technology
partnerships in Albuquerque.
And among the various boards
that I sat on I co chair of the
education and workforce
development committee of the New
Mexico chamber of commerce with
Amanda Aragon.
I leave reviews this of bills
quite extensively we applaud PED
and the developers of this bill
to our go that extra step to
provide additional funding for
schools that are economically or
regions where schools are
economically deprived as the LFC
are FIR analysis demonstrated we
could use a lot more money for
schools in need using the
criteria that we've looked at
here.
Are there are other techniques
that are available to make an
even more targeted approach to
funding but this is the best I
believe that can be done on a
short notice and utilizing the
resources of the other state.
Entities to help guide how this
of funding is provided so we
have all agreed that we would
stand in support of the.
A substitute bill that's been
provided and applaud the efforts
of the PED chair takes a step
thank you very much.
Next we have Ashley Wagner also
with the New Mexico chamber of
commerce.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for New Mexico chamber of
commerce and we support this
bill according to the national
coalition on school diversity
concentrated poverty in schools
creates and sustains disparities
in academic outcomes high
concentrations of students
living in poverty complicate
learning and teaching in schools
and reduce the effectiveness of
other educational interventions
designed to address gaps in
academic outcomes the evidence
based approach proposed in this
legislation targets and provide
support to some of the most in
need schools we appreciate this
and the fiscal accountability
measures being taken but would
also note that according to the
fiscal impact report there are
many New Mexico schools that
appear eligible to receive this
funding but will not so it seems
more money is needed to provide
support to all the schools that
qualify in any case we urge you
to support SB seventeen as it is
a great start to addressing the
needs of the most at risk
students in New Mexico thank
you.
Next we have Robert Beatty.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
Senate finance committee Robert
Beatty with Robert F. Kennedy
charter school and a leader with
Albuquerque interfaith
Albuquerque to rate this
organization of schools
congregations and nonprofits are
we've actually met with the
sponsor regarding this are and
are the strong support of Senate
bill seventeen the family income
index are we particularly
appreciated calculation for
property we believe it's an
improvement over the current
calculation of the at risk
within the funding formula in
particular this monies given
down all right to the school
level hi where the the issues
can be addressed I want to thank
the sponsor L. E. S. C. R. and
Secretary Stewart for bringing
this forward I do remember
during the L. E. S. C. I have
that the amount was forty
million but ten million is a
place to start but I agree with
the other expert witnesses that
more money may need to be found
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill I'd also
like to recognize the lieutenant
governor is trying to send the
same call.
Thank you so much for.
It's your long lost finance
buddy there Mr chairman.
Governor I don't know you're
gonna be on this bill but.
What will be glad to give you
some questions.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee you
know I I very rarely will
testify in the bill because I
respect the legislative process
and the work that you do and
knowing as a former finance
member all the detail that goes
and that but it's a bill and I
am grateful for our president
pro tem the work that PED has
done as well and something that
I truly believe in and that's
why I wanted to come in to just
show my support and that amounts
that.
The support that we've been
trying to put forward with
education as being key and so I
want to thank each want to be
when I just want to just take a
moment to is all the the yes one
is been given in for all the
reasons that have been stated
that is why I strongly stand as
part of that and hope that the
committee and that can consider
supporting and and approving
this measure.
Thank you.
Governor Senator Stewart.
Mr Chairman.
I hate to say this to you but
some of our crackerjack staff
have found a missing S. on the
end of the work.
So page three line for should
read households within just so
it's your committee so
Representative you can just
write it in there.
Senator Burt Senator Candelaria
you one and then the S.
reporters.
Senator Candelaria.
I guess he's not there so.
Recommended the single letter.
Mr Chairman sorry I'm here I I
I would I would I would move
that fast amendment to the
committee substitutes as
described by the press.
Do I have a second.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Any objection to that.
Siemens growing presume.
It's been adopted Senator
Stewart so.
Correct just in the.
Place of questions from
committee members.
See anybody Oakes.
All that Mr Chairman sorry I do
have one question.
do we have do we have an idea Mr
chairman and senator the
distribution what the
distribution of these funds will
be like.
Across the school districts you
know I'm.
I want to make sure that you
know all schools in all
districts have a have an equal
opportunity here thank you.
So Mister chairman this is
designed to provide those
schools that have the highest
poverty.
The the position we put in to
ensure that it was distributed
more widely was that no district
would have more than ten percent
of their schools be funded for
this pilot even if they had more
schools that
what qualified so this crosses
this is covering a hundred and
fifteen schools and I believe
it's seventy.
Seventy one of the school
districts so the with the other
provision we put in so some of
the schools are extremely small
and the amount of funding is
based on the number of students
and so we've put a floor of
twenty thousand dollars that you
get at least twenty thousand
dollars that'll do a good chunk
towards professional development
on that they're structured
literacy but we've tried to
ensure that these funds that
were distributed as widely as
possible there are some
districts who do not have this
kind of poverty but the majority
passed major seventy one of
eighty nine to have this kind of
poverty.
Thank you Mr chairman I wish
that I would miss to pass on the
committee substitute as amended.
All second that Mr Chairman
hold on one second we'll go back
to that we have some question
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Stewart well I certainly
understand and it and agree with
the intent I've always been
under the understanding that
these issues were taken care of
in the at risk formula so how
does that relate with this and
how much the injustice a bandaid
solution to to us needing to to
come up with a long term fix of
the at risk formula.
Mr chairman and Senator Diamond
I believe the at risk formula is
still very much needed and a
large part of our state
equalization guarantee we are
now up to I believe that
something like three hundred and
fifty million dollars is part of
our at risk so that money goes
everywhere it goes to every
school in the in every district
that qualifies with at risk
students and that's the majority
of our schools so it's it's
designed to do
a lot of what this bill is also
designed to do and originally
that was my suggestion was
instead of doing this let's just
increase the at risk more so the
one issue that people have been
fighting over if you will is
that.
At risk funding goes to the
district to spread around those
schools there is no at risk
funding that goes directly to
schools and that's what this is
it is a pilot we're not sure you
know what effect this will have
but it is just something we've
been working on for years
because some people think that
we don't identify as deeply as
much as we can the poverty at
the schools because basically
what we've used before is a free
and reduced lunch you know
that's all we really use so this
uses a whole variety of
mechanisms to really drill down
and as a pilot it's only got ten
million each year first two
years of so we can see whether
or not we then need to change
the at risk formula perhaps that
at risk should be more designed
for each school rather than
districts it may help us answer
some of these questions that
we've had over the years thank
you Senator I really appreciate
that explanation because I to
wonder if maybe we should amend
the at risk so that it's more
targeted at at a school level
but I do hope that this pilot
program well identify whether or
not that's the best course thank
you thank you for your time
thank you.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
proton I don't have a question
but I just wanted to thank the
sponsor of this bill for
bringing this forward living in
a high poverty area which many
of us do I appreciate
legislation that helps to
address this issue and to help
us move our state forward so
thank you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you.
One question Senator of.
On
page eight in line twenty one.
Is that dollar amount just
because some of those schools
are too small.
That way they can choose forty
thousand anyway the some.
Yes Mr chairman so the schools
that are very small are getting
a floor of twenty thousand so
some schools I think I think
this soon it just got the
highest index with the highest
number of kids and they're
they're in their of family
income index will generate
a almost three hundred thousand
dollars but for schools that get
the smaller amount we don't want
to have to tell them what to do
so if you don't get very much we
give a lot more in the way so
that you don't have to focus on
reading for third math for third
etcetera.
Okay.
Thank you but I think we do have
a Senator Hemphill you stop your
hand up you still have another
question or.
Right now we do have a new path
motion and a second I think a.
So.
Senator Rodriguez did you I
don't have any other questions
now thank you.
Thank you we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator no.
Senator Burton Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes.
Senator Diamond.
Yes in to explain more about.
Thank Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales.
Has been excused Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
sure is excuse.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods so.
Senator no Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manuals yes.
German LCS we have seven yes to
know and to excuse.
Thank you senator.
You have another bill we're
gonna get to it I just need to
jump around for a few minutes.
Senator okay goes are you with
us make a wish license plate.
Mr chairman I am.
Senator go ahead and start.
Mr thank you for allowing me to
be your committee today I'll
give you a little bit of
background I've run this bill
multiple times we think five
times so far I'm not an expert
witness the Joe we should be on
the.
In the waiting to be heard and
to just to be a little bit of
background the main foundation
yes Sir we do have a committee
substitute for that correct yes
Sir I need to move that I
apologize.
Current mood all explained the
error.
I can have a motion to move the
committee substitute.
Mr chairman I will move a do not
pass on the Senate bill but if
you pass on the Senate finance
committee substitute for
purposes of discussion okay.
Have a motion and a second.
Junction to the motion
opportunities.
Right.
Sir guy goes then set with
history it having that such to
bill for a license.
Okay.
Mr the amendment was just take
up discussion wrap up wide one
paid one line I got through with
that as having the actual bill
ready for you here so Mr
chair and committee like so
we've been working on this for
five years to give you a little
bit of time line on May wish
foundation they've been improper
assists for forty years.
Granting life changing wishes
children family families in
nineteen eighty of there's a
young man Chris the one B.
please drive his gift was
granted in that inspired the
making of make wish foundation
in nineteen eighty three make
wish foundation America's
incorporated of president Ronald
Reagan Brandon's first
presidential wish to young lady
named Amy.
In nineteen ninety request
bridge ten years with ten
thousand wishes granted and make
which receive citation revolve
directional from president
George HW bush in nineteen
ninety three make which one
international in its of certain
countries outside the United
States in two thousand they had
so sober seventy five thousand
wishing wishes granted them in
total in two thousand ten just
two years later was first world
wish day which is celebrated
around the world they have over
a hundred ninety eight thousand
wishes granted and then in
twenty eighteen make wished.
Foundation unveiled its brand
and with fresh disruption is
permanent headquarters here in
the US what this does Mr
in center is yes to the
purchasing license plate ten
dollars for make which is what
it would do is yes people in
their organization work to buy a
plate of the back their car it
gives them an extra amount of
money that they can use here in
our state in order to make
wishes come true.
Mr.
J. lows on and we're going
you'll stand.
Mr chairman committee centers
thank you for giving us
opportunity to speak yes I'm a
volunteer with grant with make a
wish to Mexico for every which
we requests there are three
other children with critical
illnesses that need to funding
for their wishes this is
definitely go a long way to
helping these children with job
are looking at genetic disorders
brain tumors and so on there's a
lot of challenges they have but
it's been proven to be a
beneficial that these children
are get these wishes granted and
unfortunately some of them Mr
last page.
So I appreciate your time in
there are a consideration on
this bill.
Mr we stand for questions.
Thank you senator questions from
members Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator for bringing this
bill forward as a mother whose
child was a recipient of
Make a wish trip to Disney world
I a
That was life changing for the
whole family and that was twenty
one years ago that my son was
diagnosed with bone cancer but
it was such a wonderful trip and
I'm eternally grateful for the
work that make a wish does so
thank you for for working with
them I appreciate this
legislation and look forward to
supporting thank you for.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
any other questions from
committee members.
Mr chair I have a question.
Senator Steinborn grant thank
you so I am putting on a bill on
another exam we turn the volume
down that Mr chair Senator
Gallegos on looking at the bill
does it actually raise any money
for make a wish.
Yes Sir it's on page one
line twenty four item B. says
four feet ten dollars special be
in addition to the registered
motor vehicle registration fees
that money would be targeted
towards make wish foundation.
Well but the feet sorry Mr chair
Senator me from looking at this
correctly go down the line three
it says the fee shall be
retained by the division
appropriated for instance vision
to the fray the cost of making
the play it doesn't actually say
anything in there about.
Supporting make a wish
activities.
Well Mister chairman Senator
thank you for that catch I'm
gonna have to look into that
because I want to talk to the
drafter.
Every time we've had this before
us we've asked for it to be here
matter fact we had to find
someone that would be able to be
the fiscal agent for make which
and I'm gonna have to re read
that we'll get back with thank
you Mr now the practice for me
so.
That was the original can't that
that we would go towards make
which.
That figure that Mister chairman
Senator but yet so I was just
looking at the bill and then see
it so I realize the our short in
the session that's kind of a big
deal.
Not having that in this bill so
I don't know what your thoughts
are on how to rectify that were
anyone else's thoughts but I
don't hold up something
important so your intent clearly
is to is to direct those funds
to I mean obviously some of the
money maybe needed to defray the
costs although maybe that was
Jenelle's impression maybe it's
not so how much money do you
think this would raise her plate
for make a wish and can we
actually even donate to make a
wish as opposed to contract for
services because of anti
donation.
Well Mister chairman Senator
Woods that's the reason we had
to find a fiscal agent
I'm just wondering.
And and that my my thought is if
we get past this committee I
would have that corrected by
Janelle and I think it's Janelle
it may not be but I'll have to
figure out my driver was and
get them look at that but
thank you.
If you you remember who the
fiscal agent will we're looking
at to be able to handle this
instead.
Anti donation clause we're we're
working on that right now.
Okay so we don't have one that
is locked down here not yet.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator.
Homework on both of those items
hopefully before we get to the
floor.
Okay Mister chair I Senator yep
okay so we have your commitment
on that too.
To make sure that we're actually
raising money for make a wish
because obviously people will
believe that and that would not
be here correct for us to do
this without raising money for
that so anyway well with that Mr
that's all I have thank you.
Senator Steinborn.
Any other questions from
committee members.
Mr Chairman centered.
This.
Thank you first I want to thank
Senator Steinborn for actually
reading the bill.
That that I I didn't catch us so
thank you for actually going to
go I see that on today's agenda
we have a couple more license
plates and so Senator Gallegos
I'm just going to ask you as a
new be here to the Senate to
kind of explain to me is there
and number on the cap of plates
that we can allow and what are
the requirements or restrictions
and and bringing this bill
forward.
Well.
Stern and senator I appreciate
that actually of this will be
my.
Fourth attempt a license plate
that one time they looked at
instead of changing the last
what we would have a sticker so
the general license plate would
all look the same and then all
or we do have a designated area
for the labels that was never
passed in I know that it is
really hard when you get in the
house that for this market time
of this bill there's certain
committees really have a hard
time with so many license plates
that are out there I think my
from my point of view is it
really goes to a good cost and
there are groups in our state
you know you look at the
veterans plate certain just
there's so many different areas
that we can go ahead and try to
help out I get the up this last
plate and that's working from
this bill was off basis so that
in that provided of ten dollars
to the autism allegation for
research and other systems out
training and in different things
that they could use I don't know
that we have a total number to
provide I just know that it's
getting harder and harder every
session passed.
And is there a cost to the state
at some point for for having all
these different places out
there.
There is.
Mr chair in.
Senator in the FIR it talks
about.
Because of thank estimate the
amount of of.
The last place that are going to
be out there you're gonna be
requested and so also that
What twenty five thousand you
know what they're just waiting
for this one and it looks like
of the total cost if they have
the hundred plates
costs eight hundred dollars to
fifty design and five hundred
fifty the natural order of
hundred plates and that comes up
that I are TRD.
Thank you senator Mr chairman
can any nonprofit qualify for
these plates are what are the
qualifications so Mr chair
Senator that's real problem
comes and you have to find
someone that is willing to be
the fiscal agent of so I did
want to the Mexico junior
college it's a state agency so
they correctly receive money on
the of the Oct is a bill we have
to find a fiscal agent would be
able to handle the the peas for
likes you Senator Steinborn
brought up that.
It's more of a of the for
service and so they would
employees
The department for specific
items and then that money would
go towards replenishing what
they've already spent so for the
for the option if the money does
not directly go to the autism
foundation and that's what I
would proceed here and.
J. lo and I were.
Sorry about that thank you and I
have been working trying to find
someone that would carry that
portion of it because they don't
have administrative costs on
there let's say
City of Albuquerque Water Street
the fiscal agent there would be
fees associate are costs
associated to them handling this
but that's the the main things
we just can't find someone to
send it to and then make which
would send them invoices for
let's say a trip to Disneyland
and then they would look at the
amount of money they have in
that account and then they would
replenish mac to make wish for
that
I don't
okay thank you Senator for that
explanation I certainly am not
going to vote against make a
wish and I'm not going to vote
against New Mexico miners it
looks like it's on here and all
the others but I know you have
an interest in this it does seem
like long term maybe a solution
would be to consider those
stickers just a there's a cost
savings to the state but thank
you for explaining that helps me
out thank you senator.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Graham in.
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised have a motion please
have Mister chairman.
Yes.
Senator Rodriguez a second by
Senator Campos you want to call
the roll.
Yes Mister chairman Senator Burt
yes Senator Burt yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria.
You know.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales are you there.
Last year
excuse.
Okay.
Senator Hemphill yeah.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share this excuse Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Woods yes Senator Woods
yes Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes Senator menu
LCS.
That is eight yes and three one
no.
And to excuse.
Thank you senator you do have a
due pass.
Mr chairman I thank you thank
you to the committee and thank
you to Senator Steinborn I
actually read the bill four
times and didn't catch that so I
will work on that right after I
get up my next committee thank
you all so much Senator don't
miss any S. is either.
Thank you Senator Moores are you
with is some school growing to
look for you I don't see you
Senator Moores.
Senator Lopez are you with us
to.
Campos can we jump to your
Senate bill two ninety five.
Yes.
Go right ahead Senator whenever
you're ready.
In that year other bill a Senate
bill two ninety one okay.
Since Mr chairman Senate bill
two ninety five introduced to
our.
Introduced for the legislative
finance committee and so act
relating to public funds
amending repealing and acting
sections of the NMSA in nineteen
seventy eight related to
disaster funding limiting how
money in certain funds can be
used in making appropriation and
also with me today I believe it
is Donna iglesias to help to.
We're gonna go back to your
bill.
Which.
Sir Senator you wanted to Mr
chairman you already continue.
Thank you yes I'm sorry I was
trying to call center opens
great.
Okay thank you very much.
It's so it's so and in essence
what this bill does that
clarifies at three different
points verifies the emergency or
disaster situations for which
such funding may be allocated
it
is also restricting the
allowable funding sources and
amounts that may be allowed and
it establishes the requirements
for reporting on allocations and
expenditures so in essence Mr
chair members of the committee
with what has happened is that
over the years we have taken
the amount of seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars for
disaster.
And the unfortunate piece so
with that is that even though we
have allowed the seven hundred
fifty thousand we have found
that several of the disasters
that with the resources of then
allocated have not been fully
used or in some cases we have
found that the of the
emergencies would require more
than seven hundred fifty
thousand so more than one
emergency situation would have
to be proclaimed and with that
being said then of the
cumbersome paperwork would
continue to grow in essence then
what this would do is this what
are allow of two of the five
million dollars per emergency
and again everything is
accounted for and it's not to
allow the chief executive more
money it's just that as we go
forward with the cost of taking
care of our emergencies today it
definitely has continued to
exacerbate so in essence Mr
chair members of the Senate
finance committee that's what
this bill does but if I could
I'd also like to see if
grounding it less yes this is on
to our to further talk about
this because she is the
individual at LFC that continues
to work directly with this and I
believe there might be some
other individuals that the can
also attest to that thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator I'm gonna
disappear there.
Yes Mr chair thank you Mr chair
Senator Campos members of the
committee I think Senator Campos
a great job of explaining the
provisions of the bill
as you mentioned so current
statute provides no
that a limited but some
unspecified procreation at the
governor may allocate in certain
emergency circumstances but
there's no limitation at all and
how much can be appropriated in
total.
And the legislature and the
executive have different
interpretations of where those
funds can be drawn from I'm
historically the funds have
always been drawn from the
appropriation contingency fund
however in FY nineteen
unfortunately that fund balance
was low and that went unnoticed
by the legislature and there was
not enough funding in the
appropriation contained on in
fiscal year nineteen so pre co
that in order to discover that
you're a disaster so the
department of finance and
administration and the executive
old from the operating reserve
the amount that was needed for
that year's disasters the same
thing happened in FY twenty
where the ACF was well the
balance was not risk that fund
and the operating reserve was
continued to be used for those
disaster procreation however the
legislature including the
council service and LESC
believe that the current
restrictions on the operating
reserve do not actually allow
for those funds to be drawn from
for disaster funding so this
bill would actually clarify that
different interpretation it's
would specify in statute that
disaster allotment should come
from the appropriation
contingency fund first and if in
the event The appropriation
contingency fund had
insufficient balance to cover
disasters for that year then it
it allows up to twenty million
dollars to be drawn from the
operating reserve to cover any
deficiencies in the amount that
you had from the appropriation
contingency fund so it would
still allow for any fund balance
in the ACS utilized disasters as
per current law that specifies
very clearly that should be the
first funding.
The limitation on how much the
beach on from the operating
reserve or if in the event the
ACF chairman hello again I will
also note that in the current
H. HSD substitute for House Bill
Peter there is an appropriation
of fifty million dollars
transferred excuse me a fifty
million dollars the AC after for
that balance hopefully this
should not be an issue again the
legislature should will need to
keep an eye on the balance of
the ACS every year thanks
Representative has a sufficient
balance in that but just in case
we run into a situation like
happened before place would give
specific statutory authority to
use the operating reserve a
place on on how much could be on
from that fund balance.
The other thing that this does
Is increase the her executive
order amounts that can be issued
for for disaster funding so
right now the executive is
limited technically two seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
per executor her executive order
however
emergencies in recent years have
significantly outstripped that
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollar limit limitation in the
executive regularly gets around
that amount by just issuing
multiple executive orders for
the exact same disaster in order
to get the amount that they need
so for example for winter storms
in fiscal year twenty they
needed to million dollars so
they issued a to consider two
consecutive executive orders in
order to get the amount that was
needed and one of those orders
is actually in excess of the
seven hundred fifty thousand
What this bill would do is say
that each executive order could
be up to five million
what that allows is greater
transparency it doesn't change
the authority for what the
governor can issue for executive
orders so for those winter
storms if two million dollars
with needed.
Don you are muted.
Sorry about that
So if if the governor were to
need or the executive were to
need say two million dollars to
cover winter again that could be
done in eight Ingle executive
order and that increases the
transparency in terms of.
Right now in order to figure out
how much is spent on a disaster
we have to go through every PDF
format of each executive order
and try to total them all
together to figure out what was
spent on individual disasters of
multiple consecutive orders
issued its typical on that how
much is needed for individual
disaster by increasing the
current executive order limit to
five billion they increases the
chance that most increases the
ability to to issue all of that
funding and one executive order
and one clear transparent way
and then also requires reporting
requirements from the executive
within five days of issuing that
executive order so we know what
it was issued on what the funds
are being attended to be spent
for.
There's any federal matching
funds that are coming it cetera
so we can increase reporting on
that and this bill also requires
quarterly reporting on those
funds in terms of the status of
spending those accounts.
that is the key all of the other
key points
for for what this bill does is
clarify what exactly we mean
when we say a disaster this
requires funding to be issued
for disasters that have
occurred.
As opposed to hypothetical
disasters that may occur in a
fiscal year for example at the
beginning of every single fiscal
year as an executive order
issued to
the EMNRD to cover fires that
might occur during that fiscal
year we believe that that should
be covered Armel appropriation
process that encourage you given
enough budget authority to
handle fires that should current
any fiscal year and that
emergency funding should only be
used if the it can be covered in
the specific budgeting process
and if it comes up as a true
emergencies so this bill would
clarify that issue that's all I
have for now but I'm also happy
to stand for any questions and
if Senator Campos hasn't even
at.
Senator Campos thank you Mr
chair Chris said thank you very
much miss Iglesias as always for
the the expert testimony one of
the issues and as we continue to
work towards accountability it's
important to mention it it there
are federal resources that can
also be used again what were
indicating as it's not just
going to go ahead and be these
emergency dollars that would be
used
also be that the the dollars
could be replenished so that in
it it's not just going to go
ahead and be the state resources
that are used for a for the
emergency situation so I just
thought I'd bring that up as
well so that Mr chair members of
the Senate finance committee
were available for questions
thank you.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and I'll just have a
quick question thank you at
Senator Campos for bringing this
bill forward very much necessary
I want to think that Dawn
Iglesias for always being there
for us to further explain in
detail done thank you I just
have a quick question to make
sure we're on the same page
thank you on the information we
have here for what you mentioned
please stop me I missed
something but you you mentioned
that the the the governor can
issue an executive order with
this bill up to five that five
million dollars five thousand
and it's now seven hundred and
fifty thousand page that I ran
into some problems because that
was too little and so I'm happy
that we're changing that but
that would always come it
available from the appropriation
contingency fund and while
sometimes he doesn't have enough
money the N. F. funding in there
then we had to get funding from
other sources and that's where
we run into trouble so the
question that I have here is I
did I understand
That the governor can actually
if we have to go into the
general fund operating reserve
fund for example if you want we
have a shortage in the other one
that she can go up to twenty
million dollars that means that
we can do for for example for
orders I met in each are from
for more a transparency or.
Work tell me once again I didn't
fully get that you're thank you
very much Mr chairman of course
thank you very much for the
Senator Rodriguez for the
question and I'm gonna defer to
to see less as quickly as well
but the bottom line with it is
today with the seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars per
executive order one of the
problems that we're running into
is if the emergency is going
into two million four million
we're finding that there are
multitude of executive orders
that are issued and then from
there under current law they're
not being closed out so some of
these have been open for a about
ten years so one of the things
that we're trying to do is to
ensure that there is full
accountability so yes if there
is let's say for example an
emergency and it is going to be
for the amount of one point
eight million then we have the
capacity within up to the five
million dollars for executive
order to take care of that and
to deal directly with that so
those resources will be
available and then with HSC as
we go forward as that of the
fifty million is going to be
appropriated that gives us if
you will additional capacity in
case there during fire season
several fires we're able to take
care of those particular
executive orders and emergencies
up to the five million and then
if we do find ourselves in a
situation where it's a very
catastrophic during the we'll
just say one particular fire
season and we find ourselves
going into a multitude of of
emergencies then that those
resources would be available of
course the ACA are again the
whole point is as for dealing
with that today multitude of
emergencies a lot of paperwork
we're not closing out the claims
and what we want to do is to
ensure that we're able to have
transparency accountability and
the resources in order to take
care of these particular more.
Agencies and I'd like to just
close to indicate that with
those emergencies it's the
actual emergency it's not one
that we're going to go ahead and
say well just in case it was to
happen we want the
accountability for each one of
the emergencies and the actual
Austin resources that it's gonna
take to a to deal directly with
that thank you very much Mr
chairman.
Miss Iglesias would like that
little information to them in
case I missed something thank.
Yes Mr chair Senator Campos if I
may one thing that I'd like to
point out that in a typical
fiscal year on average
historically total disaster
funding for the entire fiscal
year have been less than twenty
million so at the most recent
fiscal years FY nineteen and FY
twenty were sort of anomalies
and how much they were but in a
typical fiscal year on average
is less than twenty million
total and that would be twenty
million available from the
operating reserve only if the
ACF no longer has funding
available we now are again
putting fifty million into the
A. C. F. and house bill two this
year and we'll keep an eye on it
every single year to make sure
that the AC Act has a sufficient
balance the intent is that the
operating reserve would only be
used in an event that that
fiscal year has an eight
excessive number of emergencies
but the the ACF should be
continually funded each year in
order to ensure that that
disasters can be met at any
time.
Thank you thank you very much
for that explanation dont I just
have what clarification a little
more me on the twenty million it
would still be assuming that we
have to get into that we would
still be the application of the
five million each particular
request right into the twenty
that was my initial question
right.
I think.
Mr Mr chair Senator Rodriguez
you're correct yes and Mr chair
Senator Rodriguez if I may just
one point of clarification just
because we're putting the
limitation at five million does
not mean that every single order
would be for the maximum amount
if if the request and if if the
agencies only request two
million dollars needed to
address an emergency than the
executive order would be for two
million so just because it's
capped at five doesn't mean that
every executive order would be
I.
Okay so what happens if they get
your challenge I'm John what
happens that the more it needed
and the twenty minute and
there's no there have been no
the capital points out I think
you wanted to that a little bit
early that went blank just
telling reasons that we can move
on on the agenda thank you.
A yes Mr chair Senator Rodriguez
if in the event that the entire
amount of the ACF is depleted
and the full twenty million is
also run through from the
operating reserve then that
would require a legislative
session in order to appropriate
more funds.
That's what I was thinking
probably would have to happen
because in this case it would go
before the board of finance but
it doesn't specify that we would
have to the legislature would
have to approve that that seems
like it would be the case thank
you very much and thank you
Senator Campos and again thanks
John that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you.
Senator Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator thanks for bringing this
forward and and and if I may
I would just like at I'm not
that familiar with prison system
just a couple of questions
clarifications is there no other
agency in the state The that
doesn't specials of our presence
at this time.
Senator we're not on the present
bill we are on the emergency
disaster all my apologies I'm
I'm one of okay hold my
questions and thank you.
Mr chairman that ask questions
Senator Candelaria go ahead.
Thank you Sir and Mr chairman
and Senator Campos.
and that the questions get after
the.
The
whole help me understand the
the.
The second part of the bill I'm
on board with sort of the
primacy of the appropriation
reserves the first place we go
when there is a disaster on
board on board with giving sort
of authorization from seven
fifty to five million per it
faster as I understand it so
that we're not having multiple
orders for the same disaster
just to get more money I
understand that if I'm wrong on
any of this please correct me
when I pose the question.
but that but the third piece of
this the the authorization to
dip into up to twenty million to
the operating reserve isn't that
sort of a creative way to get
around the three fifths majority
requirement on the floor to dip
into reserves and is there
current authorization under law
you know for us to get into.
The operating reserve for an
emergency without.
Following the legislative
authorization process.
Held out in the statute Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Candelaria what I'm
going to do is if you don't mind
to ask Miss.
To kind of go back historically
a little bit into what we
currently have and then from
there I'd like to also chime and
explain a little bit in terms of
of the second part of that of
that question.
Mr chair Senator Candelaria so.
The just to be clear the
operating reserve does not have
a three fifths majority
requirement that's the tax
stabilization reserve.
The the operating reserve only
requires a majority vote I'm
and.
To your question is is there
currently authorization to do
that well that's where the
disagreement is the the
Legislative Council Service
along with the LFC do not
believe that the executive has
the current statutory authority
to use the operating reserve for
disasters the operating reserve
is a very specific funds that
requires appropriation from that
fund in order to be used the the
legal authority that they have
been using to draw from the
operating reserve is this term
in the disaster funding statue
as it stands now that says
disaster funding
can be pulled from surplus on
appropriated funds and that's a
term of our it's not just
determined in statute but
basically what that means is if
there are revenues in excess of
probation then you have a
surplus of general fund dollars
however that was put in place
before the operating reserve was
created so now surplus on
appropriated funds at the end of
the fiscal year don't just sit
in the general fund they get
transferred to the operating
reserve and then in order to get
out of the operating reserve
they require specific
appropriation now the executive
has been relying on this
interpretation that that the
operating reserve is is where
surplus and appropriated funds
go and therefore can be used for
disasters however we disagree
because it requires specific
appropriation and the operating
reserve is not specifically
allowed for disasters rather
than trying to remediate that
issue in terms of past use of
the operating reserve that have
already happened what we are
doing here is creating a very
clear of purpose for which the
operating reserve can be used
but up to a limited amount.
Sorry please.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Candelaria and that's a
part of the reason why as we
were dealing with this
differently in from of the that
surfaced because the resources
that we do have available are
supposed to be used for a
specific purpose specific way
and the the lack of clarity in
terms of how that was going to
be directed did create if you
will a concern that's the
purpose legislation thank you Mr
thank you Mr chair Senator
Candelaria if I may just just
one other piece of clarification
since the you asked on the the
statements that were made so I
do want to be clear that by
increasing the seven hundred and
fifty thousand in this case to
five million this bill does not
take away the ability to issue
multiple executive orders that
could still technically be done
we think it significantly
reduces the need to do that
however the way that it's
defined here in this bill
similar to statute
is that if for some reason say
there's a wildfire and in nerd
needs seven million dollars to
just address that single
wildfire then technically under
this bill as the same in current
statute the executive could
issue two consecutive executive
orders in order to get the full
seven million that was needed if
the five million was not enough
so this bill does not in itself
address the issue of being able
to issue multiple executive
orders but we think it
significantly reduces the need
to do so and therefore increases
the transparency.
I can appreciate that thank you
Mr chairman I really appreciate
the clarification.
let me let me ask that mistakes
that are.
Chairman Senator.
I want to call your doctor
Iglesias.
But don't.
It is a subtle.
Maybe I should get my age do now
there is no and and Dr David
Abbey.
How to pay for.
the I used to be the LFC staff
for as you know it.
So let me just let me just ask
you that miss miss Iglesias from
March of twenty twenty.
You know when the first disaster
and I think emergency orders to
matter on COVID.
It over the last year or such.
Did the executive transfer funds
out of our operating reserve.
And if so for how how much was
transferred.
Under that authority described
yes Ford Authority reported on
regular orchid Authority yes Mr
chair Senator Candelaria so the
the executive issued multiple
executive orders for amounts
that we needed to address COVID
the total amount that was issued
for fiscal year twenty was
thirty five and a half million
and I will also point out that
even though statute currently
requires executive orders to be
in in amounts of seven hundred
fifty thousand each that
limitation was ignored in
several executive orders one
executive order allocated
directly ten million dollars and
another allocated twenty million
dollars to the Department of
Health to which we contend of
course they did not have the
statutory statutory authority to
do so that should have been in
increments of seven hundred
fifty thousand to be in keeping
with current law so that that
particular limitation was
ignored in that case.
Mr Chairman at the six which is
Senator that was what thirty
five issue million how much of
that is that it came from the
operating reserve.
Mr chair Senator Candelaria that
was all from the operating
reserve at the time the ACF had
no funds and it's.
Okay
Yeah I think I think therein
lies sort of the challenge
Mister chairman Senator miss
Iglesias as I.
As I think through this is.
I just think you know the the
legislature has inherent concern
here regardless of who's
currently inhabiting the
executive.
to control the probation and the
appropriation power and I think
the more appropriate course
would have been to convene the
legislature
and include us in that in that
appropriation.
and you know all the arguments
can be made.
about why that was necessary and
I don't dispute the validity of
a lot of that but it's about the
president's that we set for
future executives
and you know other reasons may
start to get less compelling in
the future and so I guess Mr
chairman what I'm left with
guess my last question for miss
Iglesias Senator is.
Let's assume.
Dot for budget thank god for bid
you know these are sort of just
I I've you that's a sort of
disaster planning in a way
well fiscal standpoint but let's
assume Mr chairman miss Iglesias
at the worst happens and you
know.
The executive needs to dip into
the operating reserve by thirty
five million again.
That we're not in session is
there any does this approach
provide the legislature or any
kind of he's to enforce that
work in the executive simply
ignore the limitation of twenty
million.
And that's what I find sort of
concerning as we're we're laying
down good guard rails here and
I'm a vote for the bill.
But I think really what
ultimately what depends whether
or not.
This is successful is if people
are going to respect the law.
On that and miss Iglesias the
yet does it find out what do we
do if the executive simply
ignores and says we're gonna
take as much out of the
operating reserves we think it's
for example are we amending and
if we're not why not the
provision of the disaster relief
fact that has that sort of vague
ambiguous language that pre
dates are reserve structure.
Mr chair Senator Candelaria so
we are completely removing that
ambiguous language under the
bill right it would only be the
ACF first if nothing in the A.
C. F. and twenty million from
the operating reserve if more
than twenty million was taken
that would be an absolute clear
violation of statute if that
happens it would be the normal
course of action when any
statute is violated and that
would have to be settled in the
courts but under this language
the legislature would have a
much more significant standing
in that sense it is now very
very clear whereas if we were to
challenge in court now there's
that differing interpretation
that exists that makes it more
ambiguous and a little difficult
for a from a legal standing but
this would make it very clear.
Mr Chairman thank you miss
Iglesias for that.
The bill.
The reason I think you've just
articulated mostly I get now I
it's not too late to get the
past but you know I I appreciate
that we're having this
discussion today because at the
time as that was going on you
know I I I'll just say from from
my perspective.
I never really thought the legal
argument that that one provision
of the disaster relief I could
be read.
Contorted in that way
you know and so that I think
there was some healthy
disagreement and.
You know the challenge I think
we faces the legislature is
there's always tremendous
political pressure on us not to
litigate an issue against the
executive regardless of the
party you know when the
Democrats control the
legislature for the majority of
the Martinez administration
there are many instances right
where I can recall various
actions by that administration
that just kinda clearly yeah
yeah you could come up with some
legal hi and of the near for it
but we just happened to be
unlawful and the legislature you
know made a political decision
not to bring a case and that's
kind of just the concern I'm
left with is.
I think we have this approach in
our legislature that.
You know sticking up for our
state of the institution or or
enforcing our rights
appropriated some sort of
personal affront and it's going
to offend people I mean it kind
of evolved past that and
recognize that unless we as a
body actually do this exact what
you just said Miss Iglesias yes
kind of restrictions don't mean
anything all it depends upon is
whether or not we as a
legislature kind of set the
political issues of the moment
aside and focus on the process
and the process is if you want
to tap into large sums of public
money you have to drive the
legislature so I appreciate all
the work it's clear that's gone
on to this all you'll the floor
and I really appreciate Mr
chairman miss Iglesias and
senator this conversation I
think it's incredibly important
as we as we respond to the new
realities we live in and and
figure out what what happens
next time so thank you very much
thank you Mr thank you senator
Candelaria.
Thank you senator Candelaria I
don't see any other questions
from committee members.
Mr chairman I don't see any
hands either thank you revenue
passed motion by Senator
Rodriguez do I have a second.
Second.
Second by Senator Campos that we
call the roll.
Mr chair Senator Burt yes.
Pat Senator passed Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzales excuse Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share also excuse
senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez at Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes.
Senator then yes yes senator
Byrd did you.
Yes Senator Burt yes so we have
nine yes and to excuse.
Campos to invest you want to do
your next bill.
you Senator Mr chairman it's up
to you if you want to go and go
with this for you want to move
on to another let's go and
finish up right thank you Mr
chair members of the Senate
finance committee essentially
Senate bill two ninety one
relates to the correctional
institutions and requires
inspections a privately operated
correctional facilities and
Senate provide an excuse me and
Senate Judiciary it was amended
to also include the the public
facilities today of course you
already have internal audits or
inspections on a regular basis
of our private and our public
institutions and in essence what
this would do is just what they
are indicate that of those
inspections can occur at any
time and within that the
auditor the findings and go with
the reported we're asking that
the Attorney General also
of participating here be the
individual or through his office
that would conduct these
investigations are what it has
brought this about over the last
several years has been working
very closely with individuals
who are very concerned of that
prisoners within our
correctional facilities
are not getting the treatment
that is being indicated in this
case as we started off
particularly by the private
institutions and then secondly
and moving forward individuals
also indicated that that this is
something that was needed also
and the public institutions with
that Mr chair members of the
Senate finance committee I I
hope he's on online his name is
Mr Tomko arch he's been
individual who's been a strong
advocate for this particular
method of moving forward with
inspections and I just wanna see
if he's available and if not
then I'll be available for
questions thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator what was his
name again look for next Thom
Cole I ge C. O. B. A. C. H..
I do not see him on now Mr
chairman Senator Campos I do not
see him on that's fine then
we'll do our best going try to
respond to some of the questions
and then we'll go from there
thank you very much Mr chairman
of more than we have any public
comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee now we do not have any
public comment on this bill
thank you senator Byrd your
first question thank thank you
Mr chairman and again this
center thanks for reading this
sure you sit with the they do
internal audits is that correct
the that the corrections
department in kind of inspection
sells a set the way this works
right now Mister chairman
Senator Burt you're correct
right now all the inspections
are conducted internally
particularly by the the private
facilities they do have the
internal auditor investigator
and they do conduct the the the
artists the investigations and
then are there findings of
course and of those are
submitted if you will to
The correctional facility and
then from there those findings
are addressed.
Okay are are those inspections
are made public.
Mr.
Mr chair and and Senator that's
a that's a very good question
because of the because of in for
a and of course confidentiality
particularly with
of those that are incarcerated
those are usually dealt with
internally.
And the Mr chairman and and send
for you to say that the
amendment to in previous
committee did include the public
presence as well as privately
owned prisons correct Mr
chairman senator Byrd you're
correct yes so that was the
amendment in the Senate
Judiciary.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator just looking to
understand the process a little
bit better so would and I think
I was a Council services or or
the attorney general's office it
will appoint someone to do these
inspections.
Mr chair Senator for your
correct in essence
what would happen is the
internal audits or inspections
would be conducted by the
attorney general's office they
would be conducted according to
the amendment
at a moment's notice in other
words they would be announced
and then from there the I
gathered
within few days of those
findings would be submitted
to the department of corrections
or to the particular private
facility and then from there
the.
The
Improvement center if you will
the the changes to the witnesses
would would be addressed so so
this is coming about because of
over the years there have been
concerns in terms of some issues
of dealing directly with of
those that have been
incarcerated
where they are not receiving of
the prescribed treatment and
this would go ahead and allow
that
as for the possibilities for
information would be submitted
for a recruitment.
Okay Mr chairman and senator I
was.
In the bills also there will be
a possible possibility of
assessment of fines of those
twenty thirty.
Categorized in and in statute
in this would be criminal or or
Financial Times lines for maybe
accounting industry
discrepancies or something like
that so so Mister chair senator
Byrd of the yes yes I have and
if you will would be for of
those violations as an example
if within
the foods area of there was
proper prices followed then
again through those fine the
assistance to be made and those
funds than what would occur and
that's something that
is.
Available now but within this
bill what it does is it speller.
Okay so Mr chairman and senator
that the.
The infractions are already in
eight in in the legislation
they're on the books it's just a
hundred identifying if they
existed any of these facilities
correct right and then the other
thing would be once this report
is that complete.
It would indicate that within
thirty days of receipt of the of
the report of the institution of
course within have to make a.
Those improvements.
Mr will question Senator
come will you look at accounting
the records on it you know the
book so to speak but you're also
going to inspect the issue and
talked to engage in talks
regards to staff so and so
forth.
Is is so one person be assigned
to do this or you can have a
kind of a team ago in in in in
these inspections.
So Mister Mister chair where
senator Byrd it's a very good
question because it would be
An individual or a team that
would be assigned by the
Attorney General so again I
would believe that it would
depend upon the gravity of the
situation as an example if over
a period of time there were
several reports that the there
were some discrepancies within
the facility then from there
announce the AG would be able to
send a team then it could be one
or two individuals for the
Senator and then through the
assessment process where they
would be looking at facilities
and operations at fiscal
we're we're she's also of those
operations and then personal
interviews with inmates
guards and others who are in the
facility then of course those
findings would be gathered in
and of course the report would
be submitted for recommendations
in terms of how to make
improvements within so.
Okay and and I guess I had that
discount one more question if I
may be a Mr chairman and senator
so it I think this is set up on
a three year rotating basis to
go into effect if correctly but
if the Attorney General
or or whoever else it gets
complaints he could.
Excuse the expression level that
you're hearing and put the team
or person together and gone
inspect the facility
At a moment's notice without
notifying the facility itself
economic of a walking if is that
correct Mr chair Senator per
year correct and and again the
the idea of this is that within
the facility if there are
reports the the discrepancies
witnesses or potential
violations then it would allow
the independence assessor if you
will which would be the office
of the Attorney General they
would be able then to going to
inspect if as an example through
their inspection within their
findings everything proves to be
okay of course stand the
inspections has taken place
facility continues to operate
and there's no further action
but again that would truly be
determined by the assessment of
the of the unannounced
inspection.
I apologize for up to one more
question Mr chairman and
senator.
So I I understand you could
probably go into a privately
owned present and provide them
if if the findings were in fact
to bear it out but can you what
would happen with a a a a
public.
You know state owned a prison.
Instead of fines would there be
some correction capabilities
I I II milling person or things
of that nature how would that
work in lieu of fines for one of
our state prisons thank you very
much for the question and Mr
chairman of course senator Byrd
the bottom line with it is that
the facility to stand would be
are treated similar in terms of
the investigation of the
assessment and then from there
the recommendations so within
that of the improvements that
changes the recommendations
would be made regardless of the
facility with the public or
private.
And and again we would be
totally according to that
assessment I would like to add
however that on a regular basis
I do to our our public and
private facilities and within
that
I have seen great improvements
at both public and private
facilities and within that what
I've seen have been improvements
in the educational offerings in
the medical and nutritional
offerings and all the way across
the board so we're we're really
working to ensure that once an
individual has served their time
of that there is an additional
component which is a placement
component so the individuals
that are giving the institution
returning back out into society
they do have opportunities to.
Seek employment to have
resources to get a start on
their career and and again back
into into society and I go back
to one of the things many years
ago as I was working on the
a focus on rehabilitation
part of that
background that I brought to the
table in dealing directly with
our facilities are with
something that the individual
private and public facilities
listen to and again I've seen
great strides made in both
levels of facilities thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator thank you for bringing
this forward I remember visit us
is LFC meeting and visit to a
The female correctional facility
in the grand Cherokee Fund
incredibly and we actually were
in a room with probably twenty
to thirty inmates in and they
said we get great training on
how to to dress and how to be
involved in an interview for
jobs we get out and so on and so
forth but they they weren't
getting any vocational training
that you know they all had
requests to for for a
secretarial skills or for
management type skills or for
maybe some locations skills like
welding or automotive manage or
the case may be and and that was
brought to.
The folks at that person's
attention instead you you
inspect these periodically I
just wanted to bring that back
up that was a vivid memory of
mine from from and visiting this
prison and I hope there is a.
Some movement in that direction
it's great to understand how to
do an interview you know for job
or or how to address something
like that but if you don't have
a skill that you can sell it
that kind of defeats the purpose
so just wonder bring that back
up to to you with your
connection prisons and again
that Mr chairman and senator of
thank you for the time and and
all the information thank you
Sir.
Thank you senator Byrd I don't
see any other questions from
committee members.
Senator I mean is it turning
general in support of this bill
because I don't see him
anywhere.
talking about it.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course so members of the
Senate finance committee.
Had discussions with them and
but his indication to me
directly has been he is
supportive
however as we move forward is
going to be an issue
who is going to pay for the
inspections and and again as we
talked about this it would come
from the payment will come from
the the private sector the
private prisons and also the
compensation for the inspections
would come from the the public
prisons if that was the case
along with that it his
recommendation to me of course
would be he would need another
FTE the full time equivalent in
order to conduct these
planned if you will inspections
of but again he it's fair to go
ahead and do that again I can't
speak for him in terms of
whether or not he would support
or endorse legislation but in
terms of the work that would go
into developing if you will the
assessment investigation and
then submit the findings he is
prepared to go ahead and do that
if the resources are made
available which they are where
the private and public prisons
would go ahead and compensate
for the investigations.
So how how does the private
prisons gonna pay that is it is
that in their contract for
inspections or how how they can
so thank you very much Mr
chairman for for the question.
That would come out of their
contractual amount that would be
part of the resources that they
do receive or provided will
contractual services for
incarceration that would be part
of their operational expense.
Thank you center just want to
make sure I understand that any
other questions from committee
members.
No questions Mr chairman with
the past.
By Senator Rodriguez second by
Senator Hemphill.
We call our all.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Senator Burt packs Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria is accused
Senator Diamond.
S. Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Bill yes Senator shares excused
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yeah Senator Rodriguez
yes Senator manuals.
Yes Senator then yes yes I have
seven yes one no and to.
That senator Byrd yes yes the.
I'm gonna go down when to
explain myself.
K. no so that is seven yes to
now and to happen to excuse.
Explainable yes thank you Mr
chairman and and again I I like
the concept to this I I'm just
have great concerns about the
application
and and again the the I know we
want to be transparent.
It's hard to.
Have information like this
about either people in prison or
the ministration in the prisons
to fully understand what the
implications of a of an
infraction or I might be so I
just have some trouble with the
application that but Senator
thank you for bringing this
forward thank you Mr.
Thank you for chairman thank
thank you sermon thank you sent
members of the Senate finance
committee.
Thank you Sir Campos been
looking out the window looking
for center shared cities claim
number ends seeming Committee
so.
We have to circle around the
building step by finding Senator
Lopez you're back with us for a
Senate Bill or two eighty nine
as amended and I do have an
immense amendment on that bill
right.
Mr Chairman I do believe that
there should be an impairment
test.
Okay.
Explain the bill and and and and
I believe that amendment strips.
Dollar amount correct because it
already is in house bill two.
Mr Chairman that is my
understanding us Mr chairman of
the amendment up for discussion.
Have a motion to.
With the mentor for discussion
purposes do I have a second
thank you Mr chairman second by
Senator Campos.
Madam chair this you know me
explain amendment I'm.
I have please this year strikes
appropriation and because the
money is already in house bill
two so.
Have a motion document.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you for reviewing is.
And I'll second the motion so
you have an amended bill center
location on explain the bill.
And thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the I'm
sorry I'm sorry any objection to
the motion.
Double.
I don't see any objection to the
motion so you have amended bill
sorry center go ahead now thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee I am in front of you
today with the Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two eight nine
and Mr chairman members of the
committee what
essentially what this bill is is
proposing for us to consider
here during this session is to
elevate the special education
entity within our public
education department to actually
have it sit as a division within
Pat on the bill also
as an Assistant Secretary for
special education within our pad
Public Education Department
and there's also Mr chairman and
members of the committee where
we are actually outlining the
powers and duties of this new
division
and of course the Assistant
Secretary and creating also was
statewide autism spectrum
registry and Mr chairman members
of the committee the bill
defines dyslexia and exceptional
students student assistance team
and students with disabilities
and Mr chairman
if you have an expert witness
with me Ronaldo tone who is here
also I know I've seen her
somewhere on our on our soon if
I could Mr chairman I also have
a letter that was written on
behalf of mobile deaths who of
course was I believe with
regards to the Martinez versus
state when we talk about the
Yazzie consolidated lawsuits of
Yazeed Martinez I'm modifica
force was the lead for the
Martinez versus the state and I
just wanted just to mention this
from a letter that was sent on
to the Education Committee and
I'm sorry I have not forward it
to you.
But essentially if I may Mister
chairman this is from again mall
definite says Senate bill two
eight nine takes significant
steps towards addressing the
needs of students with
disabilities in New Mexico
including the creation of an
Assistant Secretary level
position for special education
within the New Mexico path.
IT professional development for
teachers and other professionals
involved in special education
and also monitoring Mr chairman
of the provisions of services to
students with disabilities.
And so I just wanted to mention
that Mr Chairman and if I could
I also would like to defer to
one although she could say a few
words also.
Good afternoon.
Chair and and committee members
my name is Ronald we're we took
home and I am an education
consultant but also an advocate
for native American children
with disabilities I I've been an
advocate for about twenty years
not only in this state but also
in Colorado and I've learned the
discrepancies of what's our
children with disabilities Intel
not only within our communities
but also within our schools and
it is alarming to.
And extend to what happens to do
to our kids expressly when we
have these transition periods
that occur for children and then
trying to create the work force
and the communities ready to
take on these kids and what's
remarkable about this bill is
not only the making special
education a division and of
taking on this role of an
Assistant Secretary but their
intricate pieces within this
bill that help us not only to
look at IT process and training
the accountability for audits
and the one on one action for
for children and making sure
that transition is occurring
and it I also feel that once we
take the step up for kids we'll
create this place of letting our
children with disabilities
recognize that they're not
invisible I feel often times we
look at the laws and policies
for these kids because their
national laws under IDA but also
the budget money that accrues
for these children in their
schools and not only and and
only for the state but then when
we look at IT peas in the
process and what accountability
needs to happen I've also flying
in the grass roots when I work
in these communities not only in
rural but also in our in our
urban areas the lack of training
for just.
Putting together an adequate I.
U. P. is needed on a great
spectrum you know you look at
children with autism the
registry and I also feel you
have to go back to how the IEP
is written it helps create the
transition smoothly for kids
from not only elementary to
middle school but the middle
school to high school but what
is sorely needed is that
transition piece from high
school to the workforce sent to
post secondary school and I
often have found because I've
been advocate incident numerous
meetings of IEPs you know the
lack of not writing those
appropriately have really.
This guy did a lot of these
children to not get the extended
services they need and also just
value waiting what that
disability is but I hope with
this bill that we would not only
up the status of making sure
these children have a voice but
I also help with the because of
the pandemic and this space that
we've created and I'm sure all
of you understand you know the
race and social justice issues
that occur during the pandemic
but somewhere we can finally
addressed some of these things
but I also feel if we start this
school year and recognizing that
that special education is vital
and that we put this into the
parameter of not only looking at
the needs to the Martinez Yazzie
case but also recognizing that
parents community members are
asking for a lot of these these
pieces within this bill I
strongly supported not only as
an advocate but I've been a
parent of a child with a
disability and also gifted
children but also in my role as
an advocate for native American
children with disabilities and
the communities that I represent
I strongly believe in this bill
and I would hope that we would
just take a chance and risk and
move this bill forward thank you
very much for this presentation
for being here and allowing me
to take the space thank you.
Thank you center this did you
have any other experts who
wanted to.
Senator Lopez I mean I mean
central has.
That's okay now Mr chairman I do
have who is with us also is
Rachel Gajah all the director of
the legislative education study
committee and she's here to help
answer any technical questions
with the bill in front of us
thank you okay and do we have
any money in support or
opposition.
Mr chair members of the
committee now we receive not an
indication of opposition or
support for this bill.
Questions from committee members
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you again for
taking the time to bring this
forward I I guess my question
comes from
Special the EDD currently has a
special education bureau is that
is that correct.
In.
In it Mr chairman in a Senator.
Aren't they supposed to do the
same function that you're
looking at and my missing
something somewhere.
Mr chairman over the years it is
a bureau officially
and I know the department over
the years to said Wallace
operating as a division and they
try and give it you know it's
just do this but when you
actually go back to what's on
paper it's not a Division
and helping to elevate from the
bureau perspective as you an
official division within the
public education department in
my estimation and many others
that I've spoken with elevates
it to the place of recognition
and equal stance for future that
comes
and you know it's it's we we are
taking some of the
responsibilities that the bureau
has had over the years but we
are actually giving it a little
bit more at this point in time
and consolidating many of the
efforts that have been what I
calls because you're kind of
strewn throughout had they were
also advocating for a strong
function of monetary you know we
haven't had that and that was
part of what some of the
information that was shared
during the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuits that were consolidated
yeah there's a lot of issues
that we have to work with and
make sure that we are following
and doing justice for our
children and their families
specially those you know I.
Anyway I go on that but your
question sorry I don't know I I
understand that I I I truly
appreciate your passion for the
settings Senator Mr chairman I I
guess I'm I won't take a full
time I just see this function I
see what you would like to do in
this is something that we
constantly seem to talk about
in.
Certainly it in education
department because it's so big
but even in other departments in
the state is we have a bunch of
different.
Areas or or people or groups
doing the same thing we so pipe
the staff they don't seem to
communicate we spend a lot of
money and all of these places
and in the bottom line is what's
our result do we get the result
out of this are we should being
successful in what we're trying
to accomplish with these groups
and so right now we're looking
at an organization that that
according to the research has a
twenty five staff members
I think the full up except maybe
three positions
in and they have a director
Abbey assistant director.
In and yet it appears they're
supposed to be doing the
function that you want to do but
they don't seem to be doing the
function or or at least getting
the results that you want so
we're going to change things
again I just think with all due
respect to up.
Secretary Stewart in in in
previous sectors quite frankly.
We've always asked for what
purpose work what programs don't
what is is the first one is not
can we have a conversational
conversation about giving with
the things that don't work and
and reworking them or applying
some new.
Operation that is at least give
it a fresh start and and make it
work and so I'm just concerned
that we just keep adding
bureaucracy atop the bureaucracy
we spend a whole lot of money
and we just don't get the
results that that we're looking
for so I appreciate the
information it's it's certainly
not specifically concerned about
what you're trying to do Senator
but it's in general the state
state government in in
specifically education.
We just are not efficient in
this and and I would like to see
some more efficiencies come out
of the I just PED but but other
especially big agencies the
state so I want to address the
debate and and and look at what
we're trying to do here and and
they make a decision but thank
you for the information and
again I certainly appreciate
your passion well about the the
special issues thank you.
Thank you Senator Burt thank you
Senator Lopez I don't see any
other hands here
nope I can't see anyone else in
the we're gonna move on Senator
Lopez let me say thank you for
for your passion and in your
hard work on all these issues
from what I see it seems like
we're only redirecting the focus
here it's in the department it's
already existing we're just
trying to collect all the pieces
and focus in one area so that
special education gets what it
deserves that special attention.
Once and for all so I very much
support your bill and right now
there's no one else on the list
so can I have a motion please
from committee members so madam
chair he's in there's a motion
and as that was amended.
Yes madam chair thank you
there's a motion R. for the past
in the second as amended all in
favor what I forget we're not in
person let's call vote have you
have a roll call.
Thank you madam chair and then a
clarify was that senator
Candelaria that made the motion
no Senator Campos make the
motion and senator good souls
service okay thank you.
And senator birch Development.
Senator curtain no Senator.
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill I'm always
here Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share is excuse Senator
Steinborn.
Is no longer here.
Senator Woods.
Is excuse Senator Rodriguez yes.
And senator Munoz.
Is no longer here so I have for
C. one No six yes and for
excuse.
Yes thank you thank you Senator
budget grant and your bill thank
you madam chair members of the
committee thank you you are ever
going to move on to we're gonna
go to west Senate bill three
twenty eight Senator Gonzales
water and sanitation gross
receipts Senator.
Where is your.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
With the
I
bill three twenty eight hello.
with the water sanitation
districts and in two thousand
fourteen.
You know I was so you know just
to you know if they would
consider the one fourth the
point two five percent of the
gross receipts tax.
To help rural and this is within
no businesses that are
commercial within the sanitation
districts so well it has been
enacted and it have for you
would have a sunset.
And what they have asked is that
it has been favorable you know
and in the two counties three
counts that he has been imposed
from underneath on the to tells
County.
The they just feel that it's
favorable within the sanitation
districts and it really allows
them to have that little extra
bit on they don't generate a lot
of money but it does help them
with the funding efforts in the
operations of the system and the
going into an election every six
years the so being very costly
so asking if they could be L..
Removed the they would not have
the six year limitation I do
have expert witnesses I have
Mister Frank coupler and I have
Mister Bob for metal and the Mr
John painter.
Thank you senator
right let's that let's go on to
your expert witnesses State and
Frank are you there you would
like to to add to this and the
other gentleman Senator once I
if I can get his first name.
Romero offering more thank you.
Right I'm here to make their
comments before yes there I see
thank you.
Up there I think you are muted.
Chairman.
Thank you madam chairman Frank
coupler of I am a registered
lobbyist for the into the water
and sanitation district and so
in supplementation of senator
jealous is kind words I'd like
to mention in the Anthony water
sanitation district of.
The quarter percent has been
used exclusively by the district
for at risk youth forms of the
at risk use for.
is so.
Employing here can kids are.
From the guest and school area
and these are kids I don't know
how to put it in any other way
except that.
They're kind of at the end of
the line in terms of being lost
from the school system.
And as we know when kids get
lost from the school system it
sort of becomes a of.
A domino effect in their life
and so.
The use farm.
Was started on
You're getting land that was
purchased from local farmers
through capital outlay by former
senator Cynthia Nava.
Of Cynthia Nava was also the
superintendent against in
schools and of the entity Water
sanitation district required the
property and the new guest and
school is on that property right
next to the use farm.
We take
we take referrals from anyone in
the community or anyone in the
schools.
Four kids that want to work on
the farm and we pay them the
minimum wage.
We don't believe that poor kids
ought to have to work for free
and the they get a minimum wage
they come out to the farm on a
regular schedule they go into
the feels they use the hole in
the right get the shovels and
the plants and the harvest
it's Senator madam chairman and
members of the Senate finance
committee this is a heck of a
program
and that's what we use our
quarter percent for and we don't
and we support Senator
Gonzalez's initiative.
To not require these kids to go
back and.
Justify the quarter percent and
set up an election of every six
years.
It's working and no more than we
have referendums on taxes to
support a whole raft of
governmental activities we think
this the should should not be
subject to referendum and all of
the repeated costs involved and
the I might mention one of the
bank in the in addition to the
water and sanitation districts
mentioned by Senator Gonzales
there is a water and sanitation
district up in San Juan County.
In Kerwin.
It's the valley water and
sanitation district and they
have their quarter percent and
the they've they've approved it
twice through two different
Representative referendums
overwhelmingly.
As has happened in the and that
money up there goes to subsidize
a sewer system because that
water and sanitation district
does not own the water system
the sewer system is been
absolutely necessary for
development of the business
community.
In Kirkland and that money.
From the quarter percent is used
to subsidize those sewer fees so
as to make them affordable to
small businesses.
and the then I believe Mr
painter is is hopefully on the
line to talk about the L. pradal
if not I'll be happy to add
comments with regard to L.
pradal the other district that
has taken advantage of a quarter
percent thank you madam chair.
You bring good working
appreciate you coming in for us
today and and working with
Senator Gonzales all right do we
have Bob here on and I don't see
a picture or video I just your
name right off right but I think
things are working correctly
that we are right now by yes
thank you.
You are muted stromatolite.
Mr metal your your muted.
Well.
Yes I'm wondering if Nathan can
you and mute Mr a.
Senator at I and I said I can
not I I'm trying to ask Miss
Romero to amuse himself and
unfortunately he only hears able
to amuse himself okay thank you
Mr all right you can go to Mr
painter and all try to get a
hold of them thank you Mr
painter can you come on board
here and
Tell us a little bit about this
about this bill I don't see you.
On here.
Are you there.
The representative from the.
Every yes I'm aware of on okay
okay.
Yes if you can hear me now yes.
Yes this is Bob I'm up upper
middle madam chairman of the
advisors runs water sanitation
district board and we are in
favor of this legislation to
remove this up six year
imposition limitation on water
sanitation districts up gross
receipts tax so we we believe
that it should be made permanent
and and not some September six
years in our most recent
election it was supposed to been
held in January of twenty
nineteen but then because of the
local elections legislation our
election was moved to November
twenty nineteen and so we
actually missed out on the gross
receipts tax in twenty nineteen
and then the in twenty twenty go
out when COVID hit the it's been
limited so we are down to about
twenty five percent so we
definitely do need this revenue
stream to help us stand up so we
are in favor of a Senate bill
three twenty eight two to change
this and up remove this six
years so we can have this the
more consistent the revenue
stream in our budget.
Thank you Bob appreciate your
comments I'm happy you're
finally able to get on so thank
you all right you your do we
have another a gentleman Senator
Gonzales I think Mr painter you
had indicated maybe here
Madam chair on if he's not
available the Mr Cup that can
make a few comments on the other
sanitation district okay thank
you Frank are you available.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Gonzales with regard to
Mr painters of
water and sanitation district
located in on the north side of
house of.
That particular district uses
its quarter percent and again
they voters up there have
approved it overwhelmingly twice
with that quarter percent is
used up there too all
subsidized the cost of
administration of the water and
sanitation district of what what
part of his experiences many of
the others as well is in there
participation in federal grants
and loans and state programs.
They were the major player in
the beta Madam settling all the
water rights and they have a
fifty million dollar program
going with respect to capital
outlay wells and tanks and
storage it lines up.
That is for brick and mortar how
does the federal government and
the federal government doesn't
provide any money.
For the cost of.
Taking care of the paperwork the
accounting etcetera with regard
to these that's programs and so
this small piece of the water
and sanitation district gross
receipts tax up there is been
used for that and they also
taxed themselves on the property
tax mill levy.
So they are not without.
Broad community support and of
course as we all know it
ministering these large federal
programs and projects by a
small.
District is expensive in the
very much need the authority
without repeated all of.
The referendums thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Frank appreciate your
comments again all right
Is there anyone eight and for
the public that may want to
comment on this bill anyone for
or against this bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee received indication of
neither opposition nor support
for this bill.
Thank you for are not committee
members I don't see any
questions and looking at the
list here I don't see any
questions anyone's hand that for
a comment let me just that Tel
laan Senator state to send
directory Senator Gonzales here
late in the day thank you for
bringing value to kind of local
government
I have a deep appreciation for
it for the needs that happen
with that the water sanitation
district and otherwise you know
I'm really impressed the that
the the at the and at this
funding goes towards that
subsidizing fees and and even to
administer of water and
sanitation districts and all
right anything it seems like
they're really leveraging the
islands and working so are you
something is working R. then why
right right so I I stand up very
according to yes and continuing
to what to allow them to you
during the first round of the
six year limitation but also to
continue to allow us to keep
their water and sanitation gross
receipts taxes they've had it
for quite a few years now I'm
and I at interchange there's one
hand went up now and that is
Senator Burt Senator can you
come up and ask your question or
comment thank thank you madam
chair and and I guess I'm just
looking for some clarification
if I may
Senator are there are two other
communities I guess at water
districts I guess similar to
this do they have a sunset on
their.
tax as well or do they not the
end the they should have a sense
of wonder thank you.
I'm sure and Senator Burt so yes
they do because they fall under
the same statute.
Okay.
Madam chair and senator
Hello me these districts been in
place I mean and and I guess I
would like to know why we sunset
these every so often I know
understand working commissions
have been there a lot this year
but with this district to these
districts have this sense no.
Madam chair senator Byrd tone
this was done in the.
Two thousand fourteen and I
stand corrected by my weaknesses
it might years not right
at the time of that's the way
the legislation is proposed.
So he was enacted in that way
but now that they have had all
experiences with the.
You know the.
The actual tax and then also the
lections and specially now that
the election code change to that
November I know the one of the
districts so you know home.
Brought to my attention you know
how expensive it beginning with
slide called very very high
number and though this districts
that they really don't have that
kind of money.
And they're saying why do we
have to have this.
So that was a person yes that is
correct and and madam chair and
senator have you discussed this
with the other two districts are
they.
Looking to extend their sort of
take that to since that off of
there
Madam chair and senator Byrd
Mr coupler has pretty much done
work with all three of them and
the yes they have and then close
so this does not limit twenty
one other in the state you know
it they have all the sanitation
district may have commercial
businesses you know they would
fall under the same statute so
it's so it's open to others and
state.
Okay and madam chairman Senator
it just seems like you know what
we're always very interested in.
Individual counties or
municipalities or or maybe in
this particular instance the
district having control over
what they need to do they're the
ones who imposed the tax.
And and yet now they want to at
the want to keep that because
they've seen the benefits of
that I assume that they're
taxing the the local districts
so that the funds are not coming
out of the state coffers for
these issues is that a fair
statement to.
Senator of that is a very fair
state Senator okay all right
well I I I just it just seems
like it you know we always talk
about local control these folks
have local control and yet
they're there and had to get
that local control back every
six years for the state so thank
you very much the center for
bring this forward and thank you
madam chair thank you senator
Byrd thank you senator Senator
responding I it seems pretty
clear here that the revenue must
be dedicated only for the
operation of the district and
that anything is very inhibiting
that the every six years they
would have to go back to conduct
election they don't collect much
money from this and then having
to encourage Spence's during an
election cycle every six years
you have a bit actually have to
prepare about every five years
election would come the year
after so anyway do we have a
motion can I entertain a motion
please for the past.
So movie chair the motion on the
floor for the past to get a
second.
So madam chair okay this is
second but motion by Senator
Campos
and pack can you call the roll
please.
Yes madam chair senator Byrd.
Well yes Senator Burt yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond DS
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill is
excuse Senator share yes.
Senator sure yes.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods also Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator manual says also
excuse.
So that is six yes one no and
for excuse.
Thank you very much there's not
as you know if you happen to be
on thank you to your witnesses.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members.
We're gonna move on to the next
item we're going to go to the
Senate bill two ninety nine and
that is mobility limitation
license plate but senator Morris
is not here however I hear that
Senator Diamond is going to do
this.
For him Senator is is that
correct.
Senator Diamond.
Right here is just faulty here.
Senator Diamond are you here
Senator Wirth.
I was told the center done we'll
be doing this one so.
Not now I can hear you great
yeah right.
All right you have Senate bill
two ninety nine a year you're
going to be putting this that
percent or more yes ma'am madam
chair.
Explanation earlier today really
qualifies me as an expert
license plate area so I'm quite
confident ring this for it but
it looks to nineteen hi it's
actually a pretty straight
forward bills
what this is explaining it here
is that mobility impaired
license plates I have had to
choose between either that
mobility impaired I caught or
implement a plate or a special
plates so all this is allowing
is at the special plates that we
referred to earlier including
the make a wish chair for the
miners plate that's also on
today's agenda would also be
able to have a designation on
their that would indicate
mobility limitations there's a
gentleman on so it's really not
that simple is just instead of
work they're allowing an and
here to tell a lot of that to
have to be added to any of the
special plate so with that I
will try my best to stand for
questions if there are any.
Thank you and they that are
there any any people to the
public that may want to state
their support or opposition to
this bill you madam chair
members of the committee that is
not a that opposition or support
this bill.
Thank you Nathan all right
members of the committee.
I don't see any hands up are
there any comments any questions
we would do is hello okay thank
you to senator I have to do
passes that are certified as you
pass then Senator Campos
Senator Wirth you madam chair
thank you we can both do it to
us.
And half the okay the
representative was on the second
by Senator Campos percent bill
to ninety nine past can you call
the roll.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt.
It is time to get off so easy
all right yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
the job Senator.
Senator Campos what's yes
Senator Campos yes just a moment
the.
I'm sorry yes senator
Candelaria.
The lady votes no Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill is excuse.
Senator share.
Yet.
Sure sure yes Senator Steinborn
also excuse Senator Woods.
Is excuse.
Senator Rodriguez yeah.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz also you there yes
I'm here yes senator Munoz what
yes so we have seven yes one no
and three excuse.
Yes.
Thank you madam chairman I will
share this senator Morris thank
you all.
For putting that out
on us do you want to do one of
your bills yes let's just do the
license plate real person.
So Senate bill three seventy
nine New Mexico miners license
plate one off thank you madam
chair I think we've had our the
license plate bills this is just
another license plate bill for
the minors ten dollars goes to
the agency for the cost in ten
dollars reverts to the minors
hospital and rest home.
We've had many discussions about
license plate that she
initially.
They go on next year so we can
have stickers and everybody can
change so with that I'll stand
for questions thank you senator
Munoz Nathan do we have any one
to the public.
Yes.
Is there anyone at this time
manager one second I'm just
going through my notes here
we received one request for
support from and to go go mess
with that New Mexico state and
can.
Representative began on.
you madam chair members of
committee I'm sure speak on
Senate bill three fifteen.
Okay so so not for this month so
is there anyone else nation.
And it now and then sent madam
my apologies there's nobody at
this bill okay thank you very
much members of the committee I
don't see any hands up were
anyone indicating any questions
or concerns so can we have a
motion sure I move it to pass on
Senate bill three seventy nine.
Motion reported a second.
That.
How will you call the roll.
Yes madam chair Senator burst I
yes yes revert yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzalez.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales yes I have
Senator Hemphill excused Senator
share.
So.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn is also excuse Senator
Woods is excused Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes Senator then
yes yes five six yes to no and
three excuse.
Thank you very much you have in
the past
do you want to do here Senate
bill three fifteen Senator one
also yes ma'am Hey because we're
still waiting on the other one
Senate bill eleven three fifteen
public safety officer retirement
center what else thank you madam
chair we do have an amendment
for Senate bill three fifteen
and what it does it strips the
appropriation because the the
money is in house bill two.
Yeah movie then pass.
Well thank you.
Great.
Thank you at the amendment
scripts appropriation because
the Appropration is currently in
house bill two thank you for our
there are no opposition to the
amendment you can not proceed
with amended bill Senator so
back on the bill.
Thank you madam chair when we
may be transfer a couple years
ago of of from the from the
state police from the motor
trans to the state police remain
that that transfer of those
employees to the agency what we
lacked was warmest was the
pensions and retirement.
To transfer with them in order
to do that and make sure that we
are costs usually correct we met
we put the dollar amount in
house bill two and so now our
clean up the problems that we
created when we get that
transfer so those employees are
treated equal with state police
I do have my expert witness from
the the DPS looking for him you
just jump in right now and it
is.
For rural.
Find Mr Secretary with just you
know that expert witness some.
Mr chairman of the committee
chief Keef's Fortin is on this
call let him do most of the
talking there is a fund in great
shape.
Mr chair members of the
committee of thank you for
hearing us today and I'd just
like to Senator explained in two
thousand fifteen R. S. I. D. E.
R. S. I. U. and and into the
offices were merged as
commission New Mexico state
police officers in two thousand
fifteen that will Senate bill
ninety five during the emergency
become commission state police
officers but they were separate
target fast forward to two
thousand twenty there was a
parents all see bill that went
through I believe will Senate
bill seventy two and then that
bill on they were definitions
that were listed in the rules
agencies that were added in that
that didn't include our former
into D. S. I. U. officers that
had been state police officers
on with the since since two
thousand fifteen which pose an
issue for their retirement and
their retirement with then go to
a civilian retirement and they
wouldn't be able to claim or a
retired capacity of a law
enforcement officer or as a New
Mexico state police officer was
poses an issue as they move
forward looking towards the
their last year's it and and and
retirement they they would be a
lesser rate currently about
ninety four employees that have
been affected by it we
understand there is a cost that
is associated with it and with
that cost what we've done
throughout the years we met with
DFA the LFC and terra to ensure
that the costs that were
associated that you see within
the bill that's been moved over
to house bill two all was
properly reflected that we these
officers in these agents that
were previous into the N. S. are
you could be funded
retroactively from two thousand
fifteen to the current date and
is only the right thing to do
GPS realize is the right thing
to do for these officers they
were the same uniform I do the
perform the same jobs it that I
do every day and it's only right
as a department as we move
forward these officers are
recognized as Mexico City police
officers and the definition of
that bill so one of the also
note that even with that we did
present this to the Parramore
and the parable or supported
this bill tend to one in support
of these offices being moved
over from two thousand fifteen
to.
Two thousand twenty which was
huge for us and all that they
they were supported that
last as was stated this
rectified the issues that we see
for state police and and these
ninety four officers that have
been affected and allow them to
retire in the right manner when
when that day does come so I
appreciate the time and if you
have any questions I stand for
that.
Thank you Judy Fortin preaching
warm here and claim to us.
Okay that madam chair I think
will stand for questions so I
think there is anyone on the
list I don't your question I
think I think they're right to
be on here P. E. R. right great
you have your hand up yes I
madam chair members of a great
Trujillo with P. R. A. the board
does support this legislation
with the appropriation and I'm
available if you have any
questions as well.
Thank you Greg you're you're
good to see all right now we
have two more hands in New
Mexico we are in New York.
For for for the Asian.
Let your friend gently let
anything go to the audience for
public comment.
Yes thank you.
Can you go back if we have
anyone yes I believe those are
the individuals raising their
hand madam chair members the
committee we receive
notification of opposition for
the bill in support we have Nico
Gomez with the New Mexico state
police association okay there we
go yes and I think you had
elevated them to this list
that's why they came up that was
for public participation so
thank you very much all right so
you guys gonna scan you
Come up please I think a little
earlier you were they brought
you up on a different bill get.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
Miguel Gomes I'm representing
the New Mexico state police
association of the men and women
from mind women women of the
state police as the chairman and
the chief stated this bill
corrects an oversight or
inadvertent error to bring up
these officers from the motor
transportation division and
special education division into
Karia understate please
as the the chairman indicated
it's just relatively small
corporation that's been included
House Bill to and and this bill
actually does some good to
correct us solvency with with
regard to parents it moves these
limited number of officers from
the state general division to
the state police division the
state general division as one of
the the least funded a
division's where's the state
police division is over funded
and so this is a a a plus plus
and in many ways we are we think
chairman when US for sponsorship
of this and we urge your your
considerations this measure
thank you madam chair thank you
again thanks for your
presentation and your support of
this all right we're gonna go to
there was another hand here but
made it disappear so can I think
your hand additional lot but
that'll go down then it and we
have a Michael Francis Michael
can not I received other at U.
K. public Department does that
at you that there's another
member of that New Mexico state
read at the Senate Mr Michael
Francis would also like to be
okay thank you and I did see
that you elevated him to the
participant with some Michael
are you there you madam chairman
thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak of I am a retired deputy
chief from the state police are
worked twenty eight years for
the state of New Mexico I'm also
a board member of the New Mexico
state police association
as as stated by the previous
speaker Senate bill three
fifteen is a solution to a
problem that was created a
little over five years ago when
the members of SEIU and MTV were
transitioned over to the state
police
they were promised at that time
they would be put under the
state police retirement up
through.
A problem that was they were
inadvertently left out of the
bill that brought them over and
so currently there are they
would retire as
State General Fund retirees
which is not a law enforcement
retirement of they need to get
what they were promised these
officers were the black and gray
uniforms the state police they
do the same job as any other New
Mexico state police officer if
it's the same same dangers Daly
they bleed just like any other
state police officer and they
deserve the same retirement as
any other New Mexico state
police officer for the time that
they serve the state police
officers and I ask you to please
pass this bill.
Thank you Michael you're
absolutely correct
in order thank you so much all
right anyone else in New Mexico
a state grace Association their
hands go out and I don't know
that was just applying to
medical restrictions someone
else.
Okay it's still up again
Nathan was there someone else.
Yes we madam chair was taken a
school thank you thank you.
Hello yes ma'am of thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is a second I
screen and the president of the
New Mexico state police
association and I know you've
heard from a couple of us
already mad but I am one of the
ones that is personally affected
by this bill I did merge with
just the former as I do now is
say you back in twenty fifteen
and all we're asking is just to
be made whole I want to you know
be able to retire like my
brothers and sisters in the
black and gray and like of
Miguel said and and the deputy
chief of my friends is that we
believe just like everybody else
and of course we we lost one of
our own last month which is also
he's also a merger a person so
all we're asking for is for do
passed to make make a whole and
so we can be part of that
completely part of our family
thank you madam thank you thank
you very much your last call
okay anyone else the
association.
And is still up.
We operate on okay thank you
very much I don't see any other
hands make them but it there we
go out now okay thank you
nationwide yes we're done with
the public comment right.
Madam chair members of the
committee yes I believe we are
done okay thank you committee
members I don't see any hands up
from the committee so I'm okay
that and what are the wishes of
the committee.
Can I have a motion please.
Your move with us on Senate bill
three fifty thank you.
Hello second amendment chair
this to starboard thank you
senators okay there's a motion
Bridget ended as amended by
Senator Campos and seconded by
Senator Steinborn.
We have the mandate thank you we
are calling.
At.
Which.
Your.
Madam chair of Senator Burt yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
vote yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill is here
okay yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods is still excuse Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes Senator then
yes yes I have ten yes and one
excuse thank you thank you
senator Munoz you have a do pass
and your bill thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
my expert witnesses.
We will bring you some donuts
tomorrow chief or.
That'll work I like all kinds.
Thanks to.
Thank you.
See we're gonna go to Senate
bill eleven next.
And so we.
There is no Senate Bill as a
minute and we do have a
committee substitute.
Senator Stewart are you with
this I think I seen you with us
yes I am Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman
I'm very excited about this
reality about clean fuel
standard for New Mexico it's a
smart approach it really
positively impacts our economy
public health and our
environment we're estimating
forty six point three million
annually in economic investments
by enacting this bill meet by
nearly announcing the bill are
agencies are already hearing
from new businesses wanting to
come to New Mexico and others
that want to expand so we're
estimating six point eight
million tons in reduction of
carbon emissions from the
transportation sector our second
largest emitter of greenhouse
gases it's very simple of clean
fuel standard requires a
reduction in carbon intensity of
transportation fuels we have a
target a twenty percent
reduction from twenty eighteen
by twenty thirty twenty eight
percent reduction by twenty
forty so this applies to
businesses that refined blend to
make or import transportation
fuel does not apply to fuel
retailers like gas stations I'm
joined today by secretary he's
from the economic development
department secretary Kenny from
the environment department also
joined by secretary would be of
the New Mexico department of the
act as secretary Propst of
energy and minerals and Amy
brown chief operating officers
of the lactate consulting all of
whom can talk more about this
bill we brought you a committee
substitute Mr chairman because
of the amendments we made in
other committees and also
because secretary Kenny has
continued to work with people to
make this bill better and the
amendment that you're bringing
today Mr chairman we believe
will also make it better and it
will just become part of this.
Substitute and with that I am
finished and if you could call
on a couple of those secretaries
that would be great Senator let
me let me get the substitute
bill for discussion purposes on
the table so can I have that
motion.
Chairman I do not have on Senate
bill eleven A. and you ask for
discussion purposes on the
strategy percent well let me.
Thank the second okay.
He
that Senator just so.
Okay.
Thank you.
Any traction to the substitute
bill.
Center we are on the subject
well.
Secretary keys are whoever's
next go right ahead.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee so as the
eleven is a bill that will
create jobs it will maintain New
Mexico as a clean and healthy
place to live and work and it's
also going to create a tool for
investments in innovative
technologies and that's really
what I think is the most
important thing with regards to
economic development this bill
will help New Mexico be at the
forefront of innovation and it
will stimulate people to start
thinking differently it was for
research and development at our
universities our economists have
study California and found that
the state's clean fuel market
grew by fifty percent between
two thousand and eleven and two
thousand and sixteen we believe
that there is huge potential and
the hydrogen vehicle market and
industry expected to reach forty
two billion by twenty twenty six
their major companies like
Hyundai Audi BMW Volvo they are
all leaning towards this
technology and we would like to
attract one of them to New
Mexico in fact in New Mexico
company called bio tech who is
here to testify on behalf of
this bill is already working on
technology today with smaller
more efficient on site hydrogen
production and they just
announced at the beginning of
the year that they raised a
hundred and fifty seven million
dollars in investments that's
incredible for New Mexico
company in addition this bill
sets up the opportunity.
She.
On when you were to renewable
natural gas projects we have the
workforce we have the technical
assistance the partnership with
the lapse so what the clean fuel
standard mate that title may
raise concern for those
historically reliance on coal
mining and uses of coal and gas
and oil we think this is
actually really provide hope
well the clean fuel standards
set standards it also allows for
traditional carbon industry to
generate and use credits
allowing them to maintain levels
of operation while still
contributing to the overall
economy and job creation in
their regions so we believe that
you clean fuel standard provided
long term market signal that
will stimulate investment in
manufacturing production
infrastructure distribution of
cleaner fuels in New Mexico so
thank you I'm going to pass it
to secretary Kenny next.
Good afternoon chairman millions
and the members of the committee
my name is Jim Kenney on the
cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico Environment Department
incredibly proud to be here
before you today on this bill
with my colleagues and with
Senator Stewart presenting it
as secretary he said this this
bill is a lot of it has to do a
lot of not creating jobs and
spurring the economy but it also
has to do with reaching our
climate goals of reducing our
carbon footprint.
In an innovative way.
In New Mexico it's the first
time we would be presenting a
market based mechanism.
Really in New Mexico to solve
the climate goals from the
transportation sector which is
our second largest emitter of
greenhouse gases in the state
so
With that Mr chairman and in the
interest of time I'm going to
just close with saying that as
secretary Keyes indicated a
number of companies have reached
out to us because of this bill
to invest further and expand
their operations here and reduce
their greenhouse gas emissions
so I think this bill does a lot
not only for our environment
which is why I am here but also
for our economy which is also
line here.
Thank you.
Mr chair I know that secretary
when he is in the waiting room
if you estimating could admit
him.
Thank you is in the meeting.
I mean can you hear me and see
me okay.
Good Mr chairman members of the
committee deputy director
department of agriculture dozens
we've had the discussions on
this bill we talked to some
experts and in the chemical
engineering department at New
Mexico state and some other
folks it with New Mexico's
largest dairy sector in our
lexicon industries in just as a
couple of examples we produce a
lot of biomass can certainly be
turned into clean fuel there's a
lot of exciting discussions
going on and for that and so
with that I'll stop but we're
here to support the bill thank
you.
Senator that that's it pure
expert witnesses.
Thank you making you want to go
to the audience for public
comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee
And I'll remind Abbas opposition
and support you have ten minutes
each as a group to be speaking
we'll start with the opposition.
For opposition we have Jim
Winchester.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee and
a bill Sanchez and cabinet
secretaries the independent
petroleum association
respectfully stand opposed to SB
eleven for several reasons our
members to see this Act not as a
direct tax but the tax that will
eventually be passed on to
consumers who do use automobiles
and hitting them hard at the
pump
there also be costs associated
with fuel conversion and that
will affect the entire supply
chain and those costs will be
passed on to other oil and gas
sectors in other industries and
we wholeheartedly agree that
reduced emissions is a sure goal
by all parties in the oil and
gas industry has led the way by
significantly decreasing
emissions while increasing
production the past few years so
we do stand in opposition of
this bill that being said I PNM
would like to commend the idea
to reduce tax credits into this
legislation and we think the
environment secretary in
particular for reaching out to
us again we stand respectfully
opposed.
Next we have Dan Boren.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is don Foreign on with the
American fuel and petrochemical
manufacturers thank you for the
opportunity to comment on SB
eleven the clean fuel standard
as you'll hear from some of the
other speakers later the
California experienced on a
clean fuel standard has shown
that the program has an
undeniable impact on the cost of
fuel in the state in New
Mexico's program which is much
more grass which is much more
aggressive and calls for a much
quicker reduction targets we'll
see prices rise even faster.
It's also an expensive way to
cut carbon the new water
California's invented by middle
policies including its all CFS
program founded GHG reductions
have been overstated and double
counted across programs in terms
of broader emissions reductions
LCS fast can be credited with at
most one percent reduction in
California statewide not
sufficient and less than two
percent reduction in particulate
emissions to the key factors in
in smog and pollution.
All of this information is
publicly available in audit
submitted to the legislature as
required by California's LCS
this program.
One flaw we see in SB eleven is
that this bill provides for no
such provided over.
to the committee to take the
time to further study this
proposal its impact on the fuel
markets and the true cost to
consumers thank you.
Next we have John block.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block united New Mexican
and I oppose Senate bill eleven
the standards this bill calls
for as enacted in states like
California and Oregon maybe the
average price of gasoline
skyrocket for the average
consumer anywhere from twelve to
thirty cents per gallon today
the price of gas in California
is a hundred thirty five percent
greater than the national
average and in Oregon it's a
hundred nineteen percent greater
than the national average
according to triple lay the
large cost increases
disproportionately affect poor
and middle class New Mexicans
were thirty cents extra for a
gallon of gas makes a big
difference New Mexico currently
said that the national average
for gasoline prices tied with
states like New York and
Pennsylvania with this bill gas
prices will skyrocket meaning
more working families will be
plunged further into poverty I
respectfully urge the committee
to vote no on Senate bill Levin
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Next we have the right white.
Good afternoon madam chair and
Senate finance committee my name
is Kathy realized board and
president and CEO of the western
states petroleum association we
represent oil and gas companies
in Arizona California Nevada
Oregon and Washington we
appreciate this opportunity to
provide comments regarding
Senate bill eleven and the
impact that it could have on
gasoline and diesel fuel
throughout New Mexico I'd like
to be clear because we really do
recognize that climate change is
a serious concern and our
members invest hundreds of
millions of dollars a year on
alternative and renewable fuels
and new energy sources but we
also believe that a successful
response to climate change
really requires broad based
market solutions not a costly
and ineffective feel mandate
that could harm our Madam Kanemi
and produce uncertain costly and
likely insignificant results we
urge you to vote no on SB eleven
for the following reasons a low
carbon fuel standard could be a
very costly and regressive
approach to carbon reduction
while it's designed to have
minimal cost impact during the
first few years as the mandate
becomes more stringent costs are
likely to increase dramatically
California's experience
demonstrates that a low carbon
fuel standard would add
substantial cost of gasoline and
diesel fuels and while organs
LCS S. is still in early stages
credit prices are rising at a
faster rate than California's
credit prices and so this will
significantly add to organs feel
costs over time it's on track to
duplicate or even exceed
California field cost impacts in
California the low carbon fuel
standard is adding twenty four
cents per gallon to the cost of
gasoline and diesel projected to
increase up to forty six cents
per gallon by twenty thirty.
As carbon intensity reductions
increase over time which means
you're really increasing the
difficulty of compliance credit
prices soared and reached close
to two hundred ten dollars per
metric ton in August of twenty
twenty so this low carbon fuel
standard would likely increase
fuel costs without providing the
funding for badly needed
transportation improvements and
repairs it really is a costly
and aggressive regressive
approach to carbon reduction
policy and I just want to note
that the California legislative
analyst's office most or all of
the cop compliance costs of
purchasing practices and
allowances likely pass on to
feel consumers in the form of
higher retail prices and would
especially hurt low income
families and businesses during
the worst possible time so any
proposal that increases fuel
costs is especially unfair to
working families to pay a
greater percentage of their
income for fuel essential
services and goods they also
found the LA also found that the
California low carbon fuel
standard is ten times more
costly than on alternative
carbon reduction policies and
that cost has real impacts on
consumers and local businesses
so we offer our expertise to the
committee and the members
because our extensive experience
in California and Oregon we urge
you to vote no on SB eleven we
don't have to guess the impacts
we appreciate the opportunity to
present our perspective.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee that includes
opposition.
We'll turn to support first we
had Camilla people then with the
Sierra Club.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Camilla I will
then standing today in qualified
support on behalf of the Sierra
Club natural resources defense
council W. R. A. and sweet clean
fuels programs can be a net
positive for the Climent and our
organizations have recommended a
list of amendments including
increasing the ambition to be
consistent with other states
require clear carbon accounting
for New Mexico biofuel
feedstocks insuring funds that
go through utilities benefit
customers address additionality
so there's no double counting of
emissions that are counted
elsewhere and exclude fossil
fuel based hydrogen but most
importantly for this committee
and then we do needs to be fully
funded to implement this program
and truly protect our climate
Communities air and water we
can't have an agency in the
situation where it has to choose
what communities that protect
and we know that Senate finance
has that ability we thank you
for your time and attention and
also to the sponsor HSD for
bringing for with the proposal
thank you.
Next we have the card opens us.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee Ricardo
Gonzales with del Paso electric
we just recently provided to the
PRC a transportation
electrification plan.
And in working with groups like
our customer Misia valley
transit we believe that that the
electrification of
transportation is not only going
to lead to
less carbon being emitted into
the air but also opportunities
for for our community having I.
ten and I. twenty five running
through Dona Ana County so for
those reasons out of Paso
electric's stands in favor of
this bill thank you.
Next we have do on our to
lessen.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is Dana
Archuleta I'm the state
government relations manager for
XTO energy Exxon Mobil I stand
today date in support of the
policy directions pour SB eleven
for the following reasons we
agree with the overall
objectives and approach of SB
eleven we feel the position of
the agency to approach the
detail of the this work through
the rulemaking will be positive
and we look forward to working
collaboratively to look to
deliver those objectives to the
great state of New Mexico in
addition we are happy to see
that the agency is can't claim
keenly aware of the need to
mitigate price volatility I
billeting in an annual pro in an
annual program review process to
provide the flexibility needed
to avoid them for those reasons
we are supportive of SB eleven I
look forward to further
engagement during the rule
making process thank you Mr
chairman and committee members.
Next we have not whether it's.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee can
that everyone hear me yes we can
excellent any misstep hundred I
work for a company called
renewable energy group we're
north America's largest
manufacturer of biodiesel we
have a a partially constructed
facility in Clovis New Mexico
it's all done in just a second I
want to touch on two points real
quick because the number was
pressed for time and everyone's
fired up the first is I feel a
little bit like
Blind man in a room looking an
elephant we're we're all looking
at the same elephant the people
are describing different parts
and by that I mean if you look
today at the retail price of
gasoline for the retail price of
diesel in the state of
California it's cheaper than
when California passed AB thirty
two which was their climate
solution legislation it's
cheaper than when the low carbon
fuel standard was implemented in
two thousand ten two thousand
left I just want that to sit for
a moment it is cheaper today.
The other point that I want to
touch on is a.
With that the secretary can in
some of the other secretaries of
maybe this does have the real
potential to be a a jobs bill
with respect to kickstarting the
green economy and I speak from
experience R. E. G. operates
twelve plants across the globe
ten in North America the United
States we've invested in the
last ten years to over two
hundred million dollars into our
network of them I will be the
first to impact personally admit
that very little of that has
gone in New Mexico we've put our
investments in states that have.
Quite frankly leading or cutting
edge policy with respect to
either climate change or
biofuels states like Iowa states
like Illinois states like
Minnesota and we've been looking
at investing today in state like
Washington state which is on the
verge of also passing a.
A clean fuel a piece of
legislation this sort of
legislation will set that the
signal to invest in the state of
New Mexico New Mexico is is very
rich in feedstocks whether it's
the cattle industry in the
eastern part of the state or the
potential to grow future
feedstocks on the road like
allergy this is a smart Bill the
economy is diversifying away
from energy New Mexico can
either watch it happened will be
in the back garden help shift to
make sure that some of that
investment is actually done in
state with that I just want to
reiterate our strong strong
support press the left thank
you.
Next we haven't even seen.
You can yes thank you Senator
actually I'm a tax lawyer New
Mexico and I've been dealing.
In the transferable tax credit
income tax for the marketplace
in New Mexico for about fifteen
years.
And so my comments basically are
two point one this is not an
esoteric
you market based system it
actually does exist in New
Mexico actually does inspire
tremendous programs that.
Don't cost much money but for
example like this is the
inability tax credit.
Five million dollar location any
we've missed in New Mexico
thanks Albuquerque the greenest
building city in the country or
it's always been mission already
been mentioned about the bio gas
are opportunities.
And you know I'm working right
now with several entities in
Roswell in Clovis in that regard
hundreds of millions of dollars
into the state focused on this
kind of the Energy creation so
my point is it already does
exist and it works and thank you
very much for the opportunity
Next we have Terry Cole.
Mr chairman members of the.
All right
well regular Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we are we want to
see our what is port of the
State.
from what for our.
Expectation for.
Right very courteous
technological advancement across
the private sector.
Your actions markets are
reasonable.
We are the only implementation
run right about two years.
Approach to improving your
quality is reasonable balance
of.
In approach and we appreciate.
Our transportation fuels will go
along way toward reducing
greenhouse gas emissions our
state we are very happy today
yeah stand in support of this
legislation.
Program.
Thank you.
Next we have Stewart
Representative backpack.
Thanks I'm Stewart Stewart chief
commercial officer for biotech
appreciate the opportunity
speaking in support of Senate
bill eleven
now Mr Albuquerque company at
the center of the transition to
low carbon energy into New
Mexico success story we just
raised a hundred fifty seven
million dollars in January as
pointed out by securities driver
growth in the hydrogen segment
of the clean fuel economy we
make a breakthrough technology
came out of Sandia national labs
for on site local generation of
hydrogen from natural gas or
biomethane on site low carbon
fuel procore propulsion of zero
emission fuel cell electric
vehicles and power generation on
site hydrogen from New Mexico's
natural gas is a low carbon fuel
hydrogen from biogas sources
like New Mexico's berries and
waste water treatment plants and
renewable natural gas are the
only transportation fuels that
can actually carbon negative.
In contrast earlier commenters
in opposition I know that on
site hydrogen from New Mexico's
natural gas can be made at cost
parity with gasoline and diesel
today not a decade from now
today using equipment like they
tax and further that fuel input
into fuel cell electric vehicles
is a forty percent improvement
on carbon intensity of today's
diesel and gasoline internal
combustion engines.
Strongly supports New Mexico
clean fuel standard and a life
cycle approach department can't
accounting that standard will
bring enormous environmental
benefits as well as a be a boon
to the economic development
investment in the state.
Our customers in California
based on the LCS program there
are looking at hybrid
infrastructure investments this
year and next year in the order
of fifty to a hundred million
dollars over the next twenty
four months bail take ourselves
are looking to plan to invest
close to thirty million dollars
in California this year alone
around a hundred million dollars
over the next three years do the
LCS.
We'd love to make the
investments here in our home
state if the standard their
support of that investment.
Finally with respect to local
jobs biotech is highly
interested in expanding rapidly
on the basis the investments we
received this year we're looking
to expand by more than double
pervasive forty today to over a
hundred next year the need for
engineers scientists politicians
welders pipe fitters technicians
and draft people.
Elsewhere in the state our
manufacturing partner Pasco
located in our department and
anticipates adding anywhere from
a hundred to five hundred jobs
to manufacture clean hydrogen
generators.
Finally the chair we have
reached and then expect public
comment on this bill.
Senator Stewart are you there.
Yes I am Mr chairman you want to
continue so public comment I
think we're gonna have the same
things over and over again.
It's totally up to you Mr
chairman.
How many more do we have it is
we got to go to the floor six
and want to make sure that.
I believe that that that that
would be it.
Okay no there there are no other
members signed up by the and and
it's part of bills.
Thank you Senator Stewart you
have a copy of of.
In secretary can you have a copy
of my men.
Am I believe it was emailed to
me Mr chairman.
Six oh four point one.
So Mister chairman I don't.
There you have a copy of the
minute right.
Mr Chairman I don't see a copy
in my in box.
So the screen can you look on
the screen yeah I see on the
screen Mr chairman and senator.
Give me one second to but read
it through.
So.
Senator sure.
Senator share.
Yes so well.
About our twenty four hour rule
So I I know there's a substitute
up there that I'm not sure that
I'm no which one that is in
certainly this ammendment.
Don't fall within the twenty
four hour.
May I suggest we hear this
tomorrow.
You know center sure we.
We've kind of moved off that you
see this move off that that role
because the problem is we would
get hung up way too with way too
many substitutes a lot of bills
and then substitute.
This ammendment we were on today
we've done other attendance to
strip funds and so on so
We're just going to continue
with this piece legislation
we're already adopted the
substitute bill and now we're
we're looking at the amendment
so have a motion to
For discussion purposes.
Mr Chairman
I move that would double for
discussion more purposes.
Second.
Thank you Sir have a motion and
second by.
That was done Mr Mr chair this
is sure again I don't recall
vote on the substitute and I've
been here.
So you said it was adopted but I
don't.
To adopt it.
We've been when I get it we
didn't see any objection to the
substitute we are.
Was it was done at the beginning
of the debate Mr chairman and
**** Senator I don't know if you
are in the meeting maybe you
are.
For last hour for hours.
Yes we do.
Book of Bill without a vote now
we're going to take an
amendment.
We don't have twenty four hours
even look at this.
This is a major one when we just
strip off of financing that's a
that's a pretty simple
amendment.
This one is this one it's got
teeth that need then substance
in our view reporter reviewed a
little bit Mister chair I know
where you go in here but.
But I don't think that this one
was right it's not right at all.
This is substantial this is
substantial to major industry
both for against.
And I think we are we all the
public.
A little bit of time to read
this as well as the the
Senators.
You're reading the substitute
bill when you warning Committee.
We're going with this Mr
chairman I just wanted noted
that I don't think that we
follow the rules.
Yes of that is an issue for me
thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman.
Yes your Senator Stewart so US
secretary Kenny tells me that
this is not the amendment that
he was sent.
Are you there.
Yes Mr chairman.
Janet was it was just amendment
that was sent to secretary Kenny
the last time before we went to
the final draft.
It is my understanding that this
was the amendment sent to him
and he did comment on that to us
that.
Back from.
Changes.
Secretary can you have any
comment on that
thank you so this is the
language that was provided to me
you are correct and then we send
back some comments after
consulting with our attorney and
send those over around.
We're just after four o'clock
today.
And so Janet would be the
comments that were sent to the
drafter.
Mr Chairman this is the original
amendment sent down by the
drafter.
It does not have.
the comments that well the
secretary sent down.
because we had not gotten signed
off on that from.
Other people.
Well let's roll over the
amendment legislative committee
members Senator share Senate
rule nine six dash one.
Early states that the last two
weeks of the session.
Senator the twenty four hour
rule doesn't apply so on that's
just for your information and
get it Senator nine dash six
that one
pulled amendment down go to
questions from committee
members.
Mr Chairman.
Trying to get hello this is your
Woods centers I'm in your hands
right center was if you want to
make can Santo Domingo first
sure hands raised and then we'll
go back Senator Woods diretor
and Senator with.
Senator Diamond.
So.
Senator Diamond Senator Woods
which everyone wants to go first
to me send I mean you put your
hand down Sir would you put your
hand up there was very there.
I'm here.
What happened to a motion to
adopt that amendment.
Senator we we don't know if we
have the right amendment.
So.
We pulled amendment down until
we make sure we have the right
amendment this is not the
amendment that the secretary and
I discussed we had some
languages been working out all
day so we want to make sure that
we have the right amendment so
we have an agreement
The parties and so the amendment
came down and so we're back on
the bill because I want to make
sure I have the right amendment.
Sir would you have questions on
the bill I do.
Go ahead and proceed Senator
Woods okay.
Okay.
Okay one.
We declare a definition that the
board is the environmental
improvement for.
Well
Three about three the clean air
standards act show.
Find
rules.
And no later than twenty four
months after the rules.
Of the Rochelle establish a
clean fuel standard.
And.
Sure scheduled for annual.
Decreasing the field intensity
transportation fuels used in New
Mexico.
Is that the funds from where the
these increasing the clean
carbon intensity transportation
field.
We're here that I can figure
that out.
Chairman Senator Woods carbon
intensity is defined in the top
of the page to clean fuel
standard is defined at the top
of the page to.
Credit deficit etcetera all the
provide a starting on page two.
Okay.
Your the next.
Your right Mexico equivalents
per metric tool.
Sh your Mr chairman that's a new
word for me to so if you were on
an explanation we might have to
go to secretary keys or canning
okay with this program next
year.
Mr chairman and senator woods
secretary getting here the the
it's it's per unit of energy
megajoules just the dimension by
which we automatic measure
energy here.
I we can get more engineering.
Our language involved but that's
that's the unit about energy
that we're talking about.
Your is a heat management right.
Mr Chairman.
The secretary.
Mr chairman and senator woods we
can measure energy in joules
it's coming back to New Delhi in
physics but we can do that.
Okay well this go on.
Okay.
Number one there on page four.
Establish the clean fuel
standard based on.
Our schedule and Lee decreasing
the carbon deal with Kent state
transportation fuels used in New
Mexico.
So tell me care more about that
we're going to.
Have a clean fuel standard base.
On a schedule what kind of you
know back here somewhere in this
or maybe I haven't got to it
forward quite yet we talk about
a
Hey we.
Regional development of state
tax development but is bigger
than a state it's it's our.
What what do you expect the
decreasing intensity might be
have you got a.
That number that you're thanking
about their when you start
talking about decreasing
annually decreasing that one do
I have a twenty what what is
your idea on that.
Well Mister chairman Senator
Woods are all for all of
reduction goal is
Twenty percent
read it myself here.
Ten percent reduction in the and
infants and the fuels as
measured by twenty eighteen
standards ten percent less than
twenty eighteen by twenty thirty
and twenty eight percent.
By twenty forty.
The measurements annually that
will be developed through
rulemaking by the department
after the clean fuel standards
are developed by the
environmental improvement for
we're gonna take our time on
this this doesn't go into effect
for two years we're going to use
experts that we have all over
the country that want to move to
a less intensity of carbon in
our fuels so we're gonna have a
lot of help setting the
standards so they'll be New
Mexico standards and be
developed with New Mexico
experts.
Where did you come up with the
twenty eighteen levels madam
chairman our.
Madam protip.
Percent by twenty forty.
We are used to twenty percent
below twenty eighteen but for
for right right these are
standards that are in line with
how it's been working in other
states but they're designed for
what we think will be New Mexico
standards and if I'm not
answering this adequately I can
ask the secretary to jump in
here.
What I'm just wondering why what
it will take at twenty eighteen
is there are certain Mexico
about twenty eighteen Mr
secretary.
Mr Chairman R. Mr chairman and
Senator Woods that twenty
eighteen is the baseline level
by which will be measuring
against and that's a year in
which we have good data so if
you're asking why are we going
earlier or later
those are the those are the
places by which we at twenty
eighteen is where we have good
data.
Okay what I guess it's good that
we didn't use twenty twenty.
What the pandemic and everything
had been really low the and so
which start out I hope.
All right so we're going to all
right down here on page four
number three it says regard the
use of national way our regional
a recognize models are protocols
for determining the field last
last cycle emissions.
So you go on to describe that
last cycle the nation's.
And.
There you go over here.
You establish your own the top
page five member for Hey line
one is that Russia process to
providers to comply with the
clean fuel standard at.
By K. ning and requiring credit
explained that credit deal for
me.
Miss madam.
Protium Mr secretary yes so
Mister chairman this is one of
the most exciting things about
this I'm gonna let the secretary
to explain it.
Mr chairman and Senator Woods so
this is one of the most exciting
parts of the bill it allows for
the generation of credit so
you'll coming either produced in
the state of New Mexico or
coming into the state of New
Mexico we'll have to meet a
certain carbon intensity if it's
above that carbon intensity than
those fuel providers would have
the opportunity to purchase
credits from other parts of the
economy so whether that was
farmers who were using their.
You know Ag ways to generate
credits by reducing their
emissions voluntarily it's opt
in to generate credits so they
could do that bring equity into
their operations and then sell
those credits to fuel producers
that's what spurred twenty one
companies to contact us
subsequent US in Nancy Senate
bill eleven saying they wanted
to increase their footprint or
expand their operations in New
Mexico and I don't know
secretary Keyes has anything to
add Mister chairman Senator
words if that's sufficient.
Yes I'm just very quickly Mr
chair Senator Woods this is a
fiscal to all that we don't have
right now and it is why
companies are excited about this
bill in terms of economic
development because it helps
them pay for the infrastructure
to expand into these cleaner
fuels which everyone is doing
and
you know everyone from Boeing to
car companies to innovative
companies like Phanteks it is
really the future and so for us
this gives us a school to all
without having to defend the
lead at in order to help these
companies with that transition
and I think it'll be really
exciting specifically for the
rural areas because that's where
a lot of the infrastructure
already is these oil and gas
facilities thank you.
So some Madam pro to madam.
So we're going to invite new
companies and how were they
doing to twenty eighteen.
Madam what do you.
Mr president I Mr chairman and
I'm not I'm not sure what your
question it's what we're basing
everything off twenty eighteen.
What goes with that.
So how are these new companies
that are coming in how are they
doing to twenty eighteen.
So Mr chairman and senator a lot
of these companies are fuel
refineries well one of them in
the last committee said that
he's got a building in Clovis
but he's been just waiting for
something like this to start
using so these are companies
that bland refined and make
fuels less carbon intense they
want to come here so it's not
it's not a question of how
they're doing I I will say that
the one company the city had a
building in Clovis and I'll try
to find his name here pretty
soon said he was working in lots
of other states and that he
wanted to expand into New Mexico
to be able to do this few fuel
refinery so these are companies
that are on the cutting edge and
they're going where the market
is there going where people want
this fuels right now there's
companies in Texas they drive
right through New Mexico to
deliver that fuel to California
because California has a clean
fuel standard we want them to
stop in New Mexico give us that
fuel and take part in this
market based economy that we're
trying to set up a with this
process.
Yeah that bunch that's been what
to do that ever since I was and
Senator.
I know that that argument plan
hard yes.
And he told me about this but
for the it was the center.
And they were talking about
doing this in fact is they asked
me to contact Jeff lady.
And and use of leverage to to
make this happen.
Back in the day.
And I thought I didn't need to
do that so I didn't do that.
And let's go down the bill.
We're we're generating credit
including persons involved in
agriculture so I'm assuming.
When you say voluntarily doing
something active culture.
we are.
Capturing carbon.
With their crops is what you're
talking about there.
No tail tech forming
Is I'm assuming that's what
you're talking about there when
we start talking about carbon
sequestration.
And Mr chairman we have the
secretary of agriculture on the
call if you would like to answer
of agriculture questions sure.
Mister chairman Senator Woods no
this bill deals with the
production of fuel so you're
talking about converting the
newer the.
If any of the other biomass
products see like contrails or
or treat tree clippings are tree
cuttings from the pecan orchards
things like that and turn it
using that to
students maybe.
Cell two eight the company that
converts that into bio in into
fuel that would qualify for
these credits.
Not the carbon sequestration
that we've talked about and in
other areas in the past so some.
Mr secretary.
We need extracted of the bill H.
five nine six.
Representative carbon
sequestration.
We don't do that so on the fly.
So.
We're going down a little
further and thank you thank you.
The Jeff I appreciate your
answer
on down the line here.
We're talking about requiring
annual registration of
providers.
Any person generating credit.
Okay the providers assume our
fuel jobbers is that we're
talking about here.
The Matt wait a minute wait Mr
Chairman Madam protea we're
talking about field jobbers feel
providers the guys that that
bring me feel.
Yes is that correct yes.
Okay so they're going to be
asked to make an annual.
The annual registration of
providers and any person
generating credit.
Mr Chairman.
Where there yes.
Okay then it should.
Require the assessment of annual
registrations the.
For providers are any person
generating credits sufficient to
cover the reasonable cost of the
department's administration and
enforcement of the clean fuel
standards and implementation of
rules have we got an idea of
what that will cost.
What provider.
Mr chairman I I will of let
secretary Kenny Ortiz answer
that.
Mr chairman and Senator Woods
the the cost of running the
program is something that we
would thank you your pass on the
cost of providers Mr chairman
and senator was I don't have the
cost that a provider would pay
because we have not set the
current in the schedule your
role making.
See I'm one of those guys by
that you.
So I'm kind of interested in
that part.
But you know we're not supposed
to pass bills that personally
budget.
I guess I could just.
Council services I'm supposed to
vote on a bill that.
That.
I'm not have part we do spend a
the cost is something that's
going to be charged to me
whether that would be ethical or
not I don't I don't know let's
move on let's move on.
All right.
Fees collected percent of this
paragraph
thank you all page I.
These collected pursuant to this
paragraph shall be deposited in
the playing field standard fund.
And the playing field standards
are and will be a fund that we
use to administer this program.
What I understand yes.
Okay.
Do you expect this to.
Cost anything out of the general
fund.
Mr chairman and madam protea.
Mr chairman I am I'm not asking
for any funds are the general
fund we we think this fund will
be enough will we'll have to see
as we move forward after the
rules are promulgated after we
you know know exactly how this
is going to work so there are
some start up costs with the
environment department they've
got some experts that they need
to hire and we have covered some
of that of currently now through
the budgetary process.
So I did sure don't know
alright.
Well it's not it's not we're not
anticipating it that's why we
set up the fund okay.
Okay one eight nine twenty two
eight.
Requires providers to
demonstrate compliance with the
clean fuel standard by balancing
credits and deficit.
On annual basis and submitting a
field pathway applications feel.
Actions and carbon intense date
that.
To.
Thank you for.
Yet oh now and it says.
Establish a fair market for
credits.
Who establish a fair market
through credit.
I'm so Mister Mr chairman and
senator so what you're reading
on eight and nine is current
language by the board duties of
the environmental improvement
for I'm the only thing we're
changing is on page twenty one
and twenty two where we add the
transportation fuels as
providing the clean fuel
standard act as part of their
duties.
It I hear you right madam chair
and senator Matt.
Mr chair.
And and madam propio.
That.
Fair market.
For credit transactions.
This is already in current law
well Mister chairman I'm not
sure where you are can you give
me a page on the home page six.
well I thought you were all the
way up to nine.
No we don't have to wait to get
there yet.
What I'm getting at here is is.
When we start talking about
establishing a fair market.
I'm sure in my eyes way I see
this.
We will go to the regional group
and subgroup low somewhere will
say well let's fair because of
the environmental damage that is
being done and the social
justice that we need to create
your we need this amount for
credit.
Now I'm not too sure that will
be a fair market but have you
got a different idea than that
Mr chairman and madam protea.
So Mr chairman and senator this
is part of this the credit
market that we're trying to
establish I I do not have any I
don't have any ideas right now
about how this is going to work
I'm not quite sure what your
question is perhaps secretary
Kenny Ortiz knows how to answer.
Mr chairman and senator was I
see where you are in the bill
and looking at that the fair
market credit would be the
balancing of the credits and and
deficits that are needed to
maintain a market and equitable
market and then this section is
also saying with the department
needs to do to bring rules
before the for the environmental
improvement board and their
duties of the board that have
guardrails by which we would
have to that that are relevant
to how we adopt rules so there
are things we have to consider
is the same things we consider
for all our rule making that the
port that we bring that before
the board I'm I'm happy to give
you the citation to that go over
those of if that's of interest.
Yeah I think I think you better
send that to me because I.
Well like I say I'm I'm one of
those guys that that by the
fuel.
And I think about the guys that
work for me that happened by the
field.
And I think about the guys that
that work every day that act by
the fuel.
So that's kind of important to
me to figure out.
If I'm going to have to vote on
this to figure out how much I'm
going to raise their fuel price.
But let's go on I know that time
is get late.
All.
Eight six slide ten number ten.
Requires third party
certification.
Is that will that be a.
Authorize state vendor that
third party verification.
Our certification third party
well we let that out did.
Our will that be someone that
my fuel supplier has to go out
and find.
To be his third party certifier.
How's that going to work Mr
Chairman.
And madam protea.
Mr chairman I'll I'll let
secretary can answer that.
Mr chairman and senator woods
just as a point of clarification
of provider and in this statute
is defined as somebody who
refines or you know imports
large quantities of fuel for
distribution so I I just want to
make that clarification for you
and I'm not sure if that's if
you fit that definition but that
they would be bringing a large
refining large volumes like
barrels per day of fuel or bring
in that much fuel into the state
of New Mexico but in terms of
the your question regarding
third party certifications our
expert Amy brown from Adelante
consulting is on and I would do
for her to to talk about third
party certifications for those
bulk fuel workers okay.
Mr chair Senator Woods in the
two states that have set up
these programs so far and
implemented them they have
process sees by which certifiers
have to get
you have to take certain
training yes yes become a
certified by the state but then
the parties needing the
verification contract with them
and pay them directly the state
is not paying for those
services.
We have a a
a university program.
That these people go through.
To have some kind of degree or
some kind of certificate or
anything.
Up Madam.
Mr Chairman.
Madam pro tail and and Amy
brown.
Mr chair last go through this
again tell me again.
Here Mr chair Senator Woods at
it's not a university program
it's actually the regulatory
bodies in Oregon and California
conducted training in issue the
certification to those who
successfully complete and pass
of the training and then there's
a list of that if I am fuel
provider and I need to have my.
Submissions verified I go to
that list that the state
maintains saying here the people
you can select from move past
the training and are certified
to conduct these verifications
so so so.
Mr chairman and and madam pro
tem let's go to secretary would
begin.
If he's still here because
Secretary witty.
Regulates
weights and measures.
So do you see this is been part
of your training secretary
witty.
Sorry legislative.
Mister chairman Senator was not
the way this is structured no
Sir.
Okay so it would probably be
back over to the environment
department that that is doing
this kind of training.
Mr secretary can would it be
your department during the
training.
Also for this third party.
Mr chairman and senator was we
would be promulgating rules
pursuant to this section that
would that would clarify the
third party certification
process so if there is training
involved that the department had
to put on or what elected to put
on we we we would do that you're
correct but Mr chairman and
Senator Woods I think for those
large.
for those for those individuals
are generating credits that need
to understand how to do this we
could do that there are plenty
of companies who are looking to
expand their footprint in New
Mexico that we've talked to that
are eyeing this up as an
opportunity for them to help
businesses generate credits as
well.
Okay.
So we're gonna have employment
opportunities for for companies
to come in New Mexico to be this
third party verification
company.
Mr chairman and senator was that
is correct and they're they're
they're already heard from one
of them today who's working on
tax issues
even obscene talk a little bit
about it but there's other
companies that are looking to
expand into New Mexico to do
just that we've been in contact
with them in our collaboration
with just about everybody for
this bill.
And and under number.
On page six hundred nineteen.
Number twelve.
It talks about prioritizing
mechanisms for credits
generated.
Instead it disproportion the
impacted.
Environmental justice and rural
communities.
And reduce cumulative impacts.
Well that's that's.
Was wird Smith right there let
me tell you.
Talk about all oil and Sierra
that's a pretty impressive.
For our jazz mechanisms for
credit generation.
So what do you visualize.
As that prior Germanization.
For those credit generation.
That budget this a portion that
the impacted.
Environmental justice in rural
communities.
And reduce the community the
table at the impact.
Madam thank you.
Eight six nineteen.
Through twenty two.
A you know a Mister chairman
Senator this is this is an
important aspect of what happens
as we try to move into a
different areas of our economy
to try to move more jobs into
this kind of a clean fuel
program to have companies come
here that want to develop of
these clean fuels lower carbon
fuels and we just want to make
sure that we're we have jobs
where people need jobs a with
those areas of the state where
they don't have any for that
where they've been impacted a
with these environmental justice
issue so this is just good
policy we wanted to put it in
here so that we can has a idea
of the future of where we need
to focus on.
Do you the world.
Mr chairman and madam pro tem do
you quantify this.
How can you put a number on
this.
It's a law and so so what I'm
getting at.
Prior to as mechanisms for
credit generation not credit
generation should be no.
So how do you create art come to
that number.
So Mister chairman we want to be
able to have companies that can
generate credit generate credit.
And we want to make sure that we
have the mechanisms to set those
credits up so that
You know an agricultural
community that can generate
methane and bio mass so that
they are able to be part of this
credit generation now this is
not set up yet you have to
remember that this goes through
two years of
of intense setting up the
standard and making rules before
we're starting this and this is
a goal that we have put in here
and
if secretary Kenny or keys wants
to answer any more I bump it
over to them.
What it's a qualifying deals
it's.
This is nobody needs to explain
it because you can explain
because this you can't quantify
that you can't put a number
there.
It's it's pie in the sky.
It's it's a dream it's not
something you can quantify you
can say I want to hear I want to
I want to give them ten more
credits well how do you justify
appear more credit.
It's it's it's a hi inscrite it
is a lot of years three.
And then you come over here so
there's some all there is a new
state require electric utilities
that generate correct generate
credit for electors in use for
transportation fuel to use at
least fifty percent of the
revenue generated from these
credits now we're talking about
generating revenues from credits
so tell me how you're going to
quantify.
The the the prices talking about
money here because this talk
about revenues fifty percent of
the revenue you're talking about
revenues generated from credits
so how.
Do we.
But I'm number on those credits
all of your because I that fifty
percent of those revenues
generated from those credits.
From transportation
electrification project rebates.
For electric vehicle purchases
are provisions of direct
benefits for current electric
vehicle customers.
I did that fifty percent at
least thirty percent in one year
forty percent a year to fifty
percent in separate years shall
be used to support transmission
electrification that primarily
this budget District Court let
me impacted them get what is
this I'm sorry madam chair all
right all right I see.
I don't know if.
If a let alone are not but I'm
not going to be able to support
your bill today.
I'm so sorry Madam Mr Chairman I
guess I'm done thank you.
Thank you Senator Woods we
enjoyed your we can see here
thanks in your notes on the on
the bill.
Your next we do have to go to
the floor at six o'clock.
And we may have sent finance
first thing tomorrow morning
Senator Diamond how long are you
going to.
B..
Probably have more than fifteen
minutes worth of.
Acting for that that's okay.
Well we're gonna quit by fifty
so everybody go to the back.
Try to get to the floor six
o'clock when we start so you got
about five minutes center.
Get started today and maybe we
can finish up tomorrow morning I
have a lot of copies and maybe
in the meantime I can get the
most current I want to start off
by just clarifying if I
understand the the latest a
first reading this correctly are
we defining electricity as a
transportation fuel.
It is this correct this one.
Mr chairman if you could mention
page and number that would be
helpful.
Around four five seven point
one.
And that's just finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eleven okay that's why
we're off I do not I did not
receive that latest one if I
could get that in house I do not
have that latest one in front of
me
but let me go on with and see if
many of this is.
It overall it is a carbon credit
are we going to classify that is
as real property or personal
property how would we define
that.
Mr chairman I'll have to kick
this question too maybe Amy
brown I I don't think it's
either but Amy brown secretary
Kenny and could you all like
answer the questions.
I I'm not sure that it's either
hi I'm often and it's not real
property
I would have to look into
whether it would be considered
personal property I apologize
it's not I I know I should have
started with Mr chair it's not
it's not something that I have
researched.
It would certainly still be a a
property and if it's real I
wonder if if you could clarify
is it would be transferable then
like a mineral right or water
right out how we're going to add
value as it is a property to
that if if you could and it
sounds like we're gonna finish
up tomorrow we get further
discuss that
Follow up on that would be that
if if could a carbon credit than
ever be considered a
conservation easement and in let
me tell you what my thoughts
going is actually two more Act
producers could cause carbon
credits since then be
transferred into a conservation
easement.
Mr chair
Senator Diamond.
I'm not sure I understand your
question you're you're asking
the the credits are transferable
there is a process for
food there will be a process for
selling them so that people who
are running a deficit can
purchase them from the people
who are instead generating
credits so you you're asking if
I.
Yes we have a tie those to the
lands like we do on a
conservation easement or or do
they transfer from from land to
land trying to I'm trying to
understand how they are
connected to the land when it
comes to our producers.
Mr chair and Senator Diamond
so I a credit is something that
one would generate for the
purposes of what of holding it
or for the purposes of using and
and and selling it to a your
provider so I think they would
hold a credit for as long as
they needed to hold a credit as
long as they're they have
reduced successfully the and
quantified this CO two
reductions.
Okay okay I think I I think I
better understand clearly I need
to get the most common to see
this it seems that we received a
lot of communication on this
bill and most of the act
communities opposing this and
I'm trying to understand best
what their concerns are specific
to this bill if it's not in the
best interest of our ag
producers and I assume it's not
in the best interest of our
consumers it the end of the line
so I wonder have you considered
the impacts to food security
which we know especially during
these times is so important if
our ad producers start start
being more of carbon credit
producers what impact that may
have on on food security issues
and and food production.
Mr chair and and Senator
Diamond.
The I have not heard that we
secretary woody and I've
personally reach out to a number
of the Gary's and associations
and cattle growers and I've some
start not start with the premise
that people are opposed to the
bill I think that the the fact
that they didn't speak against
it says something and then to
your point about food security I
think this generates incentive
in the act industry to expand
agriculture in New Mexico by
using the waste by giving them
revenues by planting more crops
by harvesting more by creating
less food desert site I see in
the opposite direction.
Thank you thank you secretary
and senator I should note that
we've received a lot of emails
and communication and and
including the Institucional are
are opposing this bill at least
that's the information they
provided to us today going into
this into this committee hearing
How do we didn't how do you
address the impacts on fuel
prices which seems to be a great
concern from all the
communications I received is
it's it doesn't seem to be in
the best interest of struggling
families like we said expressly
right now or businesses or
anyone in New Mexico and that
seems to contradict all of the
efforts that we're doing here is
a legislator to provide relief
to the struggling families so so
could you speak to the potential
increase to future fuel costs
here and an address those
concerns and I'm receiving.
Mr chair and and Senator Diamond
yeah absolutely that we we we we
we share the value that we
wouldn't want to put that burden
on lower income are are
disadvantaged communities and I
think our bill does a lot to fix
that issue and make sure that
doesn't happen but specifically
well you heard people stand up
and say that they're the fuel
producers think that the costs
will go up the same fuel
producers in those associations
are representing the same
companies and other states we're
doing the investments in
California Utah Texas and the
list goes on and on they've not
disclose based on my research
the SEC bindings that they're
telling shareholders the prices
and all which is where I went
when I started seeing it
concerns coming up into that
point we've not even seen the
costs go up as you've heard from
many of the people talking on
this committee are the the
supporters but those are just
not real real numbers that we're
seeing we I will tell you Mister
chairman Senator Diamond that
there is you know up to one to
two cents per gallon that that
are going you know they feel
programs like this have caused
prices to go up we're not seeing
that
in in the way that it's being
represented and and nobody's
provided me any of that specific
data even though I keep
requesting.
Thank you for speaking to that
Senator.
We're gonna be on the floor like
seven minutes so why don't we
just roll over this a little bit
and and then tomorrow morning
for those members we're gonna
come in the Senate finance about
nine thirty we're gonna start
right back off of this bill.
We do have to go to the floor
and six o'clock and I don't
think anybody's having to have
to get on the run if the for so
we will have Senate finance
tomorrow nine thirty will start
right back up with this bill
we'll make sure we clarified
some things and.
Hopefully we will stall all day
tomorrow and we can get this
bill where IT needs to know
where whatever happens so.
Thank you guys for being here
today and and Senate finance
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine thirty thank you.
