Mm.
you.
You either
The hunter or you're the hunter?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. I am,
uh, Senator Michael Padilla,
thank you, Chair, Vice Chair,
all the chairs and all the other
chairs and the ranking members
and everybody, um, I'm here
before you with the Senate Bill
137, as you know, um, we have um
we have a situation, Mr.
Chairman, that I'm gonna show
you right now, uh, with this
slide here and these actually
these two slides here.
As I introduced the bill, I want
you to kind of take a look at
these because um in my left
hand, you're right on the right
hand side, that's a map of what
uh we have not done in terms of
keeping pace with our 911
emergency services here in New
Mexico. Um, we have not
increased our 911 surcharge
since 1989. If we were to
increase it based on, on
inflation, that would be $1.29
Mr. Chairman. So, um, I think
that's a very interesting um.
You know, and then we're
actually well under the national
average by about $1.30 and there
are so many significant gains
and then if you take a look at
this chart here that I'm showing
you.
The state of New Mexico, I think
we all recognize that we kind of
work for this place over here.
Um.
All the red is essentially where
we are woefully underfunded and
under uh uh resourced for our
911 services so I um wanna let
you know that what we're doing
today is, is we're trying to
update the definitions so that
they link up with federal
standards in terms of emergency
services for 911 and then also
the legislation proposes that we
increase the, the um the 911
emergency service surcharge on
our, on our, our telephone line
connections. We originally came
with an increase of $1.29 which
still
would have kept us under the
national average by about 60 or
so cents, Mr. Chairman, but we
amended it in the uh last
committee that we were in and we
put that at $1.
And we also as a result of
feedback we received from
several other members, we came
to you, we're coming to you with
a sub here. So we took out the
purpose statement and all the
other kind of fluffy stuff in
the beginning of the bill, and
we wanted it to be a clean bill
in front of you here.
So you'll need to act on this,
and I'll, I'll move a uh do not
pass on Senate Bill 137 in a do
pass on Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senator 1374 uh
discussion purposes.
Commit sub is 877.1. Yes, sir,
just for tracking. I'll second
that motion. Any objection to
the
discussion purposes.
See none
And they have a motion.
So moved.
To adopt the substitute bill.
Mhm
And most of my San Padilla,
second by Senator Shindo.
Any objection to that motion see
none.
We are back on the bill. Have we
gone to the audience. Not yet,
sir, but I did introduce it
already, so.
we go, how many we have on Zoom
perfect.
We had about 400 people in the
room this morning, Mr. Chairman.
I don't know if you saw online.
I know it only looked like 12 I
imagine those people in the room
were the beneficiaries of this
bill.
It would be my guess. Well, they
all had to get back to work, Mr.
Chairman. I mean, 911 services
are, you know, critical for the,
yeah. Well, I don't think they
were 911 services, so I'll take
3 people real quick.
Line up.
On Senate Bill 5, I'm waiting
for an amendment to come down
just so you guys know.
non-resident or a resident horn
hunting will not have any
license just to verify that
you're a resident and then uh
Talking to the possum buzz, the
game and fish.
Um, around a $9000 bighorn
sheep, so we don't get sued and
that's what that amendment will
do.
Go ahead, sir.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tommy
Sanchez. I'm the uh director for
Valencia County 911 Center. Um,
I'm here on behalf of the 911
directors affiliate as well in
support of this bill, um,
basically what we're looking at
is this gives all the uh public
safety answering points, the uh
means to handle uh multimedia
communications. It's like text
to 911 video live data
streaming, uh, a lot of things
that we don't have and uh I just
want to say the affi
and support. This is stuff that
is crucial to the safety of our
citizens and uh the safety of
our responders. Uh, we, we, we
need to keep up with the times.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Julianna. I'm the GIS
supervisor of Santa Fe County in
the affiliate chair for the GIS
affiliate in Mexico counties,
one of the co-initiators of this
legislation and I'm asking for
support on this bill from a
unique perspective as a data
source creator and provider.
It's my responsibility in Santa
Fe County to make sure that all
physical addresses and road
information is accurate and up
to date and so that that
information reaches our PSAs or
uh 911 call centers so that the
information can be routed to our
first responders. What we need
to do with this bill and in the
uh up incoming next gen 9 911
generation technology is to make
sure that we can get emergency
responders to that last mile
with the information they need
to help people, um, it's our
perspective is GIS experts to
make sure that maps are done
accurately and efficiently and
with your support to make this
bill go through, we'll actually
be able to get people into the
latest standard of technology to
be able to do that. So please I
encourage you all to support and
pass this bill. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jay Santiannis with
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group
again 10 small local, uh, rural
uh telephone broadband companies
in New Mexico.
Uh, this bill is, is very
important. I understand it's uh
uh uh up to the uh surcharge,
but it's very important to
update the, the technology and
to be able to locate every,
every call that comes in and our
rural providers are very
supportive of this, uh,
initiative, and 911 is so
important in the rural areas, as
you all know, and uh we really
encourage you to, uh, uh,
support this bill, and we think.
of bringing forward.
Thank you. No one in the
opposition, right?
You raise your hand.
OK, just checking.
I
Questions on the bill.
See no. Oops, sender.
Sorry, Mr. Chair. Thank you. I
just have 11 little question.
And you've heard me ask this
before. Of course, I'm, I'm
supporting the bill. It's the
most important thing that's come
through here in a in a day or
two, but I want to, um, I wanna
ask you.
For your help
Because if you pick up your map,
San Juan County.
We're pretty, pretty well
covered right there.
Except for the state police.
The state police does not use
our 911 center.
Can you help me get that back on
board, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and uh and Senator
Lanier, I'm so glad you asked
that question. The reason I'm
glad you asked that question is
by, by making these changes that
were uh proposing here, funding
will be available for
regionalization as well as uh
synergistic tie-ins with local
911s, regional 911s, and the
state 911. So absolutely, I
think you're gonna see some huge
benefits when we get this thing
done here. It just simply isn't
the funding that available.
right now to make all of those
very necessary changes. And this
is next, what's called NextGen
911, which links all of it up
and down the line.
So yes.
Perfect. Thank you, sir. I
appreciate that, Mr. Chair.
Now he raised a question for me
because our 911 system is held
during the state policing
grants, right?
And then so how does that work?
When we, well, I'll tell you
what happened. We they called
dispatch and they said well you
can't call us here, you gotta
call the other dispatch, and
then we got to figure out where
we're calling. Well, Mr.
Chairman, uh again, glad with
both of the questions, thankful
for both of them actually. What
we don't have right now is sort
of rings for us at a certain
length and then rolls over to
the next available 911 in the
region or the area or up to the
county or up to the state or
whatever, this very funding is
going to actually put us in a,
in a very good position to link
all of those linkages up and
down the line. So
Let's say even after, you know,
this all happens when your 911
is overburdened or run over with
something that's going on in
your community, uh, then those
calls will then be directed and
redirected to the next available
resource that might not be
necessarily right in your
community then right over to the
state police eventually.
So next time I see you speeding
on a 9:40 eating. You've never
seen me speeding. That was not
me running past you on ice by
the big guy in Albuquerque.
You sure knew the location
way too fast. You would have
never seen. Well, eating a
burrito, I don't, I don't, I was
eating a burrito. I will say
that. I will definitely say
that. However, I have slowed
down since you saw me doing that
one time. I slowed down.
So now we'll be able to track
you from 1911 when you leave
Berlio to go into Valencia and
then when you need to score,
we'll be able to keep calling
911 and that will relay your
location through the 91. I was
not doing 113 in Carrizozo that
time. I, I, I, I was not 112
maybe but not.
OK, what's the pleasure of the
committee.
A motion for a new pass. We have
a second by Senator Til
Calderon.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes, Senator Compos. Senator
Campos votes, yes, Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez votes
yes, Senator Lanier. Senator
Lanier votes, yes, Senator
Padilla. Well yes, center
Padilla Bosia, Senator
Steinborn, Senator Steinborn
votes yes. Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tal.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes, Senator Schdo.
Yes. Senator Sendo votes yes.
Senator Munoz votes yes, you
have a do pass.
10 to 0.
Thank you. We're gonna do, we're
just waiting on 5 and we're
gonna do 186 and then we're
going to be done.
Uh, so we're gonna do 186 as
amended. They brought me a file
and that file.
Confusion though.
Good job.
we're on 186.
Multi-family housing evaluation.
Good.
Good afternoon. I'm doing, this
is Cinabel 186.
Um, this is a multi-family
property valuation.
And let me get to the bullet
points.
Uh
This helps property owners
reduce property taxes for owners
and developers making more
affordable to own and operate
multi-family housing. It
encourages new housing by
lowering taxes and development.
The bill makes it easier for
developers to build more rental
housing and address the help
housing shortage, stabilize the
rent, simplifies the process,
attracts investment, prevents
high higher taxes.
And it supports affordable
housing.
With that, I have my expert
witness, you're not him. Go
ahead.
Josh Rogers.
And Billy Eagle.
C.
That's what the bill does.
All right, well, yeah, Mr.
Chairman and, uh, senators.
A little bit more.
Thank you, uh, yeah, Mr.
Chairman and senators. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak
with you today about SP 186.
Multi-family tax evaluation
bill.
This bill is straightforward,
yet critically important for the
future of New Mexico's housing
market to allow us to keep
delivering units to combat the
housing shortage.
Right now, multi-family
properties of every type from
low income to brand new
throughout the state are
consistently assessed.
At only 28% of their actual
value.
SB 186 seeks to address this
discrepancy by ensuring that
newly assessed properties are
brought up to their true current
value.
To prevent overwhelming tax
hikes that will stifle our
industry.
Um, the taxable value will be
based on 40% of that corrected
value.
The math is simple.
Um
Properties are currently valid
at just 20%.
Yeah.
And so the bill aims to increase
that figure to 40%, which will
insure property tax revenues
remain stable.
This is first and foremost, a
bill designed for the renters of
this state to keep rents
protected from inflationary
pressures.
This issue has been festering.
For over 30 years as assessed
values have failed to keep in
line with real market
conditions.
SB 186 will fix this problem,
ensuring the property
assessments reflect their actual
worth and eliminating the risk
of tax lightning.
Under this bill, property owners
will be required to disclose
costs for new construction or
sales.
This approach will ensure fair,
transparent property taxation
across the board.
There's a fair amount of
misinformation surrounding this
bill between the FIR report and
some of the concern that this
will lead to a loss in revenue
for the counties.
It simply isn't true. This bill
is designed to maintain or
increase taxes over the current
status quo.
Current assessments of
multi-family communities are
consistently at or under 2 28%
of their value.
Let me give you a real world
explanation before we go to the
audience. If you have a
valuation of a million dollars
or your your billings value a
million, your taxed on 28%,
let's just call it 30, so.
33,000 is your value, right,
taxed on that.
What really happens
Is the counties come back in.
OK, here's the evaluation of the
property, here's the, the rate
we're taxing.
When they come back in and the
counties will adjust their tax
rate.
To adjust for what the county's
needs are.
So saying that they're not
getting the correct valuation of
the correct tax rate. The county
makes those adjustments
annually, and we don't have a
say in it as property owners who
have their tax rate was at 3%
and they figured out they can
get to 3.5 for our operating
budget, those county
commissioners will set that new
tax rate at that level, and
they'll they'll be able to fund
themselves without adding any
valuation, but that will stand
for questions.
This time we'll go out to the
audience, uh, anybody in support
of this bill.
OK, we have anybody on?
OK, so
And we'll go ahead and uh get
the
I think I, I thought I saw 3
hands go up, so we'll give you
about a minute or so to
Make statements.
Mr. Chairman and senators, my
name is Alan Lesek and I'm the
executive director of the
apartment Association in New
Mexico. Uh, we stand in support
of this bill, you know, as many
of you know, there's a lot of
bills floating around the
roundhouse, uh, that have to do
with housing, uh, but this one
does something different and
this one creates housing, and
that's what's the most important
part. Not only does it create
housing, but it also
incentivizes the redevelopment
of our aging housing stock. So I
would encourage you to um to
vote yes on this bill because
this is a good bill for New
Mexico. This is
a good bill for investment and
this is also a good bill for the
residents. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Schulz
registered lobbyist for NAO, New
Mexico, which is a real estate,
commercial real estate
developers and we stand stand in
strong support of this
legislation, multi-family
valuations have been undervalued
for over 20 years, causing
disparity between real markets
and valuations, um, as well as
non-disclosure and outdated cost
valuation methods, bringing
multi-family valuation to uh
instantaneously current and
correct.
As the assessors uh have said
day to day may pursue will
result in devastating
consequences for the New Mexico
multi-family industry and stop
all new developments and
investments. Thank you.
Yes, I'm in support Mr. Chairman
and senators, thank you. My name
is Raheem Kassam. I support
Senate Bill 186 right now
because property taxes are a
huge barrier to getting more
housing built. People who want
to build like myself are sitting
on the sidelines because of
unpredictable tax hikes that
make projects too risky. This
bill gives us a fair stable way
to value multi-family housing so
that we aren't scared off even
before we start. It keeps tax
revenue steady while encouraging
new.
construction which we
desperately desperately need if
we want more housing, we need to
make it easier to build this
bill does that and that's why
I'm in support of it and I ask
that you do the same. Thank you.
Hey, anybody in opposition to
this bill?
Go ahead.
We're gonna charge them for the
mic, right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. With all
due respect to the sponsor, my
name is Joya Sparson. I'm the
executive director for New
Mexico Counties. Couple of key
points to recognize is these
types of multi-family properties
are considered residential,
which means when they are sold
or bought, they're required to
provide a sales transfer
affidavit, and then they enjoy
the benefit of the 3% cap.
Um, our concern is the way that
the bill is currently written,
it would affect all properties,
even those properties that are
currently at correct fair market
value using that system so it
would then give them an
additional reduction that would
take them to 40% and we are
finding that the percentage
reductions off of property taxes
are really complex and can be
devastating for county budgets.
We are waiting for the impacts
of the veterans' exemptions and
keep in mind that gets
transferred to all other
homeowners, so we are very risk
adverse about anything else that
would erode property tax values
so we understand that.
impact. Thank you.
Oops.
And Mr. chair members of the
committee. My name is Damian
Lara. I'm here on behalf of
Isaiah Romero, the affiliate
chair for the assessors
affiliate, um, the assessors
affiliate has taken a position
to oppose this bill as written,
um, as was previously stated,
um.
You know, by one of the expert
witnesses this would fix tax
lightning for multi-family
apartments, but it would not fix
tax lightning for everyday
single family residence, um,
we're willing to work on that if
if that's what we're really
trying to fix.
But what this does is really
provides a 60% exemption.
For multi-family property and
shifts that property tax burden
to your single family residence,
um, the way that we can work on
this is to ensure that we're not
rolling back those values that
are above 40% and provide some
other incentive for building or
constructing but as written in
Bernalillo County, this would be
a loss of a billion dollars in
valuation in the residential
valuation and for those reasons.
We cannot support this bill as
written, um, we're willing to
engage in negotiations or or
discuss.
alternative ways to get to where
we can all have an increase in
housing stock in lower rents,
but this bill currently does not
do that.
We're done.
Homer.
Mr. Chair, members, uh,
senators, uh, many multi my
name's Ivan Barry, uh, Chief
Deputy Assessor of Santa Fe
County. Uh, many multi-family
properties such as apartment
complexes have not been
providing sales transfer
affidavits as required for
residential properties. This has
led to significant
undervaluation of these
properties with some valued at
only 29% of fair market value.
These properties benefit from
the 3% annual cap on property
value increases.
Which has resulted in minimal
adjustments to their assessed
values. The bill's language
appears to apply not only to
undervalued properties, but also
to those who are already being
assessed at fair market value by
reducing their values to 40% of
fair market value. This
proposal, uh, could further
diminish county property tax
revenues and place an unfair
burden on uh homeowners as well.
Uh, so that with that I oppose
as well thank you.
Thank you.
Somebody let me just make one
remark. There is some uh 4
amendments that Senator Worth is
working on for the floor to
address some of the issues that
the county mentioned, so, uh
those will be addressed in the
floor amendment.
OK, so, OK, if it makes it to
the floor, we'll make those,
we'll all describe the amendment
to deal with that real quick so
you guys understand what's going
to happen as we go forward, so
you don't think we have to do
something.
But
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
senators, um, so the floor
amendment that we discussed, uh,
In working with the assessors.
is to put in a floor. Um, we've
done the analysis on the
calculations that, you know,
everything's at 28% of actual
value. We understand their
concerns about, you know, one of
the quick fixes that we can do
is put in a floor that any
currently assessed property
cannot be moved backwards by
this bill, and that's not our
goal. Our goal is to look
forward. And so we have no
issues, uh, we've talked to our
lawyers to get the language
done, to introduce an amendment
on the floor of the Senate to
get that done and I think that
addresses a lot of
The concerns about the counties,
the FIR report, if you've read
it, as it relates to this bills
looks really bad, but in
general, that floor would
prevent all of that tax decrease
that's discussed in the FIR
report and it and it also a
concern from the assessor, so
we're willing to put that in
there. We talked to Senator
Wirth, and that's gonna be one
of the amendments, uh, there
might be another but at least
for now, that one we agree with
100%. We do not want to.
Lower revenue for the counties
and we do not want the FIR
report to prove to be true
because it's not, but we can, we
can put a buffer in there to
make sure that doesn't happen.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you. So now we'll
go to committee, Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman and
We
will this change or will this
affect the yield control?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Gonzalez,
um, with the proposed amendment
that I'm just saying in general
the entire.
Bill
Uh, in general, as written, uh,
based on our analysis of the
current situation? No, but if
you listen to what the assessor
said, then, then it has the
potential to do that along with
the FIR report, but the
information that is included in
the FIR report and what the
assessors are basing their
statements off of today is
limited information. They do not
have the true sales value. The
industry for the last 30 years
has not disclosed their sales
information on multi-family
units, so it's created this
disparity in the market where
We're, we're seeing 28% of
actual value and they're
thinking it's current and
correct in the FIR report is
taking it at face value, saying,
well, assessed values are fair
market value. They're not,
they're wildly inaccurate.
That answers your question.
Very well, thank you Mr.
Chairman thank you.
You send a tripadil.
Uh, thank you, Chair and Mr.
Chairman. So I, I, I think I
heard my assessor was speaking
earlier. Is he still here?
OK, so, you know, I, I, I guess,
you know, yeah, it sounds like
this would affect this
population, but not the others,
I get that, but
I mean
Should we not do something and
then come and get the rest of
the work done. I mean, I, I, I
think that's what you're doing
here, is that right? I mean.
And we're only dealing with
commercial residential
residential housing.
And so what the assessor was
saying that that because the
reduction, which we just talked
about the amendment that will
cap that floor that it can't
lower it.
And come to true value.
This will show 28% of it. What
he's saying is it's gonna throw
it out of the marketplace that
that the commercial developers
are now going to be subsidized
by residential homeowners.
That's not true because they're
residential home home has to be
disclosed, if I remember
correctly, and commercial
property does not.
So when you build a new building
and your permit valuation is $1
million. The county assessor
says, here's what's permitted
and here's what built and here's
what we think the true valuation
is.
Uh, you don't do an appraisal
and give it to the assessor. And
so they say that's the value of
11 million, 1/3 of that or 28%,
I'll say 1/3 is 33.33%. That's
your true valuation and that's
what they value your building
off of.
And they come back and say,
here's your taxable value.
And here is the new tax rate and
that's what your tax bill is.
And so then that chair and the
chair. So has there, have there
been efforts in the past on the
residential side, I'm assuming
there have.
I do not know.
Is, does anyone aware if there's
any
I can look for the FIR Typically
we have bills that are related
to or in conflict this session.
Are we aware of any of those? I
am not, no.
I guess I'm, I'm not a, you
know, I'm not opposed to let's
get this done and then bring the
other side of the equation as
well. I mean, and that I don't
think that's a reason why we
shouldn't do this. I, I, so what
are the other key reasons that,
you know,
Go ahead, I think you were gonna
say something.
I, I, I mean, then you're gonna
be in tax lightning or tax
yield, where home valuations
that.
You may inherited your
grandmother's home.
Who hasn't been praised or ever
sold in the last 50 years, and
all of a sudden your neighbor
has a.
Half a million dollar home next
to you and that home when you're
grandparents bought it was
$30,000. Then you're gonna be in
a real tax lighting situation,
and that's, that's a residential
is very difficult to do that.
OK. I might have some more
questions and I know others do.
Thank you, chair.
Senator Steinbor.
They in his chair and senator
and gentlemen, who are you? I
don't know that you introduced
yourselves when you.
Josh Rogers with Titan
Development with who? Titan
Development? OK.
And I'm Billy Eagle with CBRE.
What what do your companies do?
The largest real estate company
in the world. I specialize in
multifamily and have, have
actually been involved in
approximately 2/3 of all of the
apartment transactions, at least
for properties over 50.
OK.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, if this
is a fair question.
How much does, um, like as an
investment, how much do these
assets appreciate.
On average, year to year.
As far as an investment goes.
So it depends what kind of
property you're looking at and
if you're developing a
commercial apartments, right?
And, and they may appreciate and
value, but they appreciate the
value more when the apartments
are full. If the apartments are
vacant, there there's no value
there.
And and you're carrying that
load. Uh, so there, there is an
appreciation, but it's hard to
determine what the market's
gonna say.
Your building's worth if you put
it up for sale the minute you
built it because you have no
income and you can't use an
income approach for for.
Evaluation, it's just the value
of the asset.
Um, yeah, Mr. Chair, I mean,
this is a bill that obviously
the FAR has concerns about it,
A, not passing on these benefits
to to
To citizens.
Uh, be going to lower taxable
value, you know, revenues to a
county, which is going to mean
that.
You know,
It's just how counties get
funded.
And I'm just not, I guess I'm
not understanding why we need to
do it, um.
So, any rate, you know, I
haven't heard from my assessor
on it, but I know I heard from,
from, um, some other assessors
on it today. So I'll keep
listening to the debate, but
Yeah, I'm not leaning in favor
of it at the moment, but thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Woods.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much.
OK, this has been amended, so
I'm gonna ask the question
because I hadn't had time to go
through the amendments and put
them in.
Back in the day, Mister Chair.
When I was uh
In college, we took appraisal of
courses that was part of the
curriculum course.
And there were 3 ways to praise.
So which way are we appraising
these? I've heard you say.
I've heard you say income.
Value
As to value, I've heard you say.
Market value.
I've got in the uh place here
that says
The full cost of the development
of the property, including the
cost of the land.
So
How are we gonna, how do you
determine the value of the
property.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, uh,
those, uh, are all correct ways
that the assessors value
properties today, what this bill
does is it requires disclosure
of the full value of the
property or the construction
costs. So that information would
be disclosed to the assessors
directly as part of this bill so
that they have the actual
information that shows what the
true cost of the project were if
it's a brand new build and then
when we go to sell an asset,
whether it's new or existing.
Uh, then that would be also
disclosed and so that would
become the basis for the
valuation.
So it would be the disclosure of
the sale price. That's correct
it would either be the, the, the
uh cost of building the
structure plus land or it would
be the disclosure of the sale
price. That's correct.
That's correct. And you know, if
there was like a recession or
something like that, you could
fall on, you know, a sit a cost
approach or uh income approach
to say, hey, I've lost tenants,
I've lost revenue.
I need, I need a different
evaluation because there's been
a recession, but that, you know,
doesn't really happen in whose
discretion is it to do that? I
would imagine it would be the
property owners to do that to
bring that to the forefront to
say, hey, I've lost occupancy,
I've lost value, I've lost
whatever it might be, to go
ahead and prove that to the
assessor.
I see why the sensors don't like
it.
And I've heard enough, Mister
Chair. I made up my mind. Thank
you. All right, Senator
Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
actually, thank you for bringing
forward the bill because as I
understand it, residential um
homeowners are really paying the
true tax burden, maybe an unfair
share currently because
commercial multi-family is
undervalued in its current
assessment, correct? So,
Yeah, go ahead.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobias and.
I would say that's a fair
statement. OK, so Mr. Chair, if,
if multi-family is generally
speaking, undervalued in the
state of New Mexico, this bill
actually gives the assessors the
ability to bring it current or
closer to current and then just
putting those annual caps on the
increase, correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobison, that
is correct. The, the full value
would be disclosed at 100%. It
would have that information and
then we would take 40% of that
value, which is higher than we
current apartments today exist
and the reason why is like we
cannot support the industry, the
industry cannot support going
from 28% to 100% overnight. This
is a classic tax lightning
situation.
And those rents are passed off
onto the tenants. And so what
we're talking about in our world
is, you know, property taxes
that are at $1500 a unit in
Burnleyo County, going up to
$4500 per unit. And so that's a
$3000 delta that would have to
be passed on to the tenants.
That's $250 a month.
And so what that means is like,
we can't build because we can't
pass that cost off to the
tenants. The tenants pay for
property taxes as part of their
rent. One, typically 1/12 of
their annual lease goes directly
to property taxes. Without this
bill, that becomes 3 months out
of 12 and so we cannot build
under the current parameters and
that's why Titan is sitting on
the sidelines right now with
1000 units ready to go because
we can't do this because of this
tax lightning concern and so
that's why we're here.
is to, you know, tell you like,
we've got a problem, it's been
created over the last 30 years.
We think we have a very
reasonable approach to fix the
problem and putting in the floor
will prevent counties from
losing money, and then therefore
we can continue to build and
properties can continue to
transact to attract new
investment and we can keep our
housing stock up to, up to the
quality that it is today and
continue to make those
improvements.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Um, those
are really good points that
you've made, and I know as an
investor, um, there must be many
investors like Titan sitting on
the sidelines waiting to see
what's happening and I'm
thinking of the current
situation, if all of a sudden
those, those assessments were
increased whatever percentage
you just said, 3000 or whatever.
Who's gonna invest in New Mexico
and how many current investors
are going to look at that
increased cost.
and pull out.
And then we really have another
crisis on our hands. So to me
this sounds equitable for both
parties, both the assessors and
the investors and property
owners. Um, I am in full
agreement with what you've done
here. Thank you so much for
bringing this forward. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator for bringing this
forward. I'm definitely all in
support of having, how we, how
do we figure out to have more
affordable housing, um, I have a
couple of questions in regards
to that.
Um, I do see that the exclusion
of amenities and ancillary
improvements, that seems like a
real positive.
Um, I'm just gonna go back to
the presentation that we had at
the beginning of the session,
um, which is that quality of
life is important to all of us,
and too often I see, you know,
apartment units or multi-family
dwellings where they don't have
amenities, and I'm just
wondering um if this exclusion
of those amenities could have
the benefit of encouraging
developers to provide amenities
so that the families have those
just a question.
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo, uh,
absolutely, that could be one of
the auxiliary benefits to this
bill by excluding that as part
of the potential cost um of the
assessment it would encourage in
the new developments for those
things to occur or in existing
properties for maybe them to put
them in, so yes, it's a good
thing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
um, Senator, I will just say on
the flip side of that, as it
discouraged builders from having
amenities because they do get
taxed.
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
absolutely, and I would say the
size of it, uh, does get
impacted as well, so whereas we
may have done an 8000 square
foot space maybe it gets reduced
to 4000 square feet, so I'll
leave.
Thank you. um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, um, I, um.
do have concerns about what's
been mentioned by the auditors,
I mean, the assessors, and I am
gonna trust that there'll be an
amendment on the floor. I will
stand in support of this here,
um, and if we can get the
amendment on to make sure that
tax liability doesn't go down,
um, I, I, I, I honestly, I think
um the.
Apartment rents go up
increasingly.
On a regular basis, on a yearly
basis, and they go up hundreds
of dollars.
Um, we've got to do something to
stabilize those families because
those are typically um
individuals who can't afford to
buy a home.
And the reason they can't afford
to buy a home is because they
have to put all of their
disposable income into rent
where they live. So thank you
for this.
Thank you, Senator Steinbar, 2nd
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I
have a question for the
assessors just for our
knowledge. So this bill.
Say that no value should be
attributed to amenities or
ancillary improvements to the
property.
So my question to an assessor,
if I can, Mr. Chair, is, do we
typically assess
Is that part of a property value
taxation assessment is ancillary
improvements to the property.
And amenities
Creating a special exception. Go
ahead.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, as
Senator Woods indicated, yes, so
when we do our evaluation
whether we use the cost
approach.
The income approach or any of
those, the all of the physical
improvements are taken into
account. So if we parallel that
if, if a house has a swimming
pool, we value the swimming pool
or not. So just to, to add on to
that, when we do one of the 3
approaches, this bill would
require that once we received
that.
We are supposed to subtract 60%
of what that fair market value
is and then put that as the
value, not the disclosed price,
not the cost approach, but 60%
off of that value, so 40% of it.
Again, it's been mentioned
before, but I think it's worth
noting that currently
multi-family residential
property were required to submit
sales transfer affidavits so
that we could value these
properties correctly.
For whatever reason, the past 30
years, multi-family residential
property, properties were not
disclosing that information, so
that is why they are severely
under assessed.
Thank you. Well, it's
interesting the FRR, Mr. Chair,
says that it kind of this
legislation could favor luxury
apartments because if you think
about it, who are the likely
ones to get high-end amenities,
right? I mean, is it going to be
a low income complex? Is it
gonna be a
An upper income one, but, you
know, my own experience, Mr.
Chairman, respectfully is, you
know, the market governs the
supply.
You know, we have lots of
apartment complexes being built
in Las Cruces and the price is
being governed by the market.
Um, not by
This, but I mean, I'm sure
obviously would make it a more
lucrative investment. I don't
doubt that.
Um, but I don't.
Yeah, but, but it would shift,
you know, it kind of create a
I don't know, it, it's just
obviously creates a special deal
for, for these kinds of
properties that your typical
homeowner doesn't get, and that
means they're gonna be picking
up the tab and I don't see
necessarily the benefits to
people who need affordable
housing or otherwise. So thanks
for answering those questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Brent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Yeah
A couple of questions, um.
We've seen a huge increase in
rents.
Over the last couple of years.
Um
Those weren't because of
property taxes.
So I, I'm trying to figure out
how, how this connects because I
mean, it's just been a massive
increase.
So
Drivers in the Gallup area.
30% increase in water.
Uh, 7 or 8% increase in in
utilities every single year,
right?
Those are drivers, property
taxes have went up.
The taxable rate has went up,
even though the value is held.
And so the cost has gone up.
There's different drivers. I
mean, labor workforce, right?
Um, maintenance and repairs
insurance, you're gonna get hit
at least minimal every single
year with at least 6% insurance.
And so if you're spending um
$100,000 on, on a property and
another 100,000 on the umbrella,
you're gonna see those those
insurance rates increase, so you
add those all up and you're
seeing 30 or 40% increases
across the board.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt, in
addition to that, coming out of
COVID and during COVID, right,
we saw the greatest creation of
household uh creation that maybe
the United States has ever seen.
So we saw more demand than we
ever saw, and this is simple
supply and demand economics,
right? If there's not enough
housing units, then people start
to raise the rates, right? So
that cause and effect. And so
what we've done in response as
one of the, you know, we're the
state's largest developer. We've
delivered over 1800 units in the
last two years. So, and
other developers have done more
in Burnleyo County than has
happened in the last 12. And so
what we've seen in the last 18
months is actually nearly flat
rents and actually some of the
categories, uh, you know, C and
D categories have started to go
the opposite direction. So we
had a supply problem and that
supply problem, uh, was limited
because it takes us a while to
build these projects. It takes 2
years and 4, if not 3, and so
now we're seeing the fruits of
our labor coming through by
keeping rents flat.
in Berleon County, uh, Santa
Fe's, I think at 1% right now.
So we are seeing the benefits of
that increased supply coming to
the market and we got to
continue to do that. Otherwise,
we're gonna be right back in the
same situation in 5 years where
we're seeing incredible rent
growth in this property tax
issue is the problem. It is the
problem.
German singer I would say it's
part of the problem, maybe.
Right, I mean
I think you're trying to protect
yourself from from those
properties having a huge
increase in property taxes, and
I don't blame you.
Um, we're seeing that, you know.
Sandoval County, we're seeing
huge increases in commercial
property.
Axes, I mean just outlandish
increases.
Um
I'm, I'm getting calls almost
every day.
From
Business owners saying it's it's
gone up like tenfold in one
year.
Um, so I think that's what
you're trying to do is just keep
you as an investor.
From having that happen to you,
and I'm like, I would too. My
concern is who's, who's that
gonna get passed on to?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brant with
the uh proposed floor amendment
to keep
This from rolling backwards and
everything, it doesn't get
passed on to anybody.
I mean, if we don't build a new
complex, there's no change in
the property tax evaluation and
there's no revenue to be had off
of that complex and that's what
we're looking at is that if this
bill doesn't go through.
We're not building. I mean,
that's just the reality, like
it's going to take as my math
earlier suggested that $250 rent
growth increase to cover this
property tax situation.
And that's, that's a lot of
money.
For every unit
Throughout Albuquerque and, you
know, it's like another 25% in
rent growth before we build
again. And that's, that's just
the reality of the situation.
Um, we are trying to protect.
Uh
You know, our future investments
here, but we're also trying to
provide housing in the state of
New Mexico because we are under
a housing shortage and now we
are looking at this property tax
problem going.
It is the issue.
It is the problem. We can't
support $4500 per unit property
taxes in these complexes. We
can't, we can't pass off to the
tenant, we can't absorb it, it,
we just won't build.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, I don't have no, uh,
Senator.
Uh thank you, chair, just a
couple of more questions, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman,
so on the FIR uh on the revenue,
um, scenario or analysis, um,
I'm seeing some pretty
significant negative numbers
here.
Um, what percentage of, so, so
FY 26, almost 50 mil and 52, 54,
56. What, what, let's just look
at the fiscal year 26 coming up
then, what share, what is Burley
County's share?
Of that figure
I tried to look in these tables
in the back of the empire, but I
couldn't quite tell which one
was the revenue loss. You're
somebody's gonna have to bring
us a copy of that FIR. We don't
have that.
A copy of that right here.
Just demonstrating property
loss, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
revenue forecast and it's pretty
significant and and increasing
over the four-year period that's
listed.
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, uh.
It is showing 33 million of the
45 million.
Is the way I'm reading it.
So then Chairman, how will the
amendment that you're, you're
proposing to fix that. I mean,
cause you're, you're reducing
property taxes here.
So I don't know how you amend
your way out of a
$50 million reduction in
revenue.
Well, uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
the amendment will hold things
to the floor.
So they can't go down.
That once that billing
evaluation is set if Titan built
a building today and it was $10
million and it was in the rent
rolls that one would not get
reduced to the 28%, correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, let
me jump in there.
Everything that the the
amendment is going to keep
everything that is currently
assessed where it is. That's, it
cannot go down, right? So the
FIR report figures are based on
all of the properties taking the
40% of value. That's what this
is calculated on. What the
amendment does is it says, no,
you can't do that.
So the property values will stay
the same. They will continue on
their 3% path for as long as
they own the property until they
transact. For new construction.
Like
we are going to take the 40% of
value, but that is higher than
the status quo of today.
It's significantly higher than
the status quo today. The
numbers in the FIR report, as
well as the numbers that the
assessors currently have are 28%
of the whole value.
So, so, Chairman, I think I'm
starting to follow what your
logic and reasoning is with the
amendment.
But I just, I'm trying to figure
out um how long would the, I
guess, exemption for the
existing.
Last, in terms of where that
amendment, how that amendment is
developed because I think I'd be
I'd be very unhappy if I were.
But if it didn't remain in
place, I think I'd be very
unhappy as, as an owner.
So they still get the 3% annual
increase on top of that. So as
it comes up, they're gonna get
the valuation moving up in the
same direction.
It's sending the baseline and
then allowing the assessors and
the treasures to come up the
annual rate and I guess we just
never thought we were gonna see
these cost escalations that
we've seen. I mean, it's just
amazing.
Um, and then, so in terms of
multi-family, what in
incentives, incentives, Mr.
Chairman, are available today to
a multi unit family developer.
Mr. Chair, Senator expect you to
list them all, but what are like
the major ones? The biggest one
is Metropolitan redevelopment
areas which are specific and I
think Burnleyo County is the
only one that has them and it
provides 7 years of tax
abatement and an abatement of
impact fees, uh, on the
affordable housing side, you can
do IRBs, um, I think some
communities do that, which just
allows for a longer time period
of that tax abatement, but in
general, there's not a whole lot
out there for incentives for
multi-family.
Yeah
I'm really struggling with this
one because of where this
revenue, uh, so, so what just
eyeball it or, or, or spitball
it or whatever or back of the
envelope, whatever that term is
with that the amendment, what
would fiscal year 26. Can you
give me an estimate?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Padilla
with the amendment, it's going
to go up. It's gonna go the
opposite direction because this
$33 million loss, what's that
estimate?
Plus 3%.
So we're not going to see
negative numbers there. We're
going to see a 3% increase in
revenues to the so
I guess I have to ask the
assessor because he's my
assessor and I want to treat him
fairly. He's the one that
brought this, you know, he was
the one that spoke on behalf of
the treasurers. Do you, have you
seen this amendment and do you
agree?
Sure, um, senator, we have not
seen the amendment, we haven't
even seen the language of it.
Um, I asked about it and um one
of the other lobbyists said
we'll let you know.
Cherry Center, so the amendments
in drafting, we know what the
amendment's gonna do. It's just
gonna put a floor on it.
That's the quick explanation of
the amendment of the amendment
uh is dropped, then we will not
have a new FIR to re-score this,
but I imagine when you see the
FIR you're going to see the
negative go away, and then
you're gonna see an increase
over the time of the years,
because the 3% calculation of
the increase.
Well, I appreciate that, um, and
I'm assuming that, you know,
this gets down to the floor
we're we're gonna have just a
barrage of Bill's landing on the
floor in the next 48 hours, so.
Um, I don't think this will get
hurt immediately, so I, I want
to learn more about it. I don't
know how I'm going to vote
tonight or today just yet. Is it
today or tonight or this
morning?
But uh so.
I think that's all I have. It's
afternoon, yes, OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Senator Campos, thank
you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Finance
Committee just to.
Going into the
Need in New Mexico for the
additional housing and.
Uh
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Munoz,
maybe you can help me a little
bit to better understand.
The, the growing need within
counties like.
Leo Sandoval and Santa Fe
counties, uh, because as we see
the additional complex is being
built today, I believe here in.
Santa Fe County is an example.
We have about 650 units that are
being built.
But there definitely is a, a
growing need for the number of
units, uh, Mr. Chair, maybe you
can help me, Senator Munoz, uh,
experts with um the need for
this legislation with the
growing number of needs for the
uh multi purpose housing if you
will.
Um
And, you know, we're gonna spend
in House Bill 2 came over with
110 million for low income
housing.
That, that's included in
apartments where they doomed to
men if they, what they do
privately, whether you take the
tax credit.
A builder still has to pay the
property tax.
That's not gonna make an
adjustment. So when you start
building and developing these,
you're going to see a slower to
the market and looking for
Places to build that the return
is bigger, where property taxes
are lower in order to make the
net profit to pay off the
building. I mean, we're not
gonna pay 100% of their costs.
Uh, we're going to subsidize
that in some way, shape, or form
to to help that move along. We
do that through NMFA I think
they did 125 million in low
income housing this last year.
And so there we're subsidizing
that with federal money and
state money, uh, 27 to 1 match.
Senator Rodriguez should be here
because this is her sweet topic
to talk about, uh, and knows it
probably better than anybody in
the legislature, but you're not
gonna see those developers move
in as quickly.
The problem in Santa Fe, uh, I
ran into
An officer from Santa Fe at the
gas station the other day, and
he said, I gotta get gas to go
home. He says, where are you
going? He said, I'm going to
Albuquerque, because I can't
afford to live in Santa Fe.
And so if you don't start
capturing and containing costs,
then that market will push to
another market.
So, so, Mr. Chair, and, and
going back, Senator Munoz, the
Chairman Munoz says we deal with
this, maybe the experts can
again, uh.
Elaborate a little bit more in
terms of the of the demand, the
uh.
I'm sure do have a better idea
in terms of uh what that demand
is because going along with that
if there is demand, um.
Definitely, if you will, would
be uh supply, so the question
again, Mr. Chair, um, Chairman
Munoz and of course experts, uh,
how do you anticipate and what
do you see um.
In terms of the number of units
that are projected for the
counties that I mentioned, which
again would be Bernnalio
Sandoval and Santa Fe counties.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Senator Campos, thank you for
your question. Um, the, uh, data
is showing a 30,000 apartment
unit shortage across affordable
in Class A, and so those are all
interconnected, um, but it's
30,000 units.
So Mr. Chair and uh uh and
Chairman Munoz as we go forward
again maybe uh the assessor from
Bernardo County can help me to
better understand in terms of
what that means in terms of um
revenue, tax revenue if you
will, uh, as we move forward and
so Mr. Chair, I'm gonna go ahead
and call again on uh the Burnley
County Assessor.
If
There is that need for 30,000
additional units we'll say
within the.
um, larger counties and in uh be
a little bit more specific as we
deal with Berlio County, um,
what does that mean even with
the proposed amendment that
would probably be entered into
in the Senate chamber during one
of our sessions.
So, um,
Chairman, uh Chairman Sendo, uh,
Senator, uh, Campos.
It it's a difficult number to
calculate again because as has
been mentioned before, there was
a lot of incentives,
particularly um in Meso del Sol,
where one of the larger
developments is, is being
happened that they're under a
tit which provides that the tax
increment, the increase of
taxes, I believe it's 75% of
that actually goes back to the
developer, so, so we would only
be realizing about 25% of that
again.
That the bill as written says
that it's you, you first do the
valuation.
Whatever the fair market value
is and then from that you
multiply it times 0.4, so
you're, you're giving in essence
a 60% reduction.
Um, so if, if, if you again if
you're saying.
That the taxes would have been
4,000s on a unit then you
multiply that times 0.4, you'd
have to subtract by any other
incentives like the tips that
would be taken off and, and, and
then so, I mean, quick math.
You
You're looking at what about
1000 times 33 times 33,000
units.
is what you would, would end up
ultimately in new tax revenue if
in fact, again, I haven't seen
any of the language, uh, I don't
know what it would look like,
um.
But
Assuming that nothing else gets
rolled back at 40% of fair
market value, uh, and again I
appreciate and, and I have full
confidence in these gentlemen up
here, um, but they, they have
been very honest with this
committee. This, this problem
has related and has come about
because for 30 years,
Multi-family units and
apartments when they sold did
not disclose their sales
transfer affidavit. So they are
very right. Assessors think that
we have them on at what should
be the value and they're saying
no, in fact, the true market
value of this is, you know,
75% more than what you have it
on for on the books, um, so it's
a very difficult number to
calculate, but I, I see Billy
here nodding at about 1000 times
33, right? Give or take a few
and Mr. Chair, if they, if uh
they further wish to elaborate
or uh expand on that. But what
I'm trying to get across to the
public as we deal with this, the
magnitude of the issue that
we're dealing with and then from
there in terms of the fair
assessment how this is.
gonna be affecting, if you will,
particularly the areas where we
see the need for additional
units and in particular those
three counties that I mentioned
earlier, so again, if either one
of the experts wishes to go and
respond, I, I would appreciate
that as well, Mr. Chair. We did
the quick math here and so
30,000 units of taxable value
would be uh 1500 and so that
under this bill, if it were to
pass,
The Counties would receive those
three counties on those 30,000
units about 45 million more a
year annually.
And so Mr. Chair and uh and
Chairman Munoz, that, that
brings to the, to the issue we
have the definite need of
additional units we have, if you
will, an adjusted system and
assessment.
And with all that being said,
then within we'll just say the
three counties that I mentioned,
that means the additional
revenue that would be available
to the, to the counties unless
there is something else that I'm
missing.
The whole intent of this
legislation is to enhance the
development.
Ensure that we have additional
resources, it goes to the
assessor that's used, if you
will, for the purposes within
those counties, uh, as
prescribed by law, so that's all
I have, Mr. Chairman. Again,
thank you very much for the
response.
I move for a do pass.
We have a Du Pas motion seconded
by Senator Trujillo.
This coro
Discussion on on discussion
thank you very much, uh Mr.
Chair. So, uh, as a commitment,
and I, I have no question that
this is gonna get done, but what
I would like to do, Mr. Chair,
uh, is to ensure that the
assessors association would have
an opportunity to go ahead and
work closely with the sponsor
and the individuals that are
devising the amendment, uh, so
that at least uh we do have that
consultation and if you will,
collaboration before the
amendment is presented with the
bill or to.
the bill, uh, in the Senate
chamber during one of our
sessions.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chairman Senator, you have
that commitment. We know that
there's an issue with the
counties. We know that we have,
we're drafting language for
everybody to look at. Uh, he
just heard the assessor say that
they have been very honest, and
they're doing that and they have
dealt with them directly, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We have a motion with
Senator Gonzales, seconded by
Senator Tils.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator Campos.
And her accompos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Lanier. No. Senator Lanier votes
no. Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla Bosia, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes no.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Wood's boats know,
Senator Sendo.
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz.
Make sure they get the
amendments Sanchez. Are you here
for some reason?
Here with your shiny shoes for
some reason.
See you, Senator.
Mr.
So just to advise the other
members are we only doing, uh,
are we gonna just, are we gonna
wrap up on Sandervi 5 which
we're gonna wrap up on Senate
Bill 5. We're not hearing, uh.
Senate Bill 259. I understand we
met with some people this
morning that had some amendments
and the sponsor needs to meet
with them
258. I'm sorry. 258, they need
to meet with them. That's the
last thing we have on our list,
uh, 2.
282 will not get heard today, so
I did let the sponsor of 258 now
already, but I wanted to double
verify, so yeah, there's some
amendments and she needs to meet
with those people to get that
amendment or that substitute.
Senator Capos.
I'm gonna leave this here so
you.
You need to
Right.
So we did get our amendment
fixed, so I'll just go over.
Oh, can I have a motion to
discuss the amendment for
discussion purposes. Second, or
do we already have that when
they stopped? I think we already
had. Any objection to that
motion?
no
We'll give you a copy of the
amendment, so what the amendment
does, we took desert off there
and put big horn sheep, we put
them at $9000 resident shed
hunters will pay nothing, just a
proof of residence and
non-residents will pay 500.
That's what the amendment does.
And you're good with that?
And.
I'm just going to them for a
response.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and members of the Senate
Finance Committee where you
consider this to be a friendly
amendment.
Thank you, Senator Trujil on the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman has taken me a
little bit of time, but I, I do
think I understand what shed
hunting is
you're hunting for the, the
antlers, the, the horns,
whatever they're not the shed in
your garage that was and I
thought it was some sort of a
shed. Thank you.
To start a meeting in my office.
Let's get some
Um, we're gonna wrap up Senator
Steinborn on the amendment.
Thank you, Ms. Check.
Senator, so the only new
language I see on this, I see
obviously you removed the desert
sheep.
License, but I just, I don't see
anything about a fee.
I see the shed hunter license.
On here.
On page 6.
Um
There's no line that says 5.
There's the the 9000 for the
sheep.
In the end, where is the
resident?
On page 2.
Uh, the, the shared hunting
license is $500 for non-re.
You're too much.
Anyway, I'm just seeing what I
was just handed it. I'm only
seeing.
Right, that's all existing
statue.
No we're adding, we're changing
its existing statute we're
changing the the value from 3150
for non-resident sheep, bighorn
sheep to 9000. Other states are
6000 and then on page 20 of the
bill, line 20 lines 11 and 12,
non-resident shed hunter's
license 500 and there's no need
to include resident.
Just gonna state that
non-residents have to pay.
We just got handed it. Can we
take a minute to look at this
thing real quick. Well there may
be other questions so you can
look at it and then we'll come
back to you. OK.
Any other questions? No, I guess
we're waiting on you.
I read it.
We can make an audiobook if you
need to. Mhm.
Any questions then, can we have
a motion to adopt the amendment?
motion by Senator Trujil,
seconded by Senator Gonzalez.
Any objection to the doctrine
and amendment seemed that we're
back on the bill.
Question, uh, one quick question
I just.
I mean, any other questions on
the bill?
I, I
I don't know how this board's
gonna really function. I mean,
we've got so many biologists and
everybody moving in, uh, the way
that gaming fish used to
function when it functioned.
There was a lot of hunters and
you take Jamie Cook and I'm a
game commissioners I grew up
with they used to fly in the
state game and fish plane when I
was little all over and, and go
to different places, I just
cautioned that this, this
requirement on this board may
may change the way it functions
and its functionality, you get a
biologist in a hunter fighting
about what's right and what's
wrong, and you're never gonna
come to an agreement.
Um
That's my word of caution. I, I
just, you know, I wish the
governor would point.
Right people to the board that
really want to serve and really
want to enjoy and take care of
wildlife. I mean, there should
have been another license fee
for the San Juan River for
non-residents, right?
That's another quality water,
but they haven't developed those
and, and if the gaming fish
really wants to develop hunting
for people in New Mexico or
fishing people in New Mexico,
and they need to get back on
board and and and start buying
ranches and in land that private
uh private citizens can go hunt
and not restricted. Every hunter
will tell you that the biggest
elk is on the private landowner
side.
Right.
And that's why we should get rid
of the other takes. Well, that's
not true because who's watering
those, who's feeding them,
right? We're gonna hit a drought
this year.
And the ranchers are gonna be
the ones that are hit, because
there's not, there's no natural
stock ponds. They're all
man-made and built, uh, and so
it's, it's gonna be a little bit
different, so with that you have
a motion for Du pass in Padilla.
You know, second my center
Trujil.
would
Did you want, I didn't see you
raise your hand.
Senator Woods.
OK.
Just let me know something, a
couple of things, and I'll be
ready to vote.
How's this going to affect my
private land.
Is there going to be any
restriction whatsoever, Mister
Chair.
And Senator, as to what I do on
my private land.
Other than what there is
happening right today. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Senator Woods. I'm
gonna defer to the expert and
then from there, uh, maybe
either Senator Bradley or I
might have a.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much,
Senator Woods. This bill does
not affect your private property
rights or what you can or can't
do on private property with
regard to predator control or
any of the things that you're
doing already today what this
bill will do though is ensure
that the state wildlife agency
has the resources necessary to
prevent species from becoming
listed on the federal endangered
species, uh, protections, ESA
Endangered Species Act
protections which would impact
private land ownership.
So, uh, this bill is designed to
preserve your private property
rights, Senator Woods. So with
that, Mr. Chair.
No one would get the right to
come on my property unless I
gave them that right.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, that's
exactly right.
On state land.
And stayed honey on hunting on
state land.
When I, when they tell me
To look after their land, and
they tell me.
Not to allow any more roads on
that land. Fact is, they're even
trying to charge counties.
For county roads sits on that
land.
So what does it do now on that
because I'm kind of responsible
for the resources on that land
too, Mr. Chair.
considered true.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, this
bill has no effect on the
interaction between state trust
lands and the grazing lessees
who are grazing the the uh
leasing the grazing rights on
those state trust lands there is
an agreement that exists an
easement agreement between the
New Mexico Department of Game
and Fish in the state land
office and in that agreement all
of those considerations are made
and those those agreements are
decided upon in that, but this
bill does nothing to affect any
of those relationships.
OK. Let me get
All right, so,
Give me just one more second,
Mr. Chair. I know you're, I know
you're wanting to get this done
and get it over. We're burning
daylight burning daylight, I
understand that.
When we talked about uh the
people that are appointed to the
board, Mr. Chair.
And we say that.
They are
a farmer, rancher.
How specific. How do we define
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I
can read the actual definition
of farmer and rancher and that
was a definition provided by the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association, you know, read that
to me so it'll come out on the.
On the board here.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
give me just one second and I'll
find that portion of the bill or
if you have it up, Judy, you're
welcome to do it as well.
I thought you'd look in the
mirror.
Well, while they're looking,
I'll ask another question.
What constitutes incompetence.
To remove a commissioner.
This year.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
I'll answer your second question
shortly, but briefly I'll read
position 4, a rancher or farmer
who actively works at growing
and selling livestock or crops
from a ranch or farm or at least
2 big game species as defined by
and for which hunting is
licensed by the department are
frequently present.
OK and again that was the
definition provided to us by the
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. OK, then
incompetence part.
I think because incompetence,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods is
subject to interpretation.
That's the reason that the
process for removal, uh, sends
the request to the uh district
attorney's I mean to the, uh, is
that to the district court, I'm
sorry, so that if, if a
Complaint is made that there's
been incompetence that complaint
itself doesn't determine whether
or not it was incompetence, but
district court gets to make that
decision.
OK.
This may be amended out, so I'm
going to ask a question here.
This chair on section 5. It says
it removes the commission's
authority to eradicate predator
animals.
Does this in any way affect the
landowner's right to destroy.
While I damaging their property.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, it
does not, there is no effect.
No.
I want you to think about that.
I've got
People said right beside me.
That el come in and destroy
their property.
in with that answer.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I
am staying with that answer, uh,
this, this particular bill does
not affect, uh, depredation
statute.
With respect to section 6, are
there any limitations to the
power granted to the commission
to protect a species.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
this bill does provide the state
wildlife commission with the
ability to direct the department
to work on species which today
might be unclear as to whether
or not they have jurisdiction to
work on.
Still in the same voice you're
saying.
That it has nothing to do with
private property.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, that's
correct.
With the respect to section 7.
Are there any criteria for being
named species.
greatest conservation need and
what is the commission expected
to do for those species.
This
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
the species of greatest
conservation need list is
updated by the department every
10 years, and that's the list of
species in decline that they
determine have needs in New
Mexico, and that's those are the
species that they are allowed to
direct federal funds to. So they
make that list internally every
10 years and they
expected to do for those
species.
So there's no legal requirement
to do anything for a species
listed on the species of
greatest conservation need list,
so there's no requirement.
that the department actually
does anything for those species.
Those are the species that they
know are in decline in the state
and the species that they can
direct their federal funds.
Again, what are they expected to
do for those species.
to do anything for uh anything
on that list. This was this was
a major deal that Senator
Steinborn kept talking about and
talking about 4 years, 5 years,
senator,
and I would like to yield to you
and
It's please to ask your
questions and then we'll, we'll
see.
No more questions.
Stein, you have a question you
want.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, first
of all, let me just say to my
disk, there are so many things
we need to fix in New Mexico
law. We probably don't agree on
Jennings law, but it's not in
here, which is the depredation
statute. I can just assure you
of that.
That's a statute that allows the
landowner to shoot first, ask
questions later if there's a
four-legged animal on their
property that's even perceived
to be a threat has resulted in
Some kind of slaughter that was
probably not justified, but that
is not in here. I can just I can
just, you know, that's my look
at it, but
There were some strong language
in a previous bill I had that
directed let's stay on this
bill, Mr. Chairman that actually
um got weakened.
Frankly, so I think the answers
you're hearing about.
The lack of trigger, you know,
on a conservation or.
I just think, uh, yeah, I think.
Put stock in what they told you.
I didn't say that much, and I, I
have other thoughts on the bill,
but
I'll reserve them for now, Mr.
Chair. We're on the Du pass
motion. We have a motion by
senator.
second base in Treil wealderon.
Senator Brent, Senator Bran
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Gonzalez votes
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Yes. Senator
Padilla votes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo votes as Senator Woods.
In her woods boats no Senator
Sendo, Senator Sheo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes, you have a due pass 9 to 1.
Uh, you might think about
putting money for the lawsuits
in the gaming fish because those
will entail.
Automatically the minute those
are appointed.
Uh, because they will start in
court when they don't like the
commissioner that they get.
And so you may, I think the
department will have to defend
those.
And so you may want to think
about that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the city
Finance Committee.
Uh, where we are adjourned.
