H. J. R. one
of just two sponsors are gonna
run through the through the bill
we're not gonna have any public
comment we're not voting on this
bill there will be no motions
maybe so we want them to take us
to the bill what it does.
And and so we can do for us.
And small you want to go ahead
and start with house bill one
fifty seven.
Thank you so much Mr chairman Mr
chair and committee house bill
one fifty seven crates the
mining act forfeiture fund Mr
chair and committee this is
really in the event of a worst
case scenario.
Re planning piece of legislation
Mr chairman committee we create
this fund there are no new fees
or of any kind that would be
assessed to our mining operators
this simply insurers that in a
worst case scenario.
The mining act.
Forfeiture fund is there to
ensure the.
Clean up and remediation of mine
sites Mr chair committee
I would stop there I do have.
Secretary props from
energy minerals as well as
perhaps other folks from there I
do also want to say Mr chairman
committee a very big thank you
to Freeport mac Moran
international and other
industry stakeholders again who
have helped inform and shape
this legislation we all want to
make sure that cleanup happens
in the appropriate way and this
is a pre planning piece of
legislation hopefully we never
have to use that
and I would appreciate would
stand for questions really
appreciate your time and the
committee's time time this
afternoon Mister chairman.
Madam secretary.
You have a real quick.
Thank you Mr chair
no we're just here available to
answer questions thank you thank
you make than we have any public
comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes and we have to it
individuals and to speak in
support we received no
indication of opposition it all
right first we have Joseph
dupont executive director cause
problems.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for taking
public comment this afternoon on
house bill one fifty seven make
those problems is a watershed
protection organization that's
been working in the state of New
Mexico thirty two years trying
to keep our protect and restore
the waters of New Mexico
support house bill one fifty
seven we think it's a good
government bill it will help to
ensure appropriate mining
reclamation in the event of a of
a default and it protects public
finances
I think the do pass is in order
and I would encourage you to to
do that thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee next we have Alice and
civic executive director of
human resources information
project.
Good evening chairman when you
know some members of the
committee I'm Allison civic
executive director of the human
resources information project
based in Silver City and I to
speak in support of H. B. one
fifty seven
what we like about this bill is
that it protects forfeited funds
from getting used for purposes
other than cleaning up and re
claiming the mine site for which
they were intended and this has
happened hearing Grant County
of the funds were diverted for
for other purposes from a
natural resource damage claim
for ground water damages at our
Grant County mines and about one
point five million dollars of
the twelve point eight million
dollar settlement were directed
to the Texas V. New Mexico
lawsuit rather than being spent
on groundwater projects here in
Grant County so we need to make
sure that reclamation funds
coming from for forfeiture of
financial assurance are use for
reclamation that will protect
the public health and
environment in mining impacted
communities so we to recommend
passage of H. B. one fifty seven
and thank you for your time.
Mr chair members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Thank you there's no one else in
the waiting room
Chairman we know that there's
not.
Okay.
Questions from committee members
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria think
chairman I I wanted on the list
are what I have a question.
I thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman I don't have any
questions truly I was just happy
that the representative Nathan
small brings this bill before us
today because it is truly very
good at that we're gonna have
now to where we can not only it
dedicate the the forfeiture
funds to but also more
importantly just this nice lady
who spoke earlier said that it
would be specifically use only
to complete the recommend
reclamation plant or the clothes
out that's always been a problem
remember since I was the county
commissioner many years ago I
remember of the problems we have
with mining and having getting
companies to reclaim some of the
damages have been done and that
having a fund that clearly would
streamline the process here is
is very crucial so I'm in full
support of this bill and I would
make a motion immediately but I
know that there is that there's
more comments here I look at
Senator Hemphill and her hand is
out so I'll let her do that
first and then I will move for
the past.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I just wanted
to also thank the Representative
for bring bring all forward and
has efforts to collaborate make
sure that this was amenable to
all stakeholders in the
community that a lot of work and
effort and outreach and many
people have reached out Justin
gratitude for all the effort and
all the work you put into this
so I was second to Senator
Rodriguez's motion.
The operator.
We do we are missing somebody
and they said they registered in
public comments and and I think
it's because.
We're trying to get them in the
committee any other questions
that we get back to that I don't
see anybody else hand raised
Senator Representative small I
do have one question.
Once funds bills you are gonna
have someone to do the
investments.
Hi and EMNRD and then
And then MSA so Madam money why
don't we just have just a few
that you do that.
There's office.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr chairman
and I will in the construction
of the legislation I believe the
energy and minerals was told
that the S. icy would not guide
the investments so Mister
chairman and that is why the
option for them to select those
investment that investment
manager is part of the
legislation.
So is his salary gonna come out
of the fund or ring me adding an
additional FTE.
Thank you Mr chairman that it
would not be an additional FTE
Mr chairman it would simply be a
contract but no at the Mr
Chairman.
We know what we think that's
going to cost in a contract and
in doing the expectations of
returns that that we're gonna
set for them.
When this fund is in place.
Mr chairman I would if
for the specifics of that if if
secretary cultural Propst your
Mr Wallman wants to add anything
Mr chair committee
It that is just in in the
legislation in case this would
be longer than five years to
make sure that the value of the
fund
Trying to keep order Mr chairman
and committee with our the R.
whatever inflation are increased
prices for the actual
reclamation so Mister chairman I
wouldn't foresee those
investments having to have a
huge return they just need to
keep pace Mr chairman and
committee with me reclamation
costs that they've already been
budget for and they've already
been set aside for.
Representative small what
happens if the investments taken
downturn from the funding and we
lose money.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
committee I think that.
It's an interesting question Mr
chair committee of would
I'm.
I would to secretary cultural
Propst but I think the
They would be made in such a
manner to not
go below that level they would
be made very conservatively and
Miss Mister chair that all that
thinking would factor into the
decision of the department about
how to approach that
How to approach that decision
sorry for them secretary
cultural Propst or Mr woman
would you have anything to add
to that Mr chair for Mr woman.
Mr chairman that's a very good
question so.
Not to get too deep into the the
subject matter so yes I see
manages three kinds of funds the
permanent funds we also have a
governmental clients and that's
what we're talking about here
Clients are self directed in
their investments all of these
there's twenty three of them and
we managed through they manage a
one point five billion dollars
of governmental client money
what we strongly recommend with
those twenty three clients is
they get professional outside
guidance as far as directing and
and doing an asset allocation
study that is why you you you
want to have those opinions the
council is much more limited in
its scope and managing the
permanent funds and the the
state reserves and and so here
this fund which we believe would
fit better in with other the
other governmental clients and
that's why I believe this line
is in inserted into the statute
or into the bill rather
You know we are glad to manage
it if that's the the preference
but we think for simplicity sake
this line in the bill actually
gives you it an additional layer
of legislative kind of direction
and oversight.
Sorry I'm talking myself out on
the Representative small what
what dollar amount you think is
going to go into the fund over
time because I mean if we're
talking fifty million two
hundred million you may want to
vestments.
And then if I can actually
happens how can you get that
money out of the market quickly
without being penalized.
Mr Chairman Mr chairman I hope
that no money goes into the fund
because we don't have one of
these defaults Mr chair
the.
That.
And and
this only comes into play Mr
chairman if there is that the
fall and that's the the work
that was done by the
stakeholders including
stakeholders from the mining
industry to ensure that the
funds that have been set aside
in these various investments
could be quickly brought into
this fund and utilized for their
intended purpose but it won't
build up unless there's that
catastrophe.
This bill that one question
about.
We do have our other public
comment and then I think we'll
be good to go.
Thank you for letting me.
That Mr chairman members of the
committee tonnages yet has
joined us.
Mr chair members of the
committee this apologize for
being late we can get the
technology to work but actually
this is my name is Eric our I'm
from Silvercity and I'm the
general manager of Tyrone mining
LLC Freeport mac Moran New
Mexico operations president of
the board of the New Mexico
mining association and a member
of the New Mexico state mining
commission so I appreciate the
opportunity to say a few words
about this bill first and
foremost us to say thank you to
get sponsor Representative small
and secretary Propst and her
staff for working with the
mining association and Freeport
to develop this compromise bill
Secretary approached and her
staff have been great to work
with on permitting reclamation
activities Freeport backgrounds
New Mexico operations were very
appreciative so a lot of work
and compromise went into getting
all of us to disagreement and so
we are in full support and
recommend passage of house bill
one fifty seven thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative small I I was
just following orders the real
question for me about.
I just want to know the answer
my hand and we do have a motion
I can't remember who made the
motion and you're you're.
Senator Rodriguez made a motion
second that was that Senators
yeah help seconded motion.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Byrd is
excused Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes.
Yes and you're done.
Yes.
Yes Mr Gonzalez yes.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes thank
you.
Madam chair yes.
You're you're Senator Steinborn.
Senator Maria there.
We
are having technical
difficulties or Senator
Steinborn what I'm I'm I'm a yes
I'm yes on okay on that bill if
you got me thanks I thank you
members that you're struggling
yes your thank.
Excuse.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Manuals.
Yes.
Yes senator Byrd is that Senator
Byrd has has come on and also
Senator.
Your.
Representative small I will yes.
Your yes and also some of your
words are you there yes.
Your would near.
We have everyone in our Levin
yes.
Representative small
congradulations help all are
Senate bills passed out of house
appropriations with the same
boat and we don't have any
issues over there.
Congradulations leading piece
legislation so.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
committee members.
Thank you Representative Maestas
and and Representative consol is
are you there Representative
Market Street Act so you know
the framework we're gonna have
you to discuss H. C. R. one
we're not gonna take any public
comment no major motion will be
made the committee may ask you
questions.
We want to get prepared and it
over the weekend for this bill
so brief everybody what it
currently has and what your
plans are.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
honorable members it is a
pleasure to be here we thank you
for finding the time to visit
with us my up with pride take
about.
Maybe ten or twelve minutes Mr
chairman I'm joined by co
sponsor representative had been
much finesse Alan Sanchez and
also just the Kadri I will say a
few words as well as the
secretary of the early education
and care department agency
Groginsky welcome secretary my a
colleague Representative
Martinez often says that we've
addressed every single issue
that's come up every single
question we've been asked we
have addressed but we have an
address questions from this
committee so we may take a
little longer than normal I know
you guys know this stuff but
there's folks you know listening
at home
Miss Mister chairman as you know
was a proposal to take one
percent from R. twenty two
billion dollar.
Funds and use it specifically
for early educational services
children zero to five or or or
in the resolution of eligible
for they stop receiving the
services when they're eligible
for kindergarten
With our fun can handle this our
fundamental this for several
reasons one is that as two
sources of income are permanent
fund has two sources of income
unlike you Mr Texas harbor Gail
so not only do we get anywhere
from a projected seven percent
up to eight and a half percent
in investments sometime just
larger that sometimes it's not
we can handle additional one
percent because we also have a
influx of cash from the State
Land Office so it grows by
financial investments
essentially global stocks real
estate bonds and it also grows
by cash inflows from the State
Land Office which over the past
two years Mr chairman exceeded
nine hundred million dollars
so the fund in the last ten
years has grown one hundred
seventeen percent actually the
last eleven years since ninety
two thousand ten one hundred
seventeen percent while the
distribution.
Has grown fifty six percent.
So if we were to talk a
generational equity they would
grow almost equal to one
another.
With with with a tweak for
inflation we are undercutting
current generations of children
for the mythical future
generation of children and
watching this Fund continue to
grow enormously large
what we can use the money wiser
and better by spending it on
early childhood
Education so let me just explain
how that works Mr chairman can I
share my screen do you know.
Let me try.
Can you see my screen Mr
chairman.
We could not see your screen
okay.
To get him control.
Mr Chairman representative you
should be able to now okay great
thank you.
Can you see the screen now.
I can't see your shared is Cher
Cher go.
Okay wonderful so real quick
review Mr chairman so what we do
is our five percent is not five
percent I just want to make that
point I'm gonna make three
points one is our five percent
is not a it's not five percent
to there's a difference between
the distributions to the
beneficiary and the
appropriation the spending of
the money
and those are and then may make
one more point but what we do is
you know Mr chairman we take the
amount of the fund in the
preceding five years we do it
the last day of the year thing
is going to be the largest day
so in the current fiscal year we
took the amounts back from two
thousand fifteen up until
December thirty first of two
thousand nineteen we average
those into what we refer to as a
five year rolling average so
right now Mr work taking five
percent of sixteen point seven
billion.
That's the eight hundred thirty
six million currently in our
fiscal budget but guess what our
fund is close to twenty two
billion dollars twenty two
billion dollars so we're
actually in this last month's
installment it's three point
eight seven percent we are
taking out three point eight
seven in this current month from
the fund and that's just the
that's just too low given the
need in our ability to utilize
it
So that's number one so we can
do one percent.
The last five year average Mr
has about four point one four
percent of there's a document
that I emailed you guys I hope
you got it yesterday but you got
it just now
and it outlines the the annual
disturb the actual distribution
in real time and this last month
Mr chairman it was in fact up
three point eight percent also
with regard to the distribution
the main and we just get back.
Get back to where we were.
You Mr it so and also so.
And for him and so November
nurse before is great
The distribution the what the
number one criticism that that I
agreed with was you cannot put a
hundred fifty million dollars
into a system overnight.
And I agree with that and we
don't have to one percent of
twenty two billion dollars is
approximately you know two
hundred twenty million.
But as you know the the this
common schools portion of the
fund is eighty six percent or so
and since we're only taking five
percent from sixteen point seven
not twenty two billion so when I
first fiscal year it'll be
approximate hundred seventy
million dollars you can't put a
hundred seventy one dollars and
a system overnight well guess
what we don't have to we don't
have to.
The distribution of the
constitution is it earmarked for
that beneficiary it's a contract
it's a it's a trust with United
States government when we became
a state we have a fiduciary duty
to those beneficiaries this
beneficiary being the common
schools so the money is
distributed to the COVID schools
it's air mark for the common
schools in this situation the
one percent would be earmarked
for education but we don't have
to spend it we are the
appropriators the courts are
very clear that this was
established back in the late
twenties we as appropriators
give the legal permission to the
beneficiary to spend the money
so we can build out this system
responsibly and whatever we
decide not to appropriate.
With a small tweak of the statue
during the enabling legislation
next year it remains in the
investment account collecting
interest for that same
beneficiaries so the plan is to
grow up this system without ever
having to cut services without
ever having to cut services
because not only will the one
percent be distributed annually
but in the first five ten years
it'll also grow larger than that
until we build capacity and
utilize the entire one percent
which will continue to grow as
well so anyway up take a to long
of a time we ask that you and
Economic department to do a
study your before last and they
came to the determination that
it is a in fact a good
investment are doing one percent
specifically for early education
thank you Mr chairman
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman and all
members of the Senate finance
thank you for the opportunity
I'll be brief I'll only take a
couple minutes
remember that the vote that this
committee eventually takes
whether it's tomorrow or the
next few days is not a vote to
approve this additional
distribution your vote is simply
to send a question to the voters
that's all we're doing the
proposal is and it calls for an
increase of the distribution by
one percent of R. twenty two
billion dollar permanent fund a
fund that has continually grown
over the last few years what's
changed in the last ten years
says this movie started two
things have changed conditions
for children have worsened and
the value of the fund has nearly
doubled.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
The one percent that we're
asking for is my is my colleague
some just as mentioned you
specifically targeted for early
childhood education this
includes things like high
quality childcare home
visitation services and any of
the pre K. wraparound services
that are needed by children we
know by the most conservative
metrics that for every dollar
spent in early childhood
education the state receives
anywhere between ten and
thirteen percent return that
there's no better investment
David David David young children
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Unfortunately this is I believe
only the first time maybe the
second time that this committee
has seen this piece of
legislation but this piece of
legislation has passed the state
house six times is being vetted
through a number of different
committees it's been vetted
through the intro it's been
vetted by the executive all it's
been vetted by bye bye uh by
those in the private sector this
is probably the most vetted
piece of legislation definitely
that you'll see this year but
perhaps that you've seen in a
very very long time.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I know that we as policy makers
are make tough decisions every
day and we don't necessarily
reliable holding all but I do
want to mention the polling with
this piece of legislation has
continually improved the most
recent poll done I'm not even
two months ago show seventy five
percent of respondents in
support of being able to vote
for the measure that includes
eighty one percent of Democrats
that includes nearly seventy
percent of Republicans and these
are our polls taken throughout
the state Mr chair members of
the committee they're not
they're not centered in urban
settings they are Representative
sample size is any good poster
would do.
members of the committee and Mr
chair.
This is not a silver bullet.
I don't want you all to think
that we're proposing that this
is a silver bullet we know that
many things L. New Mexico we
know that young people in the
state if they're lucky to
graduate high school we know
that there's a brain drain we
know that they leave for better
opportunities elsewhere those
are not so lucky to leave are
you there incarcerated they're
addicted to drugs are they are
unproductive and sadly are stuck
in a cycle of poverty poverty
that is now intergenerational
Mister chair and members of the
committee poverty that can be
addressed in many ways by
investing strategically in the
earliest years I want to give a
regular credit to this committee
to the Appropriations Committee
on the house twelve seed to
governor to governor Lujan
Grisham to government **** well
the last ten years we have
increased investment in early
childhood we have.
And we've done amazing work like
creating the early childhood
interdependent.
But we need to do a little bit
more and Mister chair members of
the committee this proposal
presents us with the opportunity
to create a sustainable and
permanent funding source.
First in the nation no other no
other state in the nation has
has done this we could be the
first perhaps the only one and
and trust me you know I started
this work before I came to the
legislature are you know
advocating for this and now that
I'm here this is one of my
this is one of my pride and joy.
The fact that this movie is not
only still alive ten years later
but it's alive and well tells me
that we're on the right path you
know the next few days members
of the committee and Mr chair
will have the opportunity to
finally send this to the voters
thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman before we
go to the secretary our experts
Ellen Sanchez and just got your
like to address the committee
for members mentor so.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for all
welcoming us in for a.
Hearing this up.
Constitutional amendment I
actually come with a lot of joy
and and excitement and happiness
about the possibility of that's
in front of us the change that
we could see it and change have
a systemic change for the
children in New Mexico I'm the
president of us CHI St Joseph's
children we operate the largest
home visiting program in the
state with the largest in the
nation going into about seven
hundred and fifty homes a week
and and we don't take any
government funding but we we see
the need and want to bring it
for you we propose this for the
first time ten years ago we
ranked forty six in children's
well being we can continue to
sink
of the status quo of being fifty
it is really what we need to be
thinking about talking about and
and I always think about the
percentages I'm very happy to
see that the trust is strong in
the trust could afford to do
this weeks talk about
percentages and what's the
what's the reasonable of
percentage and I want to put the
question what's the reasonable
percentage of children forced to
leave behind in we all know that
that that would be zero so the
unmet need we brought to you
said to you today and of course
over the years numerous times
what we call it the early
childhood Bible but you got
electronically research that
we've done over the last ten
years with the economists of
constitutional attorneys pulling
with Brian Sander off with again
Sanchez.
In all this information see can
weigh it and see it and and the
time is has proven it the the
proof is in the pudding that two
things the trust can support
this and it's what what the
founding fathers intended in the
common schools of the betterment
of our people and the second is
that our children are getting
worse and we gotta keep the kids
in front of us I like to use a
simple little example of what's
happening with that it before we
had the pandemic we had a
epidemic of toxic stress called
adverse child experiences and in
New Mexico it's a difficult
questions for children so the
little brain into it from the
from the third trimester in in
prenatal to two years old and
brain is like an artist making
pottery think of this pottery in
New Mexico it's just so
beautiful that we make that play
in that beautiful lady that hot.
That Claypool calendar.
Yeah you know thanks we're we're
gonna try to get to the enemy of
the bill and and and they
explain that to us and and we're
gonna have a hearing in and
we'll let you guys COVID you're
at the right time but we do have
other members of we got a lot
but hands up madam secretary you
want to make a quick comment.
Thank you yes thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I just
want to make a few points I know
this debate has been here in New
Mexico for a decade and I think
the one thing that is different
is that we do have the early
childhood education and care
department US legislators as the
people of New Mexico can know
that I'm if they pass this and
we have these funds we have good
governance we have got
accountability we have
infrastructure that can really
build on the good work that
we've laid over the last ten
years and and more I think the
need is really around alignment
and comprehensive services from
what we hear so you have the
opportunity here with the new
department and the fact of the
matter is not only is the human
capital return on investment so
great but the multiplier effect
in the economic impact by
investing in jobs and building
infrastructure in every
community so that every family
in New Mexico has access to
these programs for their
children and that in fact is not
a reality right now that's what
we want to see happen and I'm
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
will stand for questions.
Thank you Senator Gonzales
through our first on the list
for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman and of I
just have a couple questions
first of all you know I think.
I want to applaud you know both
representatives.
Others that have taken such an
interest in this and you know
all the work that they have done
behind this to where we are
today you know you really have
done a lot and work on this.
One of the concerns that I have.
And this is where I'm coming
from you know I see two things.
One is early childhood education
which we're talking about the
different parts of the of the
program.
You know and then the other part
is for the funding is coming
from.
So there's two things two
mechanisms.
The point that I want to make is
that
This is my twenty some of the in
the legislature.
And I have three master deed I
need three three degrees in
education to master some they're
all H. cation I would be the
last one you know to be in line
of not supporting education.
But.
Through our part we have done a
lot of good things with the
state.
And then there are some things
that we have not done that well.
And one of the things that I see
is that whenever we do something
that is not well it's very hard
to fix and it's very hard to
repeal.
You know so in going into this
you know I really want to see it
too or you know if it's going to
go to you know what we're
talking about that we don't have
to come back and you know there
was something missing or
something wasn't done right you
know just really into our.
The the question that I have
this the.
On the one percent.
Yes for this you know I will
when I ask others to make a
comment yes does it become a bit
of beneficiary.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Gonzales wonderful question the
common schools are the
beneficiary of the COVID schools
the beneficiary and so of I'm
gonna do I want to get too deep
but as you know Mr chairman
Senator Gonzales the we became a
state from to access Congress
the Ferguson Act in eighteen
ninety eight.
Which kind of set the groundwork
and then the enabling act in
nineteen ten which allowed us to
then convene a constitution to
become a state.
Up two years later and here's
what I was into those exact same
acts as well and have done some
pretty of things with their
permanent fund but if you go to
a section five of the Bergesen
Act of eighteen ninety eight and
section eight of the enabling
act of two thousand ten it says
clearly.
That this I'm actually quoting
from second gap that the schools
colleges and universities
provided for in this act shall
forever remain under the
exclusive control of said
territory under the exclusive.
Control of said territory and so
the schools are the common
schools the that that's the the
wording in the index in these
old laws the COVID schools is
what we make of them when we
added kindergarten in the early
seventies wouldn't have to
it wasn't considered a new
beneficiary
now that with with early
education and all the programs
that are available today that
weren't available back in
eighteen ninety eight and
nineteen ten there's no question
that they qualify as common
schools and so we're not
creating a new benefit sure
you're correct Mr Chairman
sentiments Alice we are not
creating a new beneficiary we
are merely earmarking.
Within that beneficiary one
percent for early childhood
services and the magic words are
On page four.
An additional distribution from
the permanent school fund shall
be for early childhood
educational services
administered by the state as
provided by law so it's
completely legal are and and to
provide appropriate up to do
this.
Mr chairman of the with so you
know both of you well.
Representative Maestas and
Representative Martinez your
attorneys.
You know that and that's fine
you know and the.
So then the part that I'm asking
is so when will the one percent
become categorical.
Mr chairman of Senator Gonzales
and maintenance be described to
up.
I don't know categorical is
defined in statute but it will
be earmarked it will be the law
that that money must be spent on
early childhood education and
that's why.
We don't have to spend at all
we're not gonna build out a
system hundred seventy million
overnight but this will allow
this committee and House
Appropriations and future
governors access to that
funding.
With with the programs that
work.
Well you know if we still have
time you know all unemployed for
maybe director at BTS any common
to you know we have been working
with the LFC on this.
you know in doing this you know
the concern is that you know
just doing it right.
You know and that we don't end
up in litigation or whatever
reason so you know if we have
the one percent and we're saying
it's for early childhood.
You know it is going to go into
a categorical funding because
you're not funding kindergarten
through second grade this great
you know just kindergarten I
mean early childhood out of this
so you know if anyone else on
maybe as director at the end Mr.
Mister chairman Senator Gonzales
yes I guess I understand your
question and I I also understand
the sectors comments to be that.
The intent of the Sanchez is
that the common school
appropriations for early
childhood would go to the early
childhood education and care
part so you're where in the end
if just and I I also understand
that that would ultimately to be
decisive cited by the
implementation statutes and this
is a constitutional amendment
but I understand that the
secretary is laid out a plan for
using these monies and so as you
know public education has about
above the line formula fund
amounts SCG and then categorical
appropriations are to the
department to do specific things
but I I just I heard the Sanchez
explained what they intended to
do in the program Santander to
serve I believe they would occur
at the early childhood education
care department of finance your
question Mr chairman.
Mr chairman and director yes the
thank you you know and I just
bring this up because still I
think you can compare to
kindergarten because sub
categories K. twelve in the from
the very beginning and going way
back you know we had we had a
pre first and we have many you
know where we went into but it
became part of the public
Education Department and then
this one is going to be
different so just a little bit
more you know so within the
funding is there going to be any
triggers or any safeguards.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Gonzales the group no there
certainly is wonderful
to ask that and allow me to
explain it but there certainly
is this is merely setting the
the question of the voters.
Assuming the voters approve that
appropriators will have access
to that one percent.
It'll be six percent
distribution which and with the
rolling average it'll be about
four point nine or five but
anyway six percent distribution
five percent will go to K.
through twelve which we spend it
all and and we and we spend you
know whatever's distributed we
appropriate that one percent
distributed to the COVID schools
early education department
we don't have to spend it all
and so we can grow this system
out responsibly using all the
techniques that the secretary
and the and the finance teams
use every day it's it would it
would be liquid money would be
just as liquid as in the general
fund you can spend or not spend
it the best part is that we
don't spend the general fund it
just stays there if we don't
spend this money it remains in
the investment account
collecting interest earmarked
for early education.
Okay Mr chairman I and just
about done just let them know
going back to the beginning of
when you mentioned that we were
getting the the five percent
that he was at four point on the
average the five year average.
And that was what was it four
point one the last of three
first Mr Chairman sentiments
this was three point eight
seven.
Well I could explain that if
you'd like no no no it's fine I
understand.
But I'll just say for example
that in the state that we end up
state with four point three.
We're saying one percent.
So then we're really not going
into six percent will be at five
point three.
In real time Mr chairman
senators Alice yes absolutely
yes okay well I think that's an
important part you know that we
see in because we do have to
keep the five year rolling
average in all and and going
with that so long very well in
the you know what again I want
to applaud you for all the work
that you put into it.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Gonzales Senator
Hemphill you're.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
like to start by thanking the
bill's sponsors for bringing
this forward and the secretary
for all your hard work and
efforts advocating for our
children and work on this
important legislation and as a
school psychologist and longtime
educator and mother of four I
fully understand how important
it is that we provide those
interventions in those early
years because of the rapid brain
development that occurs those
first three years of life that
sets up the foundation for
children to be successful that
can set up that foundation and
so what that's what we're we
really where are dollars are
best spent as in those early
years to prevent having to try
to undo
Cycles of pot of trauma and so
if we can find those
interventions to family and two
children we can help to create
healthy brains and those
children are going to have that
foundation to be successful in
life so thank you for that my
question is since ultimately
this is a question that is going
to go to the voters have we
worked on the language that's
going to be provided to the
voters because I think it's so
important that this is clear and
concise and uncomplicated
language so that there is no
question about what people are
voting on thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
gotta have built great question
the secretary of state will
prepare the ballot the secretary
state will prepare the balance
to sure with legal counsel but
it will basically read.
Proposed you know just like on
on on page one lines ten through
third thirteen you know provide
for additional annual
distribution of one percent from
the permanent funds for early
childhood education services.
So yeah we got to make sure that
there's no confusion on the
ballot and we could work with
the secretary of state leading
up to when those ballots are
printed.
And is Mr chairman and
representatives is there going
to be like a public education
campaign to further explain what
they're voting on thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr chairman and senator yes
absolutely I mean I think you
you'll see a a ground swell not
only of of of philanthropic but
also nonprofit and others for
profit private sector folks
supporting the initiative I
think we've seen over the last
few weeks sort of a change I can
tell you five six years ago all
of the chambers of commerce
would show up in the polls are
now you know there I think
number one they've been educated
as to the importance of early
childhood number two they've
been educated as to the fact
that the fund is not hurt by
this additional distribution
because of the specifics that my
colleague presented earlier and
number three you know I think
they really see this as a way to
begin that transformation in our
state and so I think you'll see
a lot of players come to the
table educate and inform the
public in preparation for that
election.
Thank you Mr chairman and again
thank you Representative since
secretary.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
center what you're next.
You Mr chairman.
My question has to do with the
you know earlier it was stated
that we're not creating another
beneficiary.
But in the and one of these FIR
should.
It state something like yes.
He said the.
Funds the benefit of public
schools and that public school
code defines school age children
as I do twenty two years of age.
And it could be argued that
adding early childhood education
as recipient of the permanent
school fund creates a new
beneficiary and it's noted that
pre kindergarten is not part of
the public school code but
instead part of the children's
code.
Would you like to address that
part of that
fifty chairman it.
Mr Chairman or Mr chairman.
Let me take first stab at it Mr
chairman Senator Woods during
the.
We're not.
Sherri because on the screen is
whatever we define COVID schools
are.
The federal government allowed
us to be a state it said you
know point blank we have
exclusive control exclusive
control over our common schools
now in the old laws it says
common schools we use the term
public schools
but we created the early
childhood education department a
couple years back and that's a
function of our.
You know of our current
government if they are the only
person who has standing is the
is the Attorney General United
States.
And if the Attorney General and
I states at has a problem with
that
One I think it's
unconstitutional there was a
recent case of Mr speaker Sir
what's Mr chairman that are with
Shelby County versus holder.
Which was a two thousand
thirteen voting rights cases and
the I think this case thank the
does away with that with that.
Journalistic relationship with
the federal government as it
relates to our state lands.
But they did away with certain
portions of the voting rights
act of nineteen sixty five and
suggested the coverage formula
was based on data over forty
years old making it no longer
responsive to current needs and
therefore on impermissible
burden on the constitutional
principles of federalism and
equal sovereignty of the states
so.
So I believe we can do whatever
we want with our permanent fund
however if we do want to create
a new beneficiary we certainly
can we just need a of Congress
to approve it and that would be
done in one of the big package
bills that Congress does from
time to time.
What the question I have is this
it if we're going to create.
A.
It's one or two of questions.
Okay you're saying that we
should have the right to do it
the hell with Congress and then
you're saying that they object
then we'll have to go to
Congress so what I essentially
that's where you're you're going
to place it to me that we're
going to do it if they slap
their hands then we'll go to
Congress to accept.
Mr Chairman there was no and
thank you for that I mean to be
flippant
in my opinion and ever and legal
opinions that we've that we've
acquired over the past five
years we are not creating a new
beneficiary.
However if folks think we are
creating a new beneficiary we
merely seek
seek a congressional approval so
we wouldn't do it after the fact
we wouldn't wait till we got
paid you know they are the
Attorney General the the lawyers
from the legislature great legal
minds in New Mexico with if this
were to pass the legislature
would decide if we need to go to
Congress or not
and it would still be simple as
that but.
Overwhelmingly.
We are we're we're not creating
a new beneficiary but if we are
if if they've great greater
legal minds in mind determined
that we are.
All then we just get a approval
from Congress but we don't we
don't I don't want to.
I want my attitude toward New
Mexico's related with the
federal government to influence
like the legal analysis if we
create a new beneficiary we need
congressional approval if we do
not create a new beneficiary we
do not need congressional
approval either way we get to do
whatever we want with our state
lands and our and our trust.
Okay not disapprove it Arizona
went to six point nine Mr
Chairman center was and they
didn't see congressional
approval when we went to five
point eight in two thousand
three we didn't within C.
conventional approval.
Okay.
Well it's certainly a legal or
not I'm not a well when
attorneys so.
A little confusing though and I
hope that you're able to bring
that point to the voter.
To you know because I'm sure.
Someone will read some of these
analysis and throw up students
is rounded so thank you Mr
chairman I appreciate it thank.
Government.
Senator Stewart center Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
gentleman thank you for bringing
forth this and it set the stage
I will tell you I'm a big
proponent of early childhood and
voted for the bill to create
the.
The department and I.
I think that we lose kids we
don't have that unfortunately in
New Mexico.
Especially because I think it's
just the so many
for example single parents who
do a wonderful job but but it's
it's just almost too much
sometimes on some of them so I
don't want losing the the kids
and so I'm I'm I'm really glad
that we have this department and
we want to make sure it's done
correctly.
But with that said I just I want
to know before we move forward I
want to know where we're coming
from so madam secretary if I
could ask a couple questions
And and maybe a David or someone
from the LFC in China as well
but originally the the budget
for setting up the committee for
the agency was three hundred
twenty million I think we took
twenty million out during the
special session last fall so.
Madam chair is that correct we
just set up the.
The then secretary excuse me the
Senate the department was about
a three hundred million dollar
budget is that correct.
Mr Chairman three hundred and
twenty million is the amount
from the trust fund.
And the secretary can help
budget but I can find a pretty
quick sure Mr Chairman yet
Senator part it's a General Fund
it's around a hundred and ninety
nine million right now okay the
overall budget is four hundred
and ten around for her.
Okay that's an annual budget of
fourteen is that correct that's
what we're looking at this I
started Mr chairman Senator
alright.
Sorry Mr chairman and and we
want to keep in the loop there
apologize.
This is so your annual budget
was my other questions about
former ten million
the.
Now that you have the agency set
up I assume you have have all
the areas that you need to have
the structure built and so so
forth
is four hundred and ten million
enough money to run this agency.
Mr Chairman senator Byrd not to
meet the need that is in the
state are for young children so
we need to meet the
administration's goal of
universal pre K. will be at
least another hundred million
will be needed to meet that
eighty five percent of all four
year olds and fifty percent of
three yearolds to ensure our
infants and toddlers had access
to the highest quality care
about seventeen thousand of them
currently do not have that
access care and education and
nurturing about two hundred and
forty million and then home
visiting again thirty three
thousand families out there who
could benefit from home visiting
who currently don't have access
that would be around another
seventeen million so there there
is a great unmet need across the
state but we are doing a lot
with what we have right now and
making sure that those programs
are online that they're offering
the comprehensive supports and
services and that there are the
highest quality we can make
them.
So Mr chairman and madam
secretary so.
Let me understand those numbers
again you got four hundred ten
as a base budget but you say you
also need a could you give me
those last but those are the two
figures that that you're you
have a short for to meet our our
our administration's goal of
eighty five percent of all four
year olds having access and that
we're including all head start
programs or tribal or bureau of
Indian education they're still
around and others almost sixty
eight hundred four year olds who
could benefit from New Mexico
pre K. about forty eight million
dollars.
and then there are about sixty
seven hundred three year old to
the benefit from New Mexico pre
can that's about almost sixty
million dollars.
Okay so fourteen plus forty
eight sixty.
It is for that okay okay just
ballpark design and we're not
quite there yet but but yes I
think so I'm.
and I I I guess.
I guess I I just need without
getting too deep in the weeds
can you give me the the the the
forty thousand foot view of.
One of the big big budget items
what what do we need this money
for how's it going to be
applied.
Mr chairman senator Byrd out
absolutely around making sure we
have this universal access to a
pre K. expanding our home
visiting eyes I spoke
incorrectly about the home
visiting it's closer to a
hundred and thirty seven million
to really invest in
comprehensive universal home
visiting again voluntary all
these programs are voluntary but
we want to make sure that every
family and every community in
New Mexico has access to the
services because of what you all
know very well of the the return
on investment them for their
family and for our economy in
the future of New Mexico so
definitely home visiting in a
toddler early care and education
services and supports two
hundred fourteen million really
invest in expanding infant
toddler care.
Seventy percent of the brain is
developed in those first three
years educators who understand
child development who have
coaching and support families
who are engaged and learning
about their role and getting
support for helping their
children develop and grow so we
have a real opportunity here
it's not going to happen
overnight we've got the stimulus
funding right now for two years
we're going to be able to learn
and grow and test out and really
bills build back our early
childhood system very strong but
we need to build on to that I'm
at the end of that two years and
continue to grow and expand the
quality in the access and and
making sure we don't economic
equity focus.
It Mr chairman and madam
secretary that that stimulus
money we have four.
Is the twenty two twenty three
is that correct
Mr chairman Senator breakfast
correct September of twenty
twenty three and is that the did
you break it up and equal
amounts for both years and and
if so how much is each year will
we use out of that stimulus
money.
Mr chairman senator Byrd we have
not at then all the barring of
details yet for twenty one and
twenty two but so we we just you
know of course the president I
think it's just finding most
recent stimulus today but we we
expended most of the first
analyst the twenty nine million
we received another eighty two
million that we are working on
administering that including
waiting all parent co pays for
the whole year FY twenty two on
because we know that families
really are struggling right now
and we don't want a copayment to
get in the way of them access
and quality care.
The.
And I'm sorry just writing a
note here.
and you know do you have a
ballpark on what you think
you're going to get this new
stimulus package I guess a
finalize it what yesterday today
so we have all the chair senator
Byrd the center for law and
social policy estimates that
that our department will receive
about three hundred and twenty
million comes into pots of money
one is strictly for childcare
stabilization grants.
That's what the largest
questions around a hundred
ninety seven million but has to
go directly to support our child
care industry
that I'm bringing back
businesses that have closed and
then another hundred and twenty
seven million for the child care
development block grant.
Okay and so just you mentioned
of course as we go to other
races.
Do private childcare is get some
of this money
and it does that money come
through your participate
directly to
what what for example in
Alamogordo we options and they
do great work down there so I
mean with the money come
directly to chance will come
through you and then the chance.
Mr chairman as senator Byrd
great question it'll come
through us to Jim's so we have
been we would have been
providing grants waiting parent
copays paying early childhood
educators stipends were being
discontinuing the service during
this pandemic I mean courts have
been serving but because of that
decisional wrecker and health
risks that they put in during
we'll also be doing that again
with this new stimulus hang
those frontline workers on those
funds and then I direct grants
to all licensed childcare
facilities in the state and
registered homes not just those
who serve families on the
childcare assistance.
And and last one last quick
question David what is is the
budget for the proposed budget
for twenty two I don't remember
I look at some of the figures
are we
Is it still fourteen for this
next year.
I'm sorry what senator Byrd.
So that work could you have ever
two things up I was trying to
clarify your question the budget
both the LFC and exec at similar
general fund numbers for the
early childhood education part
Care Department around a hundred
ninety million and exactly the
same when you consider couple
million of other state funds
what was your question Senator
Burt I hope I answered.
Yes and and and thank you my
computer just died I apologize
for that so I'm I'm using a
friends here
and I appreciate that that was
really my last question I just
want to kind of have an
understanding of what we are
and and I know early childhood
is is a it is pretty expensive
but warm warm if we do this or
whether tapped in from the fund
that's a whole lot of money as
well and so I just need to to do
some more figuring and and
understand what they're about
the budgeting process as to do
we need this can we get by
without and are there other
sources we can still find this
through so anyway I have a lot
of questions but I'm not going
to give the rest of committee's
time with this but again thank
you all for doing this again
supporting early childhood I
just want to make sure that
we're expending the the the
taxpayers dollars correctly but
that also includes making sure
that we we do or do not tap the
permanent fund and we apply
those funds properly if we do
that so anyway thank you Mr
chairman that's all of that.
Thank you senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
to the presenters
you know we I think we've many
of us have live this issue.
For many years
so first I want to really pick
up where Senator Woods line of
questioning was dying.
St chairman and representatives.
It is I am correct that private
previous iterations previous
versions of this constitutional
amendment did actually include
the provision that congressional
Approval is necessary before the
distribution would begin
correct.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria yes.
So I you know I I appreciate the
conversations I've had with the
representative on this I I am of
the opinion Mr chairman of the
Senator Woods point is we are
you're absolutely creating a
beneficiary and congressional
approval is the.
and here's why state that
kindergarten was the development
of the industrial revolution it
was known and understood to
Congress because it was
prevalent in Europe and the
eastern United States for most
of the eighteenth century and
certainly into the nineteenth
century the concept of the
services.
Something completely foreign to
to that to the comp to the
conception of public school or
comments.
both in nineteen twelve and even
today.
And I would submit to the
committee Mr chairman that you
know I think the clearest
indication this legislature sent
that we do not consider early
childhood part of the common
schools is by creating a
separate departments and by
keeping this piece silos often
its own world and in a different
section of wall and so I I I'm
glad to hear from the
representatives that they don't
think that it would be such a
tremendous burden to get
congressional approval.
but I I just as a as a lawyer
and good lawyers can disagree in
good faith about a legal
question but from a place of
good conscience I just I just I
just have to say I think we have
to include the provision of
congressional approval on it the
voters need to need to be a need
to be asked the right question
and the the completely
forthright question.
So that's one issue that the
next issue though is Mr Chairman
goes to the meat of sort of how
I have been struggling with this
amendment this year and I'm
wondering if I could ask Mr
Abbey a question Mr chairman.
Mr Abbey yeah I can the
legislature nine years ago how
would you describe over the last
nine years the trajectory of the
legislature's general fund
investment into the basket of
early childhood services that
would benefit if they became a
new beneficiary.
Help us understand the
legislature's actions of the
last nine years.
Well Mister chairman Senator cut
Candelaria we have a chart in
our by three budget document
which in ordinary time should
have before you in the committee
room but on page one of five we
have a record from FY twelve to.
the recommendations for FY
twenty two so we should we show
total programs for early
childhood going from the range
of a hundred and thirty six
million to five hundred million
now all know to copy at on that
that includes the K. five plus
program which.
When we started this chart ten
years ago it was a Kate plus
program and I think clearly
belonged in the early childhood
program and for continuity
purposes it's it's so remains
included but and I know that
point has been made a number of
times but still that's the total
investments that we've scored a
consistent basis for these
programs Mr chairman I guess the
question I have Mister every
that was historically because I
remember while serving in the
Senate even during years of
solvency early childhood was one
of the few areas of the budget
that was not only spared cuts
but actually continue to grow so
I guess I'm trying to understand
that the the history that's
brought us here okay so let me
get into a little more detail on
parts of this chart so home
visiting FY twelve two million
FY twenty two forty million of
pre K..
Of pre K. eight million in FY
twelve fifty nine million in FY
twenty two the family infant
toddler the important programs
serving children with the
developmental needs thirty one
million in FY twelve sixty
million in FY twenty two.
Thank you Mr Abbey and the
reason I wanted to point that
out and maybe it's a moment of
personal privilege I think that
the person who did my our I did
the most for early childhood
education for the children of
New Mexico was the former
chairman of this committee was
senator John Arthur Smith and he
was accused of being an enemy an
enemy of the initiative and and
was vilified quite terribly
but I was there and had the
fortune of being able to serve
with him.
During periods of solvency and
it was very clear his commitment
to increasing general fund
appropriations I think it's
appropriate that we give Senator
Smith two respecting credit for
the work that brought New Mexico
to this place the reason I bring
up that point Mr chairman is I
think that this the the effect
of this the effect of this
proposal has changed from when I
first came to the Legislature
chill today I think when I first
came to the legislature this
concept was about finding
revenue period.
I think we've gotten to a point
where the discussion today is
for their solidified for me that
this proposal is supplementing
revenue it's not aimed at being
the main source of revenue
because I haven't seen any
request from the detectives to
cut general fund support for
early at we still have the trust
fund and I expect folks are
going to be too excited about
the idea of Klein that money
back if this passes to the
voters so I think the dynamics
have changed it that's and I
bring that up Mr chairman
because the challenge for me
this session has been this I
feel like we're kind of ignoring
the elephant in the room which
is the two lawsuits that
currently hold our K. twelve
common school system which our
current beneficiaries of this
fund are constitutionally
underfunded structurally on
equal.
Both from an operational
standpoint and from a capital
outlay standpoint now I
mentioned that Mr Chairman
because I think we need to
consider what that means I don't
think that we as a legislature
are actually required to do
anything I don't think District
Court in order the legislature
to enact a statute or changing
appropriations bill there's
pretty clear space on that I
think that's in part why the
legislature was not a party to
either the Yazzie Martinez or to
the to the McKinley County
capital outlay K..
But the challenge I have is this
if we're talking about
supplementing for education.
This proposal at this point in
New Mexico's history certificate
Norse the glaring problem in the
room.
Which is this proposal as
written would generate so much
money for relief at that we have
to keep some of it in the funds
because we couldn't spend the
time while the operational needs
of K. twelve education.
Are not that.
and I don't think that anyone
would say that a that the K.
twelve system could not.
Responsibly spend a hundred and
ten million dollars especially
over the next couple of years as
we're trying to address the
learning loss of COVID so this
is the challenge I have Mr
chairman and and Sanchez help me
understand how we as a
legislature.
Can ask the voters to supplement
education revenue general fund
education dollars and not ask
them at the same time to include
K. twelve education in light of
the issues we all know exists.
Mr chairman and senator and
that's a great question and you
know number one I I
I would argue that you know if
you look at K. twelve funding
out of the permanent fund
eight it has continued to grow
every single year because of the
nature of the fund
I I believe that they're getting
more now at the five percent
than they were ever getting at
the five point eight percent.
I also agree with you that it
and I've on the house side I've
been one of the most vocal
proponents of insuring and and
and you know I I.
To your point District Court
telling us what to do I you know
I I think it would probably
agree with you
but also from a policy
perspective I think a lot of us
know that for much too long
we've underfunded education in
general and without getting into
the merits of of the lawsuit I
will say that on the house side
and and and you all on this site
as well through the leadership
of of Roger women Lundstrom and
former chair Smith and and
others General meadow how's
Education chair souls have
really put a package together
over the last couple years you
know this so called education
one shot I'm and if use the
system with an additional four
hundred and I think it was four
hundred and sixty million David
if I remember correctly that
year twenty nineteen.
Whether or not there's more to
do I think is probably
a place where many will agree to
disagree some will say yeah yeah
there's more that needs to be
done others will say you know
we've done as much as we need to
do I heard those conversations
over the interim in LFC where we
had a lot of advocates coming in
and saying Hey we need more
money for the tribal ready
framework we need more money for
the Yazzie Martinez for a one
I'm an LFC and and and it's you
know it's it's its own you know
very logical data driven way
saying well I believe we have
met.
The requirements of what was
asked of us
whether or not we should fund
public advocates wealth more I
think I think that we probably
always need to fund it more.
Whether or not it should be
added permanent fund I'm not so
sure at this point again K.
twelve system is getting more
now at five percent than they
were at the five point eight
percent years ago and that
amount will only continue to
grow because the fund will
continue to grow up next year
they will not get less money in
five years they will not get
this money they will get more.
So I hope that answers your
question it's a great question
and it's one that I think really
really takes into account why
we're here today.
We make huge investments in K.
twelve.
But when the kids enter that
system they're already broken.
What our expert was about to
say.
Earlier you know those adverse
childhood experiences that
children experience before the
age of five were our state eight
or close to it the nation in
adverse childhood experiences
when these kids begin
kindergarten.
I've heard the stories you all
have heard the stories there are
children who don't know how to
hold the pencil their children
who are not potty trained.
There are children who are
broken.
And this investment coupled with
all of the great other
investments that we've made over
the years through this fantastic
new department can really I
think insure that that big K.
twelve investment is utilized to
the maximum.
So Mister chairman I appreciate
that I think the other challenge
I have is.
We have to lift all boats and.
My concern also with early
childhood investments is at
least from my time at the LFC
and director Avid had enough
there if if Debbie director so
we is there but my understanding
is that the the education gains
we see from children who receive
early childhood services
typically certain advantage by
the third or fifth grade in
aren't just staying past my is
that still the trend we see in
New Mexico.
Mr Chairman.
So much of Madam that Charles
here yep I'm not
Charles B. my lost by the way.
Where we've been tracking that
pre K. investments all the way
from.
It's a great K. through high
school and statements I cleaning
those through testing and third
grade testing in eighth grade
and high school.
It's not enough to close the
achievement gap alone
but we are seeing positive
results from our pre K.
investments.
And and how long through a
child's in a primary and
secondary education of those
games to stand.
We're measuring that third
grade.
Well we're measuring it in
eighth grade and we've measured
the first cohort of students
that got pre K. through high
school graduation what is the
data tell us Mr Chairman for
those particular different cut
off points for those for those
low income students that
participate in pre K. they're
scoring higher than their non
lowincome peers they're
graduating at higher rates
they're experiencing lower US
special education identification
sick about half fifty percent
lower and virtually none of them
are being retained at their
great.
And in those games process to
the fifth and eighth grade.
Yes Sir Mister chairman Senator
and with like I said for the
first cohort of pre K.
participants when this program
began we're able to measure
their high school graduation
rates compared to their their
peers who did not get it it's a
small cohort but the preliminary
analysis was very promising.
Mr chairman I I I appreciate
that my and I I highlight that
because it it demonstrates again
I think.
This we are supplementing
revenue and we are seeing
tremendous gains from general
fund investments in early
education as we are seeing in K.
twelve education.
The same intractable problems
that we see with these children.
You know I the same children
have become kindergarteners and
first and second and third
graders.
So you know for me I've
struggled with this but I think
in the interest of just
everybody nine you know where
this is going into discussion.
Over the weekend and I know that
this is not an old concept
anyone senator Michael Sanchez
first sponsored this proposal
years ago I was here.
it was an appropriation or some
for early added some for K.
twelve and.
I I cannot vote for this
proposal and tend to vote now as
it's currently drafted because
it does not I believe respond to
the public policy challenges we
are facing in New Mexico we need
the additional supplementary
revenue for K. twelve for all of
the initiatives that we
discussed today barring a
significant income tax increase.
You know it's going to be very
challenging to do so I will
share Mr chairman that I think
the argument that well.
You know they're gonna get more
in eight years at their current
distribution that's kind of the
same argument that's been used
to get this bill which is if we
just leave the distribution
alone in a few years everybody
will get more.
so yeah this is not this is a
very challenging decision but.
I I just don't feel comfortable
sending a proposal to the voters
that leaves out a very important
part of this equation.
And I really appreciate the
presenters look forward to
hearing more of the debate and
discussion and I hope that this
committee I will can find a
place of collaboration with the
house but as my individual votes
I cannot support it is currently
written thank you.
Thank you.
Senator share your next time or
if you want to ask a question
you need to make sure your exam.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I.
First of all I know that from
the beginning.
this twenty two billion dollars
has just been.
The funds that we just can't
seem to not.
Salivate over get more hands on
for additional response we got
to start funded using.
But I would like to point out
that the.
When we did this the first time
which we voted on it I think in
two thousand three but if it
came into effect in two thousand
five I believe.
where we move to distribution
from four point seven percent
which all the experts said was
the highest prove number.
Two five point eight and it ran
a five point eight five point
five and now it's down to five.
my my number here and I don't
know maybe.
Maybe Dawn from LFC can can.
The help me with this but but by
my math ahead we left that
alone.
We not change that distribution.
We would have about a hundred
and fifty million dollars more
coming from the permanent fund.
To our general fund today.
Which oddly enough is the amount
of money that we say we need for
early childhood so what we did
just fifteen years ago.
Took our ability to fund early
childhood away from us today.
And I don't think it made any
difference in education because
the the whole purpose that we
did this for was to fix
education we were forty eight to
forty nineteen education at the
time we need to go into this you
know multi billion dollar fund
and pull some money out and fix
education once and for all.
And today we're forty eight or
forty nine for maybe fiftieth in
education.
So we spent a lot of money.
R. N. got no positive result
for.
But we also harms children
fifteen years later.
And.
So now I'm looking at the if the
FY are here in in
Maybe Mr Abbey needs to make
sure that I'm reading this thing
properly.
Also got this chart and so on
page three the FIR.
In so if you compares with five
percent would look like forces
what six percent distribution
would look like in over just
twenty years he would grow
assuming the assumptions are
right two fifty seven billion
and give us two point six
billion dollars in in money
coming from the permanent fund
to our general fund.
But it is six percent it'll give
us forty seven billion.
And that's the last year that
will actually have a positive
affect after that we go into the
negative so twenty years we go
negative.
Which means were harming
children twenty years from now
so twenty years from now we're
gonna look that go cost you know
we were forty eight to forty
nineteen education but we
decided we had to fund early
childhood and now we're forty
eight or forty nineteen
education and if we just add
that extra two hundred or two
billion dollars then that would
make such a big difference.
So.
First of all.
Mr Abbey can it did I read that
chart properly for my mission
something there Mr chairman we
have miss Iglesias on and she
stepped away for just a minute
but.
If you could repeat your
question was about what happened
if there she is and what happens
if the money the distribution
rate had increased in state in
the fund about return rates is
that generally right here that's
the first yes that's the first
question six lessons help us out
of the.
Yes absolutely and I think
you're asking about when it was
first at the four point seven
percent and it had never been
increased from that right yes
yes exactly if you could give me
just a few moments I'll get
right back to you I have that
calculation I just don't
remember off the top of my head
but if you just a few moments
and I can get back to here okay.
so I'm gonna let Miss Iglesias
come up with that number but
also in the FIR the analysis in
it says the analysis assumes
inflows from oil and gas
royalties consistent with the
consistent revenue forecasts.
I would also like to point out
that.
There are numerous bills
floating around of the
legislature right now several of
them still have legs.
That would in fact.
If not destroy dramatically
hamper oil and gas production in
the state of New Mexico.
So we want this to grow but at
the same time we want to cut the
legs off the industry that makes
grow.
So I don't think these numbers
revert right because well it's
not just us hello we're we're
we're doing is is much as we can
to cut off that entire industry
but it's also the federal
government's jumping on board
here.
And so today in this in the
Senate we heard that that
our clean air standards we're
gonna bring.
Million dollars to the state
which is great except it's
cutting off two billion dollars
to the state that's just not a
very doesn't seem to work in my
money.
So I I I just got concerns about
the just the wrong half of this
and I think we've got some
experience with the wrong math
what we did fifteen years ago
so.
Mr chairman Mr chairman Mr
chairman whoever would like to
answer that I'd be I'm
interested Mister chairman
Senator thank you for that and
I'm so happy we're actually
talking about them we're
actually talking about the math.
Because my favorite argument of
was generational equity you must
ensure generational equity we
cannot take another one percent
but as I explained in my
introduction the past eleven
years the fund has grown one
hundred seventeen percent.
And the distribution has grown
fifty six percent.
So in a perfect world with pure
generational equity that the
distribution and the fund grow
almost equally with just a
fluctuation for inflation.
So I support generational equity
what we're doing is we're not
utilizing this fund to its best
ability.
And so let me go to page three
of the F. I. R. Mister chairman
Senator so the FIR for the folks
listening at home it says and
does a comparison of if you take
out five percent rolling average
or six percent rolling average
what would the fun be what with
the distribution be and so in
two thousand two thousand forty
two.
The distribution would be two
billion seven hundred seventy
million.
But we went six percent if we
took out that one percent.
It would be two billion seven
hundred sixty seven million.
It would be three million less.
Holy smokes and in two thousand
forty two we're not gonna have
three million dollars that we
would have if we didn't pass
this.
But in two thousand forty two we
would have an entire generation
of young people that we would
receive some more than they
would have four point two
billion dollars in early
childhood services without
raising a dime in taxes.
So I say to you and I said
everyone with regards to the
math Mister chairman Senator
would you rather have three
million dollars in.
And in twenty forty two.
Or or or or human capital.
Of four point two billion in our
children and and and Mr chairman
Sir sure you said it goes down
that that's incorrect with all
due respect it does not go down
if we take more money out of the
permanent fund it grows slower.
At some point in your you know
some point in your twenty of the
distribution work in real
dollars would be less but it
continues to grow.
And it continues to far outpace
the distribution even at six
percent we're still cheating
current children for this miss
future child if we want
generational equity we can have
some mathematicians brought up
and I think it be closer like
seven point three seven point
eight.
But if we want really want to do
a really good investment we
would have faith in ourselves to
develop human capital in society
by teaching our young people all
that we all here in this zoom
Nolan how to succeed in the
twenty first century world so I
really appreciate the the math
because the fund can sustain it.
Just a question of do we do we
celebrate every new year's eve
over how big it is or do we
change the course of the state
forever and be the first state
in the first government in the
world to fully fund early
childhood education.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So Mister chairman I believe a
Miss Iglesias is on so.
Gonna go back to her.
Mr chair Senator.
the distribution today is about
forty three million dollars less
than it would have been if if
the distribution had remained at
four point seven percent in the
fund had been allowed to grow
with that if you look at the
cumulative differences in the
distribution over the next ten
years distributions will be over
the course of two years about
one billion dollars less than it
would have been under the four
point seven percent.
Okay thank you so over the
course of the next few years so
it's it's it's a billion dollars
that's not available to us not
three million.
but I I think my point here.
Of the in that hundred seventeen
versus to fifty six percent a
big part of that was also a
joint crash the economic bubble
that busted in that in the
middle of that and then it was
of course recovery but the
recovery came later
looks like two years ago
of so I do think there's concern
here about that matter where it
goes.
And I think you miss child is
the one that was the came into
our system fifteen years ago.
And is here now.
So it's not mythical we we we
we've already experienced we're
seeing this in real life.
But I also know that one of our
concerns here is is can we go to
Congress to we go to Congress
and in and I'm sure somewhere in
the in the omnibus bills that
Congress didn't read we can
probably get anything we wanted
in there just like you know one
point nine trillion dollars of
which the pigs of it actually
goes to of COVID relief and I'm
sure that we can sneak something
more like that if we need to.
One of the big concerns here is
private.
private early childhood centers
today well I believe that in our
current statute about fifty
percent of of the money is
supposed to go to PED and fifty
percent supposed to go to of the
early the the private centers is
is is that correct Mr trump.
Sorry Mr chairman Senator if I
could defer to the secretary
thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator share the what you're
referring to is the pre K.
statute and when we talk about a
public pre K. actually all of
that comes to ECECD now.
And as well as a private and yes
there is in statute that says
fifty percent of funds of the
percent does that for pre K.
four year olds at the public and
to private the funding right now
is about people between the two
but private sector can serve
three year olds in their pre K.
programs.
So.
It.
One of the things that I'm not
I'm not a expert in this by any
means but one of the things
that.
That it seems to me is that.
Zero two three yearolds simply
cost more money to deal with and
so
if we take the three and four
year olds out of the private.
Secretary.
Then there is no private sector.
Because.
We've taken the.
The children that actually.
Help sustain that whole business
out of that business input in
the comment schools because if
we don't put it in the comments
schools then we can't use this
money and I think most people
agree with that one way or the
other.
So now all of a sudden we really
shut down all private.
Fighters I think.
I could be wrong on that but
that's certainly what they're
telling me.
In in the other thing that
they're worried about is.
How is the money going to get to
that because if if we don't
change.
The beneficiaries you know which
which Katie some percent of that
goes to the to the COVID schools
and then of course we put in you
know for more than of the New
Mexico military institute and
unfortunately we even put in
some money for a.
For the chairman and chairman so
the university down there that
little that little one in
Albuquerque.
So how are they good how do we
how do we make them feel warm
and fuzzy that we're actually
going to not just throw them out
of the loop and and then.
Also just makes zero to three
unavailable to anybody.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator we
share that same concern we do
not want that to happen The
constitution doesn't distinguish
between a general fund dollar
and a dollar that.
That comes from the investment
account into the general fund it
the same dollar so how we were
spending dollars now is the
state we can spend that same
dollar tomorrow so whatever
we're doing now is
constitutional whatever we're
doing tomorrow is constitutional
we just have more liquidity with
investment account
but with that I'll turn over the
secretary to talk specifics but
whatever we're doing now we can
do after we have access to this
this fund
But obviously it's not in the
legislation and I know though
that's a heavy anxiety did a lot
of the providers this
legislation is incredibly simple
do the voters want to give us
access to one percent a year for
each other education and then
with the money then we and I
think now Mr chairman we have
that the best team we could have
with thank you with you with the
appropriate in the house with
the with the governor with the
current secretary we have the
perfect team to growth the
system but I us madam secretary
I do want to address that
question.
Mr chair Senator
thank you for that question
I what I want to say is that our
department our administration is
deeply committed to supporting
parent choice and supporting a
mixed delivery system we
currently without our private
sector partners we could not
deliver the high quality
services we're delivering to
families and children everyday
so thank the commitment is that
we know that we didn't know this
a hundred years ago but we know
it is not even much about twenty
years ago when the National
Academy came out and said we
know a lot more about when
learning really begins that
learning and that education
begins prenatally and at birth
and our department is charged
with this birth prenatal to five
area of care and development so
our system is built on what
families need and we want
families in every community
across New Mexico to have access
to services some communities
that's going to be delivered in
public schools some it's going
to be delivered private sector
and others it's going to be in
both and that's the commitment
that this administration makes
I'm and that these funds when
they're marked and when passed
by the voters if this is allowed
we can support a permanent
sustainable investment in a
strong robust mixed delivery
system for families.
So.
Mr chair
first one little confused by we
didn't know twenty years ago
my children are older than
twenty.
Not quite forty but certainly
older than twenty and and and I
knew that that the child needed
love in the will.
and I knew that the child needed
care the minute she came out of
the womb and in most of that was
just playing of so so just
playing with children when
they're little that that helps a
lot of help some with language
skills you know that the the
eventually want to draw things
so
I I'm not aware in one state but
most of my times are we're just
plain ties that my grandchildren
when they were three drew one.
And and those are some of the
most treasured pies I have not
those that are the most
treasured types I have
and if that was part of early
childhood education just draw a
picture on my tie when you're
three because that was just it
was fun for them it's it's great
for me and it in so I knew that
certainly more than twenty years
ago.
But.
When we look at the fifty fifty
split right now
I.
Looking at the stature I'm
trying to look at the statute
understand it it looks to me
like this fifty fifty split was
for four year olds.
Only but now as a state we're
counting three yearolds and that
so so really proportionately
PED's getting more money than
the private sector today
And in a commitment that we're
going to give him money is is
great I love that but.
We're not going to be here.
You're not going to be here
madam secretary the governor is
not going to be here of all all
of the chairs are in the that
are sitting in this committee
right now aren't going to be
here for effort.
So we need some kind of enabling
language that says that we will
do that we have that enabling
language hang out here somewhere
Mr chair.
Mister chairman Senator you're
you're actually right and
Representative Martinez comes
from the nonprofit private
sector I I came from the private
nonprofit sector before went
went back to college we agree
with you and we will be with you
in that struggle if if if if it
if it needs to be a struggle but
we don't do it enabling at
enabling legislation prior to
the voters approving it
it's just not the way.
We work but we would work in the
next thirty days or you know
next year during the thirty.
To work with you on that
enabling legislation because we
do have to tweak the statute to
To allow the money to remain in
the investment account and not
just sit in the general fund if
we choose not to spend.
We have a level of the whole
enabling act next year once the
voters approved.
So so Mister chair what I.
In this is the chicken and egg
portion here for the state can
have an enabling act into we
have constitutional amendment
but without the enabling act
then the citizens of New Mexico
doing what they're voting on
so you say yep let's take this
out but I'm gonna take that take
out the extra.
Oh one percent but without some
kind of guidance.
They don't know what that one
percent really going to do so
yes we said early childhood.
But.
We don't have a law that says
early childhood it's just going
to go into the COVID schools
public schools because that's
where the money has to go now
Mister chairman Senator the
hello District that's incorrect
we we have it in law we were the
first state in the country to
actually create an early
childhood educational department
yes all the you just explained
that half goes the path half
goes to.
To non paid providers and so we
could change that are but it's
so we're certainly gonna
implemented in the voters are
know what they're voting on
there's going to be massive
misinformation by that but a
handful of folks who don't want
to do this and this this
committee spent does because
we're having flashbacks from
like years past but the whole
world for until we have the new
legislation first I won't vote
for it in till Congress approves
it first like all that stuff's
going to come up in the campaign
but everyone in the state knows
that that that this legislature
has been pushing for one percent
early childhood and they they're
gonna know that that's what
they're gonna be voting on to
allow appropriators up to
hundred seventy million dollars
annually to devote early
childhood educational services
without raising a dime in taxes
that's what they're the
population is pretty pretty
educated on this issue.
Well.
Mr chair I.
I think there I think they've
heard a lot about it absolutely
but propaganda is not just
coming from one side of this
so.
Can we use the common schools
for for pre K. now where is the
line drawn for comments schools.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
share we don't the that five
percent of rolling average that
we get for from the permanent
from the permanent fund to go on
the general fund for the common
schools all of that money
Representative goes into the SCG
now with the other beneficiaries
it goes straight to those
beneficiaries essentially for
whatever they want to do with
that but are five percent just
strictly goes in SCG because
that's the best way to spend the
money and and the fairest way to
distribute the money that's why
we think it's important to do
the one percent for early
education we appreciate the.
The wisdom of the of senator
Candelaria and his take on it
what we need to.
We need to utilize more this
fund more wisely than we do now
but if you just do the math you
know zero to eighteen.
You know
Twenty seven you know there's
more kids five to eighteen then
there is zero.
Zero to five and so.
Twenty seven percent of the kids
are in the air twenty seven
percent of the.
Shucks I just I just had this
summer rain even weird one of.
The zero five five five kids in
in early at and thirteen kids in
K. through twelve right.
So that's sixty percent of the
kids some twenty some percent of
the kids in our system are here
to eighteen system our early at
with this proposal one percent
of the six we're only utilizing
sixteen percent for early at.
So just just to keep that in
mind so that's what we think the
one percent for the as
appropriate and and if we and
and so anyway thank you.
Will.
Mr chair I know that the private
providers are.
Are are very worried.
I know that.
Did the commitment
It is is legitimate I I I don't
doubt anybody's commitment but I
also know that.
If things weren't in.
If it can happen it will so if
we can take all the money from
them we will
so.
And I and I don't mean that in
any kind of derogatory of the
sense I just.
That's just the way.
Things happen okay
so not in this particular case
not about the you madam
secretary for use okay it's just
the way things are and so that's
why I think we need to reach be
very careful about this I'm also
that one of the question here
So in this in this is new
language wasn't in the last time
it's as used in this section
early childhood education
services means nonsectarian and
nondenominational services for
children until they are eligible
for kindergarten so that means
that.
That a church.
Licensed fully operated fully
functioning doing everything
that state wants but it Church
early education system.
Is cut completely out of the
system.
I am sure muted.
Service Senator policies and
before you start we're gonna try
to get out of here by seven and
I know Senator Rodriguez has
questions and know Senator
Steinborn has questions.
And Senator I want to wrap this
last question up and then and
then try to get Senator
Steinborn but we are gonna leave
and at seven so thank you Mr Mr
chair and all of could it short
so that language that that that
we propose.
In the constitution is straight
from the Ferguson next right
from the enabling act and so the
government cannot set up
religious schools.
You know the government cannot
says set of religious schools
however as we do today we
contract with certain up
religious providers as long as
the as long as the up teaching
so to speak is is a
nondenominational so whatever
we're doing today.
Is the legal today and it's
legal tomorrow
we would just have far more
resources to devote to that
similar activity.
All right thank you Mr chairman.
Mr.
Thank you Senator we are getting
is on Saturday Center Rodriguez.
You need my help here thank you
Mr chairman and I realize the
time is right and we're pretty
tired us so I'm going to
reserves and questions that I
have just general questions for
another time as I listened some
more but I I just wanted to make
a quick Madam at least today and
and that is that we and we have
to keep our eyes on the big
picture here and I realize that
it is the the new think of very
big thing when we start talking
about taking more from the land
grant permanent fund this is
been a very sacred Fund and it
should be in there for the
intent that it was intended and
you know we're grateful for that
for that fund so we have to be
very judicious as we continue to
do look at this fund for any and
distributions and so on when you
think of the big picture here we
have approximately one hundred
and twenty thousand children
that zero to five for example
here in New Mexico.
And if the spending is roughly
five hundred million dollars
then we're looking at.
Approximately four thousand
dollars per child as opposed to
this is an early childhood as
opposed to eleven to twelve
thousand dollars per child in
our K. to twelfth for example so
that in itself shows a very big
disparity they are when fact the
children at that age at a very
young early age have so much to
to build up from they have there
that's when their brain
development takes place and of
course the continues I think I
think a brain development
through a lifetime really but I
it starts at that very early age
we need to focus so much on on
that and so
We also you know one of the
needs at least one that we have
here in New Mexico for early
childhood is is the expansion of
this quality education for three
and four year olds in pre K. and
a mixed delivery model that
perhaps we can that we can work
on if we had more fun and and of
course the expansion of the work
force and training and
professional development all of
that would come together with
this hopefully with his
distribution and the expansion
of home visiting guy I'd like to
the the fact I had to wait for
gotten that as we're moving to
this whole scenario that home
visiting is going to be a big
got a big factor in this whole
thing and that is so important I
wish I would have had that and
I'm sure many parents do to
when you know we were when our
kids were little you know or
very early childhood we didn't
have any services really and
when I say any and that's really
what I what I need we have to
struggle to get in the form of
service are especially if you
live in rural communities that
that becomes a real problem but
anyway improved wages for
example you know increased wages
that in a in a fast growing
sector early childhood educators
also you know would be something
to look at as we we would
generate more funds for this but
I just wanted to to make those
points before we move on and and
I I had a few questions but you
know what it's getting late in
the day and I'm going to defer
for another time as we're gonna
be talking again about this so I
want to thank the sponsors
we're presenting this to us
today and that and for
continuing I remember this every
year for the last six or seven
years as correct and I think
I've actually been a long vote
more than once in the committee
before so it's it's have some
hurdles here as we know but you
know what I I think this is
perseverance and persistence
sometimes that we need to
continue to exert as we
accomplish something of this
magnitude as long as we do it in
a very careful judicious way
without safety precautions with
performance measures and with
continued very keen hi at the at
the fund depletion if there is
going to be any over time I
noticed in the chart that the in
in approximately and by two
thousand forty two I think is
when it is is when it's expected
to start seeing some decline but
based on the changes and the
moving targets that we see now
with the economy and everything
else you may not even be at that
point this is an economic
analysis that we have and things
do change so I I think that we
can go on history based on the
growth of the fund over several
years now and that's what we do
for everything we we approach
here at the state or budgets we
go on forecasts in on them
historical data and not only for
the revenues but also for budget
expenditures and so on we we
gauge all of that based on
history so that's what we would
be doing here I thank you.
To the Sanchez and I thank you
Mr chairman and I'm going to
defer my questions for another
time just wanted to thank you.
Senator Rodriguez thank you
Senator Steinborn the help
longer you're gonna be one
question Mr chairman.
One one five part question I'm
just kidding.
Mr Chairman representative and
secretary welcome one question
how much if fully ramped up.
To the full need of New Mexicos
kids.
How much would it cost us to
here for early childhood
education in the state of New
Mexico.
Mister chairman Senator I'm one
of madam secretary.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn
I'm not going to give you the
full number the number that I
gave you just in terms of the
need for infant toddler care to
meet the needs universal home
visiting the needs to meet it is
a little over half a billion
more.
And that does not take into
account some of the areas that
some of the other people have
mentioned so I think we are
doing to costs that is right now
one on home visiting one on
childcare coming out of that and
then our for your finance plan
that was required to Senate bill
twenty two will be available in
June and will have a better
number for you and and the
members of the legislature the
governor.
Thank you madam secretary and I
bring out that number because as
we consider the scale of need in
our state we consider some of
the numbers that are thrown
around with the federal money
which is fantastic it sounds
like it's part of a one year
need for the state and of course
that'll be before this
constitution them even those
before the voters let alone the
money starts coming in so really
what we're talking about here
college is a long term proposal
for the state.
Of something that is uniquely
important of the state is far as
investing at a time in
children's development of the
brains when it will literally
shaped in part probably more so
than any other part of our life
to chairman of Willie.
The success of their life and
with that the success of our
state and the success of our key
fundamental core goals of the
state of reducing poverty and a
creating economic vitality I
don't think there could be any
more important economic
development strategy that's for
sure.
Not to be cliche but we do need
a Marshall Plan for you and
that's what this is
And you well I wasn't around
Marshall Plan happen but for
those that don't know it was the
rebuilding of.
Of of Europe after and we'll see
so anyway I just want to say
it's important to get that scale
and it's important that we we we
right size this proposal to help
meet this need if that's what we
want to do and
Clearly it's gonna take a lot of
this money to do that to meet
that goal and thank few things
could be as important so thank
you again I'll have more
questions later but thank you
everyone for your time tonight.
Senator Steinborn.
Everybody that stayed with us
for pent dropping off members I
think senator Candelaria kind of
get some of my points and I I
also want to touch on it is I
can't support this piece of
legislation as it currently sits
we may have to change a little
bit.
And and see what happens.
But you will get a hearing.
And and we'll try to do that
over the weekend.
I just want to remind everybody
and and madam secretary you said
you are getting three hundred
and twenty million dollars in
this round of federal funds.
If this passes and a couple
years of the initial hundred
eighty million I think we also
had what is director Avid Sadia
three hundred twenty five
million dollars in your budget
how much did we say we had a
within the in the current child
budget.
Mr chairman it's around four
fifteen for twenty four sixteen
in total funds of one nineteen
general fund.
How much do we have in in and
that early childhood fund the
trust fund will have three
twenty well with the transfer in
the house bill two.
Want to look at that and they
went to capture those federal
funds to put that in there to
make sure that that it spent
wisely incorrectly so that
that's something you're gonna
have that conversation but three
hundred and twenty million
dollars in federal funds coming
to.
Organization that almost has a
billion dollars and.
Better birds money every single
year and I know it's a slow
start it's a process but we're
gonna look carted dollars in my
concern in the dollars is for
the future.
this may take a couple years to
get action and pastor voters.
And there will be a late time
and in those out years we may be
short of dollars so I'm very
concerned in our out years what
happens in and how we keep
everything funded stable level.
Thing I want to mention is.
So my father told me I mean
there's not and there's nothing
you can do more for childhood
given education.
However that looks.
You guys are the professionals I
don't know that.
But that's very important that
we give children the right
education and how they start
out.
I'm very disappointed Senator
Smith in somebody else's.
Happened when they did it if you
and then that was deplorable
Committee and they never done
apology you guys did what you
guys wanted to do and I'm not
seeing anybody in here was
involved but.
That was very.
I got this done working with
people and not trying to
embarrass them.
Campos.
So.
I think that.
Senator Sanchez will be with us
here Saturday I I did invite him
use the first one that that get
there early childhood bill.
Thank you your credit where
credit is due he started this
ball rolling and financially
and.
We have never been able to do
that but Senator Smith has set
the path with general fund
money.
And almost a billion dollars of
the total together.
That's very impressive for
someone to do in the legislature
well people are trying to chop
off your head because they don't
have something else that they
want.
So.
I think we will try to schedule
for this weekend I don't know
what our time frame an incentive
finances but we're gonna be
looking so watch a calendar.
We need to sit down and talk
with a couple of us because our
if you can count like I can
count
the math doesn't work out so we
will have to make some changes
to their cell.
We're very representatives thank
you so much if you could let us
know before the hearing
That be great.
Thank you Representative
appreciate your time thank you
madam secretary appreciate your
time everyone all the members
the committee thank you we'll
see you tomorrow on the floor
will get your copy the calendar
and so have a good night.
Thank you you too.
