And um
And also to our webcast.
I, uh, if you can give us your
name and the agency that you're
representing. So we will go
ahead and we'll start with the
first one.
And uh we have uh
With this is Department of
Information Technology.
Go ahead.
your chair just to clarify,
we're gonna start with an
overview of the special
appropriations item today.
Excellent. OK. Uh, so good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Uh, my name is Joseph Simon.
I'm, uh, analyst with the
Legislative Finance Committee,
uh, with me at the table here is
Mary Beth, uh, with, uh, DFA,
uh, who is the, uh,
Deputy Budget director of the
state budget division at DFA
and
see if we can make an
adjustment. It's like a little
too loud.
Mr. Chair, I will try to speak a
little more softly.
I'd rather have it adjusted.
Mhm
OK, let's start now. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, so you should have in
front of you a packet looks like
this. It is a uh rundown of all
of the executive budget
recommendations for special
supplemental deficiency
appropriations and uh the
government results and
opportunity fund as well as the
LFC recommendation for those
items and a couple of more uh
sections including fund
transfers and uh transportation.
So just sort of a a quick
warning about this sheet.
There's a lot of different
moving pieces with
this, um, between the two
recommendations, so there's some
places where, uh, you know, the
executive maybe recommended
something as a special
appropriation, the LFC looked at
it as something that could be
either a fund transfer or
something that's in the
government results and
opportunity fund. Just a
reminder about the, the growth
fund, those are for
for the pilot projects that
we're starting up so rather than
uh build some funds into the
agency.
Operating budget, this gives us
a chance to, to take a look at
new programs and sort of a test
environment spread out in
appropriation for 3 years, give
the agency some time to
implement that program and look
at the results that it's
actually having to see if it's
having the expected results.
So, um, with that, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I think, uh, I'll just
take a, a brief overview of the
totals. You can see here, uh,
the executive recommendation,
uh, from the general fund
included a total of 2.344
billion and special supplemental
and deficiency appropriations,
uh, that's from the general fund
from other state funds, which is
mostly in the grow program. It's
325 million for a total of about
almost 2.7 billion. The LFC
recommendation totals 3
million dollars from the general
fund, you'll notice online, the,
the line that says section 10,
uh, um, more than half of that
is in fund transfers, so, uh,
we'll, we'll address that when
we get to that, that section of
the bill. An additional 603
million other state and federal
funds again, uh, the bulk of
that is in the growth fund.
Uh, and so with that, Mr.
Chairman, uh, unless, um DFA had
any quick overview comments, we
can go ahead and get started and
in walking through this.
32 page uh list of
recommendations.
OK, so, uh, starting out on page
2.
We see a number of
recommendations for court, um,
for court items. I'll just note,
uh, you'll see a lot of the
areas where the executive made a
recommendation, but the LLC did
not.
Uh, the LFC has a $6 million
recommendation on page 3 line
number 14, includes $6 million
for facility repairs, uh, the
executive chose to break a lot
of those out to individual
courts, whereas uh this the um
the LFC uh recommendation said
put it all in one bucket and
then AOC can distribute it out
to the court. That's a tactic
we've used in the past.
Um, did you have anything on the
court, Mary Beth?
Um, yes, thank you, Joey. Uh,
good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, committee members. Um,
I just wanted to point out, um,
so as Joey just said, the LFC
strategy typically puts the um
IT funding at AOC. So the
executive this year has kind of
done both as you go through,
you'll see smaller amounts for
specific courts, but there is a
big bucket of 5 million going to
the administrative office of the
courts as well. So they would
have that uh discretion across
the state as well. Um, with,
with that, I'll turn it back to
Joey for the next page.
So Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that was all the, the
comments I had on the court
items if we wanted to move on to
page 4 and begin taking a look
at, um, well, actually page 5
begin looking at the Department
of Finance and Administration.
There's a couple of pretty
sizable requests I wanted to go
over real quick and then I hand
it over to Mary Beth, who I'm
sure has uh some information on
some of these, so I would just
point out page 5, line number
45, there is a $75 million
recommendation from the LFC and
110 million.
do recommendation from the
executive for the New Mexico
Match fund that was something
you all created the last year as
a sort of source for local
governments and state agencies
to be able to leverage if they
didn't have matching funds to go
after a federal grant, they
could apply to DSA receive a
contingent award for matching
funds and um and, and make that
project potentially possible,
uh, you all appropriated $75
million last year, uh, the bulk
of that was, uh,
was awarded on a contingent
basis, um.
We'll, we'll see how, uh, a
number of those, those uh uh
awards have been successful in
leveraging those federal
dollars. Uh, we'll see how much
is left in the balance of that
when, you know, when all is said
and done, there there does
appear to be a, a small amount,
uh, there, um, but the, the
executive recommendation is a
little bit higher.
Uh, Mary Beth, did you want to
talk about, um, the items on
this page?
Yup.
Uh, thanks again, Joey, Mr.
Chair, committee members, um, on
page 5, you will see lines 42,
43, and 44 are high dollar
amounts from the executive, uh,
50 million for a housing down
payment assistance program, 50
million for homelessness
programs and initiatives, and
then 100 million for the
disaster loan recovery fund, uh,
which is contingent on enactment
of legislation. Um,
If you have specific questions
about those, I do have the uh
DFA.
Uh, staff who have some
additional information on those
if, if you're interested. Um,
but I think that that's it for
page 5 for me, so I will turn it
back over to Joe.
Mr. Chair, continuing on with
DFA on, on page 6. I'll note on
line 54, the LFC has a
recommendation for $50 million
for regional recreation centers
and quality of life grants.
That's been a successful program
you've all, uh, done in the past
in getting some, some dollars
out to local governments to do
various um recreation projects
we heard uh an evaluation of
this program earlier this year,
um.
Uh, this is, this has been a, a
program that's been pretty
popular with local communities
and applying for those funds.
Additionally, line 55 and 56.
Mary Beth just talked a little
bit about housing. We have some
other money in the budget that
we'll, we'll see later on here.
But we've got a couple of uh
items here to DFA uh to really
take a look at evidence-based
programming around homeless
encampments and how communities
are addressing those issues, um,
you know, the city of Houston
has has a program that's been
pretty successful, uh, and this
would effectively be based on
those, um,
On those items and sorry just to
just to clarify that's line 56
and 57 was what I was referring
to, um, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Joey, Mr. Chair. Um,
I'll call your attention in just
a few, uh, items on page 6. Line
59 is for the sentencing
commission. It's 2.5 million
recommended by the executive for
grants awarded under the Crime
Reduction Grant Act, which they,
uh uh enter into with, um,
Judicial areas statewide.
Uh, sorry, and just on that, Mr.
Chair, so you can see a little
bit of a different strategy here
online 55, you've got uh 2, a $2
million appropriation to DFA for
criminal justice coordinating
counsels sort of a a similar uh
program.
Thanks, Joey, Mr. Chair. I, um,
if I may, that just speaks
again, I believe, to the
Somewhat difficulty this year in
some areas of actually matching
up the executive and the uh LFC
recommendations. There are
several places just like that,
where you will see slightly
different wording or maybe a
slightly different intent, but
it does overlap. So, um, it's
something to just be aware of,
um, I believe, so, uh, just a
couple more on this page quickly
line 60 is $2 million for do
it's digital trunk radio system,
and that's for emergency
responders statewide.
Um, and I will just point out um
the large dollar item, line 63,
which is 70 million to support
the satellite connectivity
infrastructure deployment
project through the Office of
Broadband, um, and that's it for
page 6. Thank you.
So, um, Mr. Chair, moving on to
page 7, there's uh, uh, there's
a number of areas where there's
a lot of overlap between the LFC
and the executive
recommendation, so, uh, for
example, um, some of the items
for the, for the tourism
department, the $16 million
online, 74, for example, um,
You know, and the online 77 uh
additional funding for the
outdoor equity fund, uh, the,
the pretty similar amount
although the LFC is just a
little bit higher, uh, Mary
Beth.
Thanks, Joey, Mr. Chair, um, on
page 7 line 75. I just want to
point out that $2 million to the
Economic Development department
for the Healthy food financing
program, which is part of the
governor's um food and hunger
initiative and online.
78, um, a small dollar item,
but, um, of importance, I think
$500,000 again to the economic
development department and this
is for grants to support
underrepresented filmmakers in
New Mexico.
Thanks.
So, um,
Mr. Chair, moving on to page 8,
we can uh see uh the economic
development department. I'll
just note real quickly here
we've got another sort of
strategy, uh, difference between
LFC and the executive on line
number 82, so you can see, um,
the executive recommendation of
$24 million is in the other
funds column. That's because uh
the executive recommended, uh,
not this exact wording that you
see on the page, but sort of a
similar program, uh, for in the
growth fund.
So the LFC recommendation of uh
$35 million for site
characterization and
pre-development would be both
contingent on legislation that's
been introduced, um, in the
house I believe and uh uh would
be a special appropriation for
one year rather than the 3 year
grow appropriation that's in the
executive recommendation.
Uh, you know, I'll just also
point out there's a number of
economic development, uh, items
in the LFC recommendation lines
83 through 887. Uh, that
includes $25 million to
establish a research and
development, uh, deployment
fund, again, that would be
contingent on passage of
legislation and $8 million for
advanced energy uh initiatives.
Mr. Chairman
Uh, thank you. I just wanted to
correct, thank you for the
comment there. I just, that the
legislation has been introduced
in the Senate, not in the house.
Thank you.
Make sure, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, I apologize. Mr. Chair,
no, no problem. Just want to
make sure we get it all done and
it's not confusing. Yes, no, I
apologize, Mr. Chair. I, I
shouldn't have said house, uh,
when, when I wasn't sure, but,
um, uh, Mary Beth, do you have
anything on this page?
Thanks, Joey, Mr. Chair. I, I
just wanted to point out, um,
again, they're slightly smaller
items, but there's support from
the executive for the uh
regulation and licensing,
licensing departments, uh,
cannabis control division with
on line 88 $610,000 to purchase
vehicles and equipment for the
division, as well as line 90,
which is for law enforcement,
uh, vehicles just under 500,000.
It's 465.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, uh, I'll just
point out that the LFC does
include those items, but, but
it's in the growth fund. I'm not
100% sure why they didn't roll
up into into the girl
appropriation, but that's just
um housekeeping error on our
part, so uh that is in the LFC
recommendation as well.
Uh, so, um, moving on to page
number 9, we can see some items
for uh the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance and
Cultural Affairs department, uh,
Mary Beth, did you want to cover
any of these?
Yeah, I, I'll just point out,
um, uh, line 93 and 95, this is
again another area where we've
got two lines for something
that's pretty similar, um.
Uh, so both of those would uh
relate to the fair access to
insurance requirements program,
the fair program, uh, property
insurance, uh, item, uh, and I
just point that out, those are 2
$50 million in the executive
49.5% in the LFC.
Thanks again, Joey, Mr. Chair.
Um,
I will bring your attention to
line 95, which is $25 million to
the office of the superintendent
of insurance, and this is for
medical professional liability
insurance premium reduction.
On line 98, um, the Native
American Graves Protection repay
repatriation Act compliance,
you'll see both the LFC and
executive do support this. The
executive is at 5 million with
the LFC at 2.5, um, and then the
other ones I want to point out
quickly would be line 99, which
is 10 million from the executive
to the rural libraries endowment
fund, and then lines 103 and
104. This again is another
example of, um,
The LFC and the executive having
slightly different wording for
appropriations, but the intent
is, is relatively similar.
You'll see they, they're
basically to support meat and
poultry inspections and meat
packing facilities, so both of
the executive and LFC support
that, um, effort.
And just uh really quickly, uh,
Mr. Chair, on line number 98,
uh, Mary Beth brought up, uh,
the initial agency request was
for 5 million through fiscal
year 2027. I don't recall if
that was the executive
recommendation through 2027. So
the LFC recommendation funds the
first year of that work, um,
you'd have an opportunity next
year to come back and do um do
do another year, so a little bit
different. We funded the full
first year of that program.
Did you wanna do uh start on
page 10 and er.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, we turn to page
10, um, and there's just a
couple that I'll uh call your
attention to, uh, line 107 is
$20 million to the energy,
minerals, and natural Resources
Department for wildfire
mitigation programs and
initiatives, um, and I will just
point again to one where we're
relatively similar, uh, line
110 supporting community energy
efficiency block grants, uh, the
executive is at 6 million on
that.
see is at 5, so, so pretty
close, um, but as for this, I
don't have anything else on page
10, so I'll turn it to Joey.
And I'll just, I'll just point
out, uh, very quickly, uh, Mr.
Chair. So line 107, there is uh
some, some additional funding in
the fund transfer section we'll
talk about when we get there
related to wildfire mitigation.
Uh
Moving on to page 11. Uh, you
can see the Office of Super, or
sorry, not the Office of the
State Engineer, my uh, my bad,
uh, so we've got uh a some
Some large items here for OSE
related to uh Indian water
rights settlement projects, the
executive has 35 million the LFC
has 20 million. That would be,
uh, for, um, projects, um, you
know, the OSE says they can go
ahead and get started on this
project while Congress is um is
uh debating whether or not to
approve those settlements.
Um,
did you have anything on page
11?
Just one, Mr. Chair, the only
item I'll call your attention to
on page 11 is line 123. It's
another appropriation of the
state engineer, $5 million. Uh,
this is from the executive and
it's implement the water
security Planning Act, a 50-year
water action plan.
And modernization of uh agency
online information and
engagement tools.
And uh I'll have you turn to
page 12 if you would.
Line 131.
Is 104.6 million. This is for
the early childhood education
and care department, and these
are childcare pilot.
Um
Uh
Programs that uh
That the executive um thought
would work well as non-recurring
to start. These are things like
increasing the floor for um
employees from $15 to $18 an
hour in childcare settings, um,
you know, providing more
resources for special education,
um, and I will also point out,
uh, in this line that the
funding
is 35,113 of general fund and I
know these numbers seem a little
bizarre, um, the other is
69,487. So just very quickly,
what this speaks to is the uh
legislation introduced um to
increase the distribution from
the Early Childhood Trust Fund
in FY 26 to $500 million and
this 69487 is the balance of
what is not in the early
childhood education and care.
apartments base budget. So when
you add their base budget, uh,
transfers with the 69 million,
you do get 500 million. So
that's where those numbers come
from. And of course, this is a
contingent on um I believe it's
House Bill 71, um, passing, um.
And with that, I'll turn it back
to Joey.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, we, we're gonna, uh,
move on to the healthcare
authority now. I won't, uh,
I'll, I'll point out a couple of
these, but won't spend a lot of
time on them. You're gonna hear
a presentation this afternoon on
behavioral health. A lot of
these items relate to that and
so I'll just sort of defer the
sort of deep deeper dive into
those recommendations until uh
you hear that this afternoon.
So, um, I'll just point out, uh,
on we're moving on page 13, uh,
line number 146. We, we
talked about uh how in the LFC
recommendation there's housing.
dollars throughout different
agencies um on line number 146
at the bottom you'll see startup
cost to build uh a capacity for
housing providers, um, on the
following page.
Um, you'll also see on, uh, line
number 149 $5 million for
additional vouchers for the the
linkages program.
Hm
Additionally, down on, on that
same page, page 14 on line
number 153. You'll see sort of
uh um
A, uh, sort of similar, I will
say this is one where you see
the LFC recommended language in
that box, but the, the executive
uh items a little bit different,
uh, so there's, there's $43
million in the uh LFC
recommendation for regional
transitional acute care
facilities and certified uh
community behavioral health
clinics, um, that somewhat
similar to an item that the
executive had for uh community
behavioral health clinics.
You wanna wanna to cover any HCA
items?
OK, thanks again, Joey. um, Mr.
Chair, um, I'll take you back to
page 13, just really quickly,
there's a few items on here that
I'd like to bring to your
attention.
On line 139, um.
It's $50 million from the
executive to support uh the
world healthcare fund that is
currently um in being operated
is very successful program from
the healthcare authority, uh,
they received more grants, uh,
applications and they have
funding for. So, uh, the
executive uh recommends another
$50 million to continue these
efforts, line 140, um, the
executive recommends $100
million for behavioral health
expansion initiatives, and I'll
just say very, very quickly,
this is another spot where
It's kind of hard to match
things up a little bit. So the
executive has the behavioral
health funding in one bucket,
$100 million and there's, you
know, uh,
Elements to it, uh, to, to
address different behavioral
health issues throughout the
state. When you look at the LFC,
you'll see that there are
More, uh, appropriation
recommendations for behavioral
health, slightly smaller
amounts, but if you match them
up, you may find that there's
not
That big of a difference. So
again, it's just how you're kind
of looking at, um, the
appropriations and then just
very, very quickly, I'll just
point out on line 144 $5 million
to support the boarding home,
uh, life insurance and
development across the state,
um, that's all I have for that
page. I'll give it to Joey.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee now uh moving on to
page 15 with the workforce
solutions department. I'll just,
uh, there's, there's a lot of
similarity here, but I will
note, um, on online 157 and 158.
This is another example of
different strategies where um
the LFC recommendation funded
them as a special appropriation,
the executive recommendation
included those programs, um, in
the grow and so that's why it's
in the other column. Uh, I also
Note on, um.
Line one number 163 $35 million
to workforce solutions to
implement the paid Family
Medical Leave Act, that would be
contingent on that, that law
passing that would essentially
be um startup costs including
building the IT system for that
uh department.
Mr. Chair, um, on page 15,
there's only one item I'd like
to, um, I'd like to bring your
attention to it's line 167, and
this is $5.4 million to the
Department of Health to offset
projected shortfalls, um, at two
of the facilities in Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute and
the Los Lunas Community Program,
and I just wanted to point out
real really quickly, um, I don't
believe you've heard from the
Department of Health yet. Um,
they have faced a structural
deficit in their facilities
program for quite a while and
they're trying to correct this
through a variety of um
approaches, uh, but this 5.4
million would help them, uh,
Fill any gaps as they move
forward, uh, trying to resolve
this.
Yes. OK. Uh, Mr. Chair, just a
couple more, um, on 16, uh, 1,
I'll bring your attention to
line 169 is $3 million for
health councils, um, to the
Department of Health, you'll see
some other smaller um amounts
for the Department of Health and
um and then we move into
Department of Environment. I'll
just point a couple large items
to you on line 175 is $50
million to fund investigation
and
mediation of neglected
contaminated sites and on line
178 is $75 million for the
development, implementation,
support of strategic water
supply program, um.
That's all I need to call your
attention to on page 16.
And I'll just point out, Mr.
Chair, so there are a couple of
large items for the environment
department on line 177 $20
million for the rural
infrastructure revolving loan
fund for that's for rural
community water programs. I also
just note a quick difference on
line 179, um, this would be the,
the state match for federal
Superfund sites, the LFC
recommended they both
recommendations funded in the
amount requested the LFC
recommendations from the
consumer settlement fund.
Mr. Chair, uh, committee
members, uh, sorry, on page 17,
um,
The, let's see, line 193, I'll
just point this one out to you
quickly. This is for the
corrections department to expand
re-entry services, career
technical programming and
housing opportunities for the
population at the corrections
department, um, and then you'll
see here, it's not a general
fund recommendation. It's from
the community corrections Grant
Fund.
And Mr. Chair, on page 17, I'll
just, I'll just back up real
quick, um, uh, to line number
188 and the children, youth and
Families department. So you'll
see there at $1.4 million
special appropriation for
liability insurance. There's
been a lot of focus on the
department and some of the large
payouts this would fund an
increase in their GSD risk
management premium, um, sort of
in a special to continue
highlighting uh that issue with
the department, um, you know,
Mary Beth noted the corrections
department. I will just
A point to line 192, both
recommendations include a pretty
large amount for hepatitis C
treatment. You all have, um, put
a lot of money into, into this
program uh and trying to, uh,
in, in trying to treat that uh
in our prisons, um, the LFC
recommendation is 40 million
from a couple of different funds
including the penitentiary
income fund and the executive
recommendations 25 million.
Uh, Mr. Chair, just one quick
thing I wanted to add um to the
line 188, which is the CYFD
liability insurance increases,
um, again, this is another just
a different approach, this
amount um is in the executive
base recommendation for CYFD and
it's in a special for LFC, so it
is supported in both places,
just again, different approach.
Moving on to page 18, Mr.
Chairman, and the Department of
Public Safety. I'll just, uh,
point down here to uh line
number 202. There's a $6 million
recommendation from LFC for law
enforcement vehicles and
equipment, which I believe was
um it was requested as Capital
Olay, the LFC chose to fund it
in the um in special as a
special appropriation and again,
uh, we've got uh uh sort of line
mismatch here so um.
line number 203, you see $1.5
million for maintenance and
repair of law enforcement
aircraft while on line 196, you
see a million dollars in the
executive for helicopter
maintenance.
Um
And Mary Beth, do you have
anything on DPS?
No, Mr. Chair, I don't have
anything additional on page 18,
uh, but I can take you to page
19, um.
And I would um ask you to look
at line 210. So now we're into
public education department, uh,
recommendations. So the
executive has $4 million to
implement special education
initiatives, uh, by the public
education department, line 211
is $9 million to support schools
with the highest ranked family
income index.
And then I'll just have you uh
look at line 213, uh, which is
$1 million from the executive to
implement student, family and
community engagement strategies
for students in foster care and
students experiencing
homelessness.
And I'll give it back to Joey
when he's ready, so, um, so Mr.
Chair, I'll just make a brief
comment on, on PED items in
particular, so a lot of these
appropriations are continuing,
uh, projects that you've um done
in the past, so a lot of
continuation with some of the
previous ones. I'll just note
like you see that, for example,
online, 212 with $40 million in
both recommendations for career
technical education pilots, um,
you know, you all have funded
recruitment and retention
initiative.
Um,
that's included online 214. I'll
also say the LFC recommendation
we'll see in a minute has um
Uh, has some, some grow items
related to public ad.
as well.
So, uh, with that, um, Mr.
Chair, moving on to page 2 in
the higher education department,
we can see, uh, actually, uh, so
there's there's a number of
items on page 20 for the higher
education department that are in
the executive recommendation.
Did you want to address any of
these, Mayor Beth?
Sure, thanks, Mr. Chair. Um, on
page 20 I'll just call your
attention quickly to uh lines
2:30 and 231, um, so these are,
uh, line 2:30 to the
veterinarian loan repayment
funds, and this is contingent on
legislation being enacted in
this session, and online 231,
there's $8 million from the
executive, and that's for the
higher education retention fund
and for student basic needs.
You wanna
Yeah, so Mr. Chair, continuing
with higher ed, um, on, on page
21 we see online 232, a big
appropriation recommendation for
both in the uh building
replacement and renewal item, so
there's $40 million in the LFC
recommendation and $25 million
in the executive, um, also, uh,
point down to another big one on
line number 238. The technology
enhancement fund to the
policy recommendation for that
is $20 million versus $10
million in the executive.
Finally, on this page, we see um
line 236 of $15 million
recommendation from LFC and $25
million from the executive for
the health professionals loan
repayment program, the LFC
recommendation would
specifically target that um
those dollars to uh providers
who are working in the
behavioral health setting, so,
um, that that that um language
that
see in your, in your handout
reflects the LFC recommendation.
that.
Yes, thanks, Mr. Chair. Um,
Still on the page 21, um.
Line 234, uh, I just want to
call your attention to that one.
It's to support dual credit
programs, um, in New Mexico's
high schools, that's 10 million,
uh, line 2:30.
7, you'll see in this one, both
the executive and LFC supported
this. It's to the teacher loan
repayment fund, um, executive
has 10 million, LFC has 5
million, but it is in both of
the recommendations, um, and the
last thing I wanted to bring to
your attention, if I can find it
is
pitch right too.
It, yeah, there we go. Thanks,
Joey. Uh, if you could turn to
page 22, um, at the top.
Lines 239 and 241, both
established endowments for the
UNM School of Medicine. One
focuses on faculty and one
focuses on student, um,
Uh, recruitment and retention.
And I'll just note, uh, Mr.
Chair, on the, the, the faculty
endowment in particular. So, you
know, that would be an endowment
fund which would push out a
smaller amounts over time. I
would just note in the LFC uh
recurring recommendation,
there's $2 million in the base
budget for uh for medical school
faculty. And uh so um moving on
to uh higher ed institutions,
Mr. Chairman, members of this
committee, uh, there's some
small items here, but I'll
really, uh, jump to some of the
larger ones on page.
23. So there's a um there's
recommendations in both the
executive recommendation and the
LFC for the Bureau of Geology at
New Mexico Institute of Mining
and Technology for aquifer
monitoring and improved
groundwater characterization,
um, additionally, um,
And I thought there was another
big one here, but I'm, uh, oh,
I'm sorry, the $3 million on,
uh, line 251 for the Department
of Agriculture for soil and
Water Conservation districts.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, I just wanted to
piggyback on that last one that
Joey did really quickly. So 251
line 251 as you said is $3
million Department of
Agriculture, if you look up at
line 248, the executive has $10
million to the Department of
Agriculture to fund adoption of
technologies and practices that
conserve water in agriculture
operations. So once again, you
see an overlap there, obviously
different funding amounts, but
again,
Um, relatively similar intent.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
think we're done with the
special appropriations, um,
So Section 5 is special
appropriations that would be for
um FY 25 and FY 26. Section 6
would include both supplemental,
that's so current year FY 25
appropriations as well as uh
anything to resolve prior
deficits. There's a handful of
um deficiency appropriations,
uh, those are typically pretty
small, you know, line, uh, line
262 is is one of those, um, in
terms of a big supplemental
appropriation though, I'll
direct you to.
attention to page 24 or no it
might be page 25.
I apologize, page 25, line 287,
you'll see a big $124 million
recommendation, uh, uh, from the
LFC in an $87.2 million dollar
recommendation from the
executive related to shortfalls
in the state health benefits
program. You all heard a
presentation about that the
other day from the secretary of
the Healthcare Authority. I
just, uh, note quickly the LFC
recommendation was based on the
agency request which was based
on the information they had at
the time, uh, they've updated
their amounts, I think.
Beth might have some more
information on that.
Mr. Chair, yes, there, there's
um HCA has been uh working very
hard to really, really nail down
these numbers, um, for the
shortfall in the state health
benefits, uh, program and uh the
124 million was indeed the
initial um estimate from them.
They have been working with
their actuary on um really
getting these projections solid,
and so they are a new number,
uh, which I think that they are
very confident about is $85
million. And in addition to
that, my, my understanding is
that that $85 million is
supposed to cover both the state
employee portion and local
public bodies, um, and again, I
know that you heard from the
secretary a few days ago, so,
uh, uh, that is supported by
both the executives and LFC,
which is, uh, which is good.
OK, thanks.
um, online, let's see, page 25,
still, I just want to call your
attention up a little bit, line
285 is uh 7.6 million, and this
is for the early childhood
education and care department.
This is for the family, infant,
toddle or program. The agency is
facing, um, uh, a shortfall this
year because the number of
children that they are serving
projected has gone high, higher
than they expected. Uh, family
infant toddler is an entitlement
program, which means that
If a child qualifies, the agency
must provide services for them
without this funding, um, they
will.
Not be able to very easily serve
all of those uh additional
children, so I just want to
bring that to your attention as
a need, um, for that department,
um, and I will just also bring
your attention again to line
292.
And this goes again with what I
was uh mentioning a few minutes
ago about uh the Department of
Health facilities, um, division,
which again has structural
deficits. This $2.5 million
would help with uh FY 25, um,
getting them, you know, out of,
uh, the negative.
Um, and I guess I will just call
your attention to 295 and 296,
which are
Um
Uh, it's supplemental in a
deficiency request from the
Children, Youth and Families
department. Um, this is sort of
a can of worms, so I, I don't
wanna get too much into it, but
they do have um a deficiency
from FY 24 at 12,287.8, and then
they do have a supplemental
request for the current year,
uh, for $20 million.
And then, uh, lastly, $7 million
online 298 for corrections, and
that's for uh projected
shortfalls, um, in the personnel
category.
Mr. Chair, just a couple more
items, uh, for supplemental in
deficiencies on page 26. So the
uh public education department
has a couple of, had a couple of
requests for um for food
programs related to the healthy
hunger-free students Bill of
Rights Act, both the LFC and the
executive recommendations
include those dollars, um, and
with that, uh, that uh wraps the
supplemental deficiencies, uh,
you can see online.
Uh, uh, line 306, we begin with
the grow uh items. So on line
number and just a reminder on
the growth, so these are, these
would be broken into 3-year
chunks. Uh, so in some places
you'll see that, that amount
varies by year that we're
actually in one place, I think,
um, that amount varies by year,
and that's in the in a little
note on the item, uh, in some
places like I'll, I'll reference
you to line number 313. There's
a little bit different language
that
The LFC is recommended for um,
Uh, for different years, right?
So, you know, on that particular
one, it would allow um
A higher percentage of that of
that $10 million per year to uh
go to capacity building versus
food purchases, for example, um,
I'll just again also note some
of these items were recommended
by the executive pecials, that's
the case on line 313 where you
see they've got $10 million the
LFC has $30 million you know,
uh, $10 million per year equals
$30 million. So that those are
effectively the same, but I'll
just back up real quick to line
number 307, you'll see a
$7 million appropriation to the
AOC related to uh behavioral
health recommendations.
Um, uh, again, we talked about
RLD uh when we covered the
specials. Here's where you see
that item in those items in the
um LFC recommendation and again
those numbers are a little
larger because we're funding
ongoing operations over a longer
period to sort of, um, but
monitor that program as it's
built into the agencies' uh base
operating budget.
Um, Mary Beth, do you have
anything on, um,
I do, I do have one thing, uh,
to point out on page 27, Mr.
Chair. Um, so it's lines, let's
see, 314.
3:15 and 316 all to the
healthcare authority. So this
This was a request from the
healthcare authority for 5
different uh Medicaid expansion
initiatives. And again, this was
addressed in both the LSC and
the executive recommendations
and is supportive of the
agency's request, but they are
funded differently again. Now
both come out of the grow, so
you'll see for the executive
online 316. That works out to
just a little over $30 million a
year. The request from the
agency was about 32 million, um,
so it's, it's almost fully.
funded just about, and then
you'll see on the LFC side,
they've broken it out a little
bit, right? So line 314 is to
provide medical respite for the
homeless. Well, that's included
in the executives 90 million.
Um, so once again, it's
You have to match things up a
little bit. It's, it's kind of a
fun exercise, um, but, uh, but
for that, uh, both, both
recommendations do support those
expansion items of Medicaid.
And I'll just note on that, the
numbers, if you add all those
numbers up, you'll notice the
LFC is a little higher. That's
because the LFC included federal
funds that can be leveraged uh
by this, whereas I don't believe
the executive recommendation
did. Yeah, no, Joey, the, the
executive recommendation only
has the, um, the growth funding.
Um, so, um, at the bottom of
page 27, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, we start
seeing some items for the
children, youth and Families
department that we're in the LFC
recommendation, the LFC
recommendation took a strategy
of, of looking at um CYFD's
requested increases in funding
them through the grow to sort of
embed that performance
measurement into um into these
appropriations so we know that
we're getting the results that
um that we're expecting,
expecting to to get.
Um, I also, um, mentioned, uh,
several, uh, items that were in
the um LFC or executive
recommendations related to um
the public education department,
so you'll notice the language in
these, uh, typically, um,
Uh, directs that appropriation
from the uh public education
reform Fund, that would be
contingent on legislation, um,
that, that would, uh,
Sort of in bed the performance
management aspects of the growth
fund into the public reform fund
again so that we're measuring um
the results works, we're, we're
noting the results, we expect to
get, measuring those and are
able to determine the
effectiveness of the programs or
not, so just a couple of items
here, the, um,
Uh, so the LFC has $15.5 million
for um evidence-based reading
instruction, uh, the, uh,
executive has $5 million. Some
of these are, uh, are special
appropriations. You'll see that
in the general fund. That's an
indicator that's, it's a special
appropriation and not a grow
appropriation. So for example,
on uh line 324.
support school improvement
initiatives. You'll see the $15
million executive in the other
column, which indicates it's
grow dollars and 20 almost $30
million in the LFC also, also
from the growth fund.
Uh, finally, there's been a lot
of uh focus on attendance and
how that impacts student
success, so both recommendations
have online 325, uh, some growth
funding for attendance
initiatives at PED, um.
Uh, finally, uh, on line 326,
you'll see uh both
recommendations have some, some
funding for evidence-based mass
instruction, so, uh, taking a
look at math and LFC um has some
funds on line 327 for uh
innovative school staffing
models, uh, LFC just did a, did
a program evaluation on uh
schools that are performing, uh,
At a high level, even though
their demographics might suggest
they would be performing at a
little lower level, and one of
the, one of the strategies these
schools are using are some of
these innovative staffing
models.
Uh
And uh with that, Mr. Chairman,
I think we're done with the
growth funds unless um
Mary Beth had anything, and we
get into online 3 330, the fund
transfers, uh, so, uh, there's,
there's a number of big uh items
here, so you can see on line
332, Mr. uh Mr. Chairman, uh,
and also on 336.
Uh, another big general fund
transfer into the government
results and opportunity fund
that strategy is to sort of
take, you know, the money that's
coming in in today and sort of
spread that out over a longer
period, so you all have uh
resources in the future to
continue to fund those pilot
projects, uh, that are that are
demonstrating results, um.
On line 333, you see a cash
infusion into the water project
fund that would be for spending
on water projects that you all
would authorize by legislation.
Additionally, there is online
number 3334 300 $350 million
dollar fund transfer for the
community benefit fund that's
based on legislation, uh, that's
been introduced in the Senate. I
know that one,
Mr. Chairman, Senator Padilla,
um.
Finally, uh, you know,
another big fund transfer, um.
Just related to it's under DFA,
um, the appropriation
contingency fund that would fund
$150 million to the
appropriation contingency fund,
uh, which is typically used uh
in emergencies.
Um
Online's 338 and 339, you see
some transfers to the public
school insurance authority. So,
um, those are, those are pretty
similar amounts. The uh the
insurance authority has been
seeing some, some rising costs
and they sort of held back on a
um large rate increase, um, one
of the reasons they often have
these large rate increases
because they're trying to
rebuild their fund balance, uh,
to meet their, their fund
balance needs. This would
provide some, some one.
time funding to rebuild that
fund balance so they could pass
along smaller rate increases
over time, um, additionally,
I'll just point out, uh, Mary
Beth covered uh in the specials
section, uh, some
recommendations related to
wildfire preparedness on line
341, the LFC recommendation is a
$12 million fund transfer to a
new fund that would be
contingent on legislation, uh,
that's before you all, uh,
creating a new fund for wildfire
preparedness programs.
Uh, you know, in, in, in
addition, I mentioned, uh, when
we were talking about the grow
dollars and the public education
department, um.
Uh, that those were generally
from the public ed reform fund
online 345, you can see another
cash infusion into that fund to
continue to be able to fund
those uh those initiatives into
the future. Finally, both the
executive and the LFC
recommendation uh have uh some
money in their recommendations
to support the current year unit
value. The executive funds that
in the um as a supplemental
appropriation.
Um,
$40 million you can see on that
line. The LFC recommendation
took a little bit a different
strategy in doing a fund
transfer to the state support
reserve Fund. So the state's
reserve fund is some is
something set up in statute that
gives PD access to additional
dollars if something happens and
they need to pull down
additional funds to maintain the
unit value for our public school
funding formula, so, you know,
effectively both of these
recommendations support the
current year unit value. They
just do it in different uh.
in different manners.
Uh, and the final, um, item on
here, uh, is the computer system
enhancement fund, the LFC
recommendation is listed there.
The um executive recommendation
has about $80 million that's on
on another line.
Um
And with that, Mr. Chairman, we
come to the final section of the
bill, which is the Department of
Transportation. Oh sorry, um,
Mary Beth has a couple of things
on the fund transfers. Thanks,
Joey. uh sorry about that, Mr.
Chair. I just wanted to call,
this is, seems like a pretty
small dollar amount after these
discussions of recommendations
that Joey mentioned, but if you
can go back to page 30.
Very, very quickly, line 331.
Um, I just want to point this
one out to you. This is $10
million to the childcare
revolving loan fund. So you will
see this in two very different
places in the recommendations,
but they're both funded fully at
the 10 million, which is what
the agency requested. So the LFC
has this as a fund transfer. Um,
I believe it, yes, a fund
transfer and it's also
appropriated to DFA.
The executive has a 10 million
as a special, and it is
appropriated, it would be
appropriated directly to the
department. So again, different
approaches, same amount, similar
intention.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that's, um,
That's a good segue into
transportation where we, we kind
of have similar amounts but a
little bit uh different in the
details. So, um, in total for
transportation, the executive
recommendations 322 million
while the LFC recommendation is
350 million. I'll just go over
the LFC recommendation that
includes $100 million for the
transportation project fund that
funds local road projects
throughout the state, uh, local
government and tribal projects.
There's $12 million in the LFC
recommendation for
Heavy equipment purchases and
$50 million for the department's
wildlife corridor fund, they
have a um project, um, in mind,
uh, that.
that, that, uh, funding could go
to support.
Um, and you know, I apologize,
Mr. Chairman, line 352 is cut
off, so the $188 million in the
LFC recommendation on that line
would fund major road, road
projects, um, and that would um
be similar to $150 million
that's in the executive
recommendation and Mayor Beth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
very, very quickly on page 32,
um, as again, as you see, the
executive has most of the
funding for transportation
recommendations in two large
buckets, uh, line 352 and 353,
but there is a uh online 354
there is $12 million
specifically for rural air
service enhancement called out
in the executive, uh, but I
don't have anything further.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, uh,
that's our presentation. We're
happy to stand for any
questions.
Uh
Thank you Joe Mayor Beth, uh,
we'll go to committee. I have uh
Senator Padilla.
know
Mm
OK. Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and thank you for the
presentation, um, wow.
It's a lot of uh pennies there,
OK? So I, I get, you know, Mr.
Chairman, I think what I'll
start with is just sort of the
overall like like glaring, you
know, 2.6 billion on the
executive and Ellis and the 3.6
billion in LFC, and I could be
wrong, but in the time that I've
been in the legislature, I don't
think I've ever seen it that
it's usually the other way
around where the, the executive
is asking for the billion
dollars more than the LFC is
willing to, there's a, there's a
lot going on here and um I
guess, you know, the, the
share seems to be HCA, am I
right?
And, and so where I'm going with
that is, why is this not a, a, a
budget item rather than
Uh, special supplemental, what
do we call it special
supplemental deficiency, grow,
etc. Why, why is that? I mean, I
don't know if anyone is in the
room that wants to comment on
that, but yeah, so, Mr. Chair
and Senator, I'll just point out
you're correct, a large amount
of this is in the, in the
healthcare authorities, some of
it is specifically related to
behavioral health. A lot of it's
specifically related to
behavioral health and you're
gonna have a presentation this
afternoon on that where you're
able to dive a little more
deeply into that sort of budget.
Uh, area, um, so you, there,
there, there's a, there's a
couple of different um big areas
in the healthcare authority.
One, as I mentioned was
behavioral health. The other
was, you know, in funding
related to that, uh, the
Medicaid waiver, um, that the
department received and Mary
Beth covered a few a few moments
ago, um, but it, you know, the
healthcare authorities by far
are are largest department and
so yeah, they're also by far the
largest amount in the special in
the with the world of the
special.
appropriations.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
um, I will just add to that, uh,
just, just briefly, there are
definitely a lot of items for
healthcare authority and here
and again as Joey just said,
some of them overlap, they look
different, but they are in
different places, but I just
want to emphasize that that
these items for the healthcare
authority at this point really
should not be in their base
budget yet. Many of these are
initial pilot projects that
they're starting, um, and we're
really made uh and very good
attempt.
uh
put some of these in
non-recurring rather than
directly in the base because
then we can track it, we can see
how the agency is doing, whether
or not it's grow or just a
regular special. We can still
see the efficacy of what they're
doing and to try to determine,
uh, if it's something that
should be in their, their
budget, in the base moving
forward. So there's a lot of
that in there, I think, um, and
once again, when you add that,
just lots of non-recurring
initiatives funded slightly
differently, you end up with a
section that looks like
It's got about 30 different
healthcare authority items, um,
but really when you look a
little closer, again, that
becomes a little bit, you know,
the number comes down when you
look at the uh the different
initiatives being supported in
the LFC in the executive, but I
really think most of it is that
these are not uh initiatives
that are ready yet to go in
their base. So they're being
recommended as non-recurring.
Well, I appreciate that, Mr.
Chairman, and, and again, I
don't expect you to, you know,
tell us about the, I mean,
that's the department's
responsibility or the the
authority's responsibility.
And, and, and, you know, um,
Yeah, so, so if, if as a
percentage, you know, I'm
looking at just if we took the,
the, about an average of the 2.6
bill on the executive 3.6 bill
on the LFC and then you bump
that up against the, the state
budget, uh, that's about a 28%
variance.
And that just tells me, you
know, some things are amiss here
in a wry with how we're
budgeting, just to begin with.
Do you want to comment on that
at all? I mean that that seems
to me like that's the largest I
think I've ever seen it.
So, you know, I'll, I'll just
point out, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, so the strategy that
LFC took for a lot of the
appropriations was in that fund
transfer section so you can see,
you know, the 1.7 billion
effectively of the 3.6 billion
is in fund transfers to try to
spread out dollars over time to
fund programs uh that are that
are in the pilot phase and that
are demonstrating themselves
over time but also for some,
some.
Uh, you know, non-recurring
spending needs like those water
projects that I mentioned in the
in the in the fund transfer
section, so you know, if you, if
you look at the, the, the
section 5 appropriations you see
about $1.7 billion from the
executive and about 950 million
from LFC. I'll just, you know,
point out that, you know, we, we
talked about this, talk about
this all the time in recent
years, but, you know, once upon
a time, $100 million for
specials was a big year.
And we're now looking at a
billion dollars in specials, so
these amounts have grown
significantly over time, which,
you know,
Has, has the, has an impact. You
all on LFC heard this summer,
uh, a review of spending from
these uh from these
appropriations and you know,
we're seeing that in some cases
agencies aren't able to deploy
these resources, um, when we're
increasing spending by so much.
Well I appreciate your comments
there. I really do. I mean, so I
see we have one of our
executives, I think from HCA
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, and so.
I guess what I would ask then
is,
On the HCA stuff, we'll just
focus on that for a moment. What
in these special supplementals,
uh, etc. get leveraged for other
federal dollars and if we don't
do it, then obviously, I'm sure
we're going to miss out on an
awful lot of other money, so I
don't want that to be lost in
this conversation, even though
it looks huge. It's going to
turn into, I think in some
cases, a 73 to 1 return or or or
or or or or matching or do you
want to comment on that at all?
And Senators and the members of
the committee and Senator
Padilla, my name is Alex
Castillo Smith and I'm one of
the deputy secretaries for the
healthcare authority.
Uh, you are correct, Senator
Padilla, that much of the
non-recurring items included in
the healthcare authority 26
executive recommendation can be
leveraged particularly with
Medicaid federal funding. I'm
just a few examples, the
approval that we just received
from the US centers for
Medicare, Medicaid Services for
the justice involved supports,
um, we will be able to provide
Medicaid reimbursable services
to folks leaving incarceral
settings.
Prior to their release and so
Mary Beth alluded to many of the
items that are non-recurring
because we're piloting this
initiative, um, those will all
receive federal matching funds
from Medicaid, um, the, the
launch this year in January of 5
certified community behavioral
health clinics, that's receiving
about an 80% federal Medicaid
match, um, that is a
non-recurring request because we
are in the.
and ramp up phase of launching
those clinics and additional
clinics and so once that startup
and ramp up is over, we will
have um money that is our, um.
We won't need to ask for this
specific pot of funding again in
future years, and there's quite
a bit of.
I'm looking at my list and um.
Snap supports gets also some
federal funding, um.
Summer ABT gets federal funding.
Um
We're also
And I know this wasn't a focus
today, but many of our IT
projects also leverage a 90%.
match so there's a lot of
federal money that these
non-recurring requests are
leveraging for the department. I
hope that helps. It does. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and so, um,
I guess, uh, let's see here.
If you were to look at
The state funding, general fund,
and then all the money you are
going to bring from the, the
feds into New Mexico. What is
your actual budget become?
I think I've heard figures that
it kind of even dwarfs the state
general fund. Is that true?
Um, Senator and members of the
committee, Senators.
Uh, yes, that is correct. If you
consider the amount of general
fund the department receives and
the
the varying amount of federal
funding we receive.
I am looking at.
Um
Our current FY 25 operating
budget, including federal and
general funds is $12.1 billion.
Um, in the FY 26 executive
recommendation, we're asking for
$15.3 billion. Um, I do want to
point out that over 1 billion of
that recommendation is
additional Medicaid federal
dollars that we are leveraging
for New Mexico's hospitals as
part of the healthcare delivery
and Access Act that was passed
last year, um, so.
Setting that
Uh, law aside the executive rack
would be about 14 billion, but
in 26 we're asking for 15.3
billion.
Total, which is bigger than the
state government of New Mexico.
Thank you, Chair, and, and I'm
glad you clarified that because
I don't want that to be lost in
this, even though there is a
significantly large, you know,
um, supplemental, um, whatever,
uh, special supplemental blah,
blah blah, um, that should not
be lost cause that's a lot of
money and and while we're on
that topic, and this will be my
last one on on this, this
subject, Mr. Chairman, uh, what
are those, those dollars will go
to rural hospitals, you know,
places like Clayton and areas
that really badly need those
services that have never been
available to their communities
before or their
the risk of losing them, want to
make sure that we're taking care
to those communities.
Want to comment on that at all?
Uh, senators and members of the
committee, Senator Padilla, you
are correct that the healthcare
delivery Access Act was designed
to um provide um.
Um
A disproportionate amount of
funding for rural hospitals and
so that's what we intend to do
and we're trying to do. We got
federal approval to do the first
round of payments late last
year, so as long as things go
all right, the first set of
those payments will go out March
if any of the members here are
requesting a specific breakdown
of the hospitals and how much
funding they'll receive. I'm
happy to provide that, um, I
also did just want to note that
Um, about 13% of the healthcare
authorities, um, general fund
budget was already existing
money from the Department of
Health. So when we became the
new agency, the healthcare
authority, those existing monies
moved over, so when you sort of
consider the size of our
department's overall budget. I
think it's important just to
take that into account as well.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you Madam Deputy Secretary. So
um I'm the majority whip. I'm
sure the minority whip loved
hearing what you just said
because I know that's very
important to him and I wanted to
call that out specifically for
you, Senator. So that's uh then
thank you very much for your
comments, Mr. Chairman. I just
wanted to
Go to the bottom of page 6.
Uh, line 63, and I'm not quite
sure if um who wants to come up
and comment on this stuff, if
it's the secretary designate or
Mr. Lovelace, but I think we
need a heck of a lot more
clarity on what item 63 is all
about because I'm concerned that
um, come on up if you want to
director.
Um
Mr. Chair and I, I'll, I'll pass
it over in just one second. I
did want to point out that to
your point of how do these
recommendations interact with
the agency operating budget
you're gonna have a sheet, a
side by side detailed sheet on
all of these with all of the
agency operating budgets, so,
um, there'll be an there's
opportunity as agencies come
before you, you're supposed to
have a do it hearing here, uh,
when we wrap this up, um, to get
further information from all of
the departments. I just wanted
to point that out. This is not
the only
sort of bite at the apple, but
in reference to your question,
I'll hand over the Appreciate
it. Thank you very much, um, but
since we're on this topic.
is in this uh special
supplemental deficiency and grow
appropriations document. I want
to ask about it. I'm trying to
figure out what, what line 63
is, is, I, I know what you're
trying to accomplish, probably
speed of delivery of service
delivery, but I'm wondering if
this is, is it a subsidy? Uh,
how will these dollars be used?
That's a pretty large matzo ball
out there and, and, and will it
end up being, I'm, I'm concerned
about why wouldn't we put the
longer term solution in place
with that much money.
What are we trying to accomplish
here exactly, Mr. Chair and
Senator, thank you for the
question. So there's a couple
of, of big programmatic uh items
out there, right? We have the
broadband equity access
deployment funds. This is $675
million that is doing that long
term solution. And uh when it
came before the LFC, uh, back in
November. I actually had a
couple of slides specifically
talking about how long those
those build times are.
Oftentimes they're in the 4 and
5 year timelines to get the the
builds completed and done.
In the meantime, we have a lot
of New Mexicans who when I go
around the state.
You know, very clearly are
saying, hey, I need, you know,
better connectivity. I need it
now. And if you actually look at
where the infrastructure is
going, it will get there.
To most of those locations, not
everywhere, but to most of those
locations. So there's a couple
of examples of places where it
might not go. Extremely high
cost locations where it's gonna
be, you know, $150,000 500,000
dollars, a million dollars,
right? Those locations, it's
gonna be too expensive to build
to in that bead program.
That's kind of one element.
Second element is going to be
locations that just do not
receive a bid, uh, in, in that
bead program. And so by looking
at where we are in that
programmatic cycle, and we have
the application portal open
right now. We're gonna have the
the knowledge of who has
received awards by July of this
year and by asking for this
appropriation now, we're able to
leverage that knowledge, get
that an RFP going and by January
of next.
year, start beating that
timeline to get to those
satellite locations. Now part of
the, the bead program does allow
for satellite deployment. One of
the contingencies on that is you
actually have to pay a $5000
reservation fee to the satellite
provider.
So we basically are gonna pay
out of federal funds to reserve
capacity on a network to
guarantee a certain speed limit,
and that's gonna be money that's
gonna not go, you know,
potentially towards a fiber
solution that the program is
that per BSL or is that or is
that just a one time fee? That
is correct. That is per
broadband serviceable location.
That's a rip off.
So, Senator, I'm looking to get
ahead of the curve, you know,
here, and when we are competing
against 50 states, 6
territories, the design of the
program was intended to get
ahead of that and make sure New
Mexicans get onto whoever needs
it, right, gets onto that
capacity now and we can put into
some of the RFP requirements
that you could transition into
the B program. So that way we're
making sure that New Mexicans
aren't left behind. Now, you
know, in my presentation, I'm
gonna talk a little bit later.
I've had a lot of conversations
with other providers, other
industries, you know, that.
I would like to see this
expanded out. We designed the
thought process around
dovetailing very specifically
with bead, um, we're open to, to
discussing how that might look,
but it's gonna certainly add
some complications into that
process. Thank you. So, Mr.
Chairman, and so on BSL uh uh
broadband serviceable locations
that
um, do we have an accurate plan,
uh, or an accurate map or, or
BSL in place or are we trying to
revise it because if you're a
rural provider out there or some
other group.
How do you know how to submit a
plan if that's not you, I
thought we were done with that
part.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I will
tell you that mapping is gonna
still be an ongoing issue. Every
time you add a new location, you
know, out there, we're going to
have to continue to do this in
perpetuity, right? That being
said, I think the broadband maps
are as good as they've ever
been. I will not say that
they're perfect because we
actually have to go through and
we find even still now locations
that are a pile of rocks, uh,
that have been labeled, you
know, in the FCC maps, and we
have to go through and do
challenges even with the FC and
do those corrections. And part
of this is, you know,
complicated because it used to
be a giant
Kind of polygon on a map, and
now we're actually going down to
individual locations, but we are
doing latitude and longitude,
and we actually have mapping
software uh that also has
location IDs and that we go
through and correct. So thank
you, and that will be my last
question I I know others have
questions, Mr. Chairman, how
much of the uh 670 million that
we brought in has gone out the
door. Um, Mr. Chair and Senator,
we have approvals to actually
finish or run the program July
26th of this last year, we
opened the portal with our our.
mapping approvals from NTIA on
January 3rd, and it is currently
open and taking bids, and we
have to get one more final
approval from the feds and, you
know, as much as
You know, I very much appreciate
the $675 million coming into the
state. The reality is this is
probably one of been one of the
most administratively
burdensome, uh, federal programs
that I've ever seen. It is, uh,
you know, 5 different separate,
uh, approvals that we've had to
get through from NTIA to make
this this project happen.
I appreciate that. Um, so can
the submittals uh be done with
the
The current snapshot of the BSL
plan or do they have to wait
till the new one comes out in
order for them to be able to
submit,
Senator anybody missing any
windows of oh you didn't get in
on time, but really it wasn't
their fault, so.
Uh, chair senator, it's a great
question. We have uh an improved
data set from NTIA uh for that,
and we were actually notified of
an error that they uh that they
gave a process for. We actually
have been in the process of now
correcting that in the way that
they would like us to, and it's
going to affect about 10,000
locations across the state. Um,
the bulk of them are from either
defaults or locations that are
not going to be served out to
other federal programs, and
we've actually identified that,
so like 90, you know, of the
math.
Uh, has been already identified,
you know, for people to work on
their bids, and we've been
giving extensions until we can
get the final NTIA data set with
those last location changes. All
right, well thank you Mr.
Chairman. I'll reserve the rest
of my questions for uh Obay and
uh do it when they're uh with
their presentation. Thank you.
Thank you. I hope uh Senator
Trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
I, um, would echo the oof, that
was a lot of information. I felt
like I was in a drive-through,
uh, uh.
Laying uh for budget. Couple of
questions I'll be really quick
about it. I do notice that on um
Line 75, the Healthy Foods
initiative and I asked about
this before and uh staff was
looking into um where the money
that I've been looking for, it's
about
They ask is about $450,000. Um,
I understand that in the past
they've had about $200,000 and
that's through the Department of
Agriculture in order to help
farmers get ready and be
approved to be part of the
healthy, whereas the economic
development is, is the other
side of that food chain. And so
I'm, I'm still very interested
in trying to make sure that we
get some money in there for
them, um, if we could just
figure out what their
What they amount has been and
I'll bring you the flyer um that
shows what they're asking for.
Um, but those are two different
healthy food programs, um,
online 90 and then line 313.
You've got the same money, so
there's the RLD, um, money for
the um.
Cannabis control.
Law enforcement bureau and then
there's the money um same money
uh for the LFC recommendation on
310, it would be helpful if
those were together because it's
the exact same language, um, but
I did find them in different.
There's a little bit difference
in the amounts, um, I don't know
which amount is better. Yeah,
no, and I, and I apologize for
that, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Trujillo, you're right, they
should be on the same line. The
difference essentially in the
amounts are the LFC
recommendation is 3 years, so if
you were.
triplet you would find.
That amount. OK, thank you. And
then, um, I'm, I'm interested in
why line 124 isn't recommended
for funding. That's the
commission on the Status of
Women and it's for um trainings
and stuff for uh uh young, young
women. Why is the LFC not
recommending that that get
funded. Is it included in a
budget somewhere or is it just
not being funded so, um,
uh, Mr. Chair and, and, uh,
Senator Trujillo.
Um
I'll, I'll follow up and get
back. I don't, I don't know that
that is included elsewhere. Um,
I would say that, you know,
You know, conferences and things
like that can be recurring costs
and we would wanna make sure
that that we're not was not the
case, so we're not setting up,
you know, the expectation of
continued recurring
appropriations in the future,
um, but we'll follow up on that.
Thank you. And then, um, jump
real quickly over to a number
line 145, uh, I noticed that the
LFC's recommendation does not
include funding for the summer
electronic benefits program,
that is a really, I just
of our, you know, reduction in
poverty, um, initiatives that
helps families. um, I've been a
part of the feeding program
where you have a site and
families have to come and pick
up food, uh during COVID, they
had to come and pick up a week's
worth of food. People just don't
show up, they can't show up
because their families are
working in the middle of the day
and so this electronic transfer
of funds, um, and I will say
that they do it after the fact
instead of before I get the fund
transfer needs to be at the
beginning of the month, not the
end of the month. Um, so that
was a little, uh, odd, but I'm,
I'm, I'm really concerned that
we're not going to fund that.
And again, uh, to your point,
Joey, uh, Mr. Chairman Joey, it
probably is just a reoccurring
and so maybe this is not the
place for it, but I wanna make
sure that we're not gonna stop
that kind of a program.
Yeah, and, um, so, so, um, Mr.
Chairman, um, and, and senator,
yeah, so I do have um
I do have some information from
our staff so that that EBT
program is currently operational
already and, and, and, and is
recurring. Uh, it's in the base,
um, um, as for the commission on
Status of Women, I had a follow
up on that, um, we, we do think
that those are, are reoccurring
costs. There are, there is some
partially included in the base
budget, um, for the commission
on the status of Women. OK,
thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
jumping to line 178. Um, I am
concerned.
That we're, you know,
Let me, let me go to that really
quickly because I wanna make
sure that I'm speaking
appropriately. I noticed that uh
many of the other appropriation
requests in this or contingent
upon legislation being passed,
this is not, and I understand
that this was going to be
legislation and I'm wondering
what, what is the parameters?
What are the guard rails for how
that money is going to be
distributed, um,
That's the Department of
Environment $75 million. I
notice it's not in the LFC
recommendation, so that makes me
feel comfortable, but I am
concerned that, you know, we may
put that in without any guard
rails.
So, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
I'm not sure if anybody from the
department is here and can speak
specifically on that, which
would probably be helpful, but
I, I'm fairly certain this was
an executive side ad, um, I
don't have too many details on
this, but I would be happy to
get that break out and and get
it over to you if you. I
appreciate that. I absolutely
support the strategic water
initiative, but I just want to
make sure that there's guard
rails on how it's implemented,
um, line 213.
is uh money for PED for um to
implement student, family and
community engagement, Mr.
Chairman, I'm sorry, um,
engagement strategies for
students in foster care and
students experiencing
homelessness, that seems like a
duplication of what CYFD is
doing, and, and I'm wondering
why it's in PED's budget instead
of CYFD's budget.
Mr. Chair, Senator, that's a
very good question. Um, it's
possible it's in both places to
try to approach it from
different um perspectives, but,
um, but that's a wonderful
question I can.
Double check on the um
Whether or not it's, it's in
both and how much. Thank you and
Mr. Chairman, I would just say
that I think it's an important
um that we fund it, so I'm not
saying that we shouldn't fund
it. I think it's important and
it's not in the LFC there and so
I wanna make sure that we all
know that we're having some
challenges with CYFD and the ask
from the individuals who came
and presented is that we try to
fully fund what's being
requested. Um, so anyway, so I'm
in support of it. I just want to
make sure that it's not a
duplication of
services. Um, thank you on line
335 that there's um $50 million
for the mortgage finance
Authority. I appreciate seeing
that in there and um, Mr.
Chairman, that's it. Thank you.
Thank you. We're gonna try to
speed this up a little bit so we
can make sure we get to the
floor in time. Senator
Steinborn, you're next.
5 minute I just have one
question, um, and it's for a
line. I was looking through this
thing. I couldn't find it again.
The, I was like $50 million for
the public education department
contingent on legislation for
truancy.
Yeah, so, um, and I'm just
curious if you can speak to what
that proposal on Simon, he's not
enough of it to put it in the
LFC rack.
Just curious what it is. Simon,
you know where that is? I want
to jump up here, see when you're
shaking your head.
Mr. Senator, um, I'm Simon
Miller, uh, analyst at DFA.
Um, the LFC recommendation has
6 or 7 different pilot projects
out of
It won't be the growth fund, and
I think this is the legislation
that you're talking about. It
it's sort of uh
Separate grow fund or education
related pilot projects, and it
would be out of the public
education reform fund.
He would work very similarly to
the growth fund in terms of 3
year pilot projects, but it's
just set aside specifically for
education, but uh
In order to make that happen,
legislation needs to pass to
turn the public education reform
fund into a grow like fund.
Understand, Mister, Mr. Chair,
what I'm asking though, thanks
for explaining that uh the
source of funds, what I'm really
asking is what is the program?
What are the
Initiatives that
I or others initiatives or we
just
Setting money aside so we can
start piloting some ideas. Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, a few
years ago you all passed the
attendance for Success Act. So
this money would be uh.
Money to implement the various
strategies within the attendance
for Success Act, the tier-based.
Approach to uh interventions to
improve attendance.
OK, so I still didn't get an
answer Senator, uh,
the public, I'm sorry, the
public education reform Fund is
now gonna switch to public
education growth fund. And so as
PED and then their budget
request that wasn't here
yesterday, asked for 200 and
some million below the line. And
so as we look at those, we're
gonna put those and target those
out of the public education
growth fund or whatever we're
gonna call it today, school bro.
And so those are targeted
investments and so I do not
remember what came out of the
LFC wreck Joey is Sonny here on
Education or somebody in
education with the dollar
amounts for that's gonna go from
The school grow to.
150 million is in there. Charles
is going to come up here and
tell us what is in that 150
million, so we can get that
question answered.
So
Sorry, Simon.
for pilot senator.
Senator, you're, you're correct.
There's $150 million fund
transfer to the firm.
And then there's spending coming
out of it. So any, anytime you
see in section 9.
It'll specify that it's coming
out of the public and reform
fund. Those are for those
education, 3-year pilots to
demonstrate results before you
put it into a a base budget.
And Senator Steinborn's question
is what is coming out of there?
Are we finding something
specific or are we just setting
the money aside for future.
Mr. Chairman Senator PED would
develop a programmatic
requirements probably in line
with the attendance for Success
Act to provide.
You know, social workers or
coaches to go out to try to
improve.
Um, attendance rates, uh, for
chronically absent students.
Thanks. I mean, we know it's a
huge issue. I just, it says
contingent on legislation, so I
don't know what the bill is. I
don't know what the idea is, so
I just wanted to connect to the
legislation is reforming the
reform fund, OK, very good.
Thank you all. Thank you, Simon,
I appreciate it. Charles, is
that a Senate bill or a House
bill, and do you know the
number?
I need to find the number, Mr.
Chairman.
OK, thanks, appreciate it.
That's all I have.
rent
just chairman and, and.
I asked all the questions I
have, we'd be here all day, so
I, I won't, I just, this is a
lot of information.
Um, I think I have really some
of the same major concerns that
uh Senator Padilla had when it
comes to why aren't these.
Budget.
Um, so we're, we're, we're
looking at a budget that's
That's uh 10.6 billion and then
if you add this.
You're actually around 13
billion.
Is that about right?
So Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
correct and then I'm sorry I'm
shaking heads doesn't help
people at home that are watching
cause we know millions of people
watch our committees, millions
of people.
Yes,
yes, um.
But there's actually all the
staff around the building that's
watching.
But, uh, so,
Um, I, I would hope that when it
comes to some of the education
funds, um, that we're not just
looking at what PD PED is
putting forward and we don't
just give them a blank check.
Um
Because, you know, we can't keep
any consistency there, uh, and,
you know, some of us actually
from LESC have some, some ideas
of, of some pilot programs as
well. And so I hope that we'll
look at those, Mr. Chairman, uh,
and use some of that money for
that, um, the, the health
professionals on page 21, the
health professionals loan
repayment program, um.
Why are, and I know this is
specific to a bill that will be
coming through, but why are we
focusing that fund on behavioral
health and trying to put a
priority on that.
When we're, we're already doing,
I think, 3 other bills and one
of them is going to set aside a
billion dollars for a trust
account for behavioral health.
Um, and we don't have doctors,
you know, we've, we lost over
600 doctors out of the state of
New Mexico in the last couple of
years.
So I'm trying to figure out why
we want to prioritize that.
Um, when our medical doctors
aren't staying and are, are
really the current program isn't
sufficient to even pay the
loans.
It's sufficient for everyone but
medical.
So, um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brandt, uh, so.
I, I hear what you're saying. I
do think one of the areas we've,
we've heard about some severe
shortages is in the behavioral
health category, and that's why
in, why in the LFC
recommendation, uh, that focus
on behavioral health, um, uh,
was there, um.
And uh so.
I, I, I hear what you're saying
about doctors more broadly, but
I think we were hearing that
behavioral health is a
particularly stark, has a
particularly stark need.
Um, I wasn't here during the,
the interim to, to hear those uh
those testimonies, but
Do we know on behavioral health.
Um
What, what is their average?
Uh, debt when they when they
leave.
I don't have the average debt
information, but on the
recommendation and the strategy
overall, both the executive and
and LFC recommendations have a
lot of
Behavioral health appropriations
for capacity building.
Uh, to stand up new services
that would then the providers
would bill Medicaid.
In the case of medical doctors,
there's additional loan
repayment.
Appropriation, uh,
recommendations and both
recommendations, as well as uh
significant provider rate
increases in the Medicaid
program.
When you consider that uh if
we're trying to recruit a doctor
or retain a doctor, and they
look.
And see that their potential
panel of patients could be
upwards of 44% on Medicaid and
historically, Medicaid pays
below Medicare.
The fact that New Mexico is now
going to raise
Those uh fees to 150% of
Medicare. That's where the state
has been making the effort at
the recruitment and retention
for uh medical doctors.
OK, thank you, but the, the bill
If it passes the way it's put,
is it will put at risk those
medical doctors from getting
that loan repayment because it
puts this is a priority, which
means that that behavioral
health professionals, we have no
idea how much they come out of
school, owing.
Um, it may be covered by the
75,000 that we get now.
Doctors are around 300,000 and
we're not coming anywhere close
to covering them, so they really
don't even look at our loan
repayment program. It's, it's a
joke to them.
Because it, it doesn't come
anywhere near covering but for
all the other people on that
list, in that, in that.
Area, it covers fully.
Theirs.
Um, and so unless we do
something targeting doctors,
we're going to continue to not
have them unless we deal with
medical malpractice and tort
reform, we're not gonna have
them. Um, the one thing that
we're trying to do.
We all agree on, I think, is, is
the rates, absolutely, that
needs to be increased, but when
I can go to
To Texas and have my full loans
repaid.
And I can make the higher rates
and my medical malpractice
insurance is a quarter of what
it is here, where are you going
to practice?
You're gonna practice in Texas.
But there's all kinds, I mean,
like I said, I could spend all
day, I've, I've got several red
marks in here, um.
So I hope this isn't the end of
the discussions on these, um,
and I guess we can save these
for when the departments come
up.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Let me, any other questions?
And wrap this up really quickly.
6 is really alarming to me to
spend 152 million of
overspending in your budgets.
Sometimes things happen, but
Some of those supplementals, I
guess we'll scrutinize a little
bit more and if they have to
have an audit finding to to
learn their lesson as they move
forward, maybe that each agency
is gonna have to do that.
We didn't fix the veteran's one
for a very long time and we're
fixing that this year. I mean,
the supplement the supplemental
deficiencies were just gone
outrageous. Charles, do we know
what that, that number was.
2 or 3 years ago or maybe 4
years ago because it's 152
million right now.
Typically, uh, smaller, we've
seen growing amounts of
supplemental requests, um, last
year we saw an alarming number
of deficiency requests and for
new members, a supplemental is
additional money to finish the
current fiscal year.
A deficiency was that somehow
the department or the agency
overspent their budget the prior
fiscal year. So fiscal year 24,
so you'll see that or CYFD where
they overspent their budget.
Uh, in fiscal year 24, and those
are some, some of the highest
amounts I've seen in my career,
Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, I mean, the courts have
the warrant fund, they could be
doing anything out of the
warrant fund, they already do
that. They pay for hotels, they
pay for a lot of stuff, a lot of
Amazon shopping, maybe even the
weight room and an exercise room
that they got out of the
supplementals or, and so we need
to really start looking at those
cause, I mean, here's 3.8
billion.
In specials and supplementals,
hopefully we'll end up.
A lot, a lot lower than what we
are, but sometimes this happens
to agencies and we got to
understand that. Sometimes it's
our fault, we put it in the
wrong place and it's so there's,
we can, it's a two-way street.
But it's just growing, it's
growing astronomically. You see
the environment department has
no general fund increase but
then asked for what their total
for the environment department
that they're not gonna get?
They asked for a number of
special appropriations and I
don't have, I, I think I've seen
it tweeter tweet or something
that says or X or whatever they
call it nowadays.
He, he doesn't need any more
money because February 14th that
he's gonna get that
appropriation because we
couldn't stop it, which is, I
mean, you want to spend money
and go right ahead, but I mean,
don't come to us asking for
money, I mean.
Work with us or work against us,
it's your choice.
Mr. Jho request for the
Environment department was 474
million.
Yeah.
We can take that off right now.
He got 43 million out of the
fund, find another company 40
million and and he just seems to
think that he can appropriate
and do what he wants without
legislator, legislative
approvals.
Just gives me heartburn.
Anything else you want to
highlight for me, Joey? I think
I should see her that the
committee should see that really
needs close eyes and scrutiny as
we move forward and have a
simple mental hearings every
single day, Mr. Chair, I would
just reiterate that when you
have agencies come up, there'll
be a packet that includes
special supplemental deficiency
uh recommendations and uh
opportunities to ask each of the
agencies about.
Uh, those requests or those
recommendations. Make sure you
highlight bold ones that we need
to think you need to keep our
eyes on.
Things that are 474 million and
just put all that in the red and
just put in.
negative already, Mr. Chairman.
for me.
I apologize.
On that point when you're done.
Thank you. I would just request,
Mr. Chairman, I know there's
some things that are eye-popping
we had an explanation for the
healthcare authority who's
brought the environment
department. I was just requested
anything before we, you know,
send it to the gallows that we
have a hearing on it, so we can
kind of understand it.
Um, because these are lots of
programs behind each of these
things and lots of asterisks of
The circumstance like we heard
about healthcare. So I would
request that for the environment
department we're gonna hear them
all if they, if they throw your
radar up, then we'll do that
cause we'll start renting seats
to agencies, and maybe we can
get to the 474 million because
they sure packed the room when
we talk about their
supplementals and deficiencies,
so, um.
There'll be a lot of scrutiny
over that and we'll be fair to
everybody if it's really a need,
we'll, we'll help you
accommodate that. But if it's
just that spending.
I mean
Love hate the courts when they
use the.
The warrant fund, which I
thought was for warrants. It's
actually to go shopping on
Amazon or stay at Tomaya, maybe
get a cake or whatever it could
be.
Um
Chairman, I just have a question
of you. I, I'm assuming that
this list of supplementals
doesn't include C2 requests.
No.
OK, we're gonna hear that
separately at another time.
Thank you. As House Bill 2 gets
closer and closer, we're gonna
start wrapping up deficiencies
to see where we're at, because
they're hearing agency budgets.
So whatever they don't get,
they're gonna try to come over
here and get, and so the
deficiencies, I mean the
deficiencies.
Have to be addressed in one
shape or form or another,
otherwise we leave them with an
audit finding, which in some
cases may be a good thing, uh,
the supplementals maybe because
we didn't do it correctly. We
got to just determine what
happened on each one.
Now the special appropriations
in
And the fund transfers are
another thing that we need to
look at. Fund transfers are
usual operation of government,
um, ECECD makes what, 700
million transfer the beginning
of the year for their agency
budget, maybe not 700 million,
but in that area because they
have to transfer out of the fund
into their agency. So some of
those numbers will.
kind of clean themselves up, but
You want to have fun, you can
spend all day on deficiencies.
All right. Thank you, Joey.
Uh
Who's next? Manny, you up?
Who is up next?
Like, um, can we clarify if you
would like to go over the CT
recommendations. Nicole and I do
have information prepared which
is in your binders, or we can
move forward with that.
I use the mic.
Sorry, chair, yes, would you
like to go over briefly the C2
recommendations, or would you
like to just jump into do it's
budget recommendations.
But
budget recommendations because
um
I don't know what time it is.
And, and so that we can do that.
That way we can, that way we can
tell, do, do it no.
OK, Chair and members of the
committee, uh, you do have
additional information for
Section 7 appropriations in your
binder in case you want to leave
the room quietly so we can get
this wrapped up, otherwise we'll
have another hearing on
supplementals.
Go ahead and start, who's
starting, Manny, you starting
this? Where did he go?
I'll be starting us off this
morning chair members of the
committee. I am Emily Hilla. I
am the LFC analyst for the
Department of Information
Technology. Today we have
Secretary Barreas of the
Department of Information
Technology, as well as Drew
Loveless, the acting director of
the Office of Broadband, as well
as Nicole Masius, who is the DFA
analyst for do it and we will be
talking about the differences
between the LFC and the
executive budget
recommendations.
Chair members of the committee,
uh, we do have some bullets
highlighting differences. This
is gonna be agency unit 361. It
should be in tab 3 of your
binders.
Um, it'll be in 10.
It'll be in our books.
Volume.
Uh, we have it in volume 2, and
volume 3, sorry, I so we don't
have it in our binders, we'll
have it in volume 2 of the LFC
Re OK, perfect. Uh, and that'll
be business unit 361 starting in
volume 2. If you look for that
at the top, I'll give you a
moment to get there.
Page 361, correct? Uh, business
unit 361, which will be at the
top. OK.
Go ahead.
OK, chair members to get us
started, the LFC recommended a
5.8% or a 400 and 540,000
increase in general fund revenue
over FY 25. The LFC
recommendation increases the
compliance and project
management program budget by um
52.8% or 540,000 to allow for
hiring of more staff, create an
appropriate budget category for
contracts and other costs, the
LFC recommendation keeps all
other general funding
commensurate with FY 25.
The executive recommended a
63.7% or a 5.9 million increase
in general fund revenue over FY
25.
The executive supports a 2.5
million general fund addition to
the Enterprise Services program,
which historically has only been
funded through enterprise
revenue, and this is support
support radio subsidies at the
agency.
The executive also supports a $2
million increase in contractual
services for the Office of
Cybersecurity, which was not
included in the agency's budget
request, therefore is not
included in the LFC's
recommendation.
Additionally, the executive
supports a $650,000 increase in
general fund revenue or 37.4%
for the Office of Broadband acts
as an expansion for various cost
adjustments.
The executive recommendation
also includes a 74.4% or
760.2,000 increase for the
compliance and project
management program which
includes partial support for the
Office of Geospatial Information
Systems to be a standalone
program which the LFC
recommendation does not support.
To to sort of preview the
special appropriations that um
We were just going over the
executive recommended a total of
93.7 million in general funds
for non-recurring special
appropriations, whereas the LSC
recommendation supports 16
million. With that, I will hand
it over to Nicole to go into
specifics, um, with the program
differences.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Emily. Um, again, my name is
Nicole Masi in the DFA analyst
for Do It. Um, I would like to
kind of just pinpoint on a
couple of items for the
executive, uh, within 772 we
included one additional FTE for
the geospatial information, uh,
systems.
Um, program, um, this also
included funding for additional
FTE and contract increases, um,
within P 773, the executive also
included um funding and the
amount of 2.5 for radio
subsidies, these are monthly
subscriptions for local um
governments, tribal governments,
um, and this is a monthly payout
for those entities.
Um, the other, uh, increase that
we have is for Office of
Broadband, slight increases for
personnel and other admin
support, um, within the LFC
recommendation, they did not
include a transfer of admin
support from Doit or.
The Office of Broadband to the
program support within um
Do it. Uh, we kindly request
that that transfer be added in
so that program support is
adequately funded um to assist
the agency for their
administrative functions, um,
for the Office of Cybersecurity,
the executive included $2
million for cybersecurity
contracts, um, and that
concludes my comments and thank
you, Mr. Chair, I'll turn it
over to the secretary.
sections you're not secretary
director or secretary?
Uh, secretary designate
no I, I just wanna make sure. So
if you want to jump to pages 4
and 5 of your presentation.
Let's talk about the money. I
think the rest of us kind of
know less new members want to go
over and do it structure.
OK
I want to start a 4 or 5.
reports where we're gonna start
your FTEs.
We
Mr. Chair and committee members,
thank you so much. Um,
As you can tell here on slide 4,
we have a current vacancy rate
of 17.8% in 2024, we had 177
positions. We have increased
that to 196 positions. We have
increased our FDE and lowered
our vacancy rate. Our goal
strategy is to reduce the
vacancy rate by another 4%
within the next 60 days. This
includes
12 positions that are currently
in the recruitment process, 7
that are advertised, 4 about to
be advertised and one that will
be offering a position for here
shortly.
Page 5
Do it request adbacks, uh,
again, uh, Mr. Chair and
committee, I want to thank you
all for your support of the New
Mexico Department of Information
Technology, but here are a few
add-ins we'll start up on the
top, uh, the 4.5 million
reoccurring is radio services
subsidies, uh, they have
significantly increased the
number of agencies participating
in the DTRS system. Since the
subsidies were introduced last
year over 20 new agencies have
joined the system. This is
resulted in greater
interoperability.
For first responders.
Uh, 2 million cybersecurity
reoccurring this additional
funding would be used for
implementing web applications,
firewall expand uh expand cloud
application security and we'll
help with risk assessments.
Uh, 1.5 million non-reoccurring
is on the enterprise side.
Examples include AI proof of
concept, bringing in, uh,
subject matter experts to assess
and evaluate and improve
efficiency, optimize IT ops uh
statewide evaluate emergent
technologies, the, the
Excuse me, the department would
use this fund to research
emerging technologies such as
generated by AI virtual desk
infrastructure, zero trust
networks. Currently, there isn't
a budget to set aside enterprise
services, um.
And, and let me back up here and
currently there is not a budget
set aside for our enterprise
side of the house.
Basically, it's funded via
chargebacks from agencies to
cover existing expenses.
Uh
Next line, 482 Oe fair share to
do it was not included in the
budget. We're asking that to be
reinstated.
The 100K reoccurring GIS
contract services or for
professional services to include
administrative services such as
budgeting and building,
building, billing.
We got
OK drew your next.
in the interest of time, I'm
just gonna talk to you about a
couple of things you guys can
look at my slides and if there's
questions, I'll be happy for,
you know, for you to ask
questions on them.
There are 3 things I want to
flag that are differences
between the LFC rec and the uh
the uh executive.
The first one is that $650,000
for the operating budget. That
is important. The Department of
Information Technology has been
supporting us for 2 years. We
use services from the CPO, CFO
and their HR services and we
haven't been able to pay them
out of our operating budget to
be able to utilize that. And so
it's important that we, that we
move forward in the
administrative attachment
continues, that we actually pay
them for those services. So
that's number 1. Uh, #2 in the
differences that we have is a
$25 million appropriation from
last year. Uh, that was designed
as matching funds for that.
program that I spent a little
bit of time talking about uh
with uh Senator Padilla, that's
$675 million portal is open now.
We have enough funding to get
through the unserved a little
bit into the underserved and
we're gonna miss out on
community anchor institutions
which include government
buildings as well as low income
multi-dwelling units, and the
idea with that we were looking
for a multi-year appropriation
on the $25 million there. And we
wanted, we'd like to see that as
an extension, uh, so we can
actually use that funding to
negotiate additional locations.
In those those beats, uh, uh,
you know, big matches, right?
So that's the second thing, uh,
the third difference, uh, out
there is the $70 million
accelerate nect New Mexico
program. Uh, I talked a little
bit about it earlier, uh,
Senator Padilla had asked about
what it does exactly. So there
are barriers to entry when
people need the internet.
One of the most common ones is
going to be on the customer
equipment. So the design of the
program was looking at the
satellite receiver as one of
the, the parts of the program,
the voucher for that. The second
part of it was low income
subsidy for for low income
households. That was designed as
a 30 $30 million.30 dollars
subsidy per month. Uh, and then
the last part that's a barrier
to entry is actually getting
that stuff set up when it's a
self-install, and so the idea
was having, you know, companies
be able to go out and do
installation if you're disabled
or elderly, you can't climb up
on your roof.
Um, and as I briefly mentioned
earlier, we've had great
conversations with concerns
from, you know, other providers
out there, other technologies
where they think they can
deploy, you know,
instantaneously, we're very much
open to having, uh, you know,
that that dialogue and figuring
out where their solutions to be
able to get more competition out
there, uh, and same kind of
concepts here, consumer uh
products, right, that are gonna
be installed into the home would
still be a uh a valuable uh
voucher program, the uh low
income subsidy would still be
valuable in that and uh again
there.
There's, you know, questions
about whether installation would
be an important part of that as
well. So, uh, with all that
said, it would be an RFP
program. Uh, lastly, I just want
to say, you know, thank you, uh,
the current, uh, executive
recommendation uh and the LFC
recommendation does have an
extension for the connecting
Mexico funds a couple of years
ago, we were given expenditure
authority out of that fund from
the Connecting Mexico Council,
uh, that, uh, fund was $99
million for the expenditure
Authority. We've awarded $74.5
million today out of that, we
want to make sure that, you
know, things like rights of way
are permitting.
does not jeopardize the ability
for us to pay those those
worthies. So we appreciate that.
Um, I do have a lot of
supporters in the room. If I
could just have them briefly
stand up for anyone who would
like to support the extension of
the connecting Mexico Fund, as
well as the $25 million that I
just briefly mentioned.
Stand up or raise your hand,
then we'll know who you are.
Yeah, just those two, yeah,
yeah.
Just those two.
Thank you so much, uh, and with
that
that stood up for only 4 no. I,
I also left a couple of letters,
uh, for you guys, AARP as well
as resound networks, uh,
unfortunately in house
appropriations we had about 18
people standing outside one of
those small rooms uh looking to
support, but maybe not as many
folks showed up today, but we
have, uh, we do have a fair
amount of supporters who'd like
to see that continue
with uh, with that said, I'd be
happy to stand for questions.
Senator Padilla, you're first on
the list. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll be very, very succinct and
and maybe a succinct response
would be great. I'm gonna
all of my questions to the OA
Office, Mr. Secretary, I fully
support the other items that
you, I just want to say that out
loud that I support your other
recommendations there on
broadband, uh, Roe, Mr.
Chairman, I'll just ask one more
time from the previous hearing
yes or no, has any of the $670
million made its way out the
door.
No.
OK.
Um, huge concern as you can
imagine, uh, next one is on um
one of the, in the enabling
legislation for your office, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Secretary
and Mr. Director. We called out.
We called out the importance of
one of the portions of the
office to be directed at 11 stop
shop for permitting rights of
way and things of that nature
has that office or that portion
of your office been stood up,
uh, chair, Senator, that has
been an ongoing challenge and
the answer is no.
I am very, very concerned about
that, that, that, that, that's,
that's completely amiss right
there. Got to get our hands
around that, Mr. Chairman. I
mean, this is, this is a thing
that we wanted to make it easier
for folks to get these projects
up and running. I feel like
that's a hindrance may become a
hindrance. So we got to get that
done, um, on the $70 million for
the, the uh satellite deal is,
is that directed at one company
or there multiple vendors that
would be able to step in there
and be a part of that, uh, chair
Senator, there are, uh, there's
one company on the market
currently and.
a lot of our, our dollars were
based off of that, but Amazon
Kuiper has been in discussions.
They've actually been
pre-qualified for the beat
program and they are going to
be, you know, on the market in
that time period. So we would
anticipate at least 2.
Yeah, so, uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm
concerned that that $70 million
could easily be put into long
range, long term solution rather
than short range and here and
now, so I really, you know,
can't support that. I, I, I'm
having a real challenge
supporting that one.
Um, you know, also,
Uh, I'm just trying to figure,
I, we, we never write a piece of
legislation that will benefit
just, you know, one company and
there wouldn't, so, so
therefore, we're not gonna get.
the lowest rates possible
because there's really no
competition there for this, so
I'm not quite sure how that came
to be. And then has there been
any economic development, um,
analysis done on what that $70
million will do to rural
carriers in New Mexico as an
example because suddenly you're
gonna just cut them off at the
kneecaps and shorten their
ability to, to, that could be a
knockout punch for some of these
companies. So uh chair center
and that's certainly some of the
concerns that we've actually
been discussing with them and
part of why we've been open to
opening up the technology base,
uh, in that conversation and.
So, uh, again, we've been very
open with uh meeting with wisps,
right, wireless industry,
wireless internet service
providers we've met with
theosing, we've met with some
individual, uh, companies with
mobile 5G, uh, you know, heard
out their concerns and their
ability to also deliver some of
the service, but to those most
rural parts of New Mexico, the
only technology that's going to
be able to get, get there would
be the low Earth orbit. I, I
would agree with you, Mr.
Chairman, but I want you to also
know that these companies are
doing, they're working their way
out to those locations when we
helped them do that.
So I don't know that that's the
best long-term solution because
then suddenly they've made these
investments, Mr. Chairman, and
suddenly they're just, it's
gonna be for naught and like we
can't have that either, so, um,
all right, well thank you. I
know others have questions,
chair, thank you.
We're gonna try to be quicken
woods and then we go send
Senator Trehill. So trying to
get to your question so we can,
we still got the auditor on
supplementals and deficiencies,
so I, I showed the same concern
that Senator Padilla does on
that 70 million, and we've got
companies out there that's put
in a lot of, of wire, a lot of
underground, and we
are fixing to cut somebody's
legs off and put some people out
of business, so.
I would be very careful, uh.
On how you do that, other
question I have is on page 5,
you have a $482,000 transfer.
Uh, I can, is, does it go to the
sheriff.
ERF fun or does it go to the
sheriff operating fund.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, I have a
question of clarification. Are
you referring to the broadband
program or the cybersecurity
transfer 5,
it says uh.
The OVAE reoccurring interagency
transfer.
And it talks about $40,082,000.
Uh, chair, I believe that is the
uh the request for the fair
share fees. Is that correct?
Yeah, yeah, so, uh, senator,
that, that is the thing that we
have not been paying for the
last uh couple of years as the
office has been stood up for
those services of the chief
procurement officer, the CFO and
uh the HR services.
So that that is in the the
request to uh for this next year
and that's one of this but I was
just wondering where those
particular
Fun showed up in in the uh
budget.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, so
it would be general fund within
obey, right? We would then
transfer that money from Oe to
program support within do it. So
it'd be an interagency transfer,
they would receive that general
fund and utilize it for program
support and administrative costs
and expenses. So most likely to
assist with uh personnel
services, so then they can
support them.
But that's the question I have
is it share operating or share?
ERF funds,
Senator, that will be um general
fund from Oy over to the ages,
so it's just, it's gonna stay
general fund.
Technically.
Not share accounting, sir. It,
it won't be share accounting,
sir.
was its interagency so they need
to make that transfer. Was it
statutorily that's required in
hadn't made it or you need
authorization to make the
transfer to go
that is going to be needed, um,
for the legislature to make that
transfer. So is this a bar, Mr.
Chair? No, this is an
interagency transfer so
Obey has to pay do it for their
operational overhead for
employee HR.
Whatever else is in the bucket
and so that 42 is is support
services and
Telephones that could be a
number of things so it's just a
normal.
It's a normal transfer. I don't
know if it happened last year or
not, didn't happen last year and
why didn't it happen last year?
Was it not requested last year?
Was it requested?
Carry it was requested last year
and it did not make it into the
LFC wreck, uh, and it did not
happen last year, OK.
So the 482, is that for last
year and this year, or is that
just this year's just this
year's, OK.
Thank you, sir.
Senator Tree Hill.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, I'm gonna assume
that we're not asking questions
about this because this is the
C2, uh, we're, uh, is that
deficiencies I don't. No, this
is like something that just got,
I think it's a C2, Mr. Chairman,
this is, I think this
presentation is the one from the
auditor.
No,
uh, Senator Trujillo, that is
information put together by the
LFC to talk about the C2
recommendations, which we didn't
have time for this morning, um.
Which if you have any questions,
I'd be happy to follow up with
you. So we skipped over that.
I'm sorry, so no, I just have
one question about what we're
talking about on page 5, the 2
million cybersecurity um for
statewide cybersecurity and yet
on page um 116 uh volume 2, it
actually says that there's only
76 executive agencies that are
participating. How many
executive agencies are there
and, uh, Mr. Chairman, does this
statewide.
Um, cybersecurity include local
jurisdictions and school
districts, and Mr. Chair Raja is
there if he wants to respond.
Chat and members of the
committee, thank you for that
question, uh, Senator.
Um
Yes. So we split it in different
grouping for better reporting
purposes. And first of all,
before I get into the details, I
wanna
Take the moment and thank you
all for funding us, right? We
try to keep um the lights going
and uh as a first responders of
any particular cyber incidents.
We are happy with your support.
So, 76 agencies, boards, and
commissions on the executive
branch side. Other than that, we
have a few participants from the
judiciary, and this has been my
pet peeve from.
few years
Other branches of government are
not actively participating in
spite of me extending the olive
branch or whatever you wanna
call it.
Um, once again, it's uh
Casting the state
Twice, uh, 3 times more because
each individual entity goes
about spending that amount of
money for the same type of
services that I am providing.
Uh, we have received a lot of uh
adoption on the K through 12 and
higher education side. So out of
the
31 higher educational uh
institutions slash location
because some universities have
multiple satellite location.
I'm happy to say more than 20
have been on boarded on the
higher education side, and, uh.
There are 5 or 6 items in my
service portfolio and attack
surface management has onboarded
all 533 entities in my portfolio
that includes 189 school
districts, both private and
charter.
All this, uh, higher, higher
educational institution. We are
working with Wobbe to extend the
support to school education
network and the newest addition
is water and wastewater. Uh, we
are potentially looking at about
100.
Um
So, we are on boarding them all
on those, but as we on board
them into more critical services
such as penetration, testing,
and vulnerability scanning, the
more devices we find for us to
scan, the cost is gonna go up.
So, uh, that is something, uh,
for all of you to consider. For
example, if we support a school
district and the school district
has 10,000 devices, not student
devices, just.
You know, systems that they
support because of the size of
the school district, that's
gonna cost us money. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and that's why I
think that $2 million is a real
under, um, a number that's less
than what it needs
it is. Yeah, so Mr. Chairman,
nationally, we know that our
school has been compromised,
which is 60 million students. So
Chad and members of the
committee, I think, uh, senator
is alluding to what recently has
hit the media, uh, there is a
product that is.
To buy significant number of
public schools in the country
that is considered compromised.
So I hate to put it that way,
the, the vendor has not come
forward and disclosing that to
us, they are maintaining one on
one communication to the, with
the individual school districts
and the notification. So my
office is currently working with
Department of Justice here to
see if we can.
Get more information to provide
assistance proactively based on
our service telemetry, we
reached out to.
About 170 some school out of the
189.
Indicating
That there is a problem that
they need to take care of.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think
On the explanation for a short
answer. Senator Brant.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask a question
on uh on page 5 of this report,
the uh radio subsidy, um, and
you don't actually have to
answer it here. If I could just
get a report on where we're at
with, with getting that
statewide for all of the
emergency personnel, um, and
what it's costing us.
So I, I know that that each
radio is they have to pay like
$20 a month.
Um, is that because we're paying
that to someone?
Or is that just for your
department to, to run this
program. You don't have to
answer, just I'd like a report
on.
On exactly how far we've gotten.
How much it costs to maintain
this program. A lot of
departments have talked to me,
law enforcement, fire, both of
them in my district have have
talked to me about how much of a
hit this is on their budget.
There's a lot of radios out
there, um, and they're wondering
why they ever switched over,
especially since we're trying to
get a statewide.
Response
Um, and so I'd like to report on
that.
And as far as um
With obey, um, it really
concerns me that um we haven't
spent any of the
$600 million.
That's been given, I would like
a report on what you've been
doing for the last 7 years.
Um, and why we should keep your
department if you're not getting
anything accomplished.
Sure, Senator.
Um, this offices only exist for
about 2.5 years. So I'd be happy
to, to give you an update on
what we're doing. I legally
cannot, so Centia asked for a
very short brief answer. I gave
that to him. I reallyly cannot
put that money out until I get a
final approval from the National
Telecommunications Information
Administration. This is not an
issue of the office of Broadband
has not been moving. We've
actually met up to this 0.4
separate approvals we have to
have had to be able to move the
program to where it is. There
are only 3 states.
That have gotten through that
final approval up to this point.
We are sitting about number 13
as to where we've opened our
portal for taking applications.
We're in the 1st 3 of states.
We've actually been moving very
quickly through these
requirements. And so to your, to
your point of why I literally
cannot do it without the final
the final proposal being
approved by the National
Telecommunications
Communications and Information
Administration NTIA.
So that is going to be one of
the biggest things and there are
many states out there and I'm
sure you've uh been able to
track some of the national
conversation about, you know,
how burdensome the program has
been, uh, to get through in
comparison, the ARPA, you know,
CPF program, we launched that 2
years ago, and we're seeing the
first programs being completed
this, this year, 2 years ago, we
were also given the uh the
expenditure authority for the uh
connecting Mexico, uh, $99
million expenditure authority.
Again, we've awarded out 74.5
and we're expecting about 80% of
those products.
to be wrapped up by June of this
year. And so we're actually
moving very quickly and this is
not, you know, an issue of the
office, which again, a brand new
office we've gone from 2
employees to 27 to meet, you
know, the demands of all of
these programs of a billion
dollars of federal and state
funding, um, but we've been
actually been moving very, very
quickly and legally I cannot put
that money out into the
community until I get that final
approval. Thank you for that,
but um.
And I have concerns on the 70
million for Starlink program,
um.
I'd like to, to maybe talk
offline about some other ideas
and if there's other ways we can
do this that are more permanent,
that could help more than just
those people. Thank you, Chair,
Senator, absolutely happy to
come meet with you.
Thank you we're gonna wrap this
up. Let's just stay right there
on Broadman, you know, I, I have
started. I probably have 3
subscriptions, right? And
they're $165 a month.
And that is the real issue of
the problem in real New Mexico,
they're never going to be able
to maintain that subscription
cost. I mean, I ordered the
Starling Mobi the other day, um,
and which is a backpack and you
plug it in, and it's $30 a
month, so there's, there's lower
rates and options, but it, for
me, that's the most reliable.
Wireless broadband, I mean, they
cut our fiber at least once a
year or 5 or 10 years of trying
to get redundancy, we can't get
that. Comcast has been so
unreliable at my office that I
back it up with Starlink.
Because we have to have service.
Uh, allows Wi Fi calling because
we lose all cellular
transmissions, but in the long
run, I don't think that's
sustainable for the average
customer to be paying that. I
mean, they'll probably be on
sale like.
And flea markets across the
state, the minute they can't
afford the service and get the
transfer and that becomes a real
issue. I mean, unless you can
get a contract rate with
Starlink and the $30 or less
range and they can maintain that
subsidy in in in that rate, but
$165. I mean, that's just the
common sense out of providing
Wi Fi where it really needs to
be in in the common sense of it
is, is it sustainable if it's
not sustainable for that high of
a cost in in annual monthly
maintenance costs. So you want
to start looking at that and
negotiating that.
Uh, Mr. Secretary, um, let me
ask you about the 1.5 million
for enterprise. Do we need to
raise the enterprise cost, uh,
across the state, so we don't
have to subsidize that so the
agencies can can pay that in
their budgets.
Well
And it's a 1.5 million
enterprise services.
Non-reoccurring.
Chair and committee. Yeah, the
$1.5 million is
You know, what, what we're
trying to do here is
We work with, you know, 76
different agencies throughout
the state of New Mexico and you
know, give you an example, you
know, let's say New Mexico DPS
wants to try out some new
technology or maybe uh CYFD is
looking at a new platform or
we're looking at, you know, some
type of, you know, software
platform that we've never worked
with before.
Well, in order to, in order to
do that, you know, sometimes we
can work with a vendor. The
vendor would be, would be able
to come out and provide.
You know, all the hardware, all
the software, but normally we
have to do a proof of concept
and there has to be some funding
mechanism behind that.
Unfortunately, over the last
several years, we haven't been
able to do that. I mean, we
could do pilots, we can do, you
know, basically what we're
trying to do is set up a
laboratory where we can do
testing for all new technology.
This would be a great starter
kit for us to to utilize and,
and I think it would be a great
investment for the state.
OK, that's the answer to my
question how much unspent
cybersecurity money do we have
out there for this year?
Mr. Chair, could I refer to
Rajan for this answer.
And it's a number, not anything
else.
Good. A chair, we do have a $5.5
million reauthorization for
cybersecurity, which has been
unexpended but is supported by
both the LFC and the executive
and previous cybersecurity
appropriations were repurposed
for other purposes, not
cybersecurity related, um.
That I'll turn it over to Raja
if there's any additional
comments explain why you, you
took the legislators
cybersecurity money and
re-appropriate it for other
things. Um.
care and members of the
committee, thank you for the
question and for clarity, uh,
there is $2.7 million that was
taken out of FY23 budget and
with the additional language was
given to us in 2024, that money
is staying as this because of
the language restriction in
that, uh, we were.
We discussed with multiple
vendors to make use of that
money.
And unfortunately, we couldn't
gather the value proposition in
uh what we're seeing third party
IT vendor risk managers, and uh
we didn't have the legislative
support are the legislation
behind us to enforce them. We
can scan, for example, the, the
school vendor you're gonna have
to shorten your answers because
we're gonna go to the floor. So
we were, we didn't have the
legislation to support us to
Implement that
You'll get anything meaningful
done. So, we are open, we are
willing, but uh I don't think uh
we.
Uh, recycled the money for any
other purposes outside of
cybersecurity and I stand here
for any
Further questions Let me go back
to the 5 million. Why is that on
spend in cybersecurity, not a
chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
question and thank you, LFC and
DFA for the support, uh, the all
the money, all the uh contracts
do not come.
For renewal at the same time, we
stagger them across the
financial year. So, uh, out of
abundance of caution, we
requested an extension.
So that we can get it done. We
will make use of the money, for
example, uh, Chat and members of
the committee, one of the funds
did not get our books until
September, October.
That's a fact.
So
This starts July 1, then we
don't get the money hitting our
account for us to renew our
contracts.
It takes delay. It gets delayed.
Well, that seems to be an issue
within the department cause you
can set your contract time
anytime you want.
Based upon your funds. So when
you're doing those contracts,
you know, when money is
appropriate on July 1, you know,
it has to be expended by April
something in order to not revert
and so you guys need to get
those contracts in line with the
way the legislature appropriates
only been doing it for.
How many years we've been in
state 107.
13, so somebody should catch on
at some point. Thank you guys
for your presentation. Thank
you. We'll try to help you.
I'll, I'll try to visit with you
and Manny, I do need to talk to
you a little bit.
Um
Thank you.
Mr. State Auditor, let's hear
about
We're gonna be unlimited on time
and
I know I.
The committee will probably have
a lot of questions, so this may,
you may want to come back.
OK
Good luck in house
appropriation. Mr. Chair,
committee, thank you for
everything today.
Mr. Otter, make sure you hit
your key bullet points and
Good morning
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I want to
congratulate some of the new
appointees to the Senate Finance
Committee.
Uh, I guess my presentation
could be perceived as uh rain on
this parade of uh supplemental
and deficiency appropriations,
but uh we do have a presentation
if uh we can go to the next
slide.
Um
But you just keep talking and
the next slides.
So I just want to offer a
timeline, um,
back in January of last year,
uh, this committee asked my
agency to look into state agency
uh deficiency requests, uh, in
the spring, uh, my office, um,
through the governmental
accountability Office and I have
my director here, um
collaborated with LFC staff, uh,
regarding, uh, state agency
deficiency data.
Uh, in August, the governmental
accountability.
Uh, Office published a
transparency report.
Uh, we presented it, uh, as
well.
And during that presentation, we
are also asked to look into uh
budgetary controls statutes.
Uh, to determine any
recommendations, uh, again, my
office has um a duty to inform
and notify, but.
Um, given the scope of this
review, there's, we're making
some policy recommendations, uh,
through this transparency report
and um again, David Craig to my
right was the author of that,
um, that study.
Let's go to key terms, please.
Um, I'm not gonna go through the
key terms of what a budget
deficiency is and a cash
deficiency is, but I will state
that these two are, aren't
mutually exclusive, but, uh,
many state agency deficiency
requests, uh.
Stem from cash deficiencies, and
the state can help prevent
deficiencies by modernizing and
clarifying agency budget making
and maintenance and related
oversight via budgetary
controls.
Um, next slide key terms what
are budgetary controls, uh,
primary purpose of a budgetary
controls to ensure that
government does not spend more
money than appropriated, uh,
budgetary controls can prevent
financial transactions from
proceeding if there are not
sufficient funds available to
cover the cost.
Of the transaction in the
budget, for example.
Uh, they include denying
encumbrances, purchase orders,
invoices, or requisitions are
not approving budget authority
of revenues are unlikely to
materialize, uh, state level
budget controls are intertwined
with budget oversight monitoring
and maintenance by central
oversight entities.
Um, so the slide, go to a state
agency deficiency
appropriations. This is a, a
summary of our deficiencies
report, and by the way, the
deficiencies report and the
budgetary controls report are
available on our website.
So some of our key findings was
state agency deficiency requests
have increased by 137.5 million
from 2014 to 2024, uh,
justifications for deficiency
requests were not always
available.
Or justifications were
available, they were partially
attributed to over expenditure
of funds and proper adherence to
budget authority and prior year
unpaid expenditures, among other
reasons, and so in that
deficiencies we're recommending
that the state should improve
transparency for budgetary
deficiency appropriations via
additional hearings and making
related documents public.
Uh, LFC and the executive may
wish to stop funding deficiency
appropriation requests or
increase the rigor of review of
such requests, uh, the
legislature and executives
should separate uh deficiency
appropriations from supplemental
appropriations requests in the
budget process and uh you all
the legislature and executive
may consider revising elements
of state law regarding penalties
for violating budget authority.
Um, let's go quickly through the
statutes we did a, a deep dive
into some of the related
statutes regarding warrants and
overpayments, uh, NMSA 86-7. Uh,
this provides for penalties for
wrongful drawing of payment of
warrant, the finance, uh, and
administration or the state
treasurer. This law dates all
the way back to uh when we
became a territory, so it's
It's very old. It was last
updated in 2003 when the
treasurer and DFA had separate
fund tracking now all tracking
is in share.
So there's no longer any
difference between issuing a
warrant and paying a warrant.
So our recommendation is you may
wish to revise this section of
law to remove the treasure from
any discussion regarding warrant
issuing and refocus on state
agency roles in the warranty
process.
Uh, we looked at another
statute, 6-5-6, if you convince
that slide for me, please.
6-5-6 provides for state
agencies and DFA's financial
control division to ensure
actual expenditures do not
exceed appropriations,
allotments, or encumbered
balances of funds at an agency's
disposal, including receivables.
Like federal funds not yet
received.
So the law appears to prevent uh
DFA's financial control division
from issuing warrants.
That exceed periodic allotments
or funds at the agency's
disposal, uh, like most
governments, the state operates
on a cash basis, expenditures
are dependent on receivables.
And depend on the accuracy of
estimating receivables.
Language regarding funds at the
agency disposal is vague and
prone to subjectivity between
DFA and the agency.
So the inclusion of receivables
not received in the calculation
of.
funds at the agency's disposal
makes it hard to deny a warrant,
and so the agency is largely
responsible for that
determination. So our
recommendation is clarify how to
measure the impact receivables
and other accruals have on any
measure of the ability to pay.
You also may wish to strengthen
DFA's financial control and
budget divisions, uh, and their
oversight regarding.
Um, revenue projections.
So let's go to budgetary control
and penalties. We also
researched, um,
Couple of statutes, 6-3.
6 and 6-3-8.
Um, these provide
responsibilities of DFA uh for
allotments with holding
allotments and penalties for
expending.
More than allotments.
So it puts in place state
budgetary level controls of
reimbursement via allotments.
Uh, under our state law, there
are only allotments in place
every other year and only for 6
months of that year, and it's
unclear if the allotment
limitations may apply only to an
agency's general fund
appropriations or whether
federal and other funds are
included.
Uh, penalties are significant,
but it's unclear.
How a violation would be made
enforceable.
Uh, so we're also recommending
that um that these uh statutes.
Uh, create standardization
across years and the use of
allotments increase allotment
frequency and provide
clarification on funds requiring
budgetary control.
So here's just one last kind of
select uh budgetary and control
laws, we looked at 3 statutes.
Uh, 6-3-15 and 6-5-2.1, it
requires DFA to obtain
information on financial
problems and creates duties for
financial oversight.
6-4-6 prohibits DFA payment
unless it may be reasonably
expected at the end of the
fiscal year and the balances in
that funder account will be
fully restored.
So this language indicates that
Expenditure should not be paid
unless fund balances are
reasonably expected to be
restored.
Whether funds are reasonably
expected.
To be received depends on either
the accuracy of the revenue
forecasts.
Federal or on the end of year
reconciliation preventing
ongoing monitoring, uh, other
issues regarding vague and
outdated oversight exist in
other sections of the laws.
That we didn't include here, so
again, we're, we're recommending
that you revisit the provisions
for budget adjustments to
require more stringent
procedures.
clarify the process by which DFA
reviews agency forecasts.
And reinstate limitations on
appropriations and are allowed
determination of expenditure
limits by DFA, uh, in our
budgetary controls evaluation,
we did look at surrounding
states.
And I'll let you take a look at
it, but I think you can see uh
these states require a balanced
budgets, uh, their mechanisms
and specific requirements to
enforce that very
Um
Some involve the governor and
the legislative staff directly.
And some other states have more
detailed provisions for managing
budget adjustments during
revenue shortfalls.
And reallocations.
So, um
You know, in conclusion, uh, I,
I do want to state, you know,
for the committee's purposes
that
Uh, we do intend to, uh, audit
those agencies that are making
deficiency appropriations
requests.
Um
Also, we have drafted a memorial
for consideration of perhaps by
the Senate to address this. We
don't have any plans to sponsor
any legislation to update the
statutes, but uh I just wanna uh
conclude, conclude this
presentation, uh, by saying it's
time to modernize, clarify and
plan for the future, uh, New
Mexico has a history of strong
fiscal accountability going
back.
To when New Mexico was a
territory and as the great
grandson of a constitutional
delegate. I don't know, it could
be rolling over in his grave
over some of these discussions.
Um, it's apparent from reading
these statutes that I've
mentioned, a tremendous
consideration and care went into
their becoming law.
We have a strong foundation, but
it has been neglected and now
needs upkeep.
Statutes and regulations don't
necessarily address modern
fiscal concerns and lines of
authority and responsibility
over different aspects of fiscal
management have become blurred.
Policymakers need relevant and
reliable information regarding
different types of deficits and
real life examples so that they
can in turn promote legislation
that balances sound fiscal
management with the public
interest.
Vague language such as the term
funds at its disposal does not
promote relevant and reliable
information and should be
replaced with more specific
guidance.
So on the clarification front,
some of the statutes that we've
discussed today.
Um, potentially conflict with
other statutes. This analysis
was very focused and were
certain that these and other
statutes not included here.
That also conflict with these
very old statutes.
Inconsistencies should be
addressed as they are are
identified.
So the plan for the future is we
recommend is most statutes that
we mentioned predate the share
system.
Workarounds have evolved.
So that processes can be
completed and payments can be
made on an ongoing basis
necessary for running a state.
The state may be considering
updating the share system.
Uh, a memo was just put up by
DFA I think they intend to keep
it until 2035, but you all may
have different ideas for that.
So, um, in conclusion, before
any such initiative is
recommended that a thorough
review of all financial related
statutes should occur and needed
changes be made before any such
initiative is undertaken, uh, so
with that, Mr. Chair, um, David
and I will stand for questions.
You know, here yesterday I
presented a bill.
In judiciary.
And it had to do with the
liabilities of court suits.
And, and, and, uh, civil rights
suits and the federal civil
rights law has no caps
whatsoever on it.
And when I said that we should
try to budget something.
To cover those.
I was told that uh
What's that agency?
was required to pay that they
shouldn't have to come and
budge. Yeah, they shouldn't have
to beg the LFC or the
legislature to come up with
those funds.
As you know,
This chair
The the legislature is the
budgeting authority. They are.
Who determines how we spend the
money.
But that was a direct reversal.
As the way they saw it.
They saw it as the court should
determine what we pay.
And that goes back to the whole
theory of are the laws so
stringent?
That we can't abide by them.
He $370 million outstanding and
liabilities right now.
How do we budget for those? How
do we budget those agencies.
When we don't know the other
side of the story.
Um
I'm, uh, this, I know this is a
question, but you see where I'm
coming from, and I told him, you
know, I'm trying to budget, I'm
trying to lay out a budget, a
sound budget, and we're really.
Just saying, well, we're gonna
operate off reserves. We're not
going to operate off the budget.
So my two cents, Mr. Chair, and
if you have any comments, Mr.
Auditor, I appreciate it. I'll
have David Craig address that.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Woods, I
think that there's always
challenges with some projections
and estimates, but it should be
based upon something.
I think that if you have some
data somewhere, either on prior
experience of the fund or some
sort of trend analysis of what
you've paid out, you have some
data.
We're trying to prevent is wild
guesses that aren't linked to
data-driven decision making.
In our deficiency report today.
And I would suggest that that
should be a policy goal for the
state everywhere.
Mr. Chairman Senator.
Thank you. We we budget every
year for those, right? About 50
million this year John kind of
looking, so we, we think we do
our best guess.
But we know that there's.
300
Zoom out there. We know that.
You know, this thing's gonna get
into the 600 million.
you know
be
usually delivers pizza night.
Just
to the state for
and so they're going to continue
to grow.
The exact as you mentioned to me
that
We need to get this under
control because what we're
seeing prior where a settlement
a lot lower.
Maybe
for 1 year, 2 years. Now 300
million in life.
Abilities is coming up.
We don't want the liabilities
are gonna come through to this
to the judgments and.
Settlements are done.
There's no way to look
150 to 300 million
We don't know
It's going to be settled in
what's
gonna be so, but that's, that's
a lot of the process, I mean.
the
is, you know,
It
both ways in 2016.
Dead flat broke, right? We were
bouncing checks and the
treasurer chose to to pay
people, which the
Thing to do even though
negative in
Bank account is 0.
So how, how tight do you want?
Yeah
In those situations where
We don't have the money
But we're
in that situation ever again.
So that becomes a question then
it does.
You know, we're
You know if she has a has a
build to recommend.
objected
and transfers.
Everybody's telling us no but, I
mean.
The estate workers telling us,
no, that we can't do that.
It's not their prerogative, it's
the legislature prerogative
whether they
They won't object or
and
I probably not because she is
the most objecting to bars that
we see.
have plenty of money.
The clean
deficiencies or can't operate
and
And just wanted
Grab 43 million
transfer.
side
to contracts or that we can't
even see and.
Who they are and what they're
doing, you can see that, but we
can't.
And and so, I mean.
And we, when we didn't have
money, it wasn't an issue.
Now that we have money, it's in
this last 2 years in this
administration, it's going to be
a really big issue because
they're gonna start pushing
everything they can through to
bars and and.
And moving money where we don't
have.
We can't visually see that every
single time where after the
transfer, where exactly it is
going in is was an appropriated
for that or not appropriated for
that.
In the legislature loses more
and more authority, I mean.
This surprises me that you're
not trying to, to get at some of
these statues or start that
conversation in this year.
As we move forward, I mean,
I don't know if that's
I think that's part of your.
job, but I, I, I don't know for
sure, so I hate to say it is
when I don't know for sure. But
I think uh Mr. Chairman, our ads
advocacy regarding this issue, I
think it's run its course cause
Uh, given the scope of the
modernization of all these
statutes.
Uh, they typically fall on
Department of Finance and
Administration and uh I, I don't
feel comfortable as state
auditor really going beyond
informing all of you policy
makers about the statutes that
need to be modernized, need to
be updated inconsistencies need
to be removed, uh, conflicts
with shared need to be
addressed, um, we feel like, uh,
sponsoring a memorial that maybe
lays out what we've just
presented.
With some specific
recommendations, I think, uh,
you can, you can consider unless
Uh, legislators want to take
this on, um, and we didn't even
mention all the statutes that in
our opinion are outdated and
inconsistent.
So, um, my office is willing to
work with your staff, uh, we can
do a deep dive and perhaps uh we
can contribute to drafting
legislation, but right now,
All we have is a memorial, um,
we published both the budget
deficiencies report and the
budgetary controls report we're
happy to give copies to new
Senate Finance Committee
members, uh, but I feel like Mr.
Chairman, uh, we're, we're at
the end here of our advocacy,
but I am committing to get a
final list of those agencies
that have requested deficiency
appropriations, and we will
expand our annual financial
compliance audit, uh, to look
into that.
So do you know who that would
that lie with with the treasure
responsibility that statues are
clear cause they're issuing the
warrants out of the treasury,
right?
They're approving the transfer
of the funds into into the
treasury or she's issuing the
checks, the warrants.
Yeah, I think the role of the
treasurer has since changed.
David, wouldn't you agree and go
ahead, David, why don't you
address that? Well, when the
statutes were created, that was
correct, Madam Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, and,
and it was correct up until
recently, but now we have a
situation in which basically
when a state agency issues a
warrant.
They have made an encumbrance
and a promise to pay. So it's at
the agency level now and DFA if
they canceled has either to
cancel the warrant or pay the
warrant, and the issue is, is
that the treasure is really not
involved with that anymore other
than transferring monies around
at the request of DFA. So I
would not say it lays with the
treasurer. I would say I agree
with the auditor, it lays with
DFA to be the agency to come
forward and say we need better
controls over this. One of the
issues to briefly is that.
that we have an independence
required as an audit firm. If we
tell DFA or we say that we want
to do things in a certain way,
um, and then they do it, and
then we come back later and our
auditors say it's all fouled up
then they say, well, you told us
to do it. It's an in you, you've
done, you've management directed
us and you violated your AICPA
requirements. So we have to stay
abreast of that in our advocacy.
Mr. Chairman.
I don't know, it, it's gonna be
an issue until
We don't have any money and then
they're gonna be saying no, wish
we had that money and then they
wasted it on head shots,
conference tables.
Computer docking stations with
no computers, I mean, those are
some of the bars that have come
through in the past.
Just
I mean
And be on them.
And Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, we're happy to serve
on any kind of work groups if
you.
If you would like our
involvement to
to address some of the issues
that we presented in this
budgetary controls and all the
framework that that it entails,
uh, we're happy to to help where
we can.
OK, appreciate that. I mean,
somebody's gonna have to step up
to the plate, I mean, I'm not a
memorial guy, but maybe somebody
on the committee would want to
do one. I'm looking to my right
over there and uh and do that,
but I mean and start setting
that up because it, it's gonna
have to happen and then just
like I said, it's fine when you
have money and everybody's happy
and then they say, oh well,
where did that money go? Well.
Somebody watched Starling go up
in smoke and spend $165 a month
when they could have got
something for 30, so.
And I think the
The urgency is there since the
decision's been made.
to hold on to share uh until
2035 and so I think that really
just elevates the urgency to
really address this entire
framework, Mr. Chairman. Well,
with the IT update and shares in
there, I don't know how long,
but I mean, the problem is we,
we feel comfortable with Cher
cause we all comprehend it, and
then we get into a new IT system
and then 10 years later we're
still trying to get into the IT
system that who knows what
happened in sharing such a
transfer, I mean if you do not
make a
Payment to someone for their
paycheck overnight. That's
things could go awry very
quickly and so I.
That's my fear. I mean, I don't
want to handwrite checks if you
want to print checks.
Right? It depends on how many
checks you got to do, and so
that's the problem with shares.
We're comfortable. We know it
needs to go, but none of us are,
are saying, well, we're too
afraid, well, we're gonna get
ourselves into.
That's what I think my take is
unsure.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I,
I just, I gotta put in a
A, a little uh kind of statement
about our budget we, we hope
that you seriously consider our
budget. I know that maybe that
ship has sailed, but we do have
some pending appropriations
requests and we feel that the,
the entirety of those requests
will really help us to do things
like this, uh, to have the
resources to assist you and make
these policy recommendations. So
Um
You got a few more days in the
house, I, you need a Coleman
tent and then uh a lantern to
stay over there and make your
bitch do uh they still have a
house built too as it comes
over, we'll look at that and see
what they did over there and see
what we can do for you over
here. All right, thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
appreciate your attention. Thank
you.
