And the bill that I offered had
too many of a strict strictures
in it and so this bill is asking
us to take another year to look
at the results of setting
funding directly to these
highest poverty schools so
regionally we forced them to a
split whatever funding they get
into three third from out the
third for reading and and the
third for a variety of other
issues case management tutoring
after school of current
culturally relevant professional
curriculum development full
screen interventions engaging
parents so this bill and does
that a third a third a third
essentially what would happen is
that a school wanted to buy math
program it would have taken all
the money and yet we made them
spend the third the third or
third so this bill continues it
for another year.
It's my understanding that the
fifty million for that is in
house bill two and it and those
those three categories and I'll
be happy to stand for questions.
Thank you
The audience anybody in support.
The end soon.
At the center of those.
yes network personal and speak
you got one minute.
Thank you Mr chair good
afternoon members of the
committee as well my name's
Emily will Dallas New Mexico
voices for children would like
to think Senator Stewart for
bringing for the bill and we
stand in support of SB three
family income index allowed the
state to target funding to our
lowest income students and to
support academic improvements
and it's really important
because there's reserves the
estimates it cost forty percent
more to educate a student in
poverty to the same level as
their more affluent peers and we
support these new flexibilities
in the continuation of the
family income index we asked the
committee to support SB three as
well today thank you.
Thank you anybody in opposition.
The marines in opposition.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator sheer.
Thank you Mr chair.
She is worried about what I
might say no other word.
Receive yes if everybody's
worried.
So Mr chair of.
What do we need an additional
fifteen million dollars in
minutes.
We we have money in the in the
SCG why why why more.
so Mister chairman Senator this
bill idea this program this
pilot is trying to focus on the
schools around the state that
are at the highest poverty so
these are extremely high poverty
schools and that the idea is to
give each of those schools a
little bit more money so last
year I believe it was a hundred
and seven schools were funded
we've put a provision in to
insure that we wouldn't fund
more than ten percent of your
high poverty schools so that we
would spend this funding all
over the state which we have
done
it's a pilot to see if a small
amount of money dedicated to
these highest poverty schools
could make an impact no we have
at risk money in the SCG we have
money in the SCG but we don't
really focus on these highest
poverty schools that's the idea
behind this pilot so Mr chair
Madam pro tempore.
Isn't our it this doesn't this
have the effect of undermining
our SCG.
Now we're taking things out of
that guarantee and say okay will
we like the anti but we want to
do something else that's not a.
Mister chairman Senator share I
don't think that way I don't
think it does we have plenty of
things that we give to schools
outside of the SCG our
professional development is
outside of the SCG will some of
it is some of it doesn't the
programs we do for principals
and teachers are outside of that
so we have programs outside of
it Kate plus started outside of
it K. three plus without side of
it K. five plus was outside of
that so the SCG is for everyone
it's real fast it's supposed to
pay for most everything's when
we do pilots like this we often
do it just this way.
Kate Kate plus some K. three
plus was a pilot for many many
years so this is a way for us to
look at what kind of impact that
this kind of statement would
this kind of funding would do
for these high poverty schools.
Mr chair and senator so is it
still even though it's not
specific now thirty thirty third
still literacy interventions of
mathematics instructions in in
whatever interventions for at
risk means so those are still
the things that has to be used
on Mr Chairman yes.
In.
Mr Chairman what are
interventions for at risk
students
I think in your legislative
information system your
breathing Sheetï¿½ it's on the
backside so that's what I
mentioned with after school
summer enrichment program
curriculum development whole
school interventions like social
emotional interventions
instructional resources and
materials Services to engage in
sports a parents and families
bringing families together
bringing parents and feeding
them that's how they get tougher
elementary which offer food
showing them how to help their
child with homework with their
master their reading and and
also for tribal communities
tribal communities trying to
ensure that their fully
integrated in the school system
so.
Those are all different our
districts are different and what
they need is is up to them
especially at the school level
the last the last thing here on
any of our it's got.
List of schools and what they
what they did and really just
kind of randomly I see that
Bernalillo I'll get on a
supplementary.
Expended thirteen percent of the
money that was sent to me last
year.
The two schools in Farmington
animus elementary McCormick
elementary animus spent ninety
nine percent in McCormick ninety
seven percent.
I see others in here thirty two
twenty five thirty nine.
If they have the money what it
may spend so Mister chairman
Senator this started when the
pandemic start.
I mean the pandemic just
undermined everything is under
money to this pilot and in
addition but we made it harder
for them to do what they needed
to do at that there's other
examples but the one that really
strikes me is that the math
program what it taking all the
money that they could I because
we were saying you have to do a
third on literacy and the third
and everything else so this is a
way to right size the pilot do
it for one more year and get
good data and then we'll decide
if this is made a difference
going forward so these goals try
it we made it too hard for them
and the pandemic made them
doubly hard so we want to right
size it this year and give the
mother of another chance to use
the money.
So Mr chair Senator I appreciate
that I just on some of these are
you know eighty ninety hundred
percent so some people figure
out how to use of ninety seven
percent.
My only my only concern and I
don't I'm not gonna vote against
your bill but my only concern is
if we're going to put fifteen
million dollars into something
we can't have eighteen percent
or eight percent of someone of
vacuous eight I can't remember
where it is now usage.
So agree people need to learn
how to read and do a little bit
of math.
So that we know what four point.
One seven zero million dollars
actually looks like so thank you
Mr chair Senator we do have a
minute for that has to take off
the perforation amendment
the pass out the amendment
process everybody knows is
appropriation bills moved
through in the budget we're
going to strip out the.
Dollars in and do that so.
Senator Stewart we should copy
the.
Mr Chairman RT hat.
Mr chair I move to pass.
Amendment number one to Senate
bill three second for
discussion.
There's two.
Mr chairman all it does to take
off the fifty nine at the and
that's our in house bill two
questions on the amendment CNN
any objection to the amended
bill.
Thing that you have amended bill
any other questions from
committee members.
Senator Rodriguez Mr Chairman
just very quickly thank you
Senator for bringing this
forward you know I see this is
truly meeting the intent that
was initiated back then when we
did it is how do we get funding
more to those impoverished
schools we've been lacking this
for too long and we need to
remove all barriers we are the
biggest culprits truly in we
allocate funding we have an
intent but they would find
barriers and we try to dictate
ourselves for legislative
perspective how to do it we're
not the experts were not in the
classroom and we're not the
administration of the public
schools to be able to determine
this so I think this is a way to
remove these barriers give it a
chance collected data we need to
do it right and truly meet that
intent so I'm gonna move it to
pass Mr chair Senator we have
Senator Padilla I was school
second that
Senator Stewart I just have one
quick question in reading FIR
the judges kind of saying you
need to.
You guys want to share.
We need to gather this data as
part of the Yazzie Martinez so
when we do come to court the
state probably sufficiently
funding school only we can do
this with hi the purpose of high
that.
But only other comment is impact
aid school districts right which
are some of the highest poverty.
Should be doing this on their
own probably should put this
impacted.
You may need to think about how
we require those impact the high
poverty school districts to do
that would affect the money so
they can report to the feds.
Because in hearing the federal
impact aid pretty hard and if
it's sufficient for not
sufficient to what they're
accomplishing it better be
listening that impact aid money
better be spent in the same way
so that impact aid is available
it's and that money to fall in
the keynote here is we need to
get data and information get out
of the Ozzie Martinez scored on
the consent decree I think we
are in the lawsuit for years and
years and years to come and
maybe not to consider for that's
what I call basically what they
are Mr chairman I agree with you
completely and that's one of the
reasons why we want to do this
in other years it's been hard
the pandemic to get that data
and now we're all focused on
that date.
So we have to make a motion by
Senator Rodriguez a second by
Senator Padilla
any objection to the two passed.
Soon then Senator.
How much more than five minutes.
The only process left.
I appreciate the hard working I.
We'll see you will propose.
Two years.
Senator Steinborn soon.
Twenty ninety four we do have an
amendment.
Senator Stewart easy.
Mr chair Senator will draft
amendments to the bill of
rights.
Mr chair this is the only
expenses Senate bill ninety four
which transfer the Rio Grande
trail commission which is the
Commission provided created in
law to plan Rio Grande trail
project requests for L. from
Texas to Colorado it would
transfer administration of the
commission and the whole
management the project from the
New energy minerals natural
resources department to the
Economic Development apartment
that has an outdoor division
that didn't exist when we first
created this this is supported
by the administration this is
very much needed to advance this
project and with that Mr chair
happy to stand for questions or
just an amendment removes the
appropriation.
To them and then met anybody in
the audience and support.
So one person any of the soon.
all of the way from this bill.
If the whole but Mister
fantastic hi Mister chair
members of the committee and
Ellen well and the policy
adviser from the energy minerals
natural resources department and
I am here to say that we are
very much in support of this
bill and that we think that
probably had the outdoor
recreation division and economic
development existed when it was
originally created this what it
ended up there naturally it's a
really good home for it we're
happy to stay on the board and
keep participating in making it
happen thank you.
This
is.
The motion
So that.
Actually.
One I want to Mr chair Senator
Steinborn I want to draw Senator
shares attention to page five.
Line sixty nine in which it
addresses
What concerns that we have been
with and also private property
rights are addressed on page
eight one eight three ten in
which eminent domain shall not
be used to establish the trail
with that
I'm good thank you Mr.
Would have to ship of
goes reversion increases the
other thing.
Seven.
The last two digits of.
With the right.
They were like what receive
Care again my name is Anil and
and well I'm the policy adviser
the Energy middle initial
resources department and the
technical amendments are
actually to the senator's bill
the bill is fine.
The technical amendments are the
underlying statute which creates
the Rio Grande trial our general
counsel pointed out that some of
the authorities to create trail
segments still live in EMNRD and
this bill does not change that
nor we precisely want that to be
changed
because there are other trails
where that authority is
appropriate but that we wanted
to point it out in our FY are
because it does not completely
sever the administration of the
Rio Grande trail from EMNRD to
EDT.
Miss yeah Mr calling for media
response so we look at this when
the bill first came out and
respectfully offer an
alternative point of view so
there is a trails Act in law
which incidentally is like never
been used I mean but when we
created the Rio Grande trail we
were looking for a home for the
commission and the trade New
Mexico trials access that the
secretary of energy minerals
natural resources department
shall have the authority to
create trails in the state he
didn't say that's the only one
in the state that could create
trails we just created trails
Act and again this authority to
energy sector what this bill
does really is create an
alternate path and that's kind
of the ultimate theory of the
case here and I I spoke to
Legislative Council about this
at a high level is that we
believe that the bill the law
allows and further we added more
definition to that.
On the new language in the home.
On page eight.
We give the division the
responsibility and the authority
to create a trial segments and
to work towards trail segments
so it's really you know and
there doesn't have exclusive
jurisdiction over creating
trails in the state this creates
its own jurisdiction to the
division and and so we didn't
feel like we needed to amend the
real the the trails Act it
sounds like the energy
department doesn't would want
that anyway the service I don't
think we would with the caveat
that I am not a lawyer nor Miner
general counsel that does make
sense for this particular trail
our point in the FIR is about
the underlying trails.
The.
I believe that that we think
there could be if someone wanted
to make a point of it but that
it is unlikely.
At
if you need emergency.
Yeah I'm just getting off yes
that.
Right Mr chair I had one.
Correct.
In a.
So Mister chair we did you know
consult Legislative Council.
Yes I did we Shawna we didn't
necessarily feel like an
amendment was needed or
necessarily even a good idea so
I would say I would based upon
the council I got when we could
have done it if we thought it
was needed we didn't think it
was needed SO a good idea so I
would say let's move it and then
when I'm willing to do is have a
sidebar conversation with
Senator Diamond in the general
counsel and Sean and see if we
think something is needed it
would be a very easy fix it be a
short amendment that we could do
on the floor.
I don't think one is needed for
I would have done it.
Options.
It is the lack of.
You
more than.
Committee reports to come up
with more.
It's an option.
would like us to side bar and
then come back in the morning
I'm happy to do that too.
We don't think once the.
We would have a conversation
regardless and if I still felt
one was needed we we we do an
amendment on the floor but
that's not the feedback I've
gotten up to now so.
just so let's keep moving that.
In support of the bill.
So.
Not have.
Making a difference on the
floor.
The
wall I see.
Thank you for.
So Mr chair are you saying that
the committees can meet in the
morning.
Okay insiders okay okay so the
one we do that since that sounds
like that's a comfort level and
then we will sidebar here with
the department and with
Legislative Council and will
confirm this in the morning one
way or the other says hundred.
Sure.
Our change talk to the you
should and okay sure happy to.
Hi let's to the losses you in me
he is stopped.
Understood thank you.
Okay thank you Mr.
Senator.
So usual she's nearly ready.
That.
Well.
Senator Munoz thank you Mr.
Forty four point eight million.
Which we do have amendment to
strip the money for the PRC
currently the PRC resides in
downtown Santa Fe in a rental
space
that I don't know what the right
rates are but we have a new
member the PRC hair in their
executive director and the
former PRC director now DFA
director.
Head looked around to find them
a home since they got displaced
by ET DEC and so this
appropriates money for them to
buy the current an existing
building of the E. R. B. because
the RP is buying a new bit of
building a new building for
their help in according to
statute and law we have to
purchase that from the
retirement.
Fund of the RB.
Wall.
Mr chairman so the one going to
demand for so you can.
Okay we have.
The motion to approve the number
one.
Yes all right very well and that
is on point two two five three
four eight point one.
Thank you Mr chairman amendment
districts of two point five
million dollars appropriation.
Is there any questions
discussion on the amendment.
Well you thank you Mr.
Is there
revenue guidance.
Of the two point I was.
I'm too but we think it's
actually gonna be and as a
search somewhere the budget
already here.
Two point five is in the budget
currently of the dollar amount
was come to meet your OB when
they would have to place that
building for sale.
And.
We feel confident that there was
enough analysis and market
analysis and all that put
together.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
yes.
With the.
Chairman I believe the Mr be
valued their building and what
they've that the oil market rate
was going to be.
And then we went from there.
Thank you and I have some
really.
When I got some.
Further.
Questions to.
There any objection to accepting
the amendment.
See none we have adopted the
amendment will back to bill as
amended.
Members so question Senator
share.
Mister chair Mister chair.
This is.
This this current building is it
on the property tax rolls or is
it owned by the state and
therefore not on the property
tax rolls and physicality.
Mister chairman Senator I'm not
for sure but the building is
currently owned by the E. R. B..
I'm assuming that they're quite
I government agency which would
not be on the tax.
so I bring that up Mr chair and
others just because we've talked
about taking things.
Property tax rules that forming
the counties but more
specifically the bonding
Authority or capacity of the
school districts and so every
time we take any piece of
property off property tax rolls
at that is the effect of what we
do so I just want to make sure
we weren't doing that.
I'm also.
I'm torn I want to know what the
return on investment is versus
owning this versus of leasing
because.
The the the owner actually
sponsor for the maintenance of
the buildings on the roof leaks
the owners problem not just not
the.
The fourth.
Releasees problem Mr chairman
Senator we're gonna get you some
lease right permission of what
they're currently paying and
then you have to do an
amortization schedule on based
on the purpose and the pay out
in the cost compared to lease
right to
Purchase.
Purchase is one thing but the
maintenance is a whole
different.
Then you that fix your own roof.
Mr chair Senator share madam
aperi Kaelin I face T. director
for PRC
the lease agreement we currently
have is a ten year lease
agreement and that agreement we
paid to earn eighty five
thousand five hundred fifty two
dollars a month for the
building.
Mr I'm sorry annually I said
that wrong it's twenty three
thousand seven earned the ninety
six a month two hundred and
eighty five thousand five
hundred fifty two annually but I
do want to preface on that we're
downtown so there's a lot of
parking issues building downtown
so while the lease agreement
does cover some parking it
doesn't cover sufficient parking
for staff so we pay out right
now about two thousand two
hundred a month so that's twenty
six thousand four hundred
annually just to deal with also
parking there's additional
parking that we have leased from
the city a parking lot for
overflow parking for the staff
plus on top of that we do
validation stickers and that is
for staff that need to come in
and also for people that come to
visit our our our open meetings
people that come to visit staff
at the building we validate
their parking in the central
parking garage so that
constitutes the parking costs
so we deal with not just the
least cost but the parking costs
the least does cover gas
electricity water and
waste disposal janitorial
supplies and services are
covered also in the lease
agreement.
So Mr chair I.
I'm not going to be able to use
my calculator fast enough for
this but
twenty one thousand dollar.
If we but with this complied
with cash is that the.
The plan Mr chair.
Matt Mr chair Senator that is
correct.
But it would be the same
building.
Those who have the same issues
Mr chair marking Senator no we
are be building.
The current building there in is
located next to Maria's
restaurant I don't know the name
of the street quarter over
quarter of a.
Quarter street they're building
new buildings.
When the former director DFA the
secretary said that would be a
building that they could use and
that would fit for the PRC's use
and we drafted this bill thank
currently don't have enough
space where they're at to even
bring their staff back full time
even if they wanted in the E. R.
B. building the still be a
little bit tight correct me if
I'm wrong but wouldn't work.
Mr chair Senator that's correct
the building we're in and we're
leasing is in downtown Santa Fe
it's on palace Avenue
in that building it's it's a
it's an older building it's the
traditional historic Santa Fe
building single pane windows
things nature it's it's an older
building also in the sense that
the make up of the building
there square footage but the
usable square footage is what we
struggle with very wide hallways
weird kind of intense in some of
the hallways and things of that
nature I've been in the air be
building that we're discussing
here the the ability to make it
work for the number staff really
rests in the fact that two
floors of that building up here
be have open spaces and it
really is going to come down to
configuring those open spaces
with cubicles to make that
number match for staff.
And then finally Mr chair of I
know I know we're not putting
any money in now so we're gonna
renovated with no dollars but we
were going to do two and a half
million dollars.
Did I read this right this is a
fourteen thousand square foot
building.
Or would I miss something.
This is
chair Senator fourteen thousand
four hundred and forty five
square feet.
Mr chair Senator that is
correct.
Get through at the window for.
Mister chair Mister chair if
phone is on silent.
I think we should throw him out
of the room.
Okay I'm just I I am.
Mr chair Senator I understand
you're trying to do the value of
the building yes per square foot
E. R. B. came up with the value
that they think that the
building is worth in its
condition.
As a sale from one state agency
to another.
All right thank you Mr.
Senator Steinborn and thank you
Mr chairman.
Couple quick questions I think I
heard the answer how many
employees Mr chair work at the
ERP right now and that's.
Mr chair chairs okay.
The Mr chair Senator I do not
know that.
I'm not ninety eight BFA is told
me about ninety.
Early work at E. R. B. is
building on the corner of.
Okay and so Mister chair and
then how many PRC staff for
their that would be going into
the building.
Mr chair Senator there are
eighty seven FTE that work you
know are signed to the Boca
building downtown right now now
that does not include our
pipeline safety are
transportation staff they are
always out in the field but
eighty seven FTE are signed to
the Mr chair so it's pretty even
swap as far as the amount of
person leaving the building in
going into it that was question
number one and number two is
right now Mr chair is the
building being rented by the ERP
or is it actually I guess it
just right Mr chair Senator note
the R. B. currently occupies
ability their new building is
being built.
And
Been told by the PRC director
that there's a hundred sixteen
total the.
Total of P. Garcia employees but
eighty seven are going to be in
the office and other differences
in the field under service chair
I guess what I'm asking is is
right now we have a lease
situation but we're recommend
purchase the bill.
And if that's the case where we
continuing the leases are we
moving to a purchase
misdirection under.
They're currently in a lease
situation downtown.
Which doesn't fit their needs.
E. R. B. is building a new
building.
Which no matter what they're
building would have to go on the
market in the put up for sale
and come back to for approval.
If the E. R. B. cells the
building the state purchased the
building from Mr B. and then
transfers to the PRC then there
it's a PRC building right Mr
chair sorry what I'm asking
though is to E. R. B. lease this
building right now.
No it no they currently own okay
that's a that's what I was
getting at so the phone at the
building and meal one.
It's so really
Well then let me ask a different
question if ERP owns it so
government owns the building
right now.
We are beat us so.
We're we're making we're making
money on our self care we're
charging a profit to another
element of state government as
opposed to just transferring the
ownership wire wise we have an
to pay twenty five million
dollars Mr chairman I for
myself.
They are a quasi government
agency that owns the building
independently it's not a GSD
building like you can I. D. O.
T. so they actually own their
building in their budget.
And so when you do that you can
just take the building there
remove that asset out of their
budget or asset file you need to
make a sale on a transfer in
order to make it complete.
But the yeah.
we have had this discussion
lengthy and Hyde Park Committee
that part of it is with the RP
they need that money for the new
building.
County jails.
Thank you yeah they may I guess
I'm just struggling with the
fact is is the RP a government
entity or is it is it not I mean
obviously the funds are managed
by the state investment council
right.
Mister chairman Senator E. R. B.
manages their own funds okay.
Well this is a key question for
me.
If there are private entity I
can understand having to sell
the building if it's the
government any like you said Mr
chair would be just transferring
it.
So had a little bit of a mess.
Just because I know he R. B. the
manager government funds their
beneficiary of public employees.
R. E. R. B. employees public
employees.
Mr Chairman center yes so public
employees public beneficiaries
will have his is a privately
owned building I don't know why
the are be considered private
landlords I don't quite get that
at that point Mr chair Senator
at GSD usually only all the
buildings right and they
maintain all the buildings when
this the
E. R. B. when they imagine and
they originally did this
building they took the money
from their own funds and built
the building and put that
infrastructure net assets in
their asset listing on their
balance sheet.
So it's not a GST property it's
under control and it's under an
asset listing of of the E. R. B.
and so E. R. B. cannot transfer
probably the transfer that
building and to the state
without a return because it will
show negative loss on their
asset she looked.
Look at DFA and he's texting
them correct in this.
So there asset should be short
in a negative balance in showing
a loss in the state will have to
transfer the money in order to
purchase a building if you take
the two point five million a new
a new calculate that over a ten
year period the net savings on
interest in operating costs
alone probably in the in the
three to four million dollars
yes the question this way Mr
chairman to we no public funds
used to buy that building then I
know we are be built at these
public funds to buy it.
Sure I can only assume that they
did that way that they could I
can only assume okay about the
dates me.
Mr chair if these public funds
to buy them even though it's on
on by GST of the that is a
public building and I view that
as a transfer to another public
entity I I don't know if someone
can like me yes but if that's
what my concern is coming from.
Mr chair Senator let you more if
you have a asset on your balance
sheet yeah can you take the
funds from that entity and
purchase an asset in use that
asset.
For your personal use you cannot
just remove that can say we're
giving away.
Two point whatever the value of
the building two point five
million you have to make an
asset transfer in there has to
be at a countering transfer on
the other side of the balance
sheet the funds that I'm told
for Kim the money came from the
retirement funds so you have to
replace that money in the
retirement funds in order to
make that transfer that's not a
GSA transfer to a private entity
whether selling it is not a GSD
transfer from department of
health to CYFD by those
transfers can be made internally
right and for those you know for
a little contacts into play as
we know it when we transfer
ownership of a property usually
between agencies we do a bill
only do it there's no money
changing hands we just so that's
where I'm torn on this one
because if it was a publicly pay
for building I don't see a
distinction there
so.
Unless they learn otherwise
that's kind of my concern right
now Mr thanks.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair Mr chair all the chairs so
I I I can have some similar
questions but so I'm on the
eighty seven employees it'll go
in its
the north American office you
know pods you know four square
footage per employee in the
business office anywhere from a
hundred fifty and seventy five
square feet so I think you're
good there if you with eighty
seven folk you're in pretty good
shape there
what was the length of time that
was used Mr chair and senator to
kind of study where the state if
this is going to I've seen this
building I'm surprised to hear
that it's fourteen thousand
square feet doesn't look that
big to me but I could I'm I've
seen it several times but I
guess I'm the budget to look at
it closely to I mean is there
parking there for eighty seven
employees is there.
Potential for you know the
configuration that you're gonna
need is there a public board
room for commissioners to be
able to conduct their work
publicly in it is I mean I'm
just concerned that you're gonna
take a large chunk of that to
have a meeting room because some
of these meetings I I have to
regularly with a lot of
legislation that I carry I'm
gonna have to regularly be over
there I kind of wish she was
still across the street because
I would move my body as fast as
I could to get over there when I
had to be over there I I need to
have an improvement this a
future here for this this this
this this public regulation
commission they're gonna need
staffing for telecommunications
are going staffing for any
number of other things.
Is this really the building for
for them.
Senator like to respond Mr
chairman Senator.
In the numbers of it FTE
employees are going to be there
they're almost identical to what
E. R. B. currently has their.
And so the city would not allow
an over parking without having
this the parking spaces
available so has to match up
pretty closely I can't answer
the questions on the
reconfiguration the probably
come back in the air when you're
B. moves out and and just for an
update in reconfiguration of the
building it in but.
According to the former PRC
director and yet now current DFA
secretary this was the best
match for them that was in the
inventory that was a.
Senator Steinborn this is your
answer your question they are
choirs I constitutional agency
and that's why the transfer has
to be done this way because
our constitutional agency in.
Mr chair Senator yeah I can add
to also the space where and
currently is and much smaller
hearing room than what the
agency was in before an old pair
of building
going through COVID you know
everything kind of change with
COVID and even though COVID is
done and we do have open
meetings we still continue to do
this just hybrid meetings and we
do continue to have a number of
people that participate through
soon and we do also put that
meeting on you to so that people
can watch that people need to
participate they have the zoom
option and then we have people
in the hearing room also.
Thank you and I just that that
thankful I would really want to
hear the steps perspective on
whether this is really going to
work for you or not I I I hope
that over the years and one of
the biggest concerns I've had a
sort of alluded to this little
while ago because I I really
feel like the PRC needs more
staff to do a lot of other
things that that they had just
been quite frankly and honestly
world you know I think they've
struggled with and so I I I'm
assuming that you know you're
going to come forward with
additional staffing requirements
and to be able to provide the
professional analysis that's
needed before the PRC takes
action what have you if you feel
like it's I'm gonna listen to
you you're the ones are gonna be
doing the work and if you feel
like this building works for you
then I can supported it when
you've talked about cubicles I
mean I I bill call centers for
living and manage several of my
own and you can get a lot of
space with cubicles I just hope
that that also works for the
worker because of the type of
work that they're gonna be doing
I'm assuming it's going to
require a lot of
A concentration in you know what
have you and so I just hope this
works for you.
Thank you.
Is anyone else.
Senator we didn't one thing we
didn't do is go to the audience
or zoom.
The the Mr Chairman correct all
in the audience is we have
anyone in support of full.
Hello Senate bill one forty
four.
New PRC.
It
you like to say a few words.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
I'm Pat o'connor current year
the public regulation commission
and and I'm here to stand in
support of the bill and grateful
for senator Munoz for moving us
forward
The debate here's been
instructive and and and to your
point Senator Padilla we do need
to be looking for down the road
for for the long term but just
immediate comparison of where
we're at verses this building it
will improve the quality of our
work.
Thank you this thirty one
against.
Hey let's go to her for the
first time in the two thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
for bringing this forward and to
the last lady I was forget your
name I'm sorry.
Program not a parent thank you
for that thank you you know I
haven't been through a bill like
this where you have a quiz I
institution the in in the in the
middle of of an exchange like
this or a state all our or
transfer whatever it may be so
the first question that crossed
my mind was pretty much what
Senator Steinborn had is you
know I've always been told that
in the twenty years that I've
been here any time I do have
some might this is that or even
allocations of any kind of
public money that the buildings
have to be owned by the state in
order to
funding to the buildings and
I've been stopped actually in
trying to allocate funding to
buildings which I thought had
some kind of connection with the
city the stator like for for
development or whatever may be
in explained that they're not
they're not state buildings and
therefore because they're not
even though they could be quite
as I whatever may be the funding
for our cater and that was the
question when I walked in the
Senators timer was speaking it
crossed my mind but
you know has there have there
been other situations like this
Mr chairman.
Members chairman Senator the
expert witness who walked in the
room yeah in the.
Informs me that the pair
building across the street was
sold.
Right yeah the state when way
and they took it over because
the building across the street
was the pair building that
became the PRC building.
Correct is that what yeah can I
have one come up Mr chairman I
the skit when can you help us
out me into this mess yeah I
think that's what is that yeah.
The where when you're gonna come
to make.
Representative madam chair
members of the committee.
I'm sorry.
The current defense secretary
but yes I'll admit I'm the one
who got senator Munoz into this.
Let me see if I can confuse
things a little bit more this is
no different than what happened
with the public employees
retirement association about
twelve years ago as as if you
have been around for awhile no
based on the building right
across the street.
Act also called the pair
building all those no longer
term building.
There are sold it to the state
for about ten million dollars it
was owned by a pair Trust as a
trust assets.
This all to the state for about
ten million dollars and built a
new building on the south side
of town.
That's exactly what's happening
here the R. B. trust owns this
building as a trust assets as
part of their roughly sixteen
billion dollar trust fund.
So they're building a new
building they no longer need
this building and they're going
to sell it.
they can sell to really want to
think it's all to a private
entity they could sell to the
state in this case because the
current.
Our office space as you've heard
where the PRC is that doesn't
meet their needs is extremely
expensive but almost twenty five
thousand dollars a month.
It was my idea to have the state
purchase the Arby's building and
then lease it to the PRC that's
sort of how this all came about
but in direct response to your
question madam chair yes this is
a courtesy for about twelve
years ago with the R. X..
Thank you very much for that
explanation and looking back now
I do recall that transaction so
thank you for making that clear
all right yes I don't have any
further questions.
Will.
Or just to follow up will a
little bit on to Senator Ortiz
so would this be like the same
similar with New Mexico
mortgage.
Because the there qualify also
they own the building.
And they're moving to a new
building.
Madam chair and senator I'm not
familiar with that situation
I'm does the situation I'm
familiar with this is your right
but it may be maybe similar to
that I don't know but the state
does not own the year of the
building the onset just like the
state to not only fair building
surmounted again as a part of
their trust fund on behalf of
the members of the state of the
New York people the state will
now if this were to occur yes
Senator madam chair Senator.
The sport the state would
statement on this building but
E. R. B. as part of their trust
would own their new program
correct madam chair.
We had Senator we don't know no
I I'm done yes thank you can
proceed you can continue thank
you first will be in I'll just
be real quick so
When I went so I heard said when
you say that you have done an
inventory of available space and
what have you can use tolls when
that was done only the reason I
ask is Mr madam chair and and
and senator is Mr chair is
we just got all these reports
recently several months ago of
all of this you know gangbusters
on space we've got all kinds of
space available and we're having
the the public dialogue on
returning to work state
employees returning to work so
when was the study done and and
did you look at all that other
open space that might be
available to Mr chairman and
madam chair members the
committee and senator I I
wasn't.
Listening to that part of this
conversation the pair say do not
do an inventory of of other
space as you recall madam chair
and members of the committee the
PRC actually used to be across
the street in the old pair of
building of the executive at
that time cited that they needed
that space for the new early
childhood Department and ended
the PRC's please.
the PRC was essentially homeless
for two years
fortunately that kind of
coincided with the pandemic when
they didn't really need office
space but tennis presented my
time.
Before I became of the chief of
staff of the PRC the PRC again
look for space I'm not sure
where they looked in Santa Fe
but they eventually determined
that the building that currently
houses a PRC to focus building
wasn't appropriate space for
them and then turn into a lease
without all predated my time
Garcia.
I appreciate that I just you
know for an actual final
purchase or decisions made I
hope that there's another
assessment done of what's
available because I on the I
I'll say one last time and then
I'll stop Mr chair and and Mr
chair so I just feel like
Pierce's will need some more
space beyond what is being
proposed here if they are to be
established the way that we all
I think hope they are with all
the professional services that
they're going to find thank you.
Okay.
Okay very well anyone else what
is make a.
Okay we have a motion for to
us and we have a second want to
call the roll.
Diamond yes.
It's always yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz maybe no yes.
Thank you Andrew for coming and
secretary some of the of the
everybody here in the.
None of the negative we have a
due pass on the Senate bill one
forty for us amended.
I believe the federal cabinet
secretary for Indian Affairs.
It sounded.
When the state.
Try to get out of here I.
No displays important alone.
So all the travels of the.
All right Mister chair members
of the committee in a trend is
as efficiently as possible
because I know we've got four
agencies.
And he said you're trying to get
done at five o'clock and I
believe spaceport has to fly for
drive back to so New Mexico.
So next to me is the newly
appointed
Secretary of Indian affairs
James mountain sitting next to
him is nickel Misia's.
for.
Their their budget from LFC is
pretty straightforward the
executive recommended two
hundred thousand increase in
general fund revenue LFC
recommended a one hundred
thousand increase in general
fund revenue both
recommendations put that
increase in person services and
and that's that's about it and
I'll pass it over to the call
for.
Mr chair members of the
committee I just want to point
out one item that was part of
the LFC recommendation that was
included in the that wasn't
included in the executive
recommendation fallacy did
reduce the FTP account for the
agency and we are requesting to
add that F. T. back in other
than that that concludes my
comments for the agency and I'll
turn it over to secretary Powell
and.
Thank you
Chairman you know send honorable
senators of the committee I'm
James mountain newly appointed
is
Eric you mentioned the secretary
designate of the Indian Affairs
Department appreciate this
opportunity I have with me today
as well our CFO Monica my Estes
and
again appreciate this
opportunity and.
You have the very brief slide
presentation in front of you
page two is is our organization
chart twenty three positions in
that organization chart as you
move on the slide three page
three.
Our recommendation is is to
support the Indian Affairs
Department request this was
Pakistan heritage this by of my
predecessor former secretary
Lynn trio and I I believe as
we've reviewed it with the staff
this was a well packaged
proposal on that keeps a flat
but it also increases on that
too two hundred thousand
K. increasing the tuna category
and this is to accounts
basically for the legislation
the classification that will
affect into FY twenty two in FY
twenty three.
it also allows us the ability to
continue our effort to retain
and seek high qualified
individuals for the Indian
Affairs Department in those
positions.
Our budget priorities for FY
twenty four again is to maintain
that salary benefits currently
we're at thirteen full time
employees with that shows us a
week ago we were at forty seven
percent vacancy rate as you all
probably have looked at those
numbers today we have offer
letters out for an additional
five positions on through today
so that would put us on reduce
that forty seven percent vacancy
rate down to twenty two percent
should that be completed by the
end of this week because I know
that was a concern and I wanted
to just make note of that for
you all and again I appreciate
the the the time and the you
know this been my this is
actually my second Committee
hearing so I I appreciate the
you all hear me out we do.
Touch broad range.
Areas with regards to capital
outlay it nearly covering up
approximate three hundred
million dollars in capital
outlay and as you all know where
around sixty eight million
tribal infrastructure funding as
well so as you look at the org
chart
Mr chair Senators that's a
reason why we asked to go with
the recommendation that we're
requesting of the executive
budget and also to keep that
full time position in place as
we rebuild this department
there's an incredible it sh
structure in place already with
staff and I've had the the
pleasure and honor being able to
work with him over this past
week and a half thank you for
again for this time and I stand
for questions.
Reservations and we can have.
Thank you relax
Senator Ortiz has anybody in the
last couple years.
So just relax a little bit to
questions from the committee.
I don't see any I have a few out
there that want to make sure the
amount of capital that we're
doing that you have the ability
within your system to get that
out.
You know I represent a lot of
Navajo and Zuni pueblo
and that capital the level is
always tied up and is it hard to
process no fault of yours no
make sure that you have the
correct number.
to do that job and so.
Get a handle on that and get a
handle on what you're thank you
very need for private have you
back as a budget crosses over.
Good.
Thank you Mr chair thank you and
members of the committee thank
you for that and and I
appreciate that and we'll
definitely come back with a
legitimate answer the path
forward.
Okay that'll work I I do want to
make sure that everybody is
gonna presentation.
Look at the short.
Because the longer we sit here.
Gentleman cuts made.
So you see how quickly he's
gonna get as FTEs.
What do you.
Longer you talk.
Thank you Mr.
Thanks we've got a thank you we
got spaceport America's.
All right thank you Mr chairman
members.
Yes.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Amanda
Dick Peddie with the legislative
finance committee we are joined
by the executive director of
spaceport America Scott
McLaughlin as well as Simon
Miller from DFA to speak on the
executive recommendation
I will just go over the high
level differences the
recommendations from the
executive and the LESC were
pretty close to each other I
will note as you well know of
the spaceport to does have a
good amount of enterprise
funding so they have about seven
million of revenue they get from
operations including lease costs
that they use and then they of
relied about four million
dollars in general fund revenue
if you'd like to take a look at
a kind of sources and uses sheet
of where that revenue comes from
and how it's spent you can find
that in your volume three on
page sixty.
Of that being said the LFC and
Executive recommendations for
general fund we're about ten
thousand part with the executive
building about ten thousand
higher LFC was higher in other
revenues and that was because
the LFC budgeted a hundred
thousand more than the executive
from lease costs in operations
the LFC also added an additional
FTE and one hundred thousand
dollars for a business
operations manager and that was
to assist with complex of
business operations things
including these negotiations
lease negotiations such as the
lease with virgin galactic of
both recommendations did support
the agency's request for an
infrastructure plan that was
requested by the agency to help
get some of that capital of
those capital outlay
appropriations moving which
we've discussed in this
committee before
and both recommendations also
supported the request for a
director of security.
AGFC did preliminarily adopt the
executive recommendation so that
did not include that business
operations manager and of yes
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
so I can hand it over to Simon
for any additional comments.
Thanks Amanda Mr chair members
of the committee the difference
were not big enough for me to
take up any of your time with so
I will toss it over to our
executive director thanks.
Mr chair Senators would you like
me to.
Gail.
Yes Sir
I I prepared a quick side
presentation I don't know what
we need to go through but I'll
I'll go through this very
quickly a couple things the
activities on page three are you
can see many of the customers
we've had over the last year I
don't know if we need to
highlight any particular.
we met stay pretty busy
if you go to the site three you
see pictures of of some of those
as well that kind of gives you
an idea of the variety of
customers we have out there and
one on that's not shown as we
have an electric car
manufacturer that's going out
there on to do some testing now
for various parts of the of
their production and we're
hoping that they will be kind of
a long term tenant which is nice
because I don't use of their
space
I I will talk anything about the
G. other than to say that
they'll be back sometime you
know early this year the Q. one
Q. two to fly eve was in the air
today in my hobby so they're
finishing up the enhancement
period in there you know plan on
bringing that back very soon the
spaceport America and then to
some test and operations so
I'll skip for.
Soon as part of our you
statutory
effort our mission so page for
their cell lysis some of the
things we do so we're
continually bringing out
students at different levels how
to the spaceport or even going
to the school.
page five years many of the
business development activities
or working on.
Probably one of the most
important ones is working on
reentry license there are many
different vehicles now being
planned out that are going to be
going to space there's I think
for private space stations being
planned right now and several
different private vehicles that
what we'll go back and forth to
the space station so getting a
reentry license allows us to
bring spare space home there's
also some small capsules that
might be able to land in the
area the CST one hundred Boeing
caps already lands at white
sands missile range so it's
something that's already being
done but they're doing it on the
whites inside.
one thing of interesting known
as el Paso county announced a
few weeks ago that they're now
looking at putting a space point
somewhere in West Texas and I'll
pass a region so obviously that
could be construed as a threat
to spaceport America but what
we'll do what we can to work
with them but it does show that
the market is still there for
space point other states are
also looking at space point.
moving ahead quickly we had the
spaceport America Cup
which brought fifteen hundred
students here to New Mexico over
about five thousand participate
in the spaceport America Cup
around the world but about
fifteen of them come with the
teams and participate and this
is kind of their first look in
New Mexico and the and the
aerospace ecosystem in New
Mexico and also spaceport
America so it's a good stem
event but also very good
marketing event for us.
moving ahead I've already talked
about capital outlay in another
hearing but here's on page seven
the list of the capital outlay
projects I don't know if we need
to go through any of those in
particular we do have a master
plan R. S. P. that the final
selection was made and we're now
finishing up the paperwork and
will announce the winner of that
that will be a one year effort
where the master planner company
will go talk to stakeholders
talked to us and and review
everything about the spaceport
come up with a five to ten to
twenty year plan.
Skipping ahead I could go over
the budget if you'd like the the
recommendations that Amanda
talked about are part of on page
eight
our staffing is still pretty low
about about twenty two people
thought appropriations picking
up this is part of the request
to get some people focus on very
particular aspects of the
spaceport to include
infrastructure development
safety and security especially
considering as we ramp up for
virgin galactic and and and and
the business manager to focus
specifically on the contracts
and leases we have especially
the upcoming negotiations with
virgin galactic as they expand.
So that's it I don't want to be
penalized so Mr chair so I will
stand for questions thank you.
Thanks to see you a quick
question you the spaceport in
Texas el Paso county is that
Chris has helped us again is
that not connected to blue
origin Mr chair and Senator
Steinborn blue origin has what's
called the private spaceport
which means I have an area that
the FAA sees as a space for but
they don't actually have a
spaceport license and all and
they're only allowed to to
launch one vehicle which is the
blue origin's new Shepard
vehicle and that's the same as
Boca chica which a SpaceX so
those are called a private space
point we're a commercial
spaceport which is a particular
type of license from the FAA
that means for a multi user
spaceport we can handle many
different types of customers I
think that's what I'll Paso
county is looking at they'll
have lots of hurdles though have
to do for mental impact
statement like we did all have
many people in the area that
will we'll talk about whether
it's possible or not there
there's a spaceport in Camden
for example and and Georgia that
has was on being looked at for
years and years and is now
failed in their ability to get
through all those wickets so
I'll Paso county has a lot of
work to do and we hope we'll be
able to work with them since
rolling our north of them but I
think what they're after is a
commercial spaceport.
Just feels really entrusted me
with van horn so close by blue
origin is is basically so me why
they would leverage that
facility but.
That being said that's
interesting so well I know visit
with virgin that they're about
to take off right upon intended
quarter one big time allegedly
and so I hope for good things
good things that I think you're
doing a great job growth thank
you Mr.
In the house thank you.
One question with the counties
of the participate on the levy.
Of how often do they have to go
to the voters.
Mr chair and senator I the my
understanding is a statutes that
were passed in both of the
counties are are ongoing
continuous
there is pay back for the
regional bonds and when that
happens I I'm not quite sure
what happens to the excess
pledge revenue I'd have to check
into that if that tax reasons or
not I I don't I don't believe it
does.
So it's and as we discovered in
last few years during the
mastication that was happy with
the spaceport those taxes can
only be used for capital
improvements and design and
engineering associated with the
spaceport.
Very well thank you.
Thank you let me ask you some
questions are we still in
violation of our least I not
performing the maintenance on
the building.
Mr chairman we we were never in
violation of our least but we
were unprepared for the the
range that came the summer we've
done quite a bit of work on the
roof for that twenty skylights
that were there and we've also
we're getting ready to hire a
consultant to do a a bigger look
wholistic rough look at the
rough and to give us a
maintenance plan and a and a
maintenance looking forward even
to what we might have to do for
some future replacement or major
retrofit so we we believe are on
top of it now Mr chair according
to your comments you can take
the G. R. T. revenue from those
counties and you maintenance
and.
And repairs and additional
investments correct
Mr chair the the money I think
can be used for major repairs
that are
associated with retrofits I
don't think they can be used for
say minor repairs that are on
the small on going maintenance
but I don't.
Amanda you look like.
Mr chairman members of the
committee bill the last time I
looked at this page was last
year I believe part of the issue
with spending those monies was
that there's a provision I
believe it's got can correct me
if I'm wrong that has to be of
some benefit to either of the
counties and so I think that's
where it gets a little tricky if
you're using it for something
like that the counties can argue
that doesn't directly benefit
them.
Mr chairman at the check into
that.
Thank you I look at that so we
know because of their capital
questions they can use those
cities and counties G. R. T. for
additional capital or
infrastructure than.
Let's put it on them and and not
on the state.
Let me ask you about the F. I
know the least is gonna get
without this conversation before
Manda I want to make sure that
we give them a special
appropriation for contract
attorney to renegotiate and
review the lease on top of the
business person because you have
a business person listed in
here.
F. T. increase that.
Looking for maybe I'm wrong Mr
Chairman you're correct that
that was in the original LFC
recommendation in that was
specifically for lease
negotiations but agency did
accept the executive
recommendation that did not
include that that would Mr
Chairman that would be something
this committee would have to do
on the Senate side.
Okay make note of that we're
gonna give him the FTEs so.
If anybody's ever read the lease
which I did take the time to
read it when I want to sell the
spaceport.
Thank you for that.
Right and it is a totally one
sided.
Thank you bye.
Please or not the least the.
And in any lease negotiations
I've ever been and I want to be
the winner in the league so I
want to make sure that we have
the ability and the staff to
negotiate the best Leo deal for
the state and the tenant because
you got to come to terms at some
point.
But I want to make sure that we
didn't have anything left.
Scott you're no nothing non you
your expertise is in in space
not in law I'm not a lawyer but
I've read enough leases to note
we wind.
I want to make sure that we have
that additional FTE.
or that contract money for that
contract FTE for.
Your capital requests were yeah
with capital I know we've when
you're we gave move capital make
it operational money for you
your capital request both
looking back at each other like
how much money in the state have
a capital that much of the
space.
Mr chair I don't have the exact
numbers in front of me I didn't
prepare for that side of it but
we're moving spending money much
quicker on the capital
improvement not a we've got a
couple of our project managers
and civil engineer so we're
about to I think it went on in
the street yesterday for for the
on a new building up front which
was approved of course several
years ago by the legislature so
we're moving much quicker the
the interest in having this
other full time equivalent for
infrastructure development is to
really have someone that's only
focused on that part our problem
is been focusing you know on
business development operations
when and then once we get a
customer there they have to take
the highest priority so we're if
we were having trouble getting
capital improvements done now
with these two engineers were
doing it well but I would like
someone to focus totally on that
especially working with the the
master plan that's going to be
coming out so we really can
offer citizens in Mexico and you
all you know a much longer term
plan and we've been able to do
so far.
And rectus twenty two current
staffing what are they really
do.
I mean there's no dated a
operations other than the
firefighters right
should be on site to kill
rattlesnakes and takes or if no
Mr chair where we're on site
every day we have people on site
every day we have customers on
site every day whether it's been
monitor up aerospace for this
other company that's doing.
Testing we have to of the high
altitude platform systems that
are on site right now we expect
another one later this year
we're staying very busy and the
business development side we're
continuously working out plans
and safety plans for those folks
operate we also have to work
with white sands and and then we
have normal offer business
operations people doing finance
and accounting and that sort of
thing.
Thank you other questions.
For good have a safe trip home.
Thank you Mr.
Gonna do the work for solutions
it's got.
It
seeing a lot of.
All right Mister chair members
of the committee sitting next to
me is secretary Neier of the
workforce solutions department
good really quickly go through
these bullets first of all
though I wanted to remind the
committee that this is a
logistic Committee if you recall
those hearings from the
beginning from over the summer
You'll you'll notice right now
for example that the
unemployment rate is going down.
But on the very last page of
your packet in there you'll see
that are
workforce participation rate is
also going down so what that
means that there might be some
people that are leaving the
workforce and so I just kind of
want to update the committee on
that little piece of
of the pie they're moving on to
the budget.
For those members that aren't on
LFC.
Legisla- at the school process
to see how efficient the HSD is.
Hello the appropriation and
adaptation.
LFC got an award on their legs
that production.
Robin Hood the point Eric and so
we we paid agencies throughout
the LFC and did this.
Legislative staff performance
evaluations to where there was
efficiencies deficiencies and
weaknesses in the short term
that's correct Mr chair and also
you know just it's it's also
just to do a deep dive into
specific policy area for.
Department of workforce
solutions that was the labor
force participation rate.
you are correct to note that
workforce participation is not
equaling the number of.
And so if you look back in the
history of unemployment rate it
was based in the nineteen
fifties or sixties to do a
baseline calculation after war
which really should be currently
use because the workforce
environment is changed
but I believe if the
participation numbers and the
unemployment numbers added
together we'd be at a higher
number which is I think I five
percent of part on people that
are participating Emrick.
Mr chair if you look on the back
page of your.
You can catch up with some great
work read about
around fifty five percent just
eyeballing it there and then
the U. S. averages up around
getting closer to sixty five.
And so New Mexico this
purchased basic participation
rate is going down well the US
is.
Either flat or actually maybe
recovering a little bit from
Penn pandemic times.
All right.
All right Mr just going to go
over the votes very quickly here
I LFC recommended a three and a
half percent and executive
recommended a ten percent
increase in revenue from the
general fund.
LFC recommended increasing other
transfers revenue by four and a
half percent well the executive
recommended and other transfers
revenue increase of fourteen
percent.
I LFC maintained federal
revenues commensurate with FY
twenty three operating budget
well the executive reduce for
the revenues two point nine
percent.
In total LFC recommended a one
percent increase in spending
well the executive recommended
is zero point nine percent
increase in spending so this but
spending levels were very very
close.
and program support labor
relations and workforce
technologies the executive
recommended more other revenue.
and with that Mr chair you can
read the rest of not going to go
over every single one of them
I'll pass it over to Simon
Miller for for the phones the
you Mr chair members of the
committee the biggest difference
between the two recommendations
and funny here has to do with up
federal revenues for next year
the department
Requested a reduction in federal
revenues based on what they
anticipate in receiving
the anticipate of.
Like reduction to the indirect
cost rate from the feds and so
that's why you'll see the
executive built in a lower
number for the federal revenues.
And to make up that difference
and and hold those certain
programs harmless the executive
built in a little more of a
general fund and a bit more from
there employment security fund
Again to to hold those programs
aren't harmless well the LFC
recommendation held the federal
federal revenues flat to this
fiscal year so so that doesn't
take into account
the reduction to the indirect
cost rate
that was communicated by the
department.
So with that I will turn it over
to the cabinet secretary thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name mystery denier
I am the cabinet secretary for
workforce solutions I've been
there about six months I have
with me today my W. secretary
Marcus Martinez who's been with
the department for twenty seven
years my CFO Joanne Chavez and
my budget officer Steve rigs I
have three slides because I
heard we need to keep its.
The first line is really to
highlight why the executive
budget in our request it was
looking for more federal dollars
as you know our department is
funded ninety some percent from
federal funds and our request
was to reduce ESNT which
administrative support
technology also noticed indirect
overhead charge to certain
programs for certain position.
For the department when we don't
get those funds and what happens
is we have to leave positions
open in the federally funded
divisions to absorb that higher
indirect overhead costs now the
LFC budget did highlight that
the work of the department is
really getting people back to
work increasing that labor force
right and what you see on that
chart is the employment services
division which is the division
that puts people back to work is
holding a two percent of its
FTEs on funded because of the
lack of federal dollars to keep
up with the increased expenses
so we're very grateful when on
the legislature gives our
employees that are raise we're
we're it's awesome we need them
and they need the money how.
Matching federal funds so that
hits our budget directly on the
next slide you'll see that the
how that affects our raises so
the total salary impact of
twenty of the FY twenty three
races across the board and we
have some others was a three
million dollar three point four
million dollar hit to our
federal programs and the
potential impact of the races
this year of four percent in the
executive budget is one point
one million and five percent in
the at eight LFC budget is one
point four million so again well
if we don't get any additional
funds from other sources other
the federal funds that means we
help those positions open we
have less people here to do the
work so just highlighting on the
last slide the difference
between the executive and LFC
budgets in non federal funds the
executive had recommended a
million dollars plus from the
general fund and one point six
million from our penalty and
interest fund which is our own
fund into two hundred and thirty
eight thousand from the law a
labor enforcement fund which
again is are funded and many of
you've heard me speak about
money sitting on the sidelines
this is money on the sidelines
in our department that we would
like to put to use in operating
department in getting people
back to work so I will stop
their for questions thank you.
Questions from committee members
Senator Gonzales first in the
Senator share thank you Mr
chairman I just have one thank
you on page twenty the the it
says so that this was from
September.
And on Luna County you have nine
point five so has that changed.
Mr chair of.
You have.
Senator twenty two numbers.
Unemployment for Luna County
It is it's worse it's eleven
point six percent.
It's gonna.
So I guess just as a follow up
so with something like that
Is there anything that goes in
there to help those counties.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales at we
do you have a lot of efforts
especially in the.
We have special programs
related.
The more on the the jet it's one
of the few places in the state
where we don't have this huge
mismatch with the whole.
workers and that's the part that
that we and economic development
of.
Thank you thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair so Mr chair.
Madam secretary so the
participation rate has always
bothered me because with all of
the lowest unemployment rate
since nineteen fifty two or
whatever.
But we have plenty of.
Able workers whether.
they just don't want to they're
out for fifty five percent of
New Mexicans participate me
forty five percent of New
Mexicans don't in that forty
five or people as old as the
chair you know he's he's needs
to retire but
But these are these are people
that are in working age
categories that are that are
physically mentally capable of
doing whatever it is they want
to do.
Why are people not wanting to
work.
Mr chair Senator sure that the
participation rate does reflect
some people you know with
disabilities and that sort of
stuff they they are counted in
the the denominator of that
number however there's been a
lot of research about this not
not very much specifically in
New Mexico but the trend seems
to be number one coming out of
the pandemic a family seem to
have changed what they want from
their lives we see a lot more
parents.
Two parent families were only
one parent is working there also
seems to be a generational shift
when I was growing up the that
you wanted to get a car you want
to drive you wanted to move on
to your parents house even the
independent in this the other
generation doesn't seem to have
quite that same sense of urgency
and so we're seeing lower
participation rates in the young
adults as well.
And then you know there are
theories that somehow the
additional supplemental benefits
that occurred during the
pandemic we're enabling more
people to not have to work full
time almost all of those
benefits are tapering off as I'm
sure you've heard with that snap
in Medicaid so we have worked
closely with HSD to reach out to
folks who are changing their
budget status to make sure that
we they know about our services
to get re employed but those are
the sort of prevailing theories
on the lack of labor force
participation so Mister chair
madam secretary looking at the
Legisla- that grading here it
says individuals who received
employee of employment services
excuse me I think I'm here in
connection office retaining
employment services after six
months fifty five percent so
again you're helping people but
forty five percent of them are
quit or get fired something.
So.
It just seems like I mean this
workforce solutions I don't
think we're we're solving
anything here if the rest of the
country has sixty five percent.
Participation we've got fifty
five there's some underlying
costs I'm not blaming Avenue
there's something going on that
we need to figure out what that
something is and and change that
were accepted fifty five is good
for us except that we know the.
There's help wanted signs
everywhere.
The the minimum wage is almost
irrelevant because to get
somebody to work at McDonald's
got a paid fifteen dollars an
hour most places now for more
so
so it's not that but but we're
also not helping people.
Get there and stay there the
getting there apparently but
they're not staying there.
So I just I just want to bring
that up that there's.
We need to think broader than
whatever it is we're doing here
because there's something else
going on and it's five o'clock
and I don't want to delve into
the more.
The landlord thank you Mr chair
well I think the economy is
changing and you know that's the
dynamic you know
but anyway you can so that being
said the acting cabinet
secretary near welcome to the
committee just a few questions
for you
number one when asked about the
the energy transition act and
there are some funds that were
appropriated to your department
for that require your department
to appropriate them and I think
PNM has released a tranche of
funds to your department thank
you can Namik about there's
three different funds one goes
to your department.
three a total and so question
number one I think there's some
concern about losing these funds
we don't get appropriated.
would say you on that question.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn so
there were three for.
Twenty twenty two the
interpretation of the language
of the T. is that that now needs
to be re appropriated even
though it is.
I'm not sure why those.
I don't think there's any risk
of losing any.
Okay thank you Mr chair I just
want to make a point.
I don't think I'm wrong and say
this and I think Senator share
probably appreciate this comment
which is that it's additive
money to help with the purposes
of the act this is not we're
substituting that money for
other money right it's it's
additive and I think that's how
we have treated in the budget to
help people and San Juan County
in other areas
Dealing with transitions so
that's when I can I hope I hope
we can work together to track to
make that happen for sure so we
don't lose that trust.
And I just have another quick
question which is the
unemployment fund it are you
pretty solid on that this agency
pretty solid on the phone right
now Mr chair Senator Steinborn
yes we do solvency calculations
however.
The two one at that look at it.
Mr chair.
And senator if you look on
volume three.
On page twenty.
Mr spiral bound we have the
balances in their.
Eight six twenty.
It looks like this.
In one.
Those as of November Mr chair
representative number.
I mean Senator Steinborn serve
at the.
Final question Mr chair Mr
chair.
Six thousand that
the system is you know the
pandemic if we had to upgrade a
lot of systems to prepare for
the volume in technology and
things that crashed in a lot of
problems obviously thank god
that situation has abated for
the moment is that
technologically the feel like of
the departments in a better
place or or are you still in
technological transition.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I
take it confirmed last week of
technology is stable I would say
on the right side to which is I
think the side that you're
talking about but we have a we
have a long list of and I T..
Department more user friendly
and if.
Okay good well and it's our apoa
I. secretary that the paper
works is acting secretary so
you're right you work from for
thank you okay well let's just
stuck in this ensure we keep
those projects moving along so
we prepare for the next one
unfortunately but thank you and
welcome again thank you Mr.
Thank you just a quick question
thank you secretary and staff on
the CTA funds we're talking
about how much of how much was
that was sent to you by PNM I do
remember the amount Mr chair
Senator Rodriguez we got a
little over twelve million
dollars that was twenty million
dollars total.
Came to work.
to went to Indian Affairs I see
okay and and I know economic
development it request the funds
be appropriated but we noticed
that you had to and also the
Indian Affairs Department we
forgot to mention to them
earlier but will reach out to
them so we can get those kinds
appropriating used thank you
very much so I have Mister
chairman thank you.
Quit I.
I members are.
Tension now the secretary number
that.
In that region presentation
before cover.
Just so you know the that wasn't
done on purpose in our society.
Mr chair yes I had fight more
original hearing was actually
before my confirmation in the
gap thank you
welcome to twenty first century
things pretty quickly I try to
flee
I think the the problem we have
and I think this is the eight
hundred pound gorilla in the
room is is people don't want to
participate in the work force
because we don't have too many
benefits I budget for two rich.
Or they have other options and
that becomes a problem in the
economy I was in Phoenix this
weekend and get in and out
burger.
But still has.
Eight dollar hamburgers.
I dollar hamburgers.
They were starting pay was from
eighteen to.
And and now.
And so that tells you how much
demand there is in the market
place for employees to be paying
that wage at a.
Eighteen a twenty dollar range
and so everybody's dying for
employees.
In prior times I did see pizza
delivery in Scottsdale Arizona
paying up to thirty five dollars
an hour with benefits I couldn't
for the pizza.
But the rate was so high somehow
we're gonna have to start
reducing benefits and getting
these people into the workforce
and requiring the same if you're
gonna be part of the benefit
issue you can be part of the
work force issue and I don't
care they can get a free
certificate for welding.
In college education our
plumbing electrical whatever it
is but we is contractors as
people all need people in the
work force your agency vacancy
rate was.
But the other agencies need
people in the work force to do
that thank you to rates are
really high across the state
and so there's plenty of jobs
out there but we're gonna have
to figure out a way to start
reducing benefits in order to
make that shift in the paradigm
into getting them back into the
work force.
COVID changed everything the way
everything worked I'm in the
contracting business we never
slow down during the COVID we
had waivers and a and we just
kept on working in and our crews
got adjusted that but in the
work force and into the new work
force we're gonna have to start
decreasing some of the benefits
in order to get that because you
talk about.
Paid leave and paid medical
leave if you have a smaller
amount of people in that work
force and you don't have a big
enough base to do.
The medical leaves funds and
you're going to go broke and
that's not what we want designs.
So.
I think that's it and I
appreciate your time and.
We are going to quit as.
I clocked give the other
