with me as an expert witness is
Monica alts
with the fines and fees etcetera
is that correct I get it I get
it correct results.
Senator you almost got it right
it's the fines and fees justice
center there we go fines and
fees justice center perfect and
essentially Mr chair with there
is an amendment that was worked
out to address some concerns
raised by the tax department so
I'm not sure how you I think
it's a technical amendment that
just strikes one of the sections
I'm not sure whether you want to
do that first or have a
presentation of what the bill
does.
Senator let's do what the bill
does and then and then we'll
we'll grab gaming great so what
this bill does Mr chair is and
driver's license suspension for
missed court hearings an overdue
fines and fees payments owed in
traffic and criminal cases are
so basically the bill will allow
a driver's license to be
reinstated without the twenty
seven dollar reinstatement fee
why is this so important we
currently have a system under
New Mexico law that suspends a
license when a few cannot be
paid and over a three year
period in New Mexico over two
hundred and sixteen thousand
driver's licenses were
suspended.
Simply for non payment of the
fee and what happens with this
is you end up with folks trapped
in a vicious debt cycle and we
had this discussion on the floor
in a variety of bills but not
only are they in that debt cycle
they lose their license so it
just spirals that rapidly out of
control up so again this bill
does not eliminate suspensions
or revocations based on
dangerous driving or overdue
child support or those types of
issues and it does not limit the
court's discretion to impose
sanctions in criminal and
traffic cases.
Basically what it does though is
for you know non dangerous
drivers it takes the payment of
money out of the system when it
when examining whether someone
should have their license and be
able to keep that license so
with that I would yield to miss
all through can also add some
additional information on this
and just in addition to her
current policy position she was
an analyst for Senate Judiciary
for a number of years where
where we work with her so it's
very nice to work with her and
not the effort that the center
is doing to address this this
issue so I would be able to miss
miss all.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator Wirth a good
afternoon my name is money
called him a criminal defense
attorney and the state director
of the fines and fees justice
center the the first issue right
I'd like to just quickly address
is with regard to the FY are and
the the estimated Revenue
impacts it's listed it's
important to note that that's
based on
assessed fees and not actual
fees collected which likely
leads to an inflated projection
we agree with the FIR analyst
who stated that the most
accurate based data to use for a
revenue loss estimate would
actually be the number of
reinstatement fees actually
collected not just assessed this
is largely because many people
abandon their license due to and
L. in a bill inability to pay
excuse me
in addition what these numbers
do not reflect is the
significant cost of collections
which I'll go into as well as
the cost savings that would be
achieved across multiple state
agencies Senate bill seven Rick
pass including savings to the
courts wind force then the
counties the public defender and
finally the motor vehicle
division
and Senator Wirth is it's
exactly correct that there's a
host of fees that courts are
able to assess on both traffic
and criminal cases and what we
found is that assessing and
collecting these fees are has
proven to be extremely
inefficient and comes at a
substantial cost of old people
and government agencies serving
as a regressive tax on the most
underserved and economically and
secure communities while
simultaneously undermining the
the very public safety goals of
the legal system
and what's more is that.
Cities and counties receive
minimal that revenue from
administrative fees because most
of the individuals to whom they
are assessed those who are
overwhelmingly people of color
and low income cannot afford to
pay them we then forced judges
police officers and even the
motor vehicle division to go
after money that we know doesn't
exist and added in moments
costs.
The Brennan center for justice
report
found that New Mexico County
spend more than forty one cents
to collect a single dollar
finance the revenue that's a
hundred and fifteen times more
than the IRS Spence to collect a
dollar of income tax our largest
county burning Leo spends a
dollar seventeen for every
dollar of fines and fees
collected meaning that it
actually loses money to the
system.
And because so many New Mexicans
have so few excuse me New
Mexicans have access to reliable
public transportation that based
on failure to appear driver's
license suspensions for CENIC
possible choice stopped writing
and lose access to work child
care health care food and other
basic necessities or keep
driving on a suspended license
and risk criminal charges and
more unaffordable fines and
fees.
And we know that when people
lose their license over forty
percent also lose their job and
those who are able to find jobs
take significant pay cuts there
was a study done by Arizona
State University that found
restoring just seven thousand
licenses would increase GDP by a
hundred and forty nine point six
million dollars.
So not only so any agency
practices not only would
increase the GDP it would also
improve our businesses and
workforce improve public safety
and also protect New Mexico from
uninsured motorists I'm the the
bottom line is really that when
someone is unable to pay fines
and fees or misses a court
appointment it doesn't help to
suspend their driver's license
and make it even harder for them
to earn a living take care of
their families pay off their
debts and comply with court
orders.
I'm finally I just like to add
that this is truly a bipartisan
effort nationally
red blue and purple states have
enacted this reform and in your
materials that lists all those
states here's Texas Mississippi
Maine Idaho Montana California
and Maryland working Virginia
West Virginia why do you work Mr
in DC and in the last two weeks
two more states have joined
Illinois and Utah and part of
the reason for you know sort of
this push is that there is there
soon will be federal money
through the driving for
opportunity act which is also a
national bipartisan effort led
by democratic senator Chris
Coons and Republican senator
Roger wicker and this will
provide grants to states that
don't engage with this practice
to cover the cost of
reinstatement fees and with that
I I'm happy stand for questions
and thank you thank you very
much Mr chairman Senator Wirth
and members of the committee and
just Mr chair just want one more
thing you are going to hear from
municipal judges that have some
hard work on this but I did want
to share judge Carr who is the
municipal judge in the village
of eagle nest sent me a very
short email and I just read it
and then we'll go to god take it
out to the public I support this
bill when I was appointed
municipal judge I inherited
several of these cases although
the citizens involved or
negligent many of these people
live on the fringe of society
and one person lost their job.
For the.
It amounts the punishment
without due process and presents
an undue hardship and so I just
wanted to share that it really
this is moving it's a trend
that's capping nationally it's a
really important discussion and
I realize it's a change it's a
paradigm shift for the judges
who are used to doing this one
way but I I do think with the
potential for federal money
coming here we can make the
shift and really encourage you
to support the bill thank you
will stand for questions.
Thank you senator when we put
the amendment on before we go to
the audience that way the
audience can get a clear view
amendments so I have a motion.
To document for discussion
purposes.
So we'll Mr chairman.
So we have a motion and I think
Senator Rodriguez is trying to
in the second that.
If not all second motion.
I'm on mute Mike Mike in pieces
okay can you hear me out there
my yeah we got you got you got
it thank you yes yes so center
we have a motion for discussion
purposes one explain your
amendment etcetera I will Mr
chair so it's point two two oh
two four nine point one and what
it does on page one line fifteen
through page line to line
fourteen it strikes section one
in its entirety and the issue
was.
Reporting for a national
database and the concern was.
Tax in rat race that
a compliment that were part of
and so they didn't like this
being taken out of wouldn't it
would conflict with the compact
would requirement so basically
this was an agreement reached on
this all to address that issue
and simply leave the language in
the law like it is on the
compact reporting requirement
will happen so it's a technical
amendment that's what it does.
Thank you questions on the
amendment for you go to the
audience.
Have a motion to adopt the
amendment and.
So Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
We have a motion and a second
Senator Campos made a motion
Senator Rodriguez.
Second we have the amended bill
Senator Wirth we're gonna go to
the audience making do you want
to begin with the those for or
against whichever or do you want
to do.
That Mr chairman members of the
committee.
That we received now what
indication of opposition.
But we do have support please
keep in mind that you will have
ten minutes to speak as a group.
We have the at Bennett J. Baur
chief public defender.
Mr Bauer.
Thank you very much Mr members
committee my name is Pam are I
am the chief public defender for
New Mexico I will try to keep it
brief but I wanted to talk to
you first as a public defender
and then secondly as a citizen
of New Mexico who had it on my
own experience with court system
if you remember when we talked
about the public defender and
other court budgets we talked
about the best way to address
the problem of an under funded
criminal justice system is first
of all to increase the budgets
were necessary to so that the
public defender's office the
courts and where necessary
prosecutors have the additional
monies to meet our needs there
on Matt we can also improve the
system by changing the laws so
that we can focus on focus our
resources on things that
actually and truly affect public
safety and this is a bill that
squarely comes under the rubric
of something that changes a lot
so that we can indeed
Take our focus off something
that does not improve public
safety as a public defender I
have been in court rooms where
these kinds of cases are
prosecuted I've been in there
raiment rooms at the jails on
Monday mornings when people are
arrested I can't tell you how
many hundreds possibly thousands
of people I've seen sitting in
the jails because they were
picked up on warrants for
failure to pay fines or third
PED's or on these kinds of cases
and quite simply suspending
licenses for fair pay I figured
PED's does not improve public
safety what it does is it gets
people arrested and it gets them
into the court system and let me
explain what those daca use in a
magistrate court often look like
on any particular morning or
afternoon there may be up to a
dozen police officers law
enforcement officers waiting for
their case on something like
this you probably on over time
and it used to define is
represented by public defender
we will not plead people to
these charges because we know
the for the X. additional taxes
can have on their licenses you
back to the sixty one percent of
the suspended license cases
filed in twenty in fiscal year
twenty all result in dismissal
so we're not even getting to the
point where where this gets to
some kind of consequence other
then often the rest of the
person.
and the idea that
that suspending someone's
license prepare the funds
required PED's is a deterrent I
would argue with strenuously
because most of the time these
come with bench warrants and now
let me go to my own experience
as a citizen
several years ago I was driving
Albuquerque for conference in
the morning there was what I
will certainly call speed trap
on I. twenty five going south I
was stopped by state police I
was given a citation for
speeding told when to appear in
court being someone who wanted
to appear in court at and make
sure that.
At the very least I would get
some kind of a deferred sentence
so it wouldn't affect my
license.
I wrote down in calendar that
was that I was to appear on the
thirtieth of that month it turns
out that I could read the
officers writing and it was the
twentieth and so on the twenty
first I received two things in
the mail the day after that
court date of the twentieth I
received a notice of a bench
warrant and I received a notice
of suspension of my driver's
license that sent me an attorney
familiar with the criminal court
system into something that took
me approximately ten hours of
time to go down to Albuquerque
having to drive on my newly
suspended license because
there's no other way for me to
do my business to get this done
to go to the court to clear up
the misunderstanding get my case
reset to ask that the warranty
costs to take the paperwork from
there to go to motor vehicle to
have my license reinstated to be
told that I didn't have the
right people working go back to
the court to get the right
people work in to go back to
motor vehicle.
I was successful I had to pay
the fees but I've often thought
about the people that aren't
lawyers that don't know how to
navigate this kind of
bureaucracy and how that affects
them and what what I can tell
you is it affects them by
putting them into the spiral of
not being able to comply with
court orders and so I would what
I want to tell you is that this
bill is incredibly important
because it will actually save
money for the counties who have
to incarcerate people on these
warrants round these charges for
one force meant for the public
defender's office in for the
courts so I would ask your
support for this bill thank you.
We have Jason Weaks.
Okay thank.
Thank you Mr chair members of
committees in weeks registered
lobbyists from Bernalillo county
we support this legislation you
know criminal justice reforms
from an on going thing in New
Mexico for the last I'd say ten
years and we're chipping away at
it and honestly we're improving
our underlying statutes stuff
like this the this is low
hanging fruit quite frankly you
know allowing somebody to get
their license reinstated without
having to pay fines and fees
just makes good sense they get
back to work sooner they don't
worry about driving without a
license getting pulled over and
taken to jail on from the
monetary side of the coin from
the county's perspective this
also makes good sense because
then of incarcerating a lot of
people be it for a day or two
days or three days or you know
wasting law enforcement resort
resources taking people up on
purely just suspended licensure
this this will help resolve that
in in all reality we don't see
any of the money that's coming
out of the Courts and that's not
being factored into some of the
court evaluations and tear these
evaluations when it relates to
what the fiscal impact of this
is and once you factor in the
cost of housing people in county
jail on what what the resources
from law enforcement really
think eliminating this kind of
penalty is actually gonna save
money so it makes good sense
from justice perspective and
from an economics perspective.
Next we had the R. rolled from
New Mexico voices for children.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is have you
had a local number research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
voices for children one of my
areas of expertise is tax and
budget policy and to me purely
fiscal perspective when it comes
to fees in a criminal justice
system like the one this bill is
trying to eliminate the juice
isn't worth the squeeze.
For example according to a study
from the Brennan center for
justice for every dollar
Bernalillo county collects from
fines and fees it loses a dollar
seventeen funding fees also
known reliable source of
government revenue as a
significant portion of the
revenue they generate goes on
collected I'm collected fines
and fees have grown
exponentially in New Mexico from
about two million in two
thousand twelve to nearly twenty
million in two thousand sixteen
overall fifty five percent of
fines and fees go uncollected.
And even though the juice isn't
worth the squeeze from the
government's perspective certain
communities in New Mexico are
definitely feeling the squeeze
the rate of one collected data
in counties throughout New
Mexico correlates with the
poverty rate within each county
this relationship underscores
how fines and fees tend to be
serious problem with the
communities that can least
afford them lastly consumer
spending is known to decline
when individuals fall behind on
their financial obligations and
economist at Dartmouth
university found that each
license suspension could reduce
a person's spending by two point
two percent we're in the middle
of an economic recession the
last thing we want to do is
reduce consumer spending.
In conclusion fines and fees on
till the precarious irrational
mechanism to fund our government
but they also function as a
regressive tax that hurts our
economy.
Thank you.
Next we have Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and I know
Bennett Baur already spoke so I
don't want to repeat anything he
said about the common practice
in that we see as public
defenders but I can attest that
the system was not really
designed to account for poverty
and I were and I wanted to
highlight that this body the
legislature has already started
to reform other aspects of the
criminal and court system to be
more equitable and so that to
the cost of the system does not
is not borne on the backs of the
people who are brought before it
and that is consistent with this
court this bodies recent
amendment to the constitution
which amended our bail system so
that people can be held pre
trial solely based on their
inability to pay this bill has a
similar flavor and a similar
policy bends to it and I think
Senator Wirth for bringing both
of those pieces of legislation
and I finally just wanted to
highlight for this Committee
that this bill was given an a
minus grade by the New Mexico
state coalition which is a
coalition of many different
oriented organizations who
review criminal justice
legislation for its fiscal
responsibility as well as its
impact on public safety and
again it was given an a minus
grade because of the fact that
this would have a minimal fiscal
impact while having a huge
benefit for many US citizens
without any negative public
safety impact we do ask you to
support this bill thank you.
And unfortunately it looks like
we have at B. ten minutes why
public comment back include
public comment are done to
determine.
Thank you.
Questions from committee members
Senator share Europe first all
by Center woods
thank you Mr chairman and
Senator can you tell me what the
fines of are which is speeding
ticket what's the of parking
ticket what what is that
actually cost.
So Mister chair I yield to a
miss all so we get it absolutely
right.
How about just the top five I
violations in the state can you
tell me that.
Mr chairman and senator Wirth
and that senator chair I cannot
tell you with the the top five
fines are that actually might be
a question for
chief chief public defender
Bennett Baur I can't.
Yes you can go grow family
always comes first this.
I'm sorry I'm but what I can
tell you is that there is a
range of fines that could be
assessed in both criminal and
traffic cases depending on
depending on what it is so like
for example a.
Traffic kind of penalty
misdemeanor the to the Max find
could be three hundred dollars
and then it continues upwards as
you get into petty misdemeanors
misdemeanors and felonies.
But.
Mr chair and senator and
assaults.
According to the motor vehicle
department I'm seeing provide
from seventy one dollars two
hundred seventy five.
Let's see in three hundred.
But but I also know there's
other add ons so it's not just a
fine so you get a ten dollar
traffic ticket but it really
ends up to be a hundred and
fifty dollars because we piled
on all kinds of other fees and
fines not fines fees and you
know for the D. W. Y. funder for
the the sky is blue fund or
whatever other kind of pylons we
have
and I was looking for those on
this website motor vehicle and I
was also looking for on point
but apparently we've taken all
it down so I can't find it now.
What if we just charge the
actual fee and we do have all
these additional follow up the
try to find we have always
additional weird fees on with
that.
Yes that's all the problem you
still got punished for the crime
you just didn't have to pay for
everything else so Mister
chairman and senator share it's
it's interesting having spent
twelve years on Senate judiciary
in the former Senate judiciary
chairman used to just do exactly
what you're doing highlight the
fact that we have funded all
kinds of programs and corks and
we've added all this and we
stacked up and quite frankly
we've made a problem that
they're even worse it's just
magnified the problem so if you
took them all away are you still
would have a basic underlying
fee and I don't think it would
eliminate the problem altogether
but it would make it better but
I think that that the key piece
here and this is the this is the
thing that I mean it's it's it's
shocking to me that Bernalillo
is spending a dollar seventeen
to collect a dollar I mean it
just makes no sense and I
appreciate Mr weeks you know his
his testimony that when you put
in jail when you put in the cost
of law enforcement and of course
remember that's just the cost
for the the the local
governmental entity I mean when
you throw someone in jail so
they end up losing their they
lose their their license they're
in jail they probably lose their
job and this is where this this
vicious cycle begins and at the
end of the day I think we end up
spending way more than we do if
we're proactive and invest you
know in these folks and not use
money to to basically punish
people because they're poor and
I think that's the problem with
this is tying.
A fee like this to the ability
to drive is just really
problematic and that's what
we're we're getting out with
this bill.
So Mister chairman Senator a.
We're in this bill does it say
of only poor people don't have
to pay the fee I mean of the I
didn't drive quite as fast as
Senator Paypen but I have been
known to exceed the speed limit
and I can pay a hundred seventy
five dollars my wife will be
angry at me.
But I could still pay it would
but now under this bill I don't
have to I just say hello I think
you in golf a hundred miles an
hour again.
Well let me let me have agency
all to address the different
remedies that still remain again
we're not putting in some kind
of means yes into this year
correct Senator we're basically
eliminating the suspension of a
license based on a failure to
pay but it doesn't eliminate
other remedies that the court
has and I'd like agency all to
address those so we can figure
out what happens to Senator
share when he drives a little
less fast than Senator Paypen
used to drive but fast enough to
get himself in trouble so one of
the remedies for for someone
like judge Carr you know what
remedies does judge car up in
eagle nest when Senator shares
racing around the lake I am gets
arrested he's not going to pay a
fine but what's what's the
remedy.
Mr chairman and I was Senator
Wirth and Senators share so if
you were of.
Granted a speeding tickets and
you didn't rate with the court
would first do is they would
send a summons and the summons
would and this is my court rule
that says that they have to send
us some so first they would send
a summons telling you we'd like
you to come in for a hearing to
tell us why you didn't pay
then if you if you come to that
hearing you can explain to the
court what happened or if you
don't come to that hearing.
Then the court is able to issue
a bench warrant well for failure
to appear or for failure to pay
and a notice of that bench
warrant will be sent to your to
to whatever address you have on
your on your license you'll be
notified of the bench warrant
you're able to to either remedy
the benchmark by coming into the
court calling the court or if
you are out on the streets and
you do get picked up depending
on depending on the law
enforcement agency and what they
decide to do sometimes what one
person officers is though
actually called the court
depending on what kind of bench
warrant it is and what the
underlying basis and say Hey you
know we pulled up we we just
pulled over Senator share it
looks like he has an outstanding
ticket and we like to bring in
and so that you can just take
care of this right out right off
the bat if it was for something
more serious than the law
enforcement agency or the
officer might choose to actually
take you into custody.
So Mister chairman Senator
missile so
So what's the difference so I
live in Farmington but I was
going to.
Fifteen miles an hour over the
speed limit in eagle nest
whatever that speed limit was.
so I I know that I I throw that
out there because ten miles an
hour often is just ignored but.
so I'm going fifty miles an hour
over the speed limit.
Officer pulls me over he writes
the ticket the ticket itself is
probably twenty five dollars but
then there's a hundred dollars
worth of add on's that we that
we put on there.
and I'd North.
So then I get the summons.
I I nort.
Especially if I were in fact.
poor I don't know how to
describe that word but but
whatever we mean by that and so
going back to eagle nest was a
problem for me okay
so I don't go back the last I
don't go to court I don't pay
the ticket.
What's the difference between
that and having my license
suspended.
We would effectively what does
that mean because now the
Farmington police pull me over.
Of there not really hunting me I
mean they're not going out a way
to find me so the only reason
that they pulled me out the only
reason they provide agency
because they pulled me over for
something else.
So we've got an outstanding
warrant eagle nest.
I still have to come up with
money to do something whether
it's to pay that fear go to go
to the judge in eagle nest so
what's the difference what how
did you how did you ease my
burden.
This all want to take a shot at.
We I'm Mr chairman senator Wirth
and Senator share I I will be
the first to admit that this
particular bill does not fix all
of the problems with fines and
fees that we face here in New
Mexico but what it does do is it
does ease one of the penalties
which is the suspended license
yes and in that particular
hypothetical you would be picked
up on a bench warrant most
likely taken into custody and
then if you were in another
jurisdiction than they would
have to come get you and bring
you back to eagle's nest so that
you could answer for this I'm
rate unpaid issue and I I will
say that we would like to work
on some of these other issues as
well and there's other
legislation that I'm working on
this to try to have a real
ability to pay assessments
that's not this piece of
legislation this piece of
legislation is just having to do
with your driver's license
because of the particular harms
that are imposed on a large
portion of the population here
in New Mexico that are low
income that when their license
is suspended in addition to all
of the other problems this also
sort of
it can exacerbate the problem.
So Mister chairman Senator I I I
understand that but I also know.
That this isn't it should not be
and and the the the penalty
itself portion never was
supposed to be a fund raiser for
the state.
Or the city or county.
All of the add on our fund
raisers.
But the twenty five dollar
speeding ticket is never been
that's that's that's to convince
me that I should slow down.
That's that's what that twenty
five dollars for.
And we're gonna take that away.
Okay.
I care.
Yes the bench warrants gonna
come eventually but is but again
nobody's hunting me unless I'm
picked up for something else
we're stopped for something
else.
So I think that this I think I
understand what we're doing
there's two parts of this that
bother me one.
That means that Senator Wirth
who who I'm sure makes a lot
more money than I make doesn't
have to pay his fee either I
don't have to pay money just the
same as an indigent person who
still has a car doesn't have to
pay their.
But neither do we.
We talk about how this is unjust
it did it did harm certain
segment of the population and
not others I'm not sure that's
true.
I don't see the evidence for
that except that New Mexico is a
poor state the US.
It harms New Mexicans because
New Mexicans are poor.
But we're not going out of her
way to pick on a particular
economic us section of the of
the state with the ticket or
without the take.
I also hear these these sad
stories out there and I see in
myself in okay yes and there are
sad stories but the reality is
it's not the see that's the
problem.
It's all the other stuff that
creates the issue here it's all
the other stuff or fees ought to
be to influence drivers.
To do the right thing to
influence them to slow down to
influence them to wear the seat
belt the influence them to not
park in the parking spot or
whatever it is.
But if you eliminate that you
have a limited traffic law.
Now you have the bench work
because I didn't show up well
that's a whole different
ballgame.
Now we've actually we've upped
the ante on someone.
We made it worse.
Because if you suspend my
license what I do is I show up
somewhere I I I pay the twenty
five dollars plus the extra
hundred dollars for all the
other stuff we put on it plus
the extra the extra fee for the
forget my my license renewed but
now if you go to arrest me.
Will you of what the anti.
Could not get an attorney.
We have an attorney on here how
much is the the I have no idea
what he would charge me.
To get me out of this.
All right speeding ticket.
So I think we've actually made
things worse under this
scenario.
the answer is get rid all of the
other stuff that we Pyle one.
Leave the traffic feed as it is
because that's it's it's it's
it's not about money it's not
about how much it costs or how
much you save.
This is not a business.
This is a penalty.
Given all of the stuff and then
all of a sudden even even the
poorest of New Mexicans can pay
twenty five Bucks for the
speeding ticket well maybe not
the point but almost every New
Mexican can come up with twenty
five Bucks and learned the
lesson that they should slow
down both.
That's what I would suggest I I
don't think this bill get you
where you want to go.
I'm okay with the idea doesn't
gets we want to go so Mr chair
can I can I think what's
important is for miss all to
pass you know let's say it's a
hundred dollar.
Fine that's at issue you have a
citation with a hundred dollar
fine so we're now not going to
give the judge the ability to.
Suspended driver's license for
non payment what what is the
judge's remedy I think what
Senator wants to know is okay
you're going to get a summons to
come to court so the person
comes to court you're not gonna
have to pay the hundred box
what's going to happen in that
court hearing.
You know when they come to court
so so again as a citation
doesn't go away it's the fee
that goes away and the ability
of the judge to use a license to
basically as as security to get
a fee paid but I think what
Senator wants to understand is
what is the what's the judge's
remedy under that scenario.
Thank you.
Gentleman in the US and senator
Wirth and senator Sherrod I
think one thing I want to just
clarify is that this bill
doesn't change any of the fine
structure it doesn't change any
of the of the traffic's the
structure the fee that it get
that it is waiting is the
reinstatement fee for the
license that has to do with
motor vehicle division we're not
waiting anything that has to do
with the courts the courts still
have they can find people they
they can apply all of the
extensive fees for that and we
have a very we sort of have a
complex the structure in the
courts so this is a get rid of
any of that
Mr chairman and senator share in
addition we're not we're not
creating the bench warrant
system that already exists as
well so I'm every time that
somebody fails to appear or
fails to pay
a bench warrant is issued and
the somebody's licenses
suspended I recognize that there
may be some judges in some
municipal courts that do not do
both however in my experience as
a criminal defense attorney they
always come together because the
court has the ability to
to to issue a bench warrant they
do not have the ability to
suspend somebody's license motor
vehicle that's that's the
authority of motor vehicle I'm
so if somebody.
Where to have a citation and so
for example we can talk real
real fees I'm in a magistrate
court for a traffic case if if
it's of misdemeanor traffic or a
petty misdemeanor traffic K.
misdemeanor they would add on a
hundred and thirty one dollars
of fees if it's a petty
misdemeanor traffic offenses
they would add on eighty one
dollars and fees and for traffic
cases that are contested penalty
assessment misdemeanors they
would add on eighty two dollars
and this is actually and this is
taken and I'm happy to share
this with with the members from
and AOC documents that came out
in twenty eighteen which is sort
of an overview of all of the
financial sentences I'm so this
bill doesn't deal we're we're
not touching any of the fines or
fees that live within the courts
we're just talking about the
reinstatement fee with motor
vehicle I'm and I I hope I
answered answer the question but
I'm happy to answer more Mr
chair Senator chair and senator
Wirth.
So of Mister chairman Senator
miss alt I've got I've got when
you said the the add on fees or
or those the ticket plus all of
that other stuff the eighty one
dollars or whatever it was okay
so so Mr chair and senator if
that eighty one dollars that's
the problem.
That's what needs to go away.
That's what makes a difference
if you took away that eighty one
dollars all whole lot less
people would be negatively
affected by this a whole lot
less people would would
would lose their have their
driver's license suspended for
non payment.
I think that's the problem right
there.
So.
Again I.
I don't I think this sends a bad
message the message that's going
to be in the Albuquerque journal
and Santa Fe New Mexican and
kale the radio and K. we need
television is you don't have to
pay your tickets anymore state
legislature removed your fees
that's going to be the message
they're going to get.
That's not true but.
All the time I just I read
articles ago wait a minute I was
sitting in that room that's not
what happened.
But that's going to be the
message it's going to be out
there you don't have to pay a
traffic fine your traffic
finding more.
That's the message we're sending
in in in there's much better
ways to help people.
Much better ways.
And so that's why that's why I
think I have a real problem with
this bill I don't have a problem
with the concept of of trying to
help people keep their license.
But I also know that we have
people arrested for their
seventeenth eighteenth twenty
second DWI clearly they're
driving without a license.
And my guess is that all of
however many hundred thousand
you said driver's license had
been suspended have not resulted
in a hundred thousand people
losing their jobs because they
don't care they strive anyway.
So.
I've said this before but I
think that we're we're working
up emotional issue.
It doesn't solve the problem I
agree there's a problem but it
doesn't solve the problem this
is all the motion.
And it's pointed at the wrong
thing.
The thing we should point out is
all those adults.
And then I think we solved most
of the problem I would also then
given an option.
For N. in appeal yes my my
driver's license was suspended.
But here's why please reinstate.
But to just tell people they
don't have to pay the traffic
fines which is what will be in
the news.
Is counterproductive to safety.
on the roads so.
If I arrest you enough yet
senator Wirth.
Been a good day Senator share
okay thank I'm on.
Senator Woods you're next thank
you Mr chairman.
I'm gonna leave a picture off I
was having trouble with my.
Moores the other day so maybe
this will make it better.
I'm glad that it was explain
because the way I understood it
when I I read the balances what
is that.
It a ball issued by news or
suspension of license and
notifications.
remove the story of the motor
vehicle department to forward
notice of failure to appear our
failure to pay a penalty
assessed to a non resident
driver to motor vehicle
administrator of the drivers all
jurisdiction so I I'm assuming
that's all rolled right that's
that's completely not what the
bill does.
It Mr Chairman is is that right
Senator words are thank you Mr
chair I'm gonna yield to Mr all
to give it to target in Bocas on
against because I think it's
true there's a lot of this
understanding about what exactly
we're doing here and there's a
whole bunch of things that need
to be done and Senate center
shares highlighted all those
well we're not doing I'm in this
bill this bill is a very
targeted targeted focus so miss
all the you could answer Senator
Woods very good question.
Yes Mr chairman and senator
what's and also Senator share
and excited to work with you as
we move forward on some of these
other fines and fees issues
because it sounds like it's
something you're really
interested in so I appreciate
that
and at Senator Woods so the
issue with the compact and
notice that was never our
intention so we worked with the
tax and revenue department and
the motor vehicle division to
come up with a fix which was our
amendment so that that section
that people were worried about
we completely removed so that's
no that that's no longer an
issue for this particular bill.
So the only thing this bill
bills with Mr chairman and and
senator and madam expert witness
is the part about paying the fee
to reinstate a licensure license
users never.
Never suspended is is that right
Mr Chairman.
Senator Wirth and Monica.
Mr Chairman salt.
So Mister chairman and Senator
Woods that's correct all this
does is that you still will be
punished you still have to pay
your fines and fees when you get
the ticket or have a criminal
case you still have to pay
benchmarking still be issued for
your arrest we're not changing
any of those things were just
saying that the motor vehicle
division can they cannot they
cannot suspend your license as
well and for all of the
outstanding licenses that were
essentially abandoned because
people could not afford to pay
that pay the reinstatement fee
and the underlying court that
that that he does not have to be
paid.
Emmett Mr chair I can it's it's
Senator Woods I think the
privilege to drive a vehicle
should not be based on your
ability to pay the fees and the
funds that are still there it's
just it's separates this to this
track here and again it and
having the vehicle.
White frankly allows a person to
go to work to get the money they
need to be able to address the
situation they're in versus
losing the vehicle we're right
down the debt the death spiral
both you know the person's up
losing their job ends up getting
locked up it's just it's a mess
so this is allowing the person
to maintain the privilege to
drive in New Mexico.
Pod which shouldn't be based on
your ability to pay a fine or
fifty.
Mr chair and senator thank you
for that.
A few minutes ago it was
discussed by public defenders
that it was costing a dollar.
Something to collect ever
dollar.
On fees and fines.
So it's still going to cost them
the same amount but because
we're not doing anything with
with the counties or cities to
change any of their fees or
fines the only thing is going to
changes what is paid to the
motor vehicle department for
suspension of license is that
got it in a nut shell Mr
chairman and senator Wirth Mr Mr
chairman and Senator Woods that
Senator Woods analysis is
sounding pretty good to me but
I'll double check with miss all
to make sure we're not missing
anything but I think you have
synthesize this bill down to
what it is and.
I do think that there's room for
a I share course bill on some
other issues down the road but
this one really deals with that
privilege to drive and miss all
the by missing anything let me
now she said now so you got it
Senator Woods.
Those who were stuck good of
explain my bill yesterday that
would.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
I have.
I
you I don't see any other
questions from committee
members.
I move to pass Mr chairman.
Thank you let me just double
check Senator Steinborn that
thank god.
Okay have a motion for do past
and do have a second I'll second
that.
Second by Senator Gonzales path
we call the roll.
Yes.
Senator Burt.
Yes.
yes.
Senator Campos this excuse
Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
S. Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Yes Senator Hemphill is that if
you Senator share.
No because I'm going to get
charged extra fees.
Okay thank you Mr no Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
is yes Senator Woods yes.
Senator Wirth is yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez is yes and
senator Munoz.
Senator menu LCS yes so we have
eight yes.
One note and to excuse.
Thank you senator I'm waiting
for one more member to join us.
so I just want to make sure
something so can we skip Senator
Pirtle are you with us.
The Mr yeah Mr chair what will
wait on Senate bill a but I just
want to really appreciate the
committee on Senate bill seven I
appreciate the vote thank you
very much and also I'll just
hang tight until you call me on
Senate bill eight.
Thank you I could you we go
ahead and cut around the fence
to make center should make sure
Senator doesn't go to work out
there.
Senator Pirtle you with this.
Here Senator Pirtle
Senator Shendo I see you sitting
there let's uh you want to jump
off your telephone and and do
Senate bill for forty.
All right.
Mr Chairman you ready.
Go right ahead Senator okay
thank you thank you Mr chairman
of the members of the committee
of the gentleman told me earlier
that is need to make it quick
so.
I think his words were if you
believe in economic development
you should vote for this bill.
So Senate bill for forty.
Is basically amends the
statewide economic development
finance act.
All of the financing financing
tools that The New Mexico finest
Authority if you can help you
have guidance you should be
happy.
In the event that additional
federal funds are provided to
New Mexico as you all are very
well aware of congress is
currently in negotiated of the
Democrat Lee measures that
include the re authorization of
the small the state small
business credit initiative of
two thousand ten.
Program that provides grants to
states to center by private
investment in small businesses
the current version of the
American rescue plan includes
ten billion for the SS be icy
program of in two thousand ten
New Mexico received eleven
million dollars under this
program which we had to leverage
ten times the Mexico find a
story in New Mexico Economic
Development Department use the
fund to operate of a a loan
participation program well this
was effective in delivering the
funds the low participation
program.
Do not provide the same leverage
as other just as BCI eligible
programs the state would have
benefited from the ability to
offer one or more additional
programs as most other states
have done.
Should the money become
available The New Mexico
finest Authority would like to
use the SS BCI funds to operate
a capital access program.
Which provides matching funds to
banks to create insurance pools
within the rules banks to curse
and to make loans to small
businesses.
Senate bill would allow and it
is a to offer this program.
Additionally the Senate bill
also simplifies the bureaucracy
of Senator I sure would like
this.
Involved in making of businesses
eligible to apply for funds by
eliminating the requirement that
the economic development
department determined that the
business service and academic
development purpose and is
suitable for financing.
So I have a Marquita Russel of
from one NMFA and us so she is
my expert witness Marquita if
you can add to my comments.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
members of the committee it in
addition to what senator Sanders
mentioned the tools that would
be provided should Senate bill
four forty pass would still need
to be implemented by rule and
the finance authority implements
rules for this program by having
the the NMFA oversight committee
approved the rules that have
been adopted by the New Mexico
finance authority board of
directors so this is simply a
place marker and allows for
expansion of program should
federal dollars come down in two
thousand and eleven when the
funds became available we had
one program that would meet that
was authorized under state law
that would have met the targets
under federal law and that was a
low participation program not a
lot of big bang for the Buck in
that program and so this of the
the amendments that we're asking
for here would allow us to do
broaden the reach the federal
dollars should they come to New
Mexico and with that I'm happy
to stand for questions.
Thank you senator.
Click over I'm sorry about that.
Thank you senator anything you
want to go to the audience see
if we have any at Mr chair
members of the committee we do
not have the either opposition
or support for this bill.
Thank you mate then Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Shendo this program
would go through some local
banks is that right Mr chairman
and senator.
The senator would have more to
to respond to that.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Woods so yes the what would
happen is that the finance
authority would partner with
banks so the loan dollars again
the federal dollars would come
to the finance authority and in
particularly with the capital
access program we'd make
matching contributions within
each local bank so we wouldn't
be the finance authority would
not be lending directly to
businesses we would simply be
matching contributions of bank
made to a loan loss reserve
there are other tools that we
could use but we think this one
in particular would be very
helpful but all the all of the
tools that we're looking at
would partner with local banks.
Okay.
Mr chairman and senator mark we
know.
We're talking about a fifty
fifty Max what kind of match we
talking about.
I'm Mr Chairman Senator that
would be determined by rural
again a rule that would be
approved by the NMFA oversight
committee across the nation
there different ways of having
this happen typically it's
matched one to one with the with
the bank dollars sometimes they
ask for.
Businesses to contribute to them
but again the the capacity is
there forced to create a program
that works for New Mexico banks
for the kinds of businesses
they're saying but typically
there's a one to one match.
And and Mr chairman and senator
mark need to we're talking about
the business can use the state
match to uses equity to borrow
the money is that the way that
works under rule that we're
gonna maker what Mr Chairman the
first program that we're talking
about is the capital access
program and there it just
provides additional comfort to
the bank that should any of the
loans that they've made under
this program go side ways that
they would have of first of a
pool of of capital that they
could make themselves whole with
so the building in it's an
insurance pool basically but
there are other tools that the
SS BCI allows one of which is
that we would potentially make
up for a deficit of of
collateral that you're like
you're mentioning so there are a
couple of different ways that
federal dollars could be used
all of those potential new ways
are included in this ammendment.
Birkir you so right thank you.
Mr chair.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn go
ahead thank you very much.
Senator Shendo welcome
And miss Russell so would you
explain a little bit more what
our loan loss program is.
Certainly Mr Chairman what
happens in this what they call a
capital access program for
purposes of the SS BCI is that a
bank would enroll in the program
and they have to meet certain
conditions the loans that they
would be able to
put into this pool would have to
also meet certain conditions so
you could have them be for in a
certain size businesses are
within certain industries or you
know you can put whatever
parameters around that that you
want but they would basically
they underwrite the loan as they
normally would but if they felt
that they needed additional
comfort that there was something
about that loan just coming out
of the pandemic might be one of
those conditions
there was something about that
that they thought they needed
more.
Comfort they would
submit that loan as part of its
this program and they'd deposit
a percentage of that loan to
percent five percent whatever
that agreed upon amount is and
the finance authority using
these federal funds would match
that contribution and that money
would be held at the local bank
if there was at any point any
loan that they rules that.
Had a deficit of collateral
after they for closed they can
go to that loan loss reserve
pool and make themselves whole.
Okay thank you madam chair Mr
chairman and this wrestle so you
now the irony is fairly thick in
this moment.
as a few minutes ago we just put
on the bill for the public bank
in the house and all the banks
were opposed to it because they
said were risking state money.
And we're putting at risk money
and now we're asking for money.
To create a fund specifically.
To our.
Kind of insure them against
making tough loans that we were
talking about with the public
bank and it's just kinda
interesting so are at the point
out that irony but
Let me ask you another question.
Miss Russell if I may going into
the bill.
Stitch.
Senator you know if you have
someone else Mr Chairman I'm
trying to find this one section
in the bill if if you have
someone on the left you can.
Jump to on.
Senator sure you're you're I
know what I'm gonna ask you Mr
chairman.
So I apologize this.
When we require a quantifiable
benefits.
The the terms other measureable
benefits to the economy on page
six.
Isn't that barely make.
As far as protecting taxpayer
money.
Mr chairman thank you so again
this would be the federal
dollars that are coming down
from from the feds and their
purpose would be to stimulate
the economy and we wanted to
make it very clear that those
federal dollars that we have the
ability to use of the tools
provided in the statewide
economic development finance act
in that in that instance and so
of the we believe that would be
better to include a more all
purpose
the statement that that
reflected economic stimulus
Lente which is really what these
federal dollars are.
you Mr chairman miss Russell
we're we're in the bill does it
say that this would be limited
to federal dollars.
Giving this money to the banks
or matching it for their losses
to ensure against our losses.
Mr chairman it doesn't say that
in the bill and that's an
excellent point this would be
something that we could
Use it we could use the rules
for this purpose so in two
thousand eleven for instance
when we created the first
program the Feds required that
we had more than one way to
deliver the capitol as I
mentioned to you earlier the all
we had available to us where the
programs authorized under sweat
for we already had a low
participation program so we were
able to immediately implement
that they also require that we
go back and
implement a direct loan program
which we never used but when we
did that we went to the
oversight committee and the
rules that were implemented
there were specifically for the
federal dollars and so we could
only use federal dollars in the
event that we wanted to use that
direct lending pool
so we would do a similar thing
here which is at the point that
we were implementing the program
the rules that are required
under a sweat for a would
stipulate that it was for
federal dollars only the state
dollars that NMFA may have on
hand would not be could not
be guided by those sets of rules
so we don't believe that.
We haven't done the
constitutional analysis to
determine whether state dollars
could be used for that purpose
we believe very strongly
obviously the federal dollars
could that's really what we're
targeting it does not however
show up in statute.
Right Mr chairman in mistrust on
that that greatly concerns me
about this bill.
Is that are basically says
authorizing you to give money to
banks to our.
To help pay off debt.
Lawsuits.
And our I understand the intent
and of course you have all the
credibility in the world.
With with me and what the
legislature that goes without
saying but
Notwithstanding the irony that
is they can more
On that other discussion yeah I
just don't know I guess I'll
listen to additional discussion
but I I don't know that I'm
comfortable with just writing in
these broad kind of blanket
Authorities to to give thanks
money specifically for the
purpose of.
Losing money so I'll keep us in
the thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
So.
What what would the banks charge
for this what with their APR be
since we we we don't know what
APR means in the state but can
you tell me what they were with
their loan would be
why would they why would think
Agyness at all.
Mr chairman thank you for that
question so typically in these
programs again this would be
further developed in rural but
typically in these programs the
lender has to stipulate that
this was a lone they would
otherwise make like there there
that the loan itself was.
Part of its regular policies and
procedures that they're not
going outside their risk
template or there were are there
loan policies in making this
loan but even in doing so
certainly conditions now would
indicate that there's a reason
for them to be uncertain in make
in making loans and so this
would just be another way for
them to
make loans that meet their
policies but that for which they
still have some concern there's
a cost to them they have to make
a match so this would not be
free to them they have to they
have to match the loan loss
reserve
but the rates that they would
charge their their underwriting
criteria and other elements
would typically be as they
normally would there's usually
no additional consideration for
risk.
Okay so if they were gonna give
me a loan at five percent well
they would still give me the
loan of five percent all this
does is say.
If my business of doesn't pay it
back there's this pot of money
that will hold the bank whole is
that right.
Mr chairman that's correct and
so typically it's post
the of.
We do have our post foreclosure
so they have to do the
liquidation of collateral before
you go to find out what your
actual losses were but that's
that's correct so again the SS
BCI money is intended to
increase the flow of capital
down to small businesses.
The leverage requirement that we
will have to meet as a state if
this money comes down the way it
did in two thousand eleven is
that there would be this tend to
one match ten private dollars
for every S. S. B. C. I. dollar
that's
I did too and this is a really
efficient way to do that.
So.
Mr chairman and.
We're just trying to get this
the straits we have this money
that we hope we never you.
With federal dollars that we
hope we never use because no no
loan is going to default because
we did the right criteria and
they did make a loan that was
bad loan to begin.
Is that right Mr chairman that's
correct of the at the end of the
day at the end of the five year
period or six year period
whenever the program expires the
money that has still remains and
that loan loss reserve program
would come back to in this
instance the New Mexico finance
authority for other economic
development programs
but yes our hope is we still
have to give them the dollars
they hold the cash in their
their bank as part of that loan
loss reserve so we give them the
dollars over there holding them
they have control of the dollars
and they report back to us on
the conditions you know that the
portfolio of their loan the
health of the the loans that
they made that are enrolled in
that program and then hopefully
at the end yes hopefully it was
enough incentive they didn't
face the conditions I thought
they would and they can return
the dollars but.
That's the way the this
operates.
Okay so I'm still trying so this
is not like the PPP long which
everybody knew was going to be a
grant eventually.
So this is this this is
different this is really along
with your local bank just like
any other loan with your local
bank it's just really to make
the local bank have a warm fuzzy
feeling that if the loan the
defaults they're still okay.
Mr chairman that's correct.
Okay.
I wish I had more opportunity to
ask Senator Shendo questions but
well I've run out of questions
and he ran out answers when he
called on you thank you.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator thank you for this and
that
a lot of my questions have been
answered already but just for
clarification so.
Senator and certainly deferring
to miss Russell of May Day so
the bank remains in first
position on on every loan is
that correct.
Mr Chairman if I might yes the
actually the finance authority
doesn't have any security
interest in any of the loans.
Our arrangement with the bank is
simply in this instance in the
capital access program for
instance we are of we are
helping them create a loan loss
reserve so that they feel more
comfortable in lending to small
businesses but we don't to take
a position ending alone we're
not doing underwriting of any
particular loan we underwrite
the bank and we agreed to the
conditions that each of the
underlying loans has to meet and
you know get it can be industry
it can be business size there
there are a number of different
conditions that we could put on
the terms all of that would be
determined by rural but we don't
take a position and we don't
under rate businesses.
Okay and and Mr chairman and
senator
So the loss reserve
would remain the same so if the
loan goes belly up.
Once you have liquidated the
water remains as the reserve
amount
this loan or this amount of
money would cover that is that
what you're saying Mr Chairman
the hope is that would offset
some of the costs yes Munich
again the more they use the
program the larger the loan loss
reserve becomes and so the more
comfort they have that should
any one of those loans not
performance they expected that
they would then be made whole
but but typically it doesn't
cover all of it covers a portion
of the.
Thank you Mr chairman miss
Russell if you have any Senator
so.
Do you apply for this as you get
the loan or do you apply for
this
once the loan is in trouble
order when you apply for this
money.
So Mister chairman the state
applies for the S. S. B. C. I.
money Senate becomes available
and we have to demonstrate that
we have a plan to get this money
out the door the program that we
would hope to use the money for
the purpose of just before forty
would be to create the program
banks would enroll.
And they would on a loan by loan
basis they'd say yes this is a
long we'd like to enroll in this
program and we'd make the match
they'd make the match and we
would have the ability to see
you know the finance authority
would be able to look at the
funds to make sure that they've
not been tapped for any other
purpose their notification
notification requirements by the
bank
But they wouldn't be able to use
the funds until they were able
to satisfy us that they they did
what they could to
it to be made whole from the
liquidation of the of the
collateral but yes they enroll
them up front we know beforehand
that they're enrolling the loan
and you know we do so obviously
before the loan is a quite a
quite a bad loan it's done at
the time that they made alone.
Mr chairman miss Russell is
It appears that there needs to
be some rules regulations.
The policies put together for
the state on on how this will
will happen and what body will
put those those rules
regulations policies together.
Mr Chairman the statewide
economic development finance act
which is the law of the semaines
has that the has the rules be
developed with a two step
process the first is that the
NMFA board of directors approved
the rules and then or actually
should say Dobbs rules and then
they become effective upon the
approval of by the The New
Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee so there's
the finance authority's board
which puts together the rules
but they're not effective until
they've been approved by the
oversight committee.
It's so Mister chair Mister so
does it do independent banks or
or she make sure any bank in the
state have some input into those
rules and policies cooperative
deal or is it all put together
by Ian by the state.
Mr Chairman the under this
process there's not a specific
requirement for public input
however it would be our goal to
make this as accessible to banks
as possible because the goal
here is obviously to increase
the amount of loans that are
made
to small businesses so we would
be putting them out for public
comment in talking to the banks
in particular to see what tools
they need to help any gaps that
they currently have you know
sometimes that the loan
participation sometimes it may
be that collateral deficit that
Senator Woods mentioned it could
be this program we expect it
will take a number of different
tools to get.
Businesses who need capital with
loans in their hands.
Will you Mr chairman and and
miss Russell I I appreciate that
and and I I heartily encourage
you and and anyone associated
with the chair this past to make
sure that the independent
bankers in the state New Mexico
state in this because when I see
want to do is get to a point
with with with.
Rules for banks in general
changing annually especially on
loan loss and and reserve fund.
Right here yeah it is really
important that they being part
of the conversations you may set
up some rules policies that are
me may not fit with with the
commercial banking and that kind
of defeats the purpose of of
what we're doing last last
question Mr chairman USDA loans
SBA loans kind do the same thing
that you're talking about here
in so why is there a need for
yet another.
Loan category section
you know to to to help out with
this makes assist roll this
money into.
Those entities for it what's the
purpose of having the state now
involved in in the loss of
personal or I guess they could
be used for home loans I don't
know whatever and this this is
going to be
what's the difference between
the just apply for USDA longer
an SBA loan.
To to accomplish this goal.
Mr Chairman I think that there
may be a need for all of those
programs again you know the
conditions are very different
but typically banks will bring
their loan when they need
assistance and they don't do it
unless they need assistance but
they'll bring it to the place
that they believe they have the
the greatest understanding of
how the program works and that
fits the particular conditions
of their business of their
business borrower so you know I
don't anticipate that this is
going to take the place of the
USDA business and industry
guarantee or the SBA seven A. or
any of those other programs
banks will look at the a program
that helps them the most for the
business that they have in front
of them could be a participation
could be something else so we
just leave it to the agency
offers one more tool to
potentially increase the number
of loans that the banks are
making.
So and in Mr chairman and I
appreciate that I I you know
maybe some additional tools will
be a good thing
I just know that.
There are our loan officers and
insert banks actually excel in
USDA and SBA loans because it's
a it's a different animal
different set of rules that they
have to play by banks like that
because of some guarantees on on
loan loss and the so I think
that's that's wonderful thing so
a lot of this weather not banks.
Slide into this program I think
again are going to
Be the banks are going to be
encouraged to get involved in
this if they're part of the
process of putting this process
running this long process to get
the policies and procedures so
again I'm going to encourage you
to make sure that commercial
bank into that bankers in New
Mexico have some say in in the
way this is all put together so
thank you very much for your
answers and and Mr chairman
that's all I have thanks.
Thank you senator Byrd I don't
see anybody else on the list
chairman.
Sorry.
Yes sorry I am still working on
getting my hand thank.
I'm on my screen here with this
new laptop.
So mistrust all I am.
As I read the bill kind of dive
into the details I that number
one the bill doesn't require
repayment of the money with all
due respect maybe it does I
didn't see it you mentioned that
at the end of a long lost
program thanks would have to get
back the money.
I don't see that in the bill.
Number two of course you
mentioned that there is a
federal program you want to be
able to take advantage of we
don't we don't
Set that as a criteria for this
which I think would provide
maybe provide some comfort but
it's not there so it's just
basically a new program that
we're creating for the finance
authority.
A number three.
On page eight also concerning
we're striking language that
requires dedicated dedicated
revenue for rate that of any
bond issued by the authority
again not even.
Not even for the low loss
program if you look at page
eight look at that struck out
language we require dedicated
revenue to pave Act funds at the
finance authority issues we're
striking that again not
connected with this program.
So and then finally.
The definition of a standard
project which is the items at
which finance authority can
fund.
We have some very tangible
things like equipment and.
And then we're adding the words
for other expenditures which is
completely also open ended.
So yeah.
With all due respect I can't
support the bill right now and
It's just our just think it's
just kind of deviate from the
best practices and you know
although I can understand the
rationale that you're getting
miss Russell but I think the
bill needs a lot of work to.
To kind of condition at and then
probably take out some of these
things are in there to boot so
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you senator.
Thank you center I don't see any
other questions Senator Shendo
and and this is a bill that I
did in two thousand nine and and
we're just broadening their
horizons and and on the
economic.
Mr Chairman yes you you brought
the amendment in two thousand
and eleven that allowed us to
access the first set of federal
funds there needed to be changes
to the state statute to make it.
Of the so that we can meet the
timelines and you you sponsored
that bill.
Marquita and correct me if I'm
wrong cause and watch this
through the years that the
average amount of money and I
slept a few times was roughly
thirteen million dollars I think
every governor has reconstituted
that thirteen million dollars
know how many times over and so
will this fix the issue that
we're been dealing with.
Mr Chairman thirteen million to
I don't know how much we would
get in this instance because the
amount of money will be to
dependent on the percentage loss
of employment of between two two
years but we're we're guaranteed
to get at least point nine
percent of the ten million
dollars that they set aside
the will it fix everything no Mr
chairman.
Okay I think that's just the can
have a motion please.
Mr chairman I move do passed.
Senator Candelaria my have you
changed.
Wait there's no thank you.
Second by Senator Candelaria
That we call the roll.
Yes chair Senator Burt.
Senator Burt H. R. eight yes
although yes and and will travel
to my machine here today Senator
Burt yes Senator Campos is not
here Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Yes thank you.
Yes thank you thank you yes
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes
Senator yes Senator share yes
thank you hearing test Senator
Steinborn now.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Right yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes thank you.
Yes.
Thank you yes nine yes one no
and what makes you.
That.
Thank you Senator Shendo Center
worthless John back to Senate
bill eight thank you madam chair
and thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you market.
There's some fresh fruit for you
here in my office if you okay.
Thank you Mr chair Senate bill
eight there is a Senate finance
committee substitute a point to
two oh one one three point two I
don't know if you want a motion
for to put that into
discussions.
Sure so I need a motion for do
not pass on Senate bill eight
and a.
To pass our.
Senator complicity with who
wants to Senator Candelaria on
to that motion real quick I got
nine balls.
Mr chairman I would not have
Senate bill eight do you pass on
that finance committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
for purposes of discussion.
Thank you senator have a second.
That.
The second by Senator Rodriguez
Senator anyone explain the
substitute bill I will Mr chair
and and the substitute is was
put together at the suggestion
of senator Candelaria worked
with secretary Kenny of the
environment department's it
really the the folks that the
change in the substituted the
original bill was to put some
guardrails that additional
rational all this required four
bowls a local authority or the
state that is going to adopt an
ordinance more stringent when it
comes to air or hazardous waste
which is what this bill is about
and it requires that there is a
determination made based on
substantial evidence after
notice and public hearing that
the proposed ordinance we more
protective of public health and
the environment.
And I appreciate that the
Senator Candelaria secretary
Kenny are came to agreement on
this language and so that that's
a guard rail that's added to the
bill this bill would allow
The New Mexico environmental
improvement board and a local
air quality board
that's in a county it under the
under the air quality act the
county has to be a classe county
as of January first nineteen
eighty organised how the
population greater than one
hundred thousand located within
a county that was a classe
county as of January first
nineteen eighty so it's limited
to a burly L. in Albuquerque I
think Albuquerque does have a
local board you'll hear some
testimony from them but what
this bill does is asserts the
state's privacy are the federal
clean air act and hazardous
waste and give states the right
to put in place
Rules that are more stringent
than the federal regulation R.
ask your.
We go through the process that
that's been added to the
substitutes so the notice and a
hearing on environmental proven
for so why do we want to do this
compared to where we are now
right now our rules for air
quality and hazardous waste our
time hi to the federal rule as
we cannot go higher we cannot go
lower and the problem with that
is that you can have huge swings
based on Federal chefs this
allows the state of New Mexico
to be able to use the federal
rules and regulations as a floor
but in certain circumstances and
you'll hear testimony as to why
this may be necessary of the
state can go higher than those
than the federal floor so that's
the gist of what this bill does
I do want to address something I
think is important why this bill
is here this bill is here
Senator share on the floor of
the Senate raised the issue of a
fiscal impact and if you all of
you may remember I remember
pretty distinctly we held the
bill back and I said I I I would
I gave it the third referral to
finance to see if there would be
a fiscal impact on the agency
there is no fiscal impact on the
agency in the FIR on this bill
so the reason is here based on
the fiscal impact of the agency
which is why I sent it to this
committee.
There's no fiscal impact having
said that I do think that it I
think it's been a helpful
journey to have kind of the
discussion in the addition of
some guardrails that senator
Candelaria suggestion which have
been agreed to by the department
of but that's where this where
this bill is and and what it
does with me today is Charles to
say when from the environmental
law center and I'm not sure if
secretary Kenny or Sandra Ely
Ely from the environment
department is on as an expert
witness there is Sandra I see
her and also I I I don't want to
overlook Senator Lopez who is
the other prime sponsor on this
bill who I believe is in Senate
Judiciary dealing with the
letter issue so I'll text her
letter no we're doing this but
she has real concerns based on
the south valley issues and
that's why she asked to be part
of the bill so with that I would
yield to Mister to sail N. and
miss you are you I to add to all
what this bill does and why it's
important we do this I thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you senator Wirth that and
we're pushing a fifteen minute
time limit
explained the bill so make sure
your co sponsors are right on
our here expert witnesses are
right on time my experts will be
surgical Mr chair.
Thank.
What.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
madam vice chair and thank you
senator Wirth my name is Charles
to sail in a staff attorney with
the New Mexico environmental law
center Senate bill eight allows
for greater state and local
control and protection of our
natural resources here in New
Mexico it means less control
from the federal government
Senate bill eight would allow
the New Mexico environmental
improvement board and the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
air quality board to adopt
regulations to protect our land
our air and our water that are
more stringent than regulations
adopted by the federal
government.
The New Mexico air quality
control act Mr chairman requires
the environmental improvement
board or the local air quality
board in the case of Albuquerque
and Bernalillo county to adopt
regulations to protect our air
quality.
Similarly The New Mexico
hazardous waste act requires the
environmental improvement board
to adopt regulations to protect
our land and our water from the
mismanagement of hazardous
wastes however both of these
laws as currently written
mandate that the board
regulations must be no more
stringent than the federal
regulations this limitation has
unnecessarily tied the hands of
the environment department in
proposing regulations and it's
tied the hands of the boards in
adopting regulations the
agencies are bound to follow the
federal regulations.
What's more if the federal EPA
repeals or weakens the federal
regulations the board is
obligated to follow suit of need
must repeal or weaken the state
regulations
ineffective federal regulations
preempt more stringent state
regulations and this is
particularly problematic given
that the federal EPA over the
last several years has rolled
back many environmental
regulations.
The limitations in these laws
have presented state and local
agencies with several problems
for example the limitation in
the air quality control act has
made it difficult for the
environment department to
propose regulations to address
methane emissions of methane is
a potent greenhouse gas but
because the federal EPA has
recently rolled back
deregulation addressing methane
emissions the environment
department in the board are
unable to methane
to limit methane emissions
directly the agencies have been
forced to to try to regulate
methane methane emissions
indirectly by regulating other
pollutants this is a very
inefficient method of of of
trying to adopt regulations.
These limitations of also made
it more difficult for the City
of Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county to regulate concentrated
sources of air pollution in the
south valley and the Mountain
View communities of Albuquerque
these are mostly low income
ethnically diverse communities
that suffered
disproportionately from the
effects of air pollution.
The limitation in the hazardous
waste staff has made it more
difficult for the environment
department in the board to
regulate per and
polyfluoroalkyl substances or so
called P. fits because from
canton Air Force base and from
Holloman Air Force base of
contaminated groundwater around
the bases and as a result of the
contamination at least one Gary
has gone out of business.
The bill would remove from both
the air quality control act and
the hazardous waste act the
prohibition on adoption of
regulations that are more
stringent than the federal
regulations the bill with us
free the boards to adopt more
stringent regulations that in
some cases are more appropriate
for New Mexico.
In addition the amendment to the
bill adopted by the Senate
Judiciary Committee would allow
the City of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county to require
vehicle inspections of diesel
powered motor vehicles no diesel
engines emit relatively high
levels of nitrogen oxides and
particulate matter which are our
health health affecting
pollutants and we know that some
of the European manufacturers of
diesel cars sold in the United
States
have cheated on on their
emissions testing.
The air quality control act
currently allows emission
testing only of gasoline powered
vehicles but not a diesel
powered vehicles so this
amendment to the bill would
remove that restriction again
providing greater local control.
As a final note Senate bill will
not require any probation and
will not affect the state's
budget.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and I
would be happy to help in
answering any questions that you
might have and I'll turn it over
to miss Sandra Ely and in New
Mexico Environment Department.
Mr chairman members of the
committee if I may I just want
to say that my role here today
is simply to serve as a
technical expert to senator
Wirth on SB eight it I'm here
and and billable to answer
questions I do not have any
statement.
Thank you.
Maybe then we want to go to
public comment.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
At we have both the opposition
and support to this bill will go
to the opposition first please
remember you have ten minutes.
We'll start with Amy barely of
New Mexico oil and gas
association.
Interment many of some members
of the Senate finance committee
my name is Amy Barrett B. and
I'm the registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico oil and gas
association on behalf of our
members new mother strongly
opposes Senate bill eight we
would however like to express
our sincere appreciation for the
leadership demonstrated by
Senator Candelaria for his
dedicated work toward a
compromise that would achieve
the intent of the legislation
without deterring business
investments from the industry
that is responsible for one
third of the state's budget
despite his efforts the
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight is still very
problematic it would get overly
broad authority over air quality
and hazardous waste to a board
appointed by the executive so
subject to political changes
every four years because there
are no meaningful parameters
placed on the board in this bill
it creates great uncertainty for
operators looking to continue to
further their investments in New
Mexico unfortunately Senate bill
eight also has the potential to
completely up end and derail the
positive collaboration that has
occurred between the executive
energy companies environmental
groups and other stakeholders
working in partnership on the
state's existing methane rule
making process I am joined today
by other stakeholders in
opposition to Senate bill eight
rob black president and CEO The
New Mexico chamber
Gabrielle Care hold government
relations for Konica Phillips in
Winchester executive director
for IBM and Billy's CO two
Gallup McKinley chamber of
commerce with that Mr chairman I
yield to my colleague rob black.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is rob
black the president CEO The New
Mexico chamber of commerce the
chamber's membership includes
businesses from every part of
New Mexico and in every
industry.
Last year we've been very
focused on two things.
It helping our existing
businesses survive the pandemic
and positioning New Mexico to
come out of the current
recession successfully so that
we don't lose another decade to
economic stagnation it's from
this perspective that we
approached SB eight.
We understand and appreciate the
concerns of the sponsor
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill because we believe
it will hinder our economic
recovery and act as a deterrent
to future investment and jobs in
the state.
Today New Mexico leads the
country in child poverty our
fourth graders are last in
reading comprehension in
organizations like Ford's in US
news right New Mexico is one of
the worst places in the country
to start or operate a business
all of which limit our
children's ability to provide
meaningful careers in the future
our children deserve the same
opportunities as the kids in our
neighboring states but the
career opportunities for young
people in Colorado Arizona and
Utah are much richer and more
diverse than those for New
Mexico's youth so when we look
at SB eight we asked the
question will this bill help
improve New Mexico's economic
compact this and job
opportunities for children in
the answer unfortunately is it
will not you will do the
opposite it will create
significant regulatory
uncertainty across a wide
variety of industries making it
harder to attract new jobs
investment in the state.
Regulatory uncertainty is
already a problem in New Mexico
and was ranked as a top concern
again I by business and industry
leaders we surveyed them last
fall our goal is to diversify
our economy and grow it so do
are not so reliant on oil and
gas for creating new
opportunities for the next
generation then we need to
create a predictable regulatory
environment for business to
invest and grow in this state is
from this perspective that we
respectfully urge you to oppose
SB eight.
Thank you.
Next we have Gabrielle gavel.
Good evening Senator million us
and committee members Gabrielle
Care hold with COG operating
which is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Kanako Phillips
COG continues to oppose Senate
bill eight well early in the
session the sponsor kindly put
me in touch with his expert
excuse me with more yeses expert
Mr disabling and I also greatly
appreciate Senator Candelaria is
efforts to improve upon the bill
the concern still is that the
environmental improvement board
and the environment department
would be unfettered from any
limitations when drafting rules
related to air quality and
hazardous waste.
I would like to draw your
attention specifically to the
last page of the committee
substitute which report repeals
the current statutes seventy
four to five point three seventy
four to five point three allows
the board and the environmental
Environment Department to draft
rules more stringent than the
federal government for
attainment and maintenance of
ozone with the Legislature
enacted that statute and make
clear that the board could write
rural stronger than the federal
government so long as they
followed certain guidelines the
current statute makes clear what
is expected of the board in the
agency there by putting the
public on notice of what
parameters in place such as
technology that is reasonably
available and economically
feasible and that methods to
reduce air emissions must be
commercially available instead
of building on this Senate bill
eight completely delete set this
caused me to wonder what our
other states doing so I
specifically looked at Texas in
Colorado air quality law both
statutes have.
Those states have statutes like
seventy four to five point three
and allow other state agencies
to draft rules more stringent
than the federal government with
those legislatures have
maintained in statute with the
environmental agencies are
required to do and show one
complicated rules why should the
New Mexico legislature
compromise for less.
Finally I would offer that the
most prudent course of action
from ending the air quality act
and hazardous waste act this
work on that during the interim
to devise legislation that
allows for New Mexico to write
rules more stringent than the
federal government while
retaining provided oversight I
can commit to you that we would
be willing to work with all the
points on these issues to do
what is best for our state thank
you.
Next we have Jim Winchester.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Gen Winchester
here on the executive director
of the independent petroleum
association of New Mexico and
for those of you who are not
familiar by PNM represents the
smaller of multi generational
family owned operators that are
based right here in the states
our members worked hard with
limited resources and then
operating margins are and they
work hard to be safe and
responsible every single day we
like to refer to ourselves as
little oil as opposed to bigger
I do want to start by saying
that IBM does share the goals of
all parties out there to protect
human health and fresh water in
the environment but it does have
to be under a reasonable
regulatory framework
unfortunately SB eight proposes
to move established regulatory
goalposts if you will to a point
of our operational in
feasibility for the small tax so
this bill would give the state
or local governments unilateral
authority to create rules are
more stringent than the federal
government and considering that
the recent federal leasing and
permitting moratorium's are now
in place it's it's showing to us
that think about how this bill
would allow for these local
governments to put together more
stringent rules than than that
this bill would create two sets
of complex rules those for
federal those for state and that
duality disproportionately
punishes smaller independent
producers who don't have those
armies of lawyers or compliance
officers to process these
changes without considerable
expense and there's your
personal impact
finally this bill if passed does
circumvent hundreds to thousands
of precious work hours that were
spent by independence and
industry working in
collaboration with the state
administration to develop new
methane.
Rules and I want to commend of
this administration on how it
shut out dialogue with
independence unfortunately
estimate did not do that in the
bill supports that entire
process on that the.
I just want to say that
independence of men Nicole this
past year to stay afloat during
which the triple whammy of COVID
oil price crash using of course
the development of these new not
the rules we are resilient we're
hanging in there with our
operations right now but I
regret to say that mother in
childhood or not this bill
signals that its supporters
don't want to work with
independence and really don't
want them operating in New
Mexico at all so for those
reasons we do respect we stand
opposed thank you.
Next we have bill we the help
out chamber of commerce.
Thank you good evening now
chairman the US committee
members my name is bill Lee I am
the president and CEO of the
Gallup McKinley county chamber
of commerce before you today to
propose an ability because of
how negatively it affects my
community as the entire nation
those Gallup has been especially
hit hard by the pandemic
resulting in devastating
closures of our businesses as we
look toward the future we're
really focused on ways to
rebuild our businesses and
attract new investment one
target for investment in my area
is the refinery that was
recently closed when running a
capacity this refinery can
employee up to twenty two
hundred twenty of my community
members these are good paying
jobs that come with benefits and
those same employees than spend
their paychecks in our local
grocery stores restaurants and a
variety of other businesses and
services within the Gallup
community currently there are
active efforts to attract
investors to reopen the refinery
and we're concerned that while
potential investors expressed
interest telling us that the
location is good the capability
of the refineries promising
they're waiting until the
legislative session is over
before making a final decision
about investment potential
investors need to know that the
parameters are in place for
future rulemakings that they're
fair that the need to know that
even if New Mexico has a rules
more stringent than the federal
government that those rules are
based in science they need to
know that our legislature is
committed to retaining its
authority as the true voice of
the people over air and
hazardous waste not
relinquishing it to an appointed
board is SB eight does I'm a New
Mexicans who enjoys our clean
air and ten states I don't want
to either be integrated I
believe this legislature can
continue to assure those things
under the current law and for
those reasons I respectfully
request the committee not pass
Senate bill eight thank you.
That concludes that opposition
to this bill will now turn to
support.
and first and support we have
David more Vigil on behalf of
the City of Albuquerque.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee of David
Hotmail I'm registered lobbyist
for the City of Albuquerque and
we want to thank the sponsors a
leader worth and Senator Lopez
for bringing forth this
important legislation to improve
the air quality in the
environment for citizens in the
highest population density
location in the state of New
Mexico specifically those
important folks who are
suffering right now with poor
air quality and environmental
issues as articulated by Mr to
sailing we want to thank all
Senator Candelaria in his
efforts to reach across in to
talk with the the folks from the
oil and gas industry contrary to
what was said in opposition
there is nothing about this
effort to improve the air
quality of the citizens of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county and specifically folks
not risks over at risk
communities there is nothing all
about that effort that is
hostile to the economy or that
is hostile to oil and gas or
that is hostile to independence
big or small oil instead it is
supportive of a healthy
community for our citizens in
that healthy community needs to
be addressed now not in the
interim not next year not two
years from now not three years
from now.
Of the concerns of Mr to salient
about the inadequacies of the
current federal regulatory
structure the snow the slowest
I'm sorry for the slow process
of changing that to respond to
the needs of citizens in
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county and especially are at
risk communities mandates the
action that has been requested
now none of that action will be
taken rationally it will be
taken with the input of all
stakeholders Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county has its air
quality board on that board is
well represented in has been in
these committees by its chair to
the Richards and it's long time
member Judy Coleman both of whom
have spoken out in favor of this
for they know what the citizens
of Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county need they know what are
at risk communities need in this
bill is what is needed and so
for those reasons the City of
Albuquerque stands with its
citizens in strong support of
this bill thank you.
Amy Miller New Mexico
environmental public health
network.
Good evening Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy Miller I'm representing
the New Mexico environmental
public health network our
organization is comprised of
medical environmental and public
health professionals throughout
the state and we're committed to
advocating for environmental
policy policies that positively
affect public health we strongly
encourage you to support Senate
bill eight I also want to
mention that Health Action New
Mexico and the American lung
association have asked that I
can be there support of the bill
they were not able to attend the
committee at this time.
Senate bill eight is really
about protecting New Mexicans
health and our state deserves to
be in charge of protecting its
citizens health and it's Nash
Nash natural environment.
New Mexico is experience with
COVID nineteen has shown us that
some of the most underserved
communities in New Mexico are
the ones that are most
vulnerable to the impacts of air
pollution and water
contamination a recent report by
the alliance of nurses for
healthy environments which
actually included research from
two nurses here in New Mexico
showed strong correlations
between high levels of pollution
in communities and those that
have experienced high comment
mortality rates let's not be
subject to the unpredictable
whims of Washington such as the
more than one hundred and Bayern
mental regulations set backs
that occurred in the last few
years let's protect New Mexicans
health by giving our state and
local air quality boards the
authority to adopt regulations
that are stronger than those at
the federal level thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you on chairman Yasin
committee members for the
opportunity to speak today on
Senate bill eight my name is
Debbie o'malley I was born and
raised in Albuquerque's north
valley for my husband and I have
the fortune to live close to our
children and grandchildren I'm
support of Senate bill eight as
our fellow Bernalillo county
commissioner scrapbook Istana
the school teacher all of whom
have or will send separate
letters of support we just
Mexicans need to have the
ability to adopt stricter
environmental regulations and
the federal government for the
protection of our unique
environment and for future
generations my grandfather was
Senate Mr Romero was a farmer in
a little town called to get the
New Mexico was also legislator
during territorial times as a
farmer he and his neighbors were
in tune with the seasons they
ate what they grew they also
knew that they had to take care
of the land and the wildlife if
they were to survive things have
changed of course most of us
today especially in urban areas
have become more more removed
from the natural world but we
know and appreciate its value
and we know the negative effects
that increase pollution can have
on the health of our families I
know firsthand about those
negative health effects in
fighting a major air and ground
water polluter in the sawmill
town neighborhood with my
neighbors many years ago we were
successful in requiring that
this industry clean up however
the damage was done we all agree
that New Mexico's and unique and
beautiful place so we need to be
purposeful in keeping it that
way and local authority will
give us the ability to do that
simply put if we are to provide
opportunities for children to
stay and raise their families
here and for clean industries to
locate here we must take care of
our air land and water again
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today.
Next we have any returns board
member for the Albuquerque
Bernalillo county our quality
control board.
If not we'll go to commend the
people then with the Sierra
Club.
Thank you so much Mr chair
Sanchez US secretary of the
environment department and all
of those who maybe Dawn the work
to make this such an excellent
bill I am speaking on behalf of
three organizations today the
Sierra club's Rio Grande chapter
the natural resources defense
council and conservation voters
of New Mexico.
It's interesting to note that
the stringency limitations that
we are looking at in these two
statutes are limited to those
two to statutes there are many
environmental Act within our
state government but only the
air quality act in the hazardous
waste act how the no more
stringent than clause and this
means that the New Mexico
environment department can't
regulate ozone which is an
asthma precursor except when the
county is within ninety five
percent of exceeding the federal
and.
On the question of the funds so
many communities are struggling
with the impact of this
pollutant and yet our state
government is limited in what it
can do to act so we're here to
stand in support of SB eight to
give our local state government
the ability to protect our air
and our communities as required
thank you so much for the
opportunity.
Next we have Artemisia Romero a
carpet with yucca or youth
United for climate change
action.
Hello chair members of the
committee my name is our initial
merry cover on here's a
spokesperson for yucca you do
not for color crisis action to
stand in support of SB eight
this is a critical bill to make
sure that our environment is
protected and we are able to
meet our responsibility as a
state to take progressive and
aggressive action based on the
best the most up to date
available science and the needs
of on track to communities we
witnessed in the last four years
just how badly federal
governments can fail to protect
our air our land our water and
our public health we need to be
able to take action regardless
of the political winds in
Washington the state New Mexico
is failing to adequately
regulate industry we federal
standards that we cannot
surpasses one excuse that's been
used earlier someone mention
child poverty I spent my
childhood in New Mexico in
extreme poverty and my opinion
respectfully it does not benefit
marginalized children when we
make it easier to poison the air
that they breathe.
Yes the whole heartedly supports
this bill that will remove the
federal barriers and allow our
state officials to take
responsible action in defense of
our health Clemente my
generation's future behalf of
yucca we thank senator Wirth for
bringing this legislation
forward and continuing to
champion the interests of youth
we asked the committee to vote
in favor of this legislation
thank you.
Next we have bill mid cap with
the rocky mountain farmers
union.
My name is going to happen
Representative rocky mountain
farmers union thank you senator
Munoz and the rest of the
committee for allowing me to
speak in favor of Senate bill
eight.
Farmers ranchers are the very
definition of conservationists
and make care mostly about our
environment.
There on the front lines of
climate change and rely on clean
air and water to raise our crops
to feed us poses Clovis and
produce some of the Energy we.
In the last four years our
federal government has let us
down a dangerous passes allowed
companies to emit the jurors
options such as methane and
mercury and charter.
Like these just in our streams
and groundwater.
Mention all the chemicals of
existing produced water.
The New Mexico environment
department should have the
authority to directly regulate
pollutants and protect our water
air and army in which we live.
Senate bill eight would let New
Mexicans decide what the
environment would look like in
the future and not Washington.
This is bill I want to thank you
senator Wirth for bringing this
legislation forward and thank
you senators for everything you
do.
That will conclude public
comment in support of this bill.
Thank you.
Senator Rodriguez
you there.
Kind of gear screen yes I'm here
Senator center I I needed to
work on some capital number for
a few minutes would you chair
the meeting and then I'll just
kind of what.
In and out so would you chair
the meeting for fuel sure we
have thank you senator all right
now thank you so are we ready
now Mr Chairman or we are the
after public comment right down
with that right we don't have
anyone else on the list and then
we can move on to west.
Okay maybe that are with your
with public comment yes madam
chair we observe the strict ten
minute rule or comments in
opposition and comments in
support of this bill thank you
thank you Nathan all right we're
gonna move on to legislators and
I have Senator share Senator
here it.
Thank you madam chair I move to
table.
Table it's not available so we
can call the roll.
On this path are you there.
Madam chair.
Yes Senator Steinborn I don't
think a table motion can be used
to stifle debate and I realize
that I was a little slow get
money and on the board but if
Senator shares okay I'd like to
ask some questions.
Order a table the option is not
available I don't think it's
gonna pass but I think we have
to observe the proper procedure.
Yes I think we're gonna put this
up for a vote and then move on
to other questions I have some
questions to the order or maybe
more comments so all right can
we proceed with the with the
roll call please.
This madam chair Senator move to
table Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos is excuse me no
your your tier I'm here I'm I'm
going back and forth presenting
bills that I am here I don't
know.
Senator Campos so it's no
Senator Candelaria.
Well.
Senator Candelaria votes no
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond votes yes
Senator Gonzales.
No.
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hemphill.
So.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
No to table.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez no.
Senator Rodriguez snow.
And senator Nelson there.
It's issues okay so we have.
Search for.
Yes six no and one excuse.
Thank you the motion to table
failed we were wrong with the
bill and
I do
want to help from the committee
that has been comments or
questions if not I do Senator I
texted you I don't know if you
got my text I'm sorry.
All right you're right maybe I.
I know we're.
Wait your next thank you thank
thank you sorry thank you madam
chair thank you so much I want
to thank everyone so I just have
a few questions
I think what what with the with
the real concern here is.
You know there's there's there's
clearly a
a perception among some actors
some folks involved in these
processing about the robustness
perhaps and the fairness of the
rule making process itself.
And I may be uncomfortable to
recognize but I think that's
sort of what is inherent here.
and and so I do want to address
madam chair that the committee
substitute because I I don't
think it provides a meeting less
instruction to the point
I think providing the
requirement that the evidence
support a finding that the.
The federal rex's would better
protect the environment public
health is sort of you know but
the sexual elements at least one
of the essential elements of
this rule making power but I
wonder madam chair if I may ask
the expert from the environment
department and also if the
representative from the City of
Albuquerque can answer a couple
of questions just about the
rulemaking process these
themselves.
Thank you yes that would be
fine.
You'll hear yes okay.
Can we ensure that.
Thank you madam chair such of
the.
That you are Environment
Department Representative.
Get all the committee substitute
codifies the substantial
evidence requirement.
but the question right in
rulemaking is always well what
is substantial evidence so
customarily in now if the
environment department is going
to regulate.
In any area but I guess
particularly under these two
acts what what is the sort of
evidence that the department or
the board typically will look at
and I guess explicitly does the
department contract with
independent.
sort of experts or do you rely
on in house analyses exclusively
because you know what's what's
challenging about this area of
regulation is it's incredibly
it's incredibly complicated and
very driven by the science
my regulatory experience is not
in this area.
So thanks all those that
question first our Environment
Department percentage of madam
chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee as a technical expert
I can answer that question I'm
having been before the board
many times we often do rely on
outside consultation to assist
us find to find the best data
available to justify any new
regulations for example in the
ozone rules we are modeling and
emissions impacts related to
everyone the sources that we may
regulate under that will to
provide evidence of whether
those rules are effective not
just cost effective but whether
we're getting admission
reductions we're not so it it is
A burden to do that and often we
do bring in experts from outside
we also bring in economists we
bring in engineers will bring an
environmental scientist
atmospheric scientists to help
support us in in our rulemaking
and will will continue to do so.
Thank you know if I can and I'll
ask a follow up to you ma'am and
and and hopefully City of
Albuquerque can address the
questions in total but I assume
that you know if if there are
opponents to a rule that's being
proposed I'm assuming they have
the right to submit their own
scientific analyses their own
expert testimony they have the
right to make a record
demonstrating that the rule is
either arbitrary and capricious
exceeds the agency's authority
or if this bill is enacted is
not necessary to better protect
the environment and public
health my correct.
Senator Candelaria you are
absolutely correct.
Madam chair my batting averages
improving from earlier this week
okay now I can go to the City of
Albuquerque you know I I think
you know one of the concerns
it's been expressed is to pass
City of local authorities and
you know the City of Albuquerque
you know is the only local
authority I understand with that
has constituted a local board
so can you speak to the
committee about the robustness
of the process and you know you
have the same ability to.
Mexico lacks.
And review you know.
I just scientific information to
make these rules.
Yes madam chair senator
Candelaria on that is why in my
presentation I said that none of
these on.
I don't know created horrible's
some of the opponents I think
we're essentially calling them
would happen overnight
instantaneous or without due
process or without a deliberate
process I would invite you and I
would invite members of the
committee to do what I did I am
not an expert in this particular
area this call then this
Richards both of whom said on
the air quality board of spoken
in favor of the bill are better
expert on they're not on but any
of anybody on the committee can
do well written this
deliberative process can go on
to the City of Albuquerque's
website and look at the air
quality for in look at that look
at that it has a robust process
on that addresses air quality
issues from wood burning to
industrial issues wood burning
by citizens to industrial air
impact by obviously larger
industry well but that that that
is so the air quality work on
has to take into consideration
not only the input of industry
but also the actual experience
of the constituents that Senator
Lopez has brought forth this
bill
in urgent matter to address and
I know Senator Cappelletti
you're quite familiar with some
of the issues that are being.
Impact of course offered by
focusing self valley with when I
was a small child that was back
in the day in which we go to my
grandma's meals house and we
would burn all her trash in the
back in her backyard in a large
metal container until that metal
container disintegrated
we've come a long way from that
on air quality in Albuquerque
has developed a systematic
process through the
establishment of its air quality
board to protect its citizens
but not only to protect its
citizens but to hear from the
folks who are contributing to
the air quality issues be they
private citizens like my grandma
who might have burned her trash
in a backyard or larger
industry through no fault of
their own but the reality of
their industries contribute to
air quality issues I know your
amendment sought to refine that
process and to set guardrails
out so that some of the concerns
that were raised about
unfettered up bureaucratic
process can be reined in
but you know obviously
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
but specifically Albuquerque who
I represent have a very large
interest in this area given the
population density and given the
already knowing impact to our
citizens and we we we take a we
our our support of this knowing
that we have this robust air
quality board in knowing that
there is due process in knowing
that the substantial evidence on
standard regulatory standards
that you set forth is no of no
small moment and I know you as a
lawyer who has practiced in the
regulatory area knows that that
that's just a.
It an absolute reality some of
that fully answer your question
described as
thank you Sir and thank you and
and the reason I and I I agree
Mr madam chair and Mr chairman
you know the the the there is a
process here and
I will tell you I I completely
sympathize and the reason I do
now is hoping I was.
Thanks Amanda for behind you
know exploring the language for
the bill with with all the
parties
is because you know practicing
regulatory law hi I have
developed a new.
And keep our fear of government
because it is at the regulatory
level.
Where government has its most
power.
and you know the contents
context of license revocations
driver's license revocations
it can have devastating effects
on a person and the trajectory
of their life.
and so you know I I I do not
take the concerns have been
raised by the industry about the
integrity of these process sees
lightly that's that I you know
I'm not by and I'm not saying I
I necessarily believe that but
I'm saying I've seen enough
times already how folks act when
no one's looking to just sort of
be suspicious and it's not out
of any kind of message that the
simple you know being a lawyer
we're taught to trust but always
verify I really don't trust
anyone on this earth about my
husband
so.
For the expert Dan is I think
it's important thing to point
out for the committee to is
less than okay this bill goes
into law with its standards and
of the board adopts a regulation
that a party believes is
arbitrary yes capriciously it's
going to kill in dentistry is
not based on the science is
merely a political document.
To either of these acts
articulate a specific appeals
process.
to the judiciary and or would be
yield just follow the normal
process of rural seventy five.
I'm madam chair Mister chair of
Senator Candelaria a yes
absolutely both of the statutes
of New Mexico air quality
control act and the New Mexico
hazardous waste act both
provided that any regulations
that are adopted by the
environmental improvement board
can be appealed to the New
Mexico court of appeals and the
the standard standard of review
as very much as you describe it
should if the regulation
regulations are arbitrary and
capricious not in court in
accordance with law or not not
supported by substantial
evidence in the record so there
is definitely a an opportunity
for folks who are are
dissatisfied with the
regulations who or who feel that
they are a potentially injured
by the regulations to have their
day in court.
So I appreciate that because and
madam chair all point out that
not all statutes articulated for
us a specific yield rate in the
regulatory space and and rule
seventy five is the default
that's used for appeal to the
District Court of the final
agency action and then there
would be an appeal to the court
of appeals it sounds like you're
we have a direct right of appeal
and I sort of wanted out to wrap
up that I think you know I don't
think we could craft a statute
that would really satisfy
everybody and put the
protections and that everybody's
looking for and that's not
really how we write regulatory
statutes to begin with we sort
of do in do this regulatory body
we presume that have the
expertise to regulate now that
being said I think the greatest
I think the the the strong word
of caution I want to share for
the regulate towards in the room
and listening is please use this
authority responsibly
I think every executive beat
Republican or Democrat and we've
identified that problem today as
the have the it has the imp of
the perverse to push the
envelope from a political
perspective and we you know that
happens because we're human
beings not a criticism in any
one person it's just because
we're people and that's why we
have these systems to control
the amount of power individuals
have so you know it's it's I
think the real the real test and
the real responsibility now
falls on the regulators to
ensure that the process these
are transparent that they are
robots that they're based on
evidence and that when you do
look at experts that they are
truly independent and that you
know I've seen departments use
sort of farms that everyone sort
of knows are the hatchet jobs
that run around the country you
know
on certain issues so.
You know and and and and I raise
that again just just you know
and perhaps in the interest of
full disclosure you know in the
last year you know I've brought
suit on behalf of clients and
overturn to rules for the
department of health why because
they didn't look at any science
just sort of confusing given the
title of the department in L.
but at the end of the day
regulatory powers a big deal
adding it just needs to be used
responsibly M. S. support the
committee substitute because you
know in closing madam chair as
an Albuquerque resident I grew
up in the community as a whole
set and Senator says kind of a
from data in the sense that it
it's sort of this no man's land
between the south valley which
gets a lot of love and attention
and bought L. us and all these
other communities and cycle just
kind of runs along the railroad
tracks it was built up as a
community where the workers on
the railroad railroad left and
that's how my my family settled
in the community.
Years ago and it's a Superfund
site I grew up in the shadow of
the route the the dilapidated
abandoned decaying railroad
yards at the time along the
railroad tracks you know and in
conditions that we would not
tolerate for many other
communities especially for
wealthier communities especially
for communities that are not
communities of color
unfortunately it seems like
these areas always tend to be
where there's a high
concentration of of folks like
my family
so I I'm gonna support you know
granting the local governments
in the state this additional
authority in statute I think we
discussed today madam chair
hopefully you've been able to
discuss with the committee the
other safeguards that exist in
the law the sky is not falling
if people are truly concerned
then folks need to invest in
their experts and get the
evidence on the table to back up
their claims but the board's
exceeding their authority
just not the job of the
legislature to hardwire statute
to do that job for them either
so at the end of the day I think
the bill strikes a good balance
I'm proud to support it thank
you madam chair and thank you
senator Wirth.
Thank you senator Candelaria all
right we have a Senator crystal
diamond you're next.
Thank you madam chair
as I review all of this it seems
to be a little bit a little bit
concerned that maybe we are
creating a solution and in
search of a problem we we know
that clearly there sufficient
protections and regulations that
currently exist on the federal
level.
And what seems to be a pretty
biased FIR states that if SB
eight is not enacted rulemaking
will continue to be limited to
federal regulations which may
not address the unique needs of
New Mexico could you find
Matt
at Senator Wirth specific
examples of beneficial
regulations that need to be
implemented here in New Mexico
that you do not believe are
currently being met under the
federal regulations.
So madam chair and senator
Diamond all all yield the center
you leave for the CPAS I'm not
Senator Ely to miss you a firm
Environment Department for the
specifics but I want to say this
and it's something that Senator
Schmedes who voted for this bill
really focused on it's about
local control it's about the
state being able to address
specific situations it's about
Albuquerque being able to
address specific situations
that's what this bill is
empowering and that's the policy
decision that needs to be
weighed and how you vote on this
bill but I will yield to miss UE
four specific examples and Mr to
Salem as well because there are
specific examples out there so
missing the.
Chairman Senator Diamond let's
let's look at P. fox as an
example it's a long lasting
environmental contaminant that's
hard to get rid of we found it
in the number of communities in
New Mexico we know there is more
out there that your constituents
are probably being exposed to
the faster as we speak we had to
file a lawsuit against the
department of defense in order
to get action on it this
language been lifted had we been
able to write rules more
stringent than the federal
government we could have gone
down another path instead of
filing a lawsuit against the
department of defense because of
what's going on at home and in
cannon Air Force base we could
write a rule that provides
consistency and certainty for
the department of defense it
would be probably less expensive
than the path that we're all
going down right now in order to
control that
but that is the path that we had
to to to take to take we love to
be able to tackle that to write
drafters rule to bring the
department of defense in on that
to bring stakeholders in on that
to bring the best science to
bear on that because the federal
government is not protecting us
right now against that chemical
and we would love to get this
behind us.
Appreciate that answer Mrs Eline
I'm I'm pretty familiar with the
damage the P. fasted to the
dairies there your cannon Air
Force base budget damage was
done decades ago when in fact P.
fast hasn't been used in New
Mexico since the nineteen
nineties.
Members of the committee we
could establish criteria.
For which the cleanup has to
take place we can establish
levels and make sense for New
Mexico.
So with that being said and
knowing that it's not being used
now why are more stringent
regulation stated New Mexico in
addition to those federal
regulations that are really
really already being that which
is great for New Mexico.
The federal area on the clean up
we need to be clear about what
can be done in New Mexico for
New Mexicans to address this
problem.
Thank you I appreciate that so
we're creating more regulations
to clean up
areas of damage that we're done
because they want regulated
decades ago so we need
regulations to clean up.
Act.
Members of the committee it's
too bad we didn't have
regulations decades ago and this
is a pervasive chemical but we
need a standard by which to
clean up to what is acceptable
what's not acceptable what are
the cleanup criteria whether the
standards we can stab us
regulations for that because the
federal government is not.
Okay I don't know if I totally
agree with you on that because
there are regulars regulations
that would prevent that harms
and being done today but I but I
do have a couple more questions
here I know that just two years
ago in fact with senator
Candelaria here that was really
successful in passing the ETA
which was an overhaul of the
utility industry and he did so
with the a lot of stakeholders
at the table to talk competition
court piece of legislation do
you believe that we should give
that a fair opportunity to take
place so we can see the results
of that before we proceed with
additional regulations.
I'm sorry Sierra is a question
directed at me.
Or or for that sponsor if you
like if you'd like to yeah you
know.
Madam chair out all your to miss
you a.
Madam chair.
It I don't see this as being in
conflict with the ETA ETA is
focused on electric electricity
sector there are a lot of other
sectors that we may want to look
at we haven't even decided how
we would you know address the
stringency issue if we have the
authority to do that so it
doesn't necessarily a conflict
at all with with the ETA.
Okay thank you for that answer.
I I worry about this and I think
there were some concerns that
were brought up in public
comment but as a legislator we
continue to discuss how to
better attract businesses and
one way we know to do that is to
create continuity and
consistency with our business
atmosphere what what I worry is
that this bill actually creates
inconsistency and I fear that it
threatens business business
growth the good news is for all
supporters watching is that we
have regulations in place we
have current federal regulations
in place that prevent harm from
being chance to to our our
environment and by industry and
and.
Most of our concerns are already
met with regulations are already
out there as they should be
because I like you and so many
out there don't believe that
industry should operate without
any regulations at all but but I
have to say that New Mexico
doesn't lack regulations surely
we all would agree with that
but what I also want to conclude
this is beginning this
presentation was that there was
no fiscal impact here to to HSD
but it's very clear to me that
there's a fiscal impact to
industry and as a result a
direct fiscal impact to New
Mexico and so I really worry
that putting additional
regulations on industries that
are already regulated we're
really not solve any problems
and and I fear they were
actually just creating more harm
so I appreciate your time are
both of you and I yield my time
thank you.
I think you are muted Senator
Rodriguez.
There we go thank you very much
we have senator Byrd next and
and we ask that question Senator
sheriff did you also have some
comments or or was that your
hand still left from before no I
they have questions now that
we're back sure thank you okay
I'm going to Senator Burt first
because he's there and then
you'll be next all right senator
Byrd thank thank you madam chair
and I I guess I I just have a
water two quick questions.
M. MRI done I understand not
understand the bill this is only
for the classic county which is
Bernalillo county Albuquerque is
that correct.
So madam chair it does two
things it's for the state so it
allows the state statewide to
impose.
Rules that are more stringent in
Aaron have his waist and then
the current statute does allow
that individual class state
county and and municipality
within it which is Albuquerque
Bernalillo who currently do that
already
they would also be able to.
In place more stringent
regulations with the guard rails
Senator Candelaria has added in
the substitute so it's both of
these both Albuquerque and
Bernalillo area and the state
okay well I I appreciate the
Madam chair of the.
The clarification on that
because that was my initial
impression was just for the
classic Albuquerque or
Bernalillo county because I was
wondering how if that be the
case you were going to impose
rules and regulations on
Alamogordo Eddy County.
Two can carry whatever the case
may be so that does clarify this
so so madam chair and senator
these this whole bill will apply
statewide correct Mr chair yes
this this bill does what the
federal.
Laws when they were put in place
specifically allowed which is
for states to exert the right to
regulate in these areas and many
states have done exactly that
and so this would just allow New
Mexico to to exercise its right
as a state and Albuquerque
Bernalillo to exercise its right
as a local board to regulate in
these areas in in in thank you
madam chair and senator so again
for clarification on my part
because I I misunderstood
initial going in
Then who will create all of
these rules regulations that
would be imposed element status
or any input from around the
state or is group of people
you know from the government
Santa Fe here.
madam chair and senator Byrd US
department through met board for
the state and what I'll do and I
think you you heard Mr Harvey
described the process for
Albuquerque Bernalillo there
airboard which exists currently
and I think what I will do is
yield Mister UP to explain
exactly how that process works
and stakeholder engagement that
they currently use as part of
that process which I think
you've seen some of that in the
in the work they've done so this
evening.
Senator Burt
we go through a very extensive
stakeholder process I could go
back to the ozone rule it's
taking us two years to get to
the point we are at right now in
developing rules to address the
ozone problems that we have in
seven counties in the state we
brought together stakeholders
from industry and from the NGOs
we developed a very extensive
technical report called methane
advisory panel report we held
meetings around the state
including.
Charles bad Albuquerque San Juan
County and that in the chapter
houses and in Farmington it is a
very extensive stakeholder
process both the regulations
that are developed under the air
quality control act which is
part of SB eight as well as a
hazardous waste act will then go
to the environmental prove that
board which is a seven member
board that will Hyen on the
evidence in front of them any
body has the ability to go to
the board or to file a petition
so you could do it independently
or you could do it all walk
through a hearing process in
which the in New Mexico
Environment Department would
would participate the local
board is in Albuquerque and that
is only pertinent to air not
hazardous waste portion of the
of the act or of SBA and they
have their own rulemaking body
in their own stakeholder
process.
So madam chair in New Mexico I
appreciate that information if
there is a problem such as a and
P. foss issue in Clovis.
Before action is taken.
Is there input from the
community of Clovis and the or
the county there.
Before decisions are made as to
how.
Rules regulations will be
implemented to deal with the
some kind of special issue.
Chairman and senator Byrd out
yes absolutely so that there we
have the informal stakeholder
process which we've been going
through for a couple years now
on ozone where we actively seek
input I also have to note that
the board itself is from all
over the state not just in Santa
Fe we have members from San Juan
County in from down south the
NMAA County and that the hearing
will take place it affects an
area of the hearing is obligated
to take place in the area that's
most most effective so if we had
a key for us hearing it's
possible it would be down and
Alamogordo and or in the Clovis
area because.
All right so the question I have
at this time Mr chairman and
Missy lie thank you for your
interest.
Thank you Senator Burt all right
center share.
You're not thank you madam
chair.
So first of all let me start
with this I'm not one of those
offended easily and I know that
there are people out there that
are professionally offended.
Well but I do find that the
extraordinarily offensive that
so many people have spoken up as
a student at the oil and gas
industry has wanton disregard
for the state they live in.
In San Juan County.
We have four generations of of
people that live there they've
lived there for at least four
generations in the oil and gas
business I want to kill anybody.
Pollute their own backyard.
These are people that live
there.
And they are environmentalists
they know what's out there.
The for the industry to pays
most of the bills in the state.
That that is just unbelievably
offensive to me.
Believably offensive did you
think that a New Mexicans want
to destroy New Mexico.
I want to talk a little bit
about science so a few years ago
the science proved that we need
to close down some of our power
plants because of the haze rule
it was decided the spice science
that the haze over San Juan
County needed to be cleaned up.
The problem with that is.
The haze was the haze over the
Grand Canyon I'm sorry the pace
of the Grand Canyon need to be
cleaned up by shutting down
power plants in San Juan County.
But the sciences the wind blows
from the Grand Canyon to San
Juan County not the other way
around so if there's any hazing
came from San Juan from the
Grand Canyon to us but the other
way around.
Around at all.
So much of the science is so
politically washed.
It's meaningless.
If we had okay but politically
what science is a big pile of
stinking bovine scat.
We don't need that.
We don't need that we don't need
to be offended New Mexicans we
don't need to pile on the bovine
scat.
It's not gonna have any of of
fiscal impact okay here's how
the fiscal impacts going to
work.
We've already taken all kinds of
steps to shut down oil and gas
because of undue hatred for for
this product.
Oil and gas is made to the world
cleaner.
Dramatically cleaner in the
places where people actually
live.
It has improved our life
dramatically has it had an
impact on the climate absolutely
everyone of you sitting in a
climate controlled room right
now.
Impact on the climate of where
you're sitting.
Before oil and gas eight we
would be talking like this be we
would have a fire in the middle
of our mud hut.
And we would be believing that
and we would be dying at age
thirty eight to forty two.
That's that's what oil and gas
is done force oil and gas is
made life better and cleaner.
Can we do more absolutely
absolutely one call first came
on coal which saved the forest
because we could burn up cut
down forced to choose far what
would call first came on as a
product there were no emission
controls on it.
So the whole London fog issue
was fog and and cold all those
old movies you know with the
of Scrooge and all that with all
the nasty air in and even Mary
Poppins in the in the chimney
sweeps what was true.
But not today.
We've cleaned most let up today.
We can get things better without
destroying things but we're
we're going right now is we're
sending a message to the
industry that actually pay for
our schools today we don't want
to.
Other industries have similar
problems.
All of those solar panels or
eventually going to have to be
disposed of.
And they all have drugs in them
they're at least is ugly is
leading asbestos work those
fifty years ago.
The difference is we didn't know
that next best as was better
fifty years ago we know the
products in the solar panels are
that.
We know that.
Everything has some impact on
the planet everything the only
way to have the.
Positive positively protecting
health.
It was mentioning here is to
have nothing.
Nothing.
No houses no transportation no
clothes nothing.
But the walls in the coyotes eat
us.
That's the only way to have a
positive impact.
Everything has some impact
everything even your horse has
some impact if that's what you
want to use instead of instead
of an automobile.
This substantial evidence.
That's a good start and I in in
and I applaud senator Candelaria
for for for doing this part of
it.
But I have seen what substantial
evidence really means
substantial evidence means.
Whoever has the power gets makes
reference.
The haze rule is an example.
The Obama administration had the
evidence that the wind blew from
San Juan County to.
The Grand Canyon.
And it might do that one or two
times a decade.
But it almost always blows away
that's what science is and it's
easy to stand outside you have
to have any instruments.
To stand out there and see which
way the wind blows blows from
the west.
So here we are we're gonna make
rules because.
The server straight up because
oil and gas hatred of oil and
gas we heard that several times
by the advocates out here.
But we also had the airforce so
we gonna close them down.
Probably that's a big industry
that goes away Clovis goes way
Alamogordo goes way.
Can we close Kirkland airforce
base can we close Sandia labs.
Can we close Los Alamos they all
have waste.
There's things that we ought to
do to clean those things up and
I and I've I've advocated for
that.
But I also know that substantial
is in the eye of the person
making the rule.
Thank you we go to court sure.
And after three years after the
industry's been destroyed after
they've left in the coral sea
yeah I was okay.
But we've destroyed that
industry in the mean time.
I am I am obviously very
concerned about this.
I think this has a massive
impact a massive impact because
when you destroy the industries
that are currently paying the
bills you destroyed the state
budget you've destroyed schools
you've destroyed Health Care
you've destroyed everything.
That is an impact.
No other bill that we've got
coming through here the last
hundred years has had that much
potential impact on the state
nothing course we have several
of them this year.
All of us in San Juan County.
Clean air and clean water.
The grandfathers.
Of the fathers of my generation
and my children.
Want clean air and clean water
in Farmington.
And I'm just concerned that the
guard rails all the way
appreciate Senator Candelaria is
attempted this the guard rails
or not really there.
Just the fact that we're talking
about this has got oil
companies.
Independent oil companies Marian
oil to oil fuel noticed those
two names are chevron or Exxon
those are people that live in
Farmington.
Their representatives here
they're scared to death.
You're scared that you're out we
know you said.
Did you want to work on this
path of destruction.
Of these industries.
We can add things and I think we
should add things we need to add
new industry.
But this isn't only about oil
and gas.
Every other industry going to
look at to single thank you.
Do we really want to go there.
California's already been there
how many people are leaving
California.
Anybody that can is leaving now
because they've regulated
themselves out of business the
Golden State the state that had
everything.
We've regulated they've
regulated themselves into
destruction.
And we make your life better
there no we've got these
homeless communities all over
the we have a map so that we
know we're not to walk in in San
Francisco it's the poop map
god's sakes.
Before.
Obviously I am a little worked
up about this.
I think every New Mexican out of
the work up about this because I
don't see the balance I've not
been shown the balance I've been
shown that I somehow hate the
environment that I hate whatever
it is what I hate is over
regulation.
What I hate is is is politically
washed science.
And I see that all the time I
see that a lot.
What we need.
It's a little more sanity.
Which means you probably don't
want me under committee but what
we need is some people that
actually can look at the science
and not politically washer.
There's no reason to have
hatred.
For oil gas coal or anything
else.
There is reason to try to make
life better every day.
And I think we've done that
Norma Slee.
With the resources of New Mexico
oil gas and coal particularly.
But we've also done that was all
kinds of other industries.
But then we decided that we
couldn't Madam forced anymore so
now we just brought down because
science they had.
If you cut down a tree you're
you're killing the.
The spotted owl.
That's what it says but the
reality is when when Lincoln
National Forest burned fifty
thousand acres.
There was not a single spotted
Allen at fifty thousand acres.
Because we didn't believe
science we allowed the Romero to
overtake those fifty thousand
acres not damn spotted out
anywhere near there.
All the spotted owls were
literally across the street at
Mescalero.
Because Mescalero manage their
forced and you know what the
spotted owl lives in a tree and
flies down and each roll off the
ground.
With the forced is completely
overgrown the underbrush is so
thick they can't eat the roads
on the ground that's why they
live in Mescalero not in in.
In Lincoln that's another
example of the science causing
problems.
I am not a scientist but I am a
historian.
And we've seen this.
We have seen this even in the
modern world.
We have seen Venezuela a
beautiful rich fantastic
country.
Turning to one of the nastiest
places in South America South
America.
I am good with the idea that New
Mexico should have.
Of the primacy over the federal
government.
What scares me is who has
primacy over us.
And I don't think it's New
Mexicans I think we have
surrendered that to
Californians.
That's why I am opposed this
bill because it's not a pro New
Mexico bill it's a California
bill.
Thank you Senator share
comments yes this the year
you're very passionate about
what you're saying so thank you
for that for expressing that we
have Senator Woods line dancing
you Senator with your you have
your hand up your next.
Thank you madam chairman I leave
my video off I had some trouble
with my audio here.
A meeting or two ago so it
scared me so bad not being able
to talk that I decided to just
maybe you just didn't make the
same we have must be scared to
do that.
So madam chair I.
Got a different take on a little
the staff up
Senator I would ask for a a
chance to speak with your
Mexico expert.
Ms Missy lie about the false.
Very.
Can.
So that we filed against the
OAG.
That serve.
The way I remember it Madam it
was a suit.
To require them to give us
their.
He false.
So to speak from there.
From their discharge waste is is
that rider and mocked will play
the role on that suit that we
filed our it can.
Representative.
Senator can you respond to that
yes.
Chairman and Senator Woods the
the lawsuit was filed my
understanding about two years
ago it was filed under the
hazardous waste Act because that
was that you only tool that we
we had
and and the idea here was to get
them to clean up the source in
in in that it was from fire
retardant that had been used on
site or in and that they were
obligated because they were the
source of the pollution they're
obligated to clean up that that
pollution.
And and let me get this straight
now.
You're telling me that we filed
a suit against them to clean up
their pollution.
Madam chair Senator and and
madam Senator is is that what
the suit was.
Chair and chairman and Senator
was yes that that is correct
we're in litigation so we can't
talk too much about it but then
the idea is you were seeking
claim that we need a tool to get
them to clean it up because of
the impacts to the dairy in the
groundwater.
And what was Senator and and
madam chair and senator and
Sandra if you don't mind me
calling you by your first name.
I I
We had a dollar amount in that
suit and we were suing them for
but the way I remember that we
was trying to get the on.
To give us a count of the false
contamination or at least on
their discharge from their
waste water is was that and more
completely wrong about that.
I'm sorry the question is was it
people in their waste water P.
fast in the drinking water for
people in the groundwater.
Way I understood the suit madam
chair and senator and Sandra we
was trying to get amazed that
we're trying to get to a
knowledge to actually knowledge
that the pharmacist was in their
discharge from their wastewater
we which we wished that was the
first step we were trying to do
was to get them to to to give us
that Beijing.
Right.
Chairwoman and Senate Senator
Woods yes we we did ask them to
do an assessment of the area to
better understand the the
affects the radius of the peace
process we have not got their we
are trying ourselves to
understand the problem and are
taking samples and have in our
offering to do
Our water samples for any well
in that area but we have not
been able to get the federal
government to do that.
That's what I'm getting at madam
chair.
That is the exact answer on
needed.
Thank you for that.
We have not been able to get the
federal government to move off
the back.
Even if we raise our.
Requirements.
It's pretty hard to sue the
federal government.
And.
You may not know that I've been
pretty involved in this deal for
quite awhile as soon as we found
out that the P. false was there.
And of Matt was secretary Kenny.
Many times on this subject and
and I have met with those
landowners I met with Mister
Scott met with all those people.
And our vast.
Secretary Kinney.
What is the mitigation we'll go
to do on that.
And he essentially said we're
going to make the federal
government pleaded not.
And I said well why don't we
clean it up and Garcia the start
on the clean up.
And.
Get the federal government Hey
this and he said they do not Hey
in their careers.
We have to make them clean it up
our our New Mexico will collect.
So when you talk about all of
the great things that the
environmental Department.
Don't make me lead me to believe
that you protecting the citizens
of New Mexico and that one
account.
But because we very well have
the money to start that process
but we're not starting it as I
understand it Mr miss madam
chairman Senator.
And we're not starting that
process because we don't want to
spend money.
Because the federal government
might not pay its.
So it's not about protecting our
citizens.
Just waiting for money.
So when you bring me a bill.
It says we're going to do all of
this fantastic staff.
And we're gonna raise all of our
state.
I have a lot of heart attack.
And I don't I've already preach
much German on the Senate floor
day so I don't want to preach it
again.
But you out I just want you to
know why I am opposed to this
bill.
Because I don't feel like you're
doing what you could do today.
So giving.
Raising the limits.
We don't bad but what we're
doing today so why bother
raising limits so.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity to say month beach
today I would love to see the
the problem taking care of
around Clovis that that is my
district.
Those are my farmers.
I deal with this this talk all
the time I've got a high flying
there.
I know we could clean that water
up that water can be filtered
back chairman that water can be
filtered and clean.
And we could clean it and put it
in that very fact one that we've
been sit put money and for M.
two years Senator how many years
we put water in and that way and
we can take that water out of
that great we could stop that
who openly.
Because we do that too as you
say we are we are monitoring
those wells around that when we
know there's there.
It's out from under that
airforce base under that during
that during his being put out of
business we don't know you know
as far as the standards.
We don't even know what the
standards are the standards are.
We're it's just a pure gas.
We don't know.
This federal government.
There in there that has been
drinking that water for years.
Not only did we we wrote is very
we couldn't put as cal's we
could take is Cassie slaughter
we couldn't use the mail for for
consumption it was it was a
wreck very much lost his whole
world and maybe his wife and
himself.
So.
I do have heartburn.
I will be able to support your
bill today.
As as roosting site similar
committee so madam chair thank
you very much.
You are muted you would for your
comments I don't see anyone else
on the list here
you know for me it's after
listening to all of this and
I've read about this quite a bit
and senator Wirth decided to
sponsor the bill.
You know to not do this to me is
to continue to willingly succumb
to the federal government to the
whims of the federal government
into willingly continue to keep
our hands tied.
To willingly continue to deny
our people here in New Mexico
the right to a clean.
Environment clean water air and
land why would we do that.
To me it's long overdue just to
have the flexibility.
To change our rules if we deem
it necessary to change and
promulgate new rules.
To protect our environment is a
huge opportunity for us to be
able to do an opportunity to
you.
We need to assert our freedom
and our ability also.
To change your rules to
accommodate our unique needs
that we have here in New Mexico
these can only be conducive to a
better cleaner safer environment
for all of this.
You're in the state so I support
this bill and I will ask for a
motion.
We have a motion for this.
The passenger.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
native Brady passed we have a
second.
I would second the motion so Pat
can you put it up for a vote
please.
Yes madam chair.
Senator Burt what no.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
no Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn.
Yes yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods snow Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator knows is that a meeting
his excuse.
So I have six yes for now and
one excuse it doesn't pass.
Thank you work you have a you
NASA will bill thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee thank you.
All right we're going on let's
see what time.
Thank
I think what we're going to be
doing here yes I know it's late
but I'm going to look at the
agenda with the what we have
next year I'm what Mexico ahead
and move on to the next I and I
think we can press the out I
don't know if the chair is going
to be able to return after yes
but I think we will do at least
a couple more items that we
can't so let's move on to on
Senate bill two thirty four this
is watery for home school
students.
And it is Senator Pirtle human
donor senator.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle is
not maintenance with us at the
moment okay thank you very much
I believe that Senator army I
have been waiting for some time
it like to add jump ahead to his
bell.
It's so madam chair I have a
bill and.
Senator Hamblen Senator Diamond
ought that doctor.
Well as well Senator
Representative Gonzalez yes yes
no I don't have a bill I DO.
It
to do in the real they've all
they've all be.
Only no madam chair I don't have
a bill is just joking but maybe
we could here from Senator I'm
your first so he can lead enough
to stay with us well we have a
long here thank and I'm here
Madam chairwoman thank you
senators so whichever way you
decide to go I am here on stand
by.
Thank you very much but I can
you give me just a moment here
just take a little one minute
right the absolute.
I absolutely madam chair in the
New York around one and let
right thank you.
Okay.
Thank you thank you so much for
giving me this this time in the
meantime I have spoken to are
you there can you hear me.
We can hear you Madam chairwoman
thank you so much that I have
spoken to the chair he just that
called and he would like to be
here for some of these bills so
he is now working on capital
outlay is what he what he
mentioned I would like to just
hold off on any of these bills
until tomorrow so I suppose
we're going to do that Senators
and we'll go from there so two
more the new day and we will
proceed unfortunately he can't
come in in in the next half hour
or so.
Thank you very much and right
here thank you for a great
meeting.
Thank you so much yeah I think
they're very with me too and and
all of us thanks for all your
comments and input and we will
proceed tomorrow let me see can
you hold is that you may be on
the other line and if you can
now he's still doing capital he
said well
you would really like to be here
for these bills all just wait
till tomorrow all right thank
you all very much and you have a
duty thank you your members of
the Senate finance committee
thank you good night.
