Afternoon everyone I'm John
Courtney Emma deputy director
over the legislative finance
committee and filling in for
Brendan today with the from DFA
Cynthia Martinez who's filling
in for for Mario and then we
also have associate justice
Michael hill with us and Supreme
Court chief clerk Liz Garcia and
this will be agency code two one
six and your binders.
So Mr chairman members for the
FY twenty four the the
actually sending you want to go
through the secretary here's so
Mr chairman members of the
committee so in with the budget
recommendations the the
executive increases general fund
revenues by two two point six
percent where is the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund by just slightly more by
four and a half percent the
primary difference is increased
compensation the.
Just that minor difference
whether some targeted
compensation
and I think that's.
so other than that Mr chairman
and members the the wrecks are
identical and then of something
to measure mention the special
appropriations both the
executive the LFC.
Socials are the same except the
LFC reckon Clinton additional
one point five million to
address some of the security
concerns identified by the
Supreme Court.
You just go ahead thank you Mr
chairman at first also standing
in for the Chief Justice today
was not able to be here so we're
all kind of expanding and except
for this with Percy are chief
clerk she was and is our chief
clerk and she does a great job
well let me begin by saying I
want to thank the analysts.
For all their hard work that
that sentence but that the full
timers.
I understand they did a very
very competent and a
professional job working with
our staff in in coming up with
the recommendations and and I'll
do want to publicly thank them I
also would like to personally
say hello honored I am to be
here before you again
it's been always a pleasure to
come before you and it's it's
really hopefully be able to
appear here before you and on
behalf of the Chief Justice
representative of the judiciary
of the state of New Mexico with
that hope to give my
presentation below if you have
this budget book would be
referring to that the other look
in New yes thank you structure
first of all if.
I know that some of you or maybe
all of you are familiar with the
budget committee process that
the judiciary engages in to come
up with its unified budget so I
thought I want to go there and
do some fine tuning to that and
I thought I might refresh your
recollection on that process
today to show you how the budget
is that it not for the entire
family for the entire judiciary
but for each and every court in
the state of New Mexico so that
you're familiar with that
process and how it's.
Proved under the leadership of
Chief Justice bacon if you could
turn the page.
Nine of the budget for.
That describes in in outline
form the process of the budget
committee under chairman John
Sanchez needs every.
Month throughout the year and
there are two charter says that
you can will be
they can only cancel a meeting
for exceptional reasons from
March until June.
The point energies thirteen
potential district the metro
court and the court of appeals
in the Supreme Court the with
the budget committee to up home
there
budgets there are priority set
by the supreme court and
consistent with those budget
priorities each and every
quarter pre presents and fine
tunes for budget request and
that six place from March until
June and I might add that part
of that process includes the
magistrate courts because since
consolidation occurred the
magistrate courts are not part
of the District Court so their
needs and their physical needs
and there the salaries that the
judges are all taken into
account during this process this
initial process which takes
place from March until June.
In July the budget committee has
a meeting here in the roundhouse
every court has to come before
the budget committee and defend
its budget in detail and it's a
hearing that takes place over
two days and of the I can I can
assure you the budget committee
this very very closely
scrutinized each university will
budget
I was remiss in not just letting
you know that justice Thompson
is our liaison with the budget
committee we have members of
from a judges from throughout
the state of New Mexico together
with thirty four have been
difficult to for you from the
AOC so they need to and
They have this committee
meetings in July over a period
of two days.
Then after they're done
scrutinizing every single budget
the budget book comes to the
Supreme Court to book about this
big and we have to sit down in a
meeting and go through each and
every quarter budget and I can
assure you we go through it line
by line and we do strike things
that have been approved and
vetted by the budget committee
That that we don't feel are are
appropriate for that we think
should be cut or reduced so that
takes place in August and
September are staffed search
work or the Chief Justice an
artiste or working with LFC and
DFA to finalize the the the
budget process that's being
taken into account the
I think that's very very
innovative you'll see in the
center of the chart
accountability.
And what you just read the
charter.
The committee will conduct and.
Image review regarding the
implementation of the unified
budget this review will include
a detailed assessment of all the
individual courts and judicial
activities
their historical budgetary
performance had previous
requests the performance review
will be provided annually by a
written report to the Supreme
Court The New Mexico judicial
council and the individual
judicial entity on or before
December thirty one so this is a
accountability which the budget
committee takes into account and
perform under under the
leadership of Chief Justice
bacon and it's not only a
qualitative analysis what a
quantitative analysis of all the
budgets and how they're working
with and it's looking back.
I want you to do this with this
money that with this money and
then it's also looking forward
to say well in light of what has
happened in the past what are
the needs for the future and
this includes buildings and
salaries every everything from
top to bottom of each and every
single judicial entity so.
That's a process that that's
going on at the on going I
should say
and the the point want to be
accountable to themselves.
And they want to be accountable
to the public one of the.
Excellent stewards of the
public's money and and that that
take it very very seriously and
so if you turn to page sixteen
and seventeen of the book in
front of you.
That budgetary processes how
this unified budget comes to
the.
It's so.
each chief judge or their
representative comes before you
and and.
Explains for example the first
additional district with their
budget is you know they've
already been.
And revert vetted and so these
numbers are very very real
numbers this is simply an
operating budget that's
presented to you here and if you
look at the bottom right hand
corner.
The operating budget
representative that we're
submitting for for approval six
point four percent which is a
very very modest increase so
with that overall view.
I'd like to talk about a couple
of our budget priorities for
this year the the judiciary
first of all if you turn to page
thirteen twelve thirteen of the
budget for I'd like to discuss
employee salary increases.
as Chief Justice bacon indicated
in her state of the judiciary
address to you.
The employees the line of these
are the backbone.
This year.
They're the ones that you know
the Chief Justice told you about
how many trials were held jury
trials were held committee
hearings were held and all of
the papers that were filed how
the.
Of court proceedings took place
remotely and in person how the
courts never closed during the
entire time of the COVID crises
and how
They put up with a lot of
restrictions added to a lot of
things to keep those doors open
the one of the short of it is
this without the line employees
the point might as well just
close the doors.
I can't handle all the stuff
that they do I don't have the
skills number one and number two
there's just too many things to
do and they're the ones that
keep the course open and
operating dispensing justice to
the people of the state of New
Mexico.
Last year we presented.
To you.
Not necessarily this committee
but we presented to the to the
legislature.
The fact that our judicial
employees are being paid ten
percent less.
Thank comparable employees in
the executive.
And
we requested that that be made
up all of once.
the fiscally responsible maybe
maybe a little bit too
conservative the legislature
gave our employees and the LESC
and the judiciary two percent
raise over and above the raises
that were given to all the other
employees.
So that's really down eight
percent right.
Well guess what we are now North
of the eleven percent less than
what come.
Employees in the executive are
being paid.
And so we're not only going it's
kind of reminds me of judicial
salaries look at these little
increments for the state at the
bottom so
The other thing I learned just
yesterday in fact.
The judiciary.
Is the second highest employer
of women in the state of New
Mexico.
The number one employee
education.
So I would respectfully submit
that those women and their male
counterparts are entitled to get
paid.
At the same Mr counterparts in
the executive as a state will
pay for equal work.
So us today.
The to consider.
Very carefully giving a ten
percent increase all the
employees over and above any
increase that's given to the
executive.
We estimate that that's going to
cost eleven point eight million
dollars.
It's a big.
I understand.
But the need is there it's been
there for a long time
you know every time you lose
somebody to the executive you
lose the we want the train.
that you put into that employee
another off going somewhere
else.
A is that different so that's
that's one of the things that's
one of our number one budget
priorities second.
As you judicial salary increase
I don't want to reiterate
everything that we went through
because we we went through that
last year.
But briefly.
recruiting judges in the state
of New Mexico largely from a
young of professional district
attorneys who have experience
in.
Experts in the criminal law but
no experience in the civil.
And that the Chief Justice made
a point the other day and I
looked it up today you know our
our statutes statute books
thirty volumes.
Senator seventy seven chapters.
In those thirteen point one
chapter.
Of all those seventy seven
chapters finds criminal offense.
Let's in volume six.
So the rest of that.
That's to make the point that
home most of the litigation that
happens most of the business
that happen to Senator not
creating
any John dust have no experience
in these areas the consequences
justice lay the studies cases
and we cannot recruit.
Lawyers are mid career lawyers
that have the civil expertise to
do this necessary.
And so what we're asking is.
In the tier of salaries that the
highest.
For New Mexico Supreme Court the
time to the lowest.
Federal for judicial majesty
that states magistrates judges
and and then the.
The tour goes down excluding
magistrate judges.
What that means is that.
In our book we we presented this
the the future to be two hundred
and five thousand five hundred
twenty eight dollars for a
justice of the Supreme Court and
the state the magistrates just
got a cost of living increase so
that would be really if you were
to go hand in hand raised it to
two ten five oh two.
And
Make sure you have it compares.
Two of the real world the last
real study that was done was in
nineteen.
In in in the where is it here
with my notes.
Twenty here is in twenty
seventeen.
Twenty seventeen.
A partner in a law firm was
making two hundred ten thousand
dollars.
The average sort will
practitioner in the state of New
Mexico was making a hundred
eighty four thousand four
hundred fifty seven dollars.
Today in December last year
twenty twenty two agent and by
the way those figures for two
thousand seventeen those were to
the stand still there making.
In the five years since for six
years since they're making a lot
more but this is the last part
data that we have.
Last year a justice of the
Supreme Court eight hundred
eighty thousand seven hundred
forty eight dollars which is
less than a so the original
practitioner in two thousand
seventeen for making a lot more
than that now.
So our salaries are tied to the
U. S. magistrate judges this
would be the office on the
Supreme Court would earn an act.
Two hundred thirteen thousand
nine hundred and ninety dollars.
Which there's I.
Really important I think is the
District Court judges they're
the ones that sit on the bench
dated dated date hearing these
cases and
in their respective districts
that would bring their salary
two hundred and ninety three
thousand nine hundred twenty
seven dollars.
So again that's a big ask I
understand that
R. us within our budget book is
for
I forget the figure it's
Two hundred and five of the
three point five million dollars
with the difference that with
the phrase that the medicines
that that that would be a short
one point five million dollars.
So.
Tied to that district U. S.
magistrate pay.
I want to speak just for a
moment about judicial
independence.
Judges in making their decisions
can not.
And must not be fearful of
political consequences of their
decisions that they may.
And I'll just give up.
Short simple that's that's in
recent memory.
A case was brought to the
Supreme Court of the art of
funds as to who is going to
decide how to spend that.
For the legislature.
In the supreme court made a
decision but whatever the
decision was or was going to be.
Somebody was going to be
unhappy.
And the potential for
retaliation in those
circumstances is always present.
And to judge can not can not
consistent with their of the
fearful of that so we feel that
time the salaries to the US
magistrate.
Ansys judicial independence
what you working tomorrow
percent the minutes.
And I'll just leave it at that.
By the way it's good I think I
learned yesterday.
Actually I'm looking for.
Overall that provide fighting
over Europe and when he gets so
much this issue.
Does anybody.
Nothing the judiciary that none
of the money.
So it's just a.
I don't know what it is it's
it's an interesting piece of
information I guess.
Settler teleporting.
Well I hope not I hope it is.
Actress that was a very
interesting to me when when.
And I've heard that
The third thing I'd like to
talk.
Issue education services it's on
pages fourteen and fifteen.
It really that tells the entire
story of judicial education so
it's been happening this
judicial education has been
provided out of the university
of New Mexico
with some general funding and
some funding from the university
of New Mexico but that funding
has been woefully inadequate in
the training that's been
provided has been
Judges once a year.
On Friday.
And you're trying to cover all
kinds of information in the
period of a couple of days.
when I became a lawyer we had a
we had thanks books so maybe
number print works for you could
look up
what the to what they're working
with the magistrate judges would
be taught in terms of the W.
line you could look up
appropriation and parole you
could look up probate cases you
could look up for some kinds of
that spoke to the divorce
all of that is gone by the
wayside we have to in we have
to.
Bring judicial education in
house that is the best practices
in the entire United States
additional training and
education of the statutorily
required only for the judges but
for staff and
Tribal this is the way it's been
been provided is just once a
year to this judicial conclave.
For us there to move it out of
there the U. N. M..
So that it would be run out of
the AOC under Mister Patton.
And we're asking for a at two
point two million dollar
recurring fund appropriations so
two hundred fifty thousand
dollar one time costs to fund
the movie from the Chasey to the
The Chasey from you and have to
pay O. C..
In the third are absolutely
color blind so we're put this
book together it doesn't have
the money
the gray area under I mean it is
dark colored area under the gray
on page fourteen those are the
things we liked and I don't want
to waste your time just reading
that but those are very very
important expansions that we
need to do.
I had like to talk a little bit
about.
The nation port fees that those
have a little bit of fiscal
impact all over and we're asking
for a very money for that we get
a ticket.
Traffic tickets you get a.
There's a fine.
There's fines imposed and
there's fees imposed fine is the
punishment.
For what's
breaking the law fees what the.
For started out as a way of
finding certain program that
expanded to another program that
expanded to another program so
we're now funding several
programs through fees imposed
through the match reports on on
largely tickets given to folks
and
It goes without saying that this
is not no way to fund government
operations there's no
legislative oversight nobody has
to come from these up with these
entities that are funded such as
you move the eight years or the
DFA there's there's no oversight
on that it's.
What it does which is going to
be there from here year to year.
And really that this affects
poor folks more than anybody
else they can't pay the fee.
The bench warrant is issued then
there's a hundred dollar
benchmark fee then the AOC has
to go out to provide these folks
we spent over four million
dollars.
We're seeing that.
And if you to forward.
If you're arrested and you don't
have the money can work it off
at the federal minimum wage
rates which rate pays less than
the cost of incarcerating the
push so what we're asking there
is that these fees be eliminated
chanted and I want to make
something very very clear
there's been some
misunderstanding.
We want a one year delay in
implementation of that I heard
some very
Moving testimony the other day
about folks that are helped by
the brain injury Services the.
And.
They will have an opportunity.
To to have a year to come before
the legislature to get there
funding there will not be cut
off there's been and so the the
one year delay would be in July
of twenty twenty four there's
been some misunderstanding
that's fiscal year twenty four
which it's not so that these
folks that are
that that would lose the funding
if these fees go away can have
an opportunity to come before
you get there there funding for
their necessary service.
So with that.
If you go to page at the
beginning.
With the I'm at the beginning of
the book at the end of my
presentation this is the summer.
We're asking.
It says three half million for
judicial salaries it's really
five million one point five
million dollar shortfall.
Nine point eight million dollars
for employee salaries.
Two point one million dollars
for judicial education and then
there's a smaller amount for
because of the nation and you'll
see there are sixteen point nine
percent increase that includes
the base budget increase plus
these additional funds so.
You'll see there the bottom
right hand two point seven
percent this is currently the
judiciary's percent of the
chapters of the general fund so
it's it's.
In certain ways big money in
other ways
a small slice of pie.
So I stand for questions before
I turn it over Garcia to present
to you for your approval the
Supreme Court budget if there's
any questions I'm happy to
provide its with them if not all
have to do for you in the spring
court budgets are already doing
the AOC correct this is in your
court once in the spring court
at the same time that way.
Pretty much covered it the.
Correct he covered a lot of the
entire judiciary's budget but I
would like to address with you
all states is.
Thank you good afternoon
chairman knows vice chair rotary
is a respected members of the
Senate finance committee thank
you for giving senior justice we
heal myself an opportunity to
appear before you in discussed
this reports budget requirements
for fiscal year twenty twenty
fourth every day that I enter
this pin court building in
Mexico justice under the law I
am reminded about the ultimate
responsibility that we have is
court in New Mexico we are to
ensure that the highest level of
justice is there for our
citizens in all cases and
controversies appear before our
Supreme Court.
You know it's of great
importance to New Mexicans and
to Americans our constitutional
system of government.
With separation of powers and
checks and balances cannot
function without adequate and
sufficient resources
you know.
Senior justice be he'll talk
about a lot of our budgetary
needs and compensation
Eighty four percent of our
budget is people.
It's all people.
I have seven people on our staff
in the building commission and
in security that are having to
work two jobs at the Supreme
Court to make ends meet and you
know struggling parents single
parents to put food on the table
on to deal with the cost of
living here in Santa Fe.
they are proud public servants
and they serve the Supreme Court
and they serve the citizens of
New Mexico with the utmost
public servants but we would
request that those
compensation requests are fully
funded.
With respect to the supreme
court's budget is very modest
it's the general fund request of
seven six three point two with
an additional base budget
request five hundred ninety five
thousand it's a two point seven
percent increase from FY twenty
three we've been working with
your staff which is been great
The additional based request is
in three categories one is to
cover increased prices and
building services which is
twenty five thousand dollars due
to inflation hi to cover for
your system and building needs
we're also respectfully
requesting hundred twenty
thousand dollars in the two
hundred category to support the
firing of a law library to
during the COVID we had over
three thousand eight hundred
fifty eight request from the
public for reference assistance
and they do a great job.
by New Mexicans and serving
their needs.
Another category request that we
have is fifty thousand dollars
in additional online library
subscriptions to meet the needs
of the gestures the government
the people of New Mexico in
support of our mission.
I did also want to dress and
thank the committee for the
special funding requests that
have been supported by DFA and
LFC with respect to security at
the Supreme Court it is a very
pressing need to meet the best
practices that have been
recommended by the US department
of homeland security
our Chief Justice testified
before LFC yesterday we're
grateful for the.
Four of the security needs of
spring quarter
It's been requested to.
And we from the capital outlay
committee two point six million
to address your needs we need to
protect our justices we need to
protect our staff and we need to
protect the public that enters
the Supreme Court building it's
very important for us to be able
to here are cases and to do what
we need to do to make sure that
we administer justice.
Again I wanted to thank you for
your support and confidence and
recognizing the very important
work that we do the impact that
we have on New Mexicans of
society in our democracy and the
ability to deliver justice to
our citizens thank you thank
you.
Any questions from committee
members I don't see your hand
raised Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
The presentation I just had a
quick question how does New
Mexico compared to other states
in terms of judicial
compensation use money money
legal the use last year we've
been at the bottom of the barrel
like fifty a Mr chair
patter posed to the bottom of
the page what's happened in the
past was we get percentage small
percentages raises which was
very much appreciate that to to
diminish the importance of these
but other states better give me
their judges raises so that we
just repeating the we're getting
up about salary we speak made it
from off lows in the court of
appeals I think we were very.
So.
Dr Courtney that what it House
Appropriations and whatever that
are analyst is make sure we know
what they did in their hearing
and and House Appropriations.
Sure they did.
Mr Chairman I believe they went
with the courtesy and the LFC
Rick reflects the eight percent
increase for judges and that's
in addition to the five percent
the
would be compensation statewide
and then I'd also point you to
to page sixty four of your
volume one where we note that
the Legislature provided
I believe it was a seventeen
percent increase salary increase
for judges last year.
Dr Courtney up seventeen percent
wasn't for.
Everybody can that give the
total can defer packs are we
went to seventy percent and then
she because of the.
Piece of of that did thank Mr
Chairman
can I ask one more question.
Want to get to get.
I just was curious if other
states tied there rate scales to
the federal magistrate.
This study is done it is he's
done and they're all over the
state.
I don't know are you.
There are states that.
Okay it's not all states that Mr
Chairman okay that there are
some okay and then as far as of
the elimination of fees Mr chair
does that require legislative
change yes I think it's seven
it's.
To.
The one third one thirty.
Thank you Mr thank you let me
ask you one eliminate the fees
right so what's a repercussion
of my child goes and gets a
speeding ticket then doesn't
want to pay and you use your
what's the repercussions now.
To send a message from not speed
what we move.
Gonna get a ticket but they're
not gonna get any a bench
warrant if they don't pay so I
mean what is our toward food and
pay the fine.
The fees are still there but the
yes yes yes so this plant decide
the difference between fines and
fees find is up to this you also
the fines and the and if you
want to raise those funds for
speeding or whatever it is
that's your prerogative but
we're asking that these
different things not being.
Funded by.
These.
That way to run government I
think.
I'm sorry chief just but I think
you did a rolling on fees
verses.
fees verses mines right I think
you did a ruling on that and I
think the Supreme Court back
says that fees are really
actually taxes.
Sounds like the.
Cool I would be remiss I did
look up with the vote was on on
the judicial compensation last
year.
And it passed so.
The house.
Fifty six to thirteen with one
excuse.
And it passed the Senate.
Thirty seven to three.
And I think it's important
County relief remember this
committee voted in favor of it
last year so we're hoping that
you'll change your mind this.
This must must've been the
Sanchez the option the Senate.
Yes.
The other quick thing is.
the problem at the fees is is we
set a structure up so people
become dependent on those fees
right like being brain trauma I
don't know what else fees go to
right.
So if we increase the fines and
offset the fees then we could
just swap those dollars and not
see any different.
We increase the fines equal to
the fees you could do that if
that's what you wanted to
equipment and then we can still
be able to fund those
organizations that request that
money without having budgetary
issues them coming back correct
that may be something you may
want to mention to the sponsor
of the house bill.
That will be looking at.
Because once we get rid of
something never get it back so.
Thank you Mr and I I appreciate
getting heavy rolling that and I
was verses that these.
I think that's it thank you
thank you very much thank you
for your time appreciate IT next
to go a little quicker.
And Dr Courtney did that house
make sure we know what the house
did for the vote so the house
except in the supreme court's
record of LFC rack was only four
point five percent they
requested two point six the LFC
was double of what they
requested and then they went
double five that so they went to
eight over the LFC wreck.
Correct.
That's what I have here I do my
math all double check that Mr
Chairman they requested two
point six LFC requis four point
five House Appropriations just
did it eight so.
Okay at the and then all of
circle back thank yes Mexico.
The state so Mr Chairman we're
on administrative office of the
courts this is agency code to
any
we have AOC director to have
been with us just a few
highlights will point out before
jumping Mr chairman members on
on the twenty four budget
recommendation
the executive reconciliation
often revenue for the agency
five point eight percent
compared with the FY twenty
three OpBud the LFC wrecked
decreases general fund revenue
by one point one of the largest
requested change was a five
point three million reduction to
account for a transfer
responsibilities from AOC to the
office of Family representation
and advocacy offer a
accounting for this transfer the
LFC reckon creases the agency's
general fund revenues by
thirteen point three percent
well the executive increases
general fund by twenty one point
one percent
And then since you want to go
through the programs thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee so for administrative
support both recommendations are
identical for this program
except for the LFC shin that of
course provides the two percent
target compensation for staff.
On statewide Judiciary the
executive recommendation uses
general fund by fifty four point
six percent well the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund by nineteen point six.
In wave magistrate court the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund by nine point six percent.
the executive recommendation
increases general fund by
fourteen point one.
moving on to special court
services both recommendations
decreased general fund revenue
to account for the transfer
for the responsibilities that
are shifting to the new Office
of family representation and
advocacy.
And the LESC recommendation
includes one point six million
for an expansion to centralize
training in AOC well the
executive recommendation
includes two point one for those
purposes.
And I'll pass it on do you want
to discuss the specials sure
just a few highlights in the
special appropriations right
Mr chair the LFC reckon clues to
special appropriations targeted
statewide priorities including
creating role clerkships to
propose promote recruitment of
public attorneys and increased
funding for treatment courts and
pre trial services
the LFC wreck also consolidate
special appropriations and
capital requests made by
district courts and provides
funds for more remote and hybrid
hearings the general fund how
well the executive provides
funding for that purpose through
non general fund that's those
are the highlights Mr chairman
with that I pass it over to RT.
You Mr chairman.
It's a bit of an unusual budget
recommendations from the
executive and LESC because
Senator basically recommends
every single requested the court
made including the SCG and we're
asking for the LFC
recommendations that the US
recommendation is very generous
on the court request and you'll
probably hear from them tomorrow
that they were happy with the
recommendations that
were made both by the executive
and files.
See included at the highest
compensation for employees and
judges
their budget right there the
recommendation of education
that's more sense to us if
you're going to if you're gonna
fund the competition is the
priority that should fund that.
What that means is when the AOC
budget many of our requests are
not recommended by so that's
fine were less of a priority
than the compensation increases
for judges and employees and
also the judicial education
request but there are a few
things I would like to ask that
the committee consider
or I just yesterday that was C.
I mean at sorry House
Appropriations was here last
bill to comes over here we may
be back asking about some of
these things that are not
recommended in the LFC
recommendation which the I was
appropriation committee adopted
the first is a statewide
automation program which we
refer to as a judicial
information division.
I said nine FTEs three were
recommended and three were
covering the recommendation
from.
LFC and in aligns a big number
it's a lot
it would be about another eight
hundred twenty thousand dollars
to add the six that weren't.
Recommend funded we begin that
process to disappear addresses
here was talking about last July
asking for thirteen and our
committee recommended the line
in the spring court about to the
line that I could say the real
important all of you certainly
are aware that the last two
years have transaction
management issue really into
much more of an electronic based
delivery system with regard to
justice as opposed to making
people come to court and and
then having a lot of paper that
just means we rely on technology
more more so I have asked the
the committee on the house
Appropriations to consider
adding those six positions
through the more extremely high
priority and if we don't at
least get those I'll try to come
back and convince you to add
funding for those three at least
which would be about four
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for automation.
In court operations which we
call court operations in the U.
cost magistrates court vision
that so it's funded because we
used to manage the master
question all over do we
transition that group the court
operations we saw
responsibilities with measure
courts and push Association
quest for capital funding for
facilities for magistrates me
sober responsible for all the
facilities
the forty seven in the forty
seven locations we have match
records that relates to the one
requesting court operations and
I would make a priority that I
did yesterday and and what is
the came here unfunded and
that's for the facilities
manager
the legislation for really good
about funding measure projects
so that we can have good
facilities where we have
landlords we need to make sure
they're doing what the contracts
require them to do in terms of
this building function and where
we own that which is brand new
for us we obviously need to do
those services ourselves we will
own the building is being
constructed here in Santa Fe
it's a big a court for us it'll
be the second largest match
record in state and we will only
court and grants and grant
sorry.
Yes.
In Gallup sorry.
Not.
I'm sorry Cibola County
and and we need help in their
ability to manage those I
learned today that that one so
we have travels a state and make
sure that all those facilities
are operating with the supposed
to had over three hundred sixty
hours of comp time Mr just
because you travel so much it's
a outside of the daily the the
work day and that's a lot that's
a lot of work for a little of
the cost to the see this a lot
of work for a person to put in
on the road making sure
facilities are functioning right
so and ask consideration of that
by this committee it's a
hospital to comes over.
Lastly special court services
it's a fourth program you budget
for the AOC and I just want to
talk a little bit about should
exchange and supervised
visitation.
This is a program that arranges
for visitation between parents
and children in situations where
the children in the family the
parents are separated.
And it's a way to maintain the
family relationship.
During a very challenging times
for those families what we've
we've lost three programs in the
last year because we can't pay
that we do this we contractors
to get certified employees who
are capable of handling very
high stress situations and
making sure the children are
safe
and with all that we pay them
probably less than they could
mechanisms and so we're losing
program to lost in the last year
and will miss more we asked for
three hundred twenty one
thousand dollar increase the
recommendation coming from LFC
and that that was adopted in the
rectus as a hundred thousand.
Really would like to get a
little more money this doesn't
state AOC this goes in your
communities so that these
programs can be maintained or
can be brought back if we have
sufficient funding to pay
adequate amounts to our
contract.
With all of that I have to say
that
it was been it's been a pleasure
to work with our analysts and
they have taken great
consideration of all the things
that we found to be a priority
critically the statewide
requested the Chief Justice
mentioned earlier.
If you want to know any more
information about any of the
things I've talked about I have
folks here who can talk about
them or I can answer questions
about the but the chairman told
me not to be too long enough
probably over his clock as it is
so I would ask you to keep in
mind that there are some
priorities at the mission loss
of course and I would I will
probably well depending on house
bill two keys over I may come
back and ask you to.
He's give consideration to a few
things that are really critical
but otherwise I would answer
questions.
Thank you already would you tell
me on the thirteen FTEs which
program that was that's
traditional from the statewide
automation program we have an a
request for nine question nine
new question nine last year how
many were funding last year.
The not sure yes you can tell me
I think it's probably two or
three zero of I got a zero from
my judicial commission folks.
We really need to prioritize
statewide automation and the
need of these folks I could go
through what they are but a lot
of that is beyond me I just know
they keep us running.
So at the request line you got
zero how did you run the program
well you know we have people
doing a lot of work that is
beyond them for example we have
the
program that exchange that
exchange insurance information a
lot of criminal justice agencies
all over the place we have to go
district by district and get
everybody on board district
attorneys public defender jails
law enforcement courts to share
their data in a way that is
accessible to everybody on the
platform thanks a lot of work we
don't have anybody whose job
that is I have two people spend
whatever half time they don't
have trying to sell the program
to our partners because it's got
such great value for everybody
involved when they use it
they're happy with it but
convincing them that we're not
going to.
Something in their data that's
embarrassing or some I don't
know what they're afraid of it
takes a lot of work and we don't
have anybody's actual job that
is we have to request for people
to New.
We have a quest for nine FTEs
yes two of the nine are in there
and then only takes two people
to run it according to what.
There's lots of people for yes
Sir one is for the video network
well as for well anyway again
the cashier Chris Withrow for if
you want to hear but the line
that survived our budget process
are all needed to do things that
yeah we're doing it but it's a
wonder if it gets done actually.
We need people we need more
people to do the more that has
come with the last two years.
This issue at the house brings a
more question from committee
members.
I don't see anybody thank you
for your time okay and up but
it's a time clock.
In order that I think.
I'm sorry about place the let me
let me remind the judiciary
something.
That junior money is out there
but I wonder money addition very
that when they do a unified
budget.
I'm getting notification from
members of the judiciary branch
they're not allowed to lobby the
legislature of money.
And so when you do a unified
budget and then you tell them
you're gonna stick to this
unified budget when we have
junior money out there
he comes pretty you and I've
heard that from.
Two different judicial agencies
that they're not allowed to
lobby legislators for money or
need your money that has to be
done through the unified budget
and once spokespersons so you
may be cutting yourself short
the gentleman that was just here
behind me awhile ago was
probably I think last year gave
all the junior money to the
court systems without a request
so just a word of warning for
sure that were built thank you
very they are allowed to lobby
anybody on junior money within
the unified budget and not
everything that they ask for is
in the house bill two.
That's a good explanation.
They're not tell me that part of
the.
Story.
As quickly as you can.
Thanks Mr chairman so we're not
Agency CO two one five New
Mexico court of appeals joined
by the honorable addition to
judge Jennifer Patrick from the
court of appeals
some quick highlights the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by ten point three
percent well the executive
increases by eight point one
percent the LFC reckon clues
increased comp for judges and
all staff not including the
executive recommendation
Incentives and did you want to
add anything to that thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee so in in way of
special appropriations the
executive recommendation for
includes eighty four thousand
for subscriptions and licensing
fees not included in the LFC
recommendation the LFC
recommendation however funds
audio recording subscriptions
and licensing fees through AOC
on both recommendations include
special appropriations for
technology upgrades and the LESC
recommendation includesd sixty
one point seven thousand as a
special appropriation to
consolidate a capital request
and with that all turn it over
to.
let me ask doctor Courtney
wanted out HSC.
So it I'm told they went LESC on
on all these Mr chairman.
Are you Mr chair members of the
committee again my name is
Jennifer L. Attrep I'm the chief
judge of the court of appeals
I'm joined today by mark
Reynolds are clerk of the court
as well as simple to Fauria our
CFO from AOC I also have with me
I in the gallery judges Yohalem
and Baca I and on behalf of all
ten judges of the court of
appeals I'd really like to thank
you for your time to consider
courts budget presentation I
will be as brief as possible I I
do just want to spend just a
couple moments as reporting that
I've been at the court about
five years and I'm very proud of
the progress that the court has
made over the last five years
after many many years of
judicial tone turnover that I
know many of you have heard
about we have ten wonderful
judges who are dedicated to
serving on our court and for the
last four years according to
appeals has had achieved an
annual disposition rate of over
one hundred percent the court
has reduced its backlog during
this time and is dedicated to
reducing the time it takes to
decide appeals but there's more
work to do at the court of
appeals and Mr chair members of
the committee I come before you
asking for the critical
resources the court needs to
better serve the public so again
and the House Appropriations
Committee they adopted the LFC
recommendation we of course I
support that Senator get a
compensation that was mentioned
by the senior justice in
addition we would respectfully
come before you and whatever the
house bill comes before you ask
that some items that LFC
recommended because it be
included back in appropriations
for the court of appeals I want
to talk about two of those items
the first one is a hundred
twenty five thousand dollars for
a building manager position for
the Albuquerque courthouse this
is not an expansion request it's
an existing FTE the court of
appeals is one of only a handful
of court.
In New Mexico that owns its
courthouse the minister Law
Center is in Albuquerque on the
UNM on campus are right next to
the UNM on campus it's a
beautiful thirty thousand square
foot building and currently we
have no maintenance staff for
that building no when
maintaining that building at
other than mark attempts to do
what he can on the weekends the
building manager position was
previously filled up it became
vacant at the beginning of the
pandemic and it's remained
vacant ever since the simple
reason for this is that our
operational
And being unable to fill this
position has some pretty
predictable and unfortunate
results and I'll just give you
one in recent years the control
panel for our staff and judge
elevator has twice been ruined
due to water leaks if we had a
building manager who is
regularly inspecting the
building it probably could have
been caught and it probably
would have cost just a couple to
a several thousand dollars
instead it ended up costing the
court I tens of thousands of
dollars to fix and so at this
point we just cannot afford not
to have a building manager the
other item that I wanted to
highlight is a a special
request.
The court of appeals request a
one time special appropriation
of eighty four thousand dollars
to pay for computer software
that's designed to convert audio
reported hearings into written
transcripts so proceedings
around the state and trial
courts are all audio recorded or
or nearly all our audio recorded
no written transcript is ever
produce so in that case comes
before us are all the cases come
before us on appeal we end up
having judges law clerks staff
attorneys listening to hours and
hours of audio recording we
really believe that this
software which would produce
written transcripts and we could
read those transcripts words or
some would greatly increase our
efficiency and so we're
requesting for that one time
appropriation to test that
software but so so with that I I
promise I keep it brief and I
stand for questions Mr chair
members of the committee.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam chair chief judge
so when you talk about software
upgrades and things of that
nature are you are you going to
be doing that with the other
entities as well so that we
drive cost efficiencies and one
speaks to the other one K. Munoz
from one level to the other.
At Mr chair and Senator Padilla
that's it that's a wonderful
question I bet that RT could
better answer than I could but
but I will I will say this we
have a number of cases pending
currently in the court of
appeals and so even if this
software is implemented
statewide and are trilobal point
we could still benefit having it
in the court of appeals at least
until all the state courts are
using on a regular basis and we
get those written transcripts
from them Mr chairman thank you
the settlement chief judge and
RT at so I think I got the
answer there the only thing so
yeah please linkages all the way
up and down the line which would
be appropriate and then just a
heads up on you know
cybersecurity and all that stuff
needs to be thought of when
you're gonna be making
acquisitions like this because
that's all part of.
Letting someone the budget other
bad guys into the bad situation
so thank you
you told me you can say try
scenery.
The tri series each to text
recognition.
Senator Gonzales thank you Mr
chairman only have one question
and it reference to the office
by the U. N. M. law.
Does that give you adequate
parking.
Mr chair members of the
committee at that's a fabulous
question I think the short
answer is probably not that I'll
defer to Mister Reynolds on that
question Mr chair and senator
the the short answer is now.
but we take what we can get we
do UNM and the court of appeals
we work very cooperatively
together so it's short for
everybody there is just not us
we think that UNM's been very
fair was given as what they can
we certainly could use more is
often a struggle lower having
hearings
we could use more parking but
we've been able to work with you
and and to to do what we can
there.
well Mr chairman with the
additional property that for the
gala schools.
they have some shuttle services
today and so are you part of
the.
Mr chair and senator that the
short answer is people are
visiting the court appeals could
make use of that the they often
do not fill.
There will.
Thank you very much thank you.
We have any further questions so
thank you for your presentation.
The public defender's Attorney
General is not here today you
sent me it takes the and
something in Albuquerque the
primary impact moral.
On to the.
Hi thank you Mr chairman so we
are now on HSD CO two eight zero
public defender Department
rejoined by chief public
defender of and our.
And a few highlights on the
budget recommendations the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue for the agency by
six point nine percent of the
executive increases by five
percent.
The LFC reckon clued to increase
general fund revenue for staff
and attorney compensation for
contract attorney compensation
The twenty twenty to workload
study conducted for PDD
recommended the agency sharply
increase the number of houses to
attorneys employed by the agency
of fully implementing the
recommendation increase the
number of attorneys by three
hundred seven attorneys which
would be a hundred four percent
increase
at budget initiatives of PED's
reported an agency wide vacancy
rate of eleven point eight
percent up from eight point two
percent
last year the agencies reported
progress on filling those
vacancies since budget
initiatives.
and while the LFC rack supports
increasing staff with in
accordance with the workload
city recommendation
such large FTE growth is
somewhat inconsistent with the
of vacancy rate so the LFC
wrecked prioritize increasing
compensation for staff attorneys
both in house and contract while
making some modest FTE increases
did you have anything to add to.
Mr chairman members of the
committee just to reiterate that
differences are pretty much
between the two recommendations
and I yeah I will take too much
time at all to that.
Presentation.
Thank you thank you very much
all right good to see you need
to you can you can proceed thank
you madam chair members of the
committee my name is Betty brown
chief public defender also with
me today is the chair of our
public defender commission
Thomas clear the third
let me.
Also introduces some of the
other folks that are here to
provide any additional
information that may be
necessary Jennifer Burrell of
who's the deputy chief in charge
of all of our public defender
offices deputy Randy Chavez
who's.
In charge of all of the contract
cancelled around the state
W. sitting Sanchez who is the in
charge for administrative
services division don't council
Adrian Turner
or chief financial officer
Debbie del and our fiscal
director to reset Edwards and
also our training recruitment
director please hold.
we have a great team at the
public defender's office we
appreciate the support that we
had to to but bring folks in to
run this agency
I I I I I will be brief you know
that the public defender's
office is a statewide agency
charged with providing effective
assistance of counsel to people
in New Mexico cues of crimes
they have a constitutional right
to this the legislature pretty
much fully funds all of our
operations and
we find this representation
through both thirteen offices
around the state and through
and.
We have four nine six nine FD
two hundred and thirty three of
those physicians are turning to
we also have
just over a hundred contract
attorneys private attorneys who
to work on a contract with us to
find representation both in
places where we have an office
where there are conflicts for
instance two co defendants or in
many of the rural counties they
are the only representation and
out of the term clear we'll talk
about the contract council more
in a bit what I want to
emphasize is that as
Mr Courtney
that.
Talk about there was a workload
study that workload study was
done and released early last
year the reason we had the
workload study was because of
the intense need for more
attorneys and staff to provide
effective representation there's
litigation that happened in two
thousand sixteen two thousand
seventeen which went to the
state Supreme Court the state
Supreme Court didn't rule but
they basically **** for more
data and in two thousand
seventeen you'll see on pages
eleven and twelve of the
material the legislative finance
committee drafted a letter
asking us to Steven P. Hamlin
general counsel the national
associate for public finance
asking for a work study and you
all gave us seed money basically
fifty thousand dollars to help
fund that work of study we got
the results of that the results
were that we need almost three
times the number of attorneys
based upon calculations done by
public and private attorneys
talking about not just what with
the number of cases we have is
needed to do what lawyers thing
need to be done but another way
to think about this is if your
son daughter niece nephew was it
was charge of something they
might be not guilty they may
have done it but they need help.
How much time would you want an
attorney to spend to represent
them is it so the only one hour
sometimes it attorneys around
the state have to do this or is
it the amount of time that they
need to get to know your son or
daughter to figure out what's
going on in the case with the
facts and Representative and so
we got the workload study back
telling us we have significantly
more in these than than can be
met right now the five year plan
that we developed sets out a way
that with more resources and
ways of finding a way to reduce
season reduce number of cases
coming in we can over five years
get very close to that effective
assistance of counsel and so
despite the pretty generous
recommendations in many ways of
the LFC and at the at the staff
we are here to tell you that we
are asking you because of the
constitutional mandated public
defender's office to give us
more than that we ask for
nineteen percent our needs are
almost three times as much basin
this workload study we
understand we cannot absorb
three times the amount of
resources we can't hire the
people we can't by the computers
we can't rent the space but what
we can do is move very
assertively to fill those
positions and although you you
heard that there are concerns
about vacancy rates we believe
that we can use the additional
monies in person both to provide
and develop new attorneys in New
Mexico through the law school
through training or an outside
the state of New Mexico
And to hire those people new
people as soon as they become
available and so what we want to
do do is a voice crying of
constitutionally based lawsuit
the Yazzie Martinez created in
the education around we don't
want that in the state courts in
the public defender around and
so we are asking for for these
new positions and for the money
to properly fund contract
council
we need to stay competitive with
district attorneys who got
significant raises last year and
with state city and county
agencies which can pay that the
the a lot more than we can
frankly especially in rural
areas where we bring in trained
attorneys and then they go
somewhere else
two so that they can make more
money
and with that I will ask the the
chairman.
Good afternoon of Mr chairman
and madam vice chair of the this
is
the incredible opportunity for
me I've met many of you before.
I joined the public defender
commission in two thousand
fourteen and that year we
submitted a budget request our
budget the time was forty three
million we requested ninety four
million.
Over a hundred percent increase.
And we didn't have data to
support of.
And the the legislature so we're
gonna try to get build you up
every year.
we now have the data to support
but we requested and potentially
more
Our New Mexico report.
Says that we need an additional
six hundred public defender
attorneys we have approximately
three hundred right now we need
additional six hundred so we
have nine.
I will tell this court for the
this body I came before you
first in two thousand and two.
But I was elected as the
chairman of public defender
commission.
And I said I'm really worried
that in five to ten years we're
not gonna have enough
contractors on the contract side
Representative defendants I came
back in two thousand nineteen
felt a little more confident
coming in your for the first
second time and told me the same
thing I told you in two thousand
twenty the same things I was re
elected as the chairman of the
public defender commission right
before the pandemic in the past
two years what will do the same
thing is with the online by
video.
it's stark it's dramatic Sunday
I was watching that wonderful
movie called Apollo thirteen.
And one of my favorite movies
but the line in that movie that
hit home at that that sprite one
most famous lines in history is
when commander level said
Houston we have a problem.
Because their spaceship had
blown up basically this is going
to the middle I'm telling you
right now I said this to the
house appropriations and finance
committee yesterday Santa Fe.
We have a problem.
And I can put it in raw terms.
This department works so hard to
do so much with so little and
they don't want to say they
can't but I am seeing at that is
going to come to a position very
soon and I'm thinking in July
August where we do not have
enough attorneys to represent
the indigent defendants of the
state what do I mean.
We have right now the the
contract counselor representing
most of the rural parts of the
state and complications and for
will county we have ninety it.
in fiscal year two two thousand
nineteen we had a hundred
nineteen.
And we have ninety eight because
a hundred applied in two of them
are suffering from onset
dementia and we didn't feel
comfortable in extending their
contracts are probably gonna get
sued by one of.
In Albuquerque where they're
doing cases where there may be
multiple defendants and and so
the office may represent one
percent and a contract council
yes Representative the other co
defendants
for the past four years before
twenty three fiscal year twenty
three we have sixteen fifteen
and a half having have flowed
fifteen and a half sixteen and
have sixty to have contractors.
In fiscal year twenty twenty
three we get twelve.
And the reality is because of
how low we Hey it is not
attractive for people to come
and try to get these contracts.
Now of Randy Randy Chavis are
director of contract council's
going to show you.
That most of the state I've
shown this before most of the
should state this service by
contract cancelled.
All of the areas in blue only
have contractors who were.
Indigent defendants in the tenth
judicial district which is to
can carry
Rory point and fort Sumner there
are no defense attorneys living
in that district and all.
Prosecutors living in the
district so we're having to
bring people from the outside.
our next screen that I'm gonna
have them show you shows the
rate that we pay and one of the
problems there's there's been a
talk about reverted money last
year because we couldn't hire
enough line attorneys basically
but we couldn't use that money
to enhance our contracts because
that isn't recurring money in
that area.
Right now Randy if you have a.
right now we are paying so
little on these contracts that
nobody wants to do on.
And there's a problem going on
as well that there are new young
attorneys coming into the system
that want to go out with the
contractors.
back in
Then if you look at the contract
rate.
That's per case okay so.
If you're charged with murder
you're going to have a public
defender contractor was going to
be paid fifty four hundred
dollars for your murder
representation.
Fifty four hundred dollars.
On a D. W. well you're getting
three hundred dollars on a first
degree felony were you're
looking at eighteen years in
prison.
You're being paid what is it
seven hundred fifty dollars
that's what they're getting paid
now they get a little bit more
if the case goes to trial or
they have to file a lot of
motions I've been in practice
forty years and three months in
Albuquerque in private practice
was a point out for twenty years
until he passed away in two
thousand two I love in my by
myself since that IT W. I. K.
that I actually did twenty
twenty hours of motions on two
weeks ago I filed two motions
and I I it was their
constitutional issues they have
to be raised they're solid
motions but I spent twenty hours
filing motions on one combined
E. W. I. to Mr violence case
prosecuted by the SLO police
department metro Court
Albuquerque do you really think
any attorney is going to do the
work that they are
constitutionally mandated to do
when they're paid three hundred
dollars.
Well they're doing it on a ball
great right so they get.
Forty cases over a month period
and it adds up but all of these
contractors right now are
experiencing the same problems
with inflation with their staffs
that all of the C. you all of
our own tears I think I'm the
only persons appeared in front
of you today's actually
volunteer I'm not getting paid
to be here I do it because it's
passion much like you all to I
don't have the guts to step up
and run and you do and so I
applaud you for that but I'm
here because this is a passion
to make this better.
In two thousand sixteen fifteen
sixteen we filed we'd sort of
defining cases in Lee County the
Lincoln County.
And it went to the Supreme Court
because we did not have the
manpower to properly represent
these people when it went to the
Supreme Court and they said no
there's not enough data to
support it well now we have that
that in two thousand nineteen
two thousand eighteen we put a
protocol in place K. reviews a
protocol that is now part of the
state rules regulations and my
fear is if we don't get these
rates up.
And get him up to a point the
people want to take these
contracts we are going to be
declining cases and that three
legged stool that you've always
heard about.
The judiciary.
Law enforcement and the DA's
office law enforcement is the
investigative arm DA's office
and the public defender.
The defender is always been
grossly under funded but if we
start declining basis the three
legged stool actually fails and
breaks.
So I'm telling you all of this
today because I see it is such a
problem and I said it was a
problem before but now the storm
clouds aren't over the mountain
they're on the ballot and it's
gonna hit home Senator Gonzales
you're at the legislative
finance committee that I spoke
at in November your remarks
impacted me and I would tell you
about how important it is the
public defenders have the time
to do what they can do to help
stop crime in the state and
helps stop recidivism.
The answer is not putting
everybody in jail I'm gonna tell
the story real quick I had to
clients it was on Martin Luther
king junior's birthday on the
Monday the seventeenth I think
of January and I was in my
office and I got a call from a
woman's daughter but the rest of
the day before for possession of
federal she had a girlfriend or
passed out of the circle K. in
northeast Albuquerque.
daughter have the the straw
hanging out of her mouth they
have the Fenton on their lap and
they were both passed out in
their laps they were both
arrested and charged with felony
possession of fentanyl.
That was your daughter.
Who was an honor student is now
nineteen years twenty years old
hooked on fentanyl who came to
you on Christmas Eve and said
I'm addicted to fentanyl my
girlfriend's addicted to
fentanyl we're gonna get off of
it.
But they haven't found the
strength to get off of the seat
the happen help they need and
now they're sitting in jail
charged with a felony as a
criminal that will mark them for
the rest of their life for their
mom came in to me one of the
girls and so what can you do and
I said she's a rock bottom right
now she's in jail you want me to
help her get off the federal I
said yes she said yesterday.
The next day we went to the
felony first appearance they
released her she came in the
same way on Wednesday and those
two days in jail she spent
withdrawing from fast and all
and being scared to death
because she was in jail she hit
rock bottom right then before
she could get hooked back on the
fentanyl start using again I was
shocked to the DA's office
because I had the time to do
that because she had parents who
have the resources to reach out
to me and on Friday of that week
we had a point with the pre
prosecution diversion director
and she was accepted in the pre
prosecution diversion program in
a felony case was dismissed her
girlfriend's family hired me on
Wednesday and she had the same
result the following Tuesday
Senator Gonzales you said what
is the result of all that a year
later they were drug free for a
year and they finished and
graduated from the pre
prosecution diversion program.
And the update in this what's up
but I'm gonna tell you.
my first client graduated from
UNM from the engineering
department in this in December
and she now is doing doing a
masters in engineering.
Grandfather called me right
before Christmas is that I just
want to tell you I don't have
long to live the was undergoing
chemo with his daughter's
granddaughter got arrested and
he said you gave me back my
daughter.
You gave me back my daughter
what.
So she did the work I just open
the door for.
And he said just want to tell
you how much that meant.
He died on Christmas.
But I realized that's why I'm
here.
We do not give our public
defenders the resources they
need to be able to do what I did
which was to get that group
that.
Those.
You want us that we have been
saying this since two thousand
nineteen and I'm telling you if
there's more resources put into
this into the contract else's
where's the we asked for four
million.
It got cut down to I think.
A little over million I'm not
sure the exact amount but even
if you only have four million to
the contract level with twenty
five cases a year that increases
and I think it's a hundred and
sixty five dollars per case.
But it may make enough of a
difference to those contractors
were thinking about leaving and
they are to stay.
And it may make somebody
although I'm not so sure it's
enough the side they want to
take a contract that's priceless
what when that grandfather
called.
That's priceless.
So I ask you to listen to what
I'm saying I'm not here asking
for a raise for me I'm not
asking for anything other than I
think this can be a way.
That we stop the recidivism that
we put people back in the
society that we get somebody off
of federal and get them
graduated from UNM and now
seeking their masters.
Mr Chairman Madam of vice
chairwoman thank you.
Mr chair if I can very briefly I
also to follow up on the the
kinds of things that would give
us time to do this we have
specials and supplementals one
for recruitment retention for
one point one million to fifty
one for defense complex cases
and the the for the kinds of
cases going to trial now after
COVID we're we're having the
kind of research of things being
set we need expert witnesses and
we need to pay our contractors
to do this and so that kind of
thing is important by the way in
the rest K. there pain the
special prosecutor hundred
twenty five Bucks an hour is my
information which is far more
than than we pay and I think
they're asking for six hundred
thousand I'm not saying that's
inappropriate but that's four
three felony were probably
nobody's going to present and
finally there's a transcription
issue you heard from the court
of appeals we need someone to do
those same sorts of things Mr
thank you.
Let me ask one question for
group members who sets the the
value of the case or the pay
that's that's not since statute
that set by rule by the agency
correct that is correct so why
doesn't the agency increase that
when you run in about a million
three last year why are we
increasing that insane we can
only get so many cases at this
level and the pay level and then
coming asking for a of our
judgment.
In contracts services to cover
those costs what wiring where is
what are you guys not doing
that.
Mr chair at the time for first
of all
A lot of the extra money that
was because of they can seize at
that time in person we were able
to over the either bar into
contracts to pay the contractors
on that money or at times we for
for instance pay double or
triple for somebody to take it
on but we couldn't increase the
rates for the forces you know
for the foreseeable future
necessarily based upon that
because you never know where
you're going to get the next
year.
Well that would've made it
easier for us to make those
adjustments as we move forward
right I'm here to get me to go
players no for a hundred Bucks
an hour right you're not gonna
get a lawyer to drive
Albuquerque for under sixty five
for an eight hour day in that in
that case then that's just
common sense so what what and I
have to go to the bill so you
can kind of be my comments is is
what's to come back and tell us
what what a case where you can
hire somebody for to go to
Gallup and that blue shaded area
in the screen shot and give us a
good basis imagine instead of a
common sense measure shoot in
the dark right here I think
we're all shooting in the dark
about how do we get public
defenders in certain areas
right.
There's no dust in Gallup so you
don't need any public defenders
because of the age are
prosecuting going to the public
defender's to dismiss the cases
right and so you know the story
had better as well as I do but I
mean I want to come back with
common sense number says you
know they're gonna send and
turning to to reserve New Mexico
to that court what is that going
to cost me not for K. how you
come up with that right because
the case is hard and the because
they don't have time time to
handle the case.
To travel time right and then
they had to have time for the
witnesses and it and.
I think a bus driver makes more
than an attorney handling the
case at the public defender's
day so then that's my comments I
want to see a clear cut path and
I don't want to come back and
say oh we need six hundred
attorneys did not six hundred
trainees to hire New Mexico and
and say this is what we can
handle and this is what we need
you to do and give us a clear
cut basically been right and
I'll help you but I want to see
the clear path not exorbitant
number of Missy it's three
hundred fifty out dollars for
this client is turning to go to
Gallup in its plus top travel
time plus this plus that I want
to see that break down so we can
get public defenders are without
just saying here this and if you
guys that the case costs and I
just don't understand why the
agency for this loan has not won
in there and just went under and
then ask for Barth already under
contract and brought that number
up all the way along St just
meandering along saying one
sixty five for K..
So it's a little too folders not
all lessons not only you but.
What a fix so now.
Wait for me and other committees
are etcetera Rodriguez and you
and I can talk later offline on
the bench certainly will and
I've got some responses that
chance.
Thank you thank you very much
for that information you know
it's sobering to say the least
because we know and we've always
heard that attorneys are getting
so little the truly it has to be
by it like you said a passion
because when you look at seven
hundred fifty dollars for a case
is not per hour it's a case and
so many reasons why the case can
take longer than initially
anticipated but these attorneys
to get seven hundred fifty
dollars total and let me add to
that to the choir here this is
gross pay.
They still have to pay taxes and
all the deductions the people
see in their paychecks so who
would be inspired to do that if
not someone who has only passion
does Norma's amount of pro bono
work.
And so it's I I have to then to
I guess a little bit here
expresses before I go on I
usually go on to the members
first to see if there's any
comments before I or any
comments before I go on anyone
here today Senator Steinborn and
then I can continue my.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you all for being here in
public service and Mr chairman I
just want to knowledge you know
your your your passion in
opening your heart today and the
stories were powerful and thank
you for sharing them and and you
know.
It's obvious that you know
where.
Driven to do what you do and and
and
Just thanks for for opening your
heart and condition the stories
today I really appreciate it and
really kind of cut through made
a really good point and
You know it's I guess it's just
not a matter of.
Providing someone attorney it's
also what what how much time
they get what quality of defense
they get there's degrees to that
depending upon how much we Fund
and that's really a really good
point.
So and I would just point out
you know having been legislature
a little bit you know this is
always.
Hey to put it this way because
no disrespect on the steps of
what the hell many of us are but
it is kind of a step child of
the judicial system a little bit
the public defenders and that
they always end up.
I remember previous
administration they were kind of
well the whole Judiciary was
that was this is the street a
little bit that the public
defenders are always kind of the
last laughs to be served and yet
so important so I hope we we
heed the words and dig a little
deeper and and put a little more
funding to help out and and
improve the situation so thank
you Mr thank you thank you have
a Gonzalez next.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you again the place to see you.
Of guess what I would ask is so.
Would you be able to give us
today a number of what it would
for.
On a request for funding.
I'm sorry mentoring center I I
didn't know when the and we
talked about the shortfall.
And what number would work what
request number would work as far
as I knew ask.
So Madam chairman and senator I
I think that in our budget
requests we requested the
initial approximately four
million for contract council and
we can't forget the people that
are working in our thirteen
offices also because besides
contract council you have to
hire a recruit and retain those
other folks so the numbers in
our request
In addition to important for
Contra Council was for thirty
additional attorneys in thirty
court staff
and pay equity approximately the
total about eleven million in
all of those categories.
And then madam chair and senator
just in terms of how we set our
rates I think that you know it's
important to note that the
legislature gives a certain
amount for contract council and
we sort of have to slice and
dice I'm not saying that we like
that but if the challenge is
that we set rates at where we
think they should be and then
spend till the money runs out
I'm not sure the legislature
likes that either so it's in a
tough space we think we should
be able to pay hourly rates but
a number of years ago the
legislature put language in our
budget specifically prohibiting
us from doing that and although
it's been removed we haven't we
don't have the money to pay
market hourly rates.
Thank you Senator.
Chair of.
The some of the very opening
part of of.
If you mentioned Houston we have
a problem.
If if we get to that level.
And you mentioned the
possibility of some litigation.
It's going to be more than
eleven million.
You know so you know I think for
also the committee.
We really need to look at this
really hard.
You know and slides and work
with this and.
We probably will have a further
discussion internally.
But we need we need to fix it us
to mention.
Thank you and thank you again
for being here thanks to thank
you senator thank you for your
responses anyone else on the
committee Senator Steinborn
thank you thank you.
The question madam chair just
for medication the increases for
public employees that we're
considering five seven percent
does that affect the judiciary.
Madam chair and senator yeah we
do our our employees would
receive that additional out I
mention that because we're
talking about two percent pay
increases but in fact I think
what we're talking about a five
percent increases just FYI same
thing to this justice behind you
you know so as we talk about
these I mean I don't we haven't
seen that yet but that's a
that's one thing that just
another quick question is it
more effective for you or.
Really is that apple and oranges
to get money for contract
council for F. T. council.
you madam chair and senator yes.
This green.
You know there's mentoring
center there there is a need I I
hope that our budget request
reflects that for both because
again hiring retaining
especially in rural areas
lawyers most of whom are not
from UNM most of whom were not
from New Mexico we're we are
recruiting nationwide many of
our hires are from Texas of
people who've gone law school in
Texas and Arizona and other
neighboring states from the east
coast from Alaska we are
reaching out to these places to
bring lawyers into
Representative New Mexicans in
our courts and so we frankly we
have to be able to keep up with
prosecutors in the pay some pay
increases they received by your
and I'm not saying they don't
deserve it but this is a
unfortunately again the kind of
competition that we end up being
in
and and for contractors as well
you have to provide to the
market spot where you can bring
people in to to do the work and
we we we we are striving to both
of those categories are at thank
you mentioned.
Thank you senator I think.
For this anyone else on the
committee have any questions or
comments okay let me just ask a
quick question before we go on
Talk is still let's look at the
example of the seven hundred and
fifty dollars per case.
Is this.
Also include travel and lodging
and don't think it does right is
district fifty K. so the person
if a lawyer has to go.
Hundred two hundred miles
whatever it may be for a case
because that's what you have is
which you can find one closer
than that person has to use
their own vehicles.
Their own gas they don't get
reimbursed and they get and then
perhaps the case in the court
cases taking two three days
maybe longer as we know can and
so what happens is they have to
stay overnight which likely
would be the case if it's that
far.
And and on and on I could go
with the expenses here so none
of that is included they get
they get close to zero probably
by the end madam chair it is not
only not enough to cover their
time in while most lawyers think
that they're just to clarify
mileages rate of the the cost of
hotel is is paid by the
department and some of these are
pretty large majority cases but
they're most attorneys that
thing Mr clear can speak to this
don't consider that were there
while and then.
Madam chair if I may
A lot of you know very much.
Very.
I'm an attorney from rid us of
this done so many public
defender contract basis and and
death penalty cases back in the
day.
I was on a committee with him in
Terrel County the twelfth
judicial district and.
They were talking about
reopening and
he told me he said you know.
I filed a motion to appear in
person or virtually in Los
crucis on a on a first degree
case that he's got eleven of
them right now so is being paid
fifty five thousand or sixty
thousand dollars for those
eleven cases.
And the judge denied his motion
to appear virtually for a
docket call which is basically
any put in as motion we're going
to announce ready for trial so
we had to drive for four hours
two hours there in two hours
back a sat there for an hour and
thirty minutes waiting for his
case to be called for thirty
seven second hearing.
And they told me I don't know if
I can do this anymore.
fortunately we've got the
systems in place during this
pandemic.
To do a lot of this virtually
which helps immensely.
But we don't have attorneys we
don't have young enough young
attorneys certainly not from the
state getting into either the
dust have the same problem I
mean and then my guys I'm so
proud of them they're they're
hiring from Harvard for god's
sake they've hired two attorneys
came out of Harvard Law School
to work public defender it's a
new Mexico they're going
everywhere they can to get
people to come in and work here
and the shortages acute it's
real I had a
an attorney down and Alamogordo
any didn't complain he's
contract attorney he did for
felony jury trials.
One on Monday one on Tuesday one
on Wednesday one on Thursday.
And all I could think of was my
god if I'd been the guy on
Thursday he was representing
because I do a jury trial I'm
spent for a week I mean because
everything goes into it here for
four days.
And the just comment they made
on that committee was of this we
signed up for to do this way
enjoys doing.
were burning mouth we're gonna
lose our most of our older than
me and I've been practicing for
forty years and three months and
they're not gonna do it much
longer and you're gonna have no
attorneys to do this we gotta
pay competitively we got a pic
competitively and I think help.
I'm here because I care help
I've never had a contract I've
learned so much and I've since
I've been on this commission and
god god love them but it's
designed to be a please email
and the attorneys and one of
your old compadres Michael
Sanchez's on our commission and
I know how hard Michael works
with his.
I know how much work Michael
doesn't he's not compensated
what should be and you could do
something else but it's his
passion.
It's his passion it's helping
people that need our help
society is judged by how they
treat the least of their
citizens and I will tell you an
indigent criminal defendants is
the least of the citizens in the
state of New Mexico period thank
you madam chair thank you for
that and yeah very true that
it's the poor and the
disadvantaged that we're talking
about here and that's the
saddest part to me is that you
shouldn't be denied.
adequate legal representation
because you're poor
disadvantaged or disabled in
fact he should be the other way
around we should be ready as
public servants to stand up and
do more for these people but I
think this Center Gonzalez's
Points are well taken and you
know senator Munoz he had to
leave but he had a good point
there about.
C. N. if maybe.
Bringing some form of requests
that
this put together for lack of
better words put together
differently in your request for
example you may keep the request
to have but then indicate on
there you know this is how much
it would cost this is how many
cases we four sea based on
history because you don't know
what else may be coming and how
much it would cost for this
particular case more or less do
we know that you can't have it
to the T. but maybe that way.
It can be seen this you know
what it is that you truly need
to perhaps finally fund due to
some adequacy here this is way
long overdue and and you know
it's it's costing an enormous
amount of time from the staff
also when we don't find you
adequately I'm not saying just
your staff I'm talking our staff
because they have to do more in
the analysis and every time you
have to come back for
supplementals or a a special
whatever it may be it takes time
to put all that together and for
us to approve a budget knowing
that this is going to happen in
your not funded adequately for
we're gonna have to see you
again sometime during the year
doesn't seem to me and not only
fair but doesn't make any sense
I'd rather just do what we need
to do and let you continue to do
your work but I know that maybe
others who may want to speak
Senator Burt had something to
say Senator.
Madam chair of the Indian we've
heard a lot about passion today.
Passion is critically important
that's what make sure success.
You can you can live on
virtually nothing.
In the passion about what you
do.
Any will rise up and you'll
probably get paid more.
The right now madam chair.
You can't live on passion.
You can't fund a household you
can't raise kids you can
maintain your automobile on
passion.
We raise judges.
We've raised public the
public safety we've we've done
everything and and as they said
this is the third wheel of this
a third leg of the stool it's
time that we step up and do this
it's the right thing to do if we
don't do especially now on in a
here where we have the funding
to apply this.
And and get folks started
again I think we're actually
foolish not to make sure that if
if you will come back with then
with the right number is as the
chairman said but we really go
right now
and we need to do that it needs
to be an H. B. to it needs to be
recurring it needs to be done
correctly.
Because I appreciate the passion
which can live on passion and
the sooner we make that decision
the better off this department's
going to be.
And the higher quality we will
see in the passion why is these
folks to a level that we need to
be able to have to compensate
for the other two legs of the
stool thank you madam chair.
Senator anyone else here.
All right well we're gonna stop
here in thank the staff our
staff your staff and of course
India very much chairman for you
work all year no worries Senator
Padilla wants to say it so we
want to take a moment here thank
you madam chair so of when you
showed us the the the
the central on the cost per case
when the last time the maybe set
up if I missed it when was the
last time that was suggested.
If I could just W. for madam
chair and senator and deputy.
This.
The last time that we change to
the streets the last the last
time the patriots with changes
in two thousand sixteen.
They were rated five fifty
dollars a basis or yeah I I I I
we literally kind of gas to tier
one when you display that
earlier look into the two
hundred fifty Bucks you're
looking at thirty six hours to
defend me for murder is that
what I'm.
Say my rate is at a fifty
dollars an hour that that's
really a powerful chart there
and I really appreciate you
showing that to us and just to
clear thank you for all the work
that you do I sent the text over
our good buddy Michael Sanchez
and told me get him some kudos
today so thank you.
Senator thank you very much
chairman everyone here today the
justices and please thank you so
much for for being here and I
remember let's hearing all that
you had to say during the LFC
meetings and so thank you again
for presenting.
Yes yes Senator.
This.
Not on this topic but I just
wanted to let the members know
the loss or not here this
morning we had some really good
hand outs and this is on the
water park.
So you know make sure that the
staff had and there for you.
Thank you yes thank you and now
let me work on the agenda we
have the crime and public safety
agenda item and I've been.
Total of our chair that we will
be rescheduling this he
mentioned so I hope I don't know
if you've got notice on this but
we will be rescheduling you I
don't know if he has intent to
put it on the agenda immediately
for the next time we'll be
talking to let you know thank
