I don't know etcetera etcetera
and.
If you can hear us text me so
that way I know you're on the.
Do.
So yes you should be inside
right you're supposed to bring
the four.
Funds.
Start.
Okay.
Very good first bill that I have
on your list I believe is the
PRC bills that correct Mr
chairman.
She salaries.
Okay Mister chairman this
you know we restricted the PRC
for constitutional amendment a
couple years ago the only
reference to the salary of PRC
commissioners under the elected
official section and it's
currently ninety thousand
dollars here we try to change
that couple years back when we
tried but is merging with the
change of the governor's salary
if you remember the history that
bill to make it nobody thought
the governor to get a raise and
it also meant that none of the
elected officials gonna raise
we've set up the PRC
commissioners to be
highly qualified people and we
expected to entice people who
would just buy much higher
salaries that ninety thousand
dollars.
The governor when she did the
appointments the final
appointments she said the salary
of a hundred ninety thousand
dollars how she did that I
assume was under the executive
purview with this uses for
cabinet secretaries and so forth
but it is not in statute so this
bill would put in statute the
PRC commissioners would earn a
salary equivalent to a district
judge district judges as you may
know Mr chair intended senators
is there's a provision for them
to change.
There process we're the Supreme
Court justice gets the same
salary as a federal magistrate
judge and then the next level
down gets a percentage of that
next level down his percentage
of that the if everything goes
as well well as we expect.
The PRC I mean the excuse me
the.
The District Court judges should
earn something in the one ninety
five ranges are eco but this
bill in case something doesn't
go right this has a provision to
were the salary will be one
hundred ninety thousand dollars
for the judges provision we do
that by amendment so it forces
they'll get no less than what
they currently were authorized
by the governor and they might
get a slight breeze if this
passes and that would then put
in statute where they would get
a hundred and ninety five is
thousand dollars or whatever the
current salary of a district
judges which will change and go
up based on what the feds do
with their judges so it
stabilizes it we don't have to
come back every few years and
change the salary just puts it
into a formula and takes care of
keeping the salaries at
reasonably acceptable for PRC
commission that we would like to
have making those decisions
that's the gist of the bill and
I'll stand for questions.
Of this for students for.
Opposition.
Question from committee members.
One question
why do we try to District Court
judges.
Just to get it in the proper
range.
That but I knew that the new
formula would put that nominal
one ninety S. range and that's
the essentially the Rangers the
governor saw that is the same
number so it was a it's a number
that's stable District Court and
and these guys sit in judgment
so it's not a far fetched
concept that the would be tied
to some kind of a judge over.
my melley issue is if we have
another judge rate increase
right that's coming to go to the
federal judges but if if happens
like last year she vetoed the
bill then these guys would be a
lower salary that sister
cautionary tale that we better
make sure which is why the
amendments is one ninety fourth
for.
In case things don't go well our
line item such kind of things we
have a motion for two passed by
Senator share second by Senator
Padilla any objection to the
past most.
CNN.
Thank you Mr chairman your bill
ahead with Senator Campos if
you'd like to join me.
And it is a free friction pulls
tackle boxes or anything.
Sure.
Mr chairman.
Are you if you're ready already
thank you Mr Mr chairman this is
a place.
Senator Hemphill can you hear
us.
You have to tell us just
because.
Thank you Mr chairman Mister
chairman Senator Campos and I
have part carrying a bill that
would change the license phase
of the game and fish of pretty
much across the board it's not a
straight percent but they're all
listed in the bill of what that
would be there's not been a
raising fees for fifteen
eighteen years something like
that of.
As many of you may know the game
and fish department does not get
general fund dollars operate
strictly is an enterprise
operational other revenues for
salaries and new trucks and
whatever they need to have a
comes out of the license key
number and we still require them
to raise salaries every time we
have a salary raise they have to
pay more insurance costs and so
forth with that short intro of
turn it over to my co sponsor
Senator Campos I thank you very
much Mr chairman members of the
Senate finance committee is
right to be with you today to
present this bill about
seventeen years ago we
had our our last to increase
when it came to the to the fees
a few things that have happened
since then we continue to grow
if you will a for a clean
environment to continue to work
with so many species as we move
forward and so with the
resources that would be
generated by this particular
measure we anticipate that would
be able to continue with the
services that are provided if
you will but this particular
department one thing that I
would bring up is that with the
supplemental nutrition
assistance program or snap what
was done in the last committee
basically they struck
eliminating the of family
members of those in the program
is included in the original bill
so by striking that it does
still state that those
are disqualified for staff will
continue to go ahead and receive
a twenty five percent discount
on the license fees for
residents of participating in a
program but just in closing a
couple of things in terms of the
services that are continued to
be provided here in New Mexico
and I know we're gonna be
deferring to to our expert we
continue to see the additional
growth and people definitely
share an interest in terms of
Gaiman Fisher if you will the
wildlife.
for the state and so with that
Mr chair of course of were
available for questions but if I
may I'd like to differ also to
are extremely limited if I'm
self and maybe possibly make a
few statements as well.
Mr chairman senators.
I'm I like to start by thanking
senator bill Campos for a
recognized the critical need for
fee increase
and for the the committee for
hearing us today
as I said you know we haven't
had an increase since two
thousand six we are an
enterprise agency this is the
only
Current consistent in perpetuity
kind of funding source available
for wildlife conservation in New
Mexico we funds everything from
dealer dear to heal monsters and
try to pinyon Jay so we think
what we've done is try to align
all of our fees with those
across the west so for residents
it it ends up being about an
average increase of seven
dollars and eighty one cents
left eleven of the twenty seven
license types unchanged and the
maximum increase for resident
would be twenty five dollars.
Non resident average increases
eighty dollars and forty five
cents six of the twenty license
types around change in the
maximum increase of twenty five
dollars.
That snapped discount that
Senator Campos mentioned is a
twenty five percent discount off
of the license types and the way
the HSD database works that we
would be referencing against is
this everybody that's in a
family essentially so if you the
mom or dad goes and signs up
they have to sign up each
individual in the family so each
individual not group would be
eligible for that discount.
So we believe that this will
give us about ten years down the
line at least in terms of
needing another fee increase so
we wouldn't be before you again
with this question hopefully.
And then I guess it's also
important to note that it
doesn't change any of the
military discounts that we have
in statute this is just about
the license fees.
With that Mr Chairman would
stand for questions.
We'll go to the audience anybody
in support.
One just one of the talk at the
galaxy signaling Christopher
Quinn stands a first.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee carrier Maryland
second director and registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
council about fighters and
guides we stand in strong
support of this bill like
Senator Campos said the
department came a fish has not
received a license fee increase
in over seventeen years so they
definitely have a legitimately
need for the money and we
appreciate that the department
and the Sanchez invited us to
participate in the in the
drafting of this bill and we
were able to negotiate the
license fee increase to the non
resident hunters and anglers and
that license fee increase does
remain within the average of of
our surrounding states license
be costs and also across the
west and that was what we
requested and so we are in
support and I think all of these
other hunting and fishing
organizations I should name them
Mexico wildlife federation trout
unlimited I think the Audubon
society is also standing in
support thank you Mr chair.
Anybody on zoom in support or
opposition.
First.
It seems that the one person can
see what they say.
Hello.
Mr chair and.
The committee members my name is
Kevin Bixby.
I am the executive director of
the nonprofit wildlife for all
in Los crucis.
we stand in opposition to the SP
two fifty four.
Not because.
We.
Disagree with the need to raise
licensed to be used we
understand that.
That is overdue.
but because the department of
game fish currently.
has an outdated mission and
management authority in statute.
and currently lacks the
authority to protect all of New
Mexico species as a public trust
for the benefit of all New
Mexicans.
So we would oppose any increase
in the ice these that is not
also combined with modernizing
the agency's mission and
broadening its authority to
protect all wildlife in the
state of New Mexico.
And there is in fact a bill to
do that it's H. P. four eighty
six
remind you were on this bill and
and so.
Yes.
There is an alternative to this
bill is my point so with that
all thank you thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator.
Rodriguez first and then Senator
thank you senator Mr chair yes
thank you very much good
afternoon senator Neville
Senator Campos and of course our
cabinet secretaries loan here
when I visited about this a few
days ago thank you it was quick
but I got some information to
refresh my memory again as I'm
looking at the bill here the
average increase for a license I
think you mentioned would be
maybe like seven dollars on an
average explained that to me
again because I'm trying to
break it down here and I can't
seem to be able to.
Mr chairman Senator we have
twenty seven license types
eleven of those remain unchanged
so that average of all of those
changes is seven dollars and
eighty one cents for you know
one license might be ten dollars
another one might be I but on
average across all the license
types the seven dollar an eighty
one cent increase I think that's
a little bit different than what
might be in the FIR just because
I think that we didn't include
the trapper dealer fees
I think that was an oversight on
our part but they remained
unchanged they remain unchanged
in the bill.
See okay that's what the
discrepancy is there and
potentially with some of the
that to route stamps and that
kind of thing I see okay and I
on your resident deer for
example I see a twenty almost a
twenty dollar increase on that
for that license is some page
two of the bill it that remained
or is it different now because I
know sometimes just get amended
and I didn't find it in one of
the amendments is that really
going to be almost twenty dollar
increase.
Mr chairman and chairman Senator
we have not changed any of the
dollar values just the only
amendment that's been
maintenance to the snap discount
clarify that it was the
individuals that are listed.
Thanks.
So that this is accurate and
that that the resident deer
licenses gonna go up about
nineteen dollars from twenty
from thirty one dollars to give
me a Seth yet thirty one to
fifty so it be approximately
that okay all right and but I
see the rest room up mostly on
an average like ten dollars in
the increase so I.
just trying to figure out you
know I did express this to you
when we talk to you know about
about the fact that you know in
the year when we've got so much
Revenue an influx of revenue
coming in and you know.
The to increase fees when in
fact we very well may have been
able to to do it otherwise
through funding coming into the
state revenues but I understand
your position and I do
understand how we haven't funded
this at all since two thousand
six you haven't had an increase
so you know that that makes a
little sense of because you're
an enterprise fund pretty much
you don't have any other way to
to develop and build up the the
coffers I just don't want to
feel uncomfortable saying that
we would increase the fees to
all at once you know what I'm
saying we should have done it
may be more gradual but it is
what it is and and here we are
today
Mr chairman I'll look at this
I'm going and will proceed thank
you Mr chair thank you Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
it's all for sponsors for being
here good to see director Sloan.
Is that correct you're not
increased any fees since two
thousand six on any hunting or
fishing licenses.
And in over seventeen years Mr
Chairman Senator.
There have been some individual
increases and some in fact
individual decreases after the
two thousand six increase I
believe cow elk reduced.
We have had some minor
individual ones increased but
overall an overall increase
resulting in a significant
change in revenue hasn't
occurred since two thousand six
thank you director thank you Mr
chair I I find these fees
increase to be quite reasonable
in my opinion to propose for
fishing license you're proposing
thirty five it's currently
twenty five up in in the last
seventeen years I think that
that's are pretty affordable and
I think that the idea that
you're still offering discounts
for for military veterans are
indicated in in conversations
with your department that I'm
supportive of the fee increase
otherwise you're just gonna be
coming to the legislators asking
for it the necessary money I
mean it fuels gone up utilities
have gone up salaries have gone
up and and this committee knows
that better than ever but I was
told today and I'd like you to
clarify that that fee increases
these revenues are revenues that
can and may be used to to for
land acquisition is that
correct.
Mr chair Senator they go into
the game protection fund which
has been used for land
acquisition in the past we don't
currently have any plans to
purchase any land okay so it's
not the intent Mr chair it is
not the department intends for
any reason to raise fees for a
particular plant acquisition
correct absolutely correct thank
you I appreciate the help thank
you yes.
Mr
you Mr thank you Mr go ahead
whenever.
Nine point here thank you Mr
chair and Senators welcome and
director welcome and.
so respectfully I appreciate the
Sanchez and I know you you all
do a lot of great work in I
can't support the bill today and
I'll just kind outlined my
reasons why
to be.
To be candid you know I I read
today a report from the LFC at
twenty twenty evaluation of the
department and here's the
problem.
We continue to have a department
in need of reform
the director will come and
they'll say well I work in
everything from blue jays to
whatever but as the D. F. as the
LFC pointed out we we really get
no transparency as a state as to
what work is being done through
the years money has been shifted
between departments.
in the department resists that
transparency so we're kind of
writing a blank check it's going
into a box really for one
constituency user group.
Of wildlife which is which is
point and I think it's telling
that that the group is here in
the audience today supporting at
and that's great but I think
only maybe fifteen percent of
New Mexicans residents are
registered sports.
it's we continue to have a
department that no wildlife is a
public trust resources once on
the Mexicans and the protection
and management of them is a
vitally important natural
resource for the continuation
of New Mexico's rich environment
so I just want to read to some
issues so number one from the
LFC report.
The the department statutory
mission is to provide an
adequate flexible system for the
protection of game and fish.
And to provide and maintain an
adequate supply of game and fish
within the state of New Mexico
the department is not report on
the wild population levels of
any other species it manages
further game and fish takes
great effort to set of levels
for big game in a way that
sustains herds however
landowners in out of state
hunters not New Mexicans and
public land hunters are the
beneficiaries of department
policies.
These policies directly affect
legislators local constituents
and game and fish could be more
transparent in reporting those
social outcomes the legislators
I say this because.
You know what we're being asked
to do today is to put more money
in the box that we really don't
get any specifics out I know
it's frustrated.
All members on all sides of the
aisle we haven't gotten that
transparency.
One of our speakers madam Mr Mr
Mr chair that there is another
bill that actually would adding
transparency in support the
increase is going to set the
outset I recognize that as an
enterprise agency we need more
funding but we also need to
modernize we need more
transparency with that these
it's really important in my
opinion this chair that these
things happen together it's way
past time I would hope we can
all get behind us I know you
know many in the audience do.
number two no performance
measures reflect gamer fish
populations also from the LFC
report despite this being the
primary mission of the
department between allocating
hunting licenses.
Maintaining threaten endangered
wildlife and prioritizing land
management projects the
department oversees activities
of interest to most if not all
all New Mexicans however basic
metrics like animal populations
in allocation of LFC tax private
landowners issues of interest to
many hunters and
conservationists are not
regularly reported by the.
number three as you all know we
just had a legacy fund I view
this bill is a little bit of
double dipping because we have a
legacy fund that.
For whatever reason.
Only funds.
The propagation again affection
and that bill by itself I think
Mr director to move around the
spin off close to three million
dollars a year to your
department.
So so there is a funding stream
right there and then my
colleague was kind of saying Hey
this is needed here's another
pot of money that we tried to
amend that to include non game
species we were fought on that
instead we we we've just
approved the funding bill
already for three million
dollars to the Department so I'm
a little concerned about the
double dipping Lawrence we
clearly need funding for non
game species it and finally Mr
Travis close by saying there is
another bill that includes the
transparency that includes some
monetization I think that is the
way to go that's what's right by
New Mexico's environment that's
what's right by all users all
citizens of New Mexico and and
so I'm gonna respectfully don't
against the bill the day and
continue the conversation
hopefully we can arrive at a
better place.
So that's all I have Mister
thank you Rodriguez thank you
thank you Mr Chairman just a
quick question here a military
discounts help me understand how
much is that military discount
is a percentage this like ten
percent twenty percent.
Shares Senator yes it's I
believe it's a fifty percent
discount fifteen or fifty fifty
percent discount Montoya doesn't
matter where you served or how
long you've served whether you'd
you'd have to be retired you can
be active or not active you
still get fifty percent off of
your of any of these licenses of
this sixteen that you're
increasing fees for it the if
you did it would be fifty
percent just want to make sure
we have any loopholes in here
okay.
All right.
So if I want to go Mr chairman I
need to get to this if we're
gonna if I want to go fishing
not that I do okay but if I
wanna go Fishin I go for a
license I would pay thirty five
dollars instead of twenty five
but I Montoya semis I pay half
not the not the thirty five.
Senator that's correct okay all
right okay.
Thank you thank you very much
with so I have to thank you so
Rodriguez so get your fishing
rod for Christmas no no I do
well the
best fish no I'm just joking I
don't feel.
Other questions from committee
members have a motion.
Motion for do we have a motion
for deep bass Center went second
by Senator share let's call the
roll since everybody was kind
energetic about.
Senator Hemphill you're on zoom.
you gonna vote on this we need
to have a voice voters figure
that out so going to call the
roll.
Yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes it might explain a
vote.
Chairman yes yes.
Three six thank you thank you I
just want to mention that I.
Want to be open minded to what
you're doing and I understand
your position on that I'm gonna
take a serious look at it before
we get to the floor and maybe
even I can visit a little more
on this thank you thank you
senator also and Senator Campos
thank you you may want to get
her efficient full.
C. work.
Thank.
Thank you Mr rose.
Chairman and thank you for the
time today as well
we present to you Senate bill
two fifty.
Senate bill two fifty does one
simple thing it creates parity
of survivor benefits between New
Mexico peace officers in New
Mexico firefighters.
New Mexico firefighters are
currently at the two hundred and
fifty death benefit
police officers and a one
million dollar benefit we're
asking to raise these guys up to
the same level as the peace
officers and so that is the
purpose of the bill with me
today is a State Farm Marshall
rainy of Barella and captain
from Bernalillo David Lujan as
my expert witnesses and they can
answer any question you may have
about this if not we'll figure
it out.
And I am standing for questions
careful what you ask for some.
I want to add anything.
Mr chair
Senators of finance committee it
is one thank you all very much
for allowing me to be here and I
speak on behalf of this bill
Sorry it's kind of a rarity that
I do these things.
I'm a captain paramedic rescue
specialists with Bernalillo
county fire department.
I'm here today to request
support for this bill which will
help ensure the families of
firefighters receive the same
benefit of their counterparts in
law enforcement the brothers and
sisters families receive from
the state in the event of a line
of duty death.
unfortunately for our department
we lost one of our own on July
sixteenth twenty twenty two.
In a tragic helicopter crash
lieutenant paramedic rescue
specialist Matthew king died
with three other of our law
enforcement brothers while
working to protect northern New
Mexico the community from the
wildfires.
it's just unfortunate event that
happened and
Our our brother lieutenant
Matthew king did receive the
same compensation as the other
three crewmen that we're all on
that to.
On that helicopter yes all four
of them we're doing this
supporting the same mission.
And you can see that the bitter
bit of irony associated with
that just because of current
state statues that are in place
so I'm looking for support from
the finance committee here to
remedy that that to where we
came parity with our our
brothers and sisters in law
enforcement as well as we all
are supporting the state mission
of public safety once again I
just want to thank you all very
much for your time and allowing
me to speak on behalf of this
bill I could stand for any
question that you may have thank
you we're gonna go to the
audience anybody in support.
AJ you wanna.
Here we have to go up to Mike.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee agent for the
agency public that senator Byrd
and the experts explain the bill
perfectly this does bring parity
with what you all did last year
and house bill sixty eight in
July one effective date is the
same effective date of house
bill sixty eight so please so
far will be the same thank you
Mr.
Anybody on zoom.
Or.
Anybody in opposition.
Questions from committee
members.
Moving to pass the second.
Motion for two passed by
Senator.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Munoz.
Mr chairman and members the
committee thank you so very much
we appreciate it thank you
senator Senator thank you.
Thank you.
Sure those three do passes in a
row I move to table for chair
facilities Santo should be
joining she said that she trusts
locked in so she's going to be
my expert witness Mr Chairman
and before you I have Senate
bill seventy which is the unit
fund bill this is an
appropriation bill for six
hundred thousand dollars to
provide technical support and
project management for our local
**** to assist with application
and managing
of our water projects as they
get funded out of the unit funds
so this would go to just find
some like an FTP for four years
for our southwest hog to provide
the additional capacity that
they need in order to expedite
the funding for water projects
directly out of the unit fund
which was created from then
Arizona water settlement act
from two thousand and four
currently there hello about a
hundred million dollars of
funding capacity and believe
there's a little over twenty
million dollars that the federal
government still owes us for
that fund and currently there's
about eighty six point five
million dollars in their and
with that Mr chairman I'd like
to turn it over to my expert
witness if she'd like to say a
few words.
Senator Hemphill
the only ones we have destroyed
just percent and Emily walls
want to see your last name all
wells thank you very much.
Chairman Clarke of it's so which
one do you want us to let in.
I believe Emily court conviction
is Priscilla Lusaka.
Whatever is.
The.
Mr Chairman I'm I'm fading
quickly.
After being on the for service.
Can you hear me and she's
absolutely right hi where do all
I wear dual roles.
So thank you again Mr chair and
members of the committee and
senator helpful for this
opportunity I I do want to share
with you that just today this is
just an indicator how much need
there is out there is that today
we had and the second meeting
with thirty eight seconds and I
got to tell you that I am one
person just working with the
Gregg county is fake is and how
much need they have in trying to
meet the state requirements on
a.
Under governor's executive order
from filling out paperwork to
complying with open meetings
resolutions and etcetera so.
Just to let you all know I I
have been working with these are
public call subdivisions of the
state for our work thirty five
years this is what I enjoy doing
and I want to continue to be
able to have hold my communities
most especially when I know that
we have funds that could help
fund some of these bigger
projects in our communities and
so the first thing that comes to
mind for me is that we have to
give them compliant with some of
the state requirements and so
right now I am the executive
director I cover the counties
accounting grant each other
although not I am also the
individual who represents the
region on the water transport
and so my goal is really to take
advantage of these dollars and
not only management but able to
leverage at least twice the
amount so my goal is to really
bring my region up to a level of
service to meet the state
requirements and be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you anybody in the
audience in support.
State engineers of twenty one
ago.
And you walk so far over here
with that.
The catch my breath Mr chairman
members the committee my name is
Tony to re of a registered
lobbyist for Freeport wraparound
the largest
employer and so close to Mexico
why is a copper guy up your
support of this bill let me give
you an exact example of how
critical the Kaghan Priscilla
use to Grant County in the work
that she does down there
currently for the last years
maybe a little bit over here
Freeport has been working with a
**** all the mining more stone
and and Grant County
two on a water project and and
basically the concept is that
well to to tie all the those
communities together in a a
water source so that they have
always a back up for their water
wrote down there we've also
donated the we've donated the
about four hundred acre feet of
water to the communities there
already to to make that happen
was also.
donated a million Bucks to fix
up their wastewater treatment
plant some and an adjacent to
that it's all based on
sustainability and economic
development they've donated
already supplied for those
locations that are down there
seven settle that our biggest
problem is following the money
is and be in compliance and the
bureaucracy involved would do
get into it to this type of
projects it will be for the
Priscilla's of the world because
she is a one person show limit
to it down there I don't know
what we were would be so the
frustrations that we have
Purcell left you know keeps is
on the line and does it all
through her talk
the organization there so we
stayed in full support of the we
can do to open up the the unit
fund to push those projects
forward which will be of immense
for the region and other we
could get the state to the
finish line and we're far away
but Priscilla is a key component
to that so we stand in full
support of this.
Thanks to the.
Good morning or good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee hope you can hear me I
we're in this to so you're all
safe because I got that could
last week
Mr chairman of the Interstate
Stream Commission stands in full
support of this bill we we
administer the New Mexico unit I
and we know there are capability
capacity issues from the
initiation to the endpoints with
projects that have been put in
place even today we think this
bill with the funding that it
entails for the COGCC will help
them with the application
process that's necessary in H.
B. two hundred to the New Mexico
water trust board which is
necessary in order for
recommendations to come to the I
just see and then from us they
get administered through our
Colorado River program manager
with multiple contractors
hopefully on the ground and
those contractors need to know
all the things that twenty
talked about and and that type
of capability capacity doesn't
exist a lot areas we know
Priscilla has it if we can build
on it we'll have more successful
projects in the four county area
under the unified thank you
thank you.
Anybody and zoom in support for.
Or.
Let's hear the opposition real
quickly.
Senator Hemphill is.
Mr chairman of the members of
the committee my name is Howard
Hutchinson I am the chairman of
the San Francisco soil water
conservation district.
I have been engaged in the
process.
That is envisioned and there are
some of water settlements Act.
For around forty years now.
We are running into repeated.
State.
Actions that have impeded
implementing.
Our water projects in the
southwest.
While I am not opposed to the
funding going to the southwest
New Mexico call of there are
some problems that are within
the bill itself.
The bill itself directs the
funding.
To a regional Planning
Commission established pursuant
to the regional planning act.
The regional planning act is
three fifty six dash one through
three fifty six staff nine.
We do not have a regional
Planning Commission that is
organized under the regional
planning at.
The council of governments is
organized under the plan the
district act which is forecast
fifty eight the last one through
four dash fifty eight past six
and that set up the council of
government regions around the
state.
The San Francisco district
recently renewed our membership
in the southwest New Mexico
council of governments and in
reviewing the agreement that we
have with the council of
governments.
We do not vest the council of
governments with the planning
capacity that was anticipated by
this legislation.
And one other problem that may
come up in the future as a
result of enacting this
legislation is that.
Miss Lou several of the
executive director of the of the
council of governments is on the
water trust board and I think
the any action.
Taken by the water trust board
would put her in NMED at.
The problem with with a a
conflict of interest so with
that Mr chairman I won't take up
any of your time but I think the
I think the language really
seriously needs to be fixed in
order to accomplish what we need
to do.
Without taking up of many more
years and trying to figure out
how do we establish a Planning
Commission thank you Mr chairman
thank you questions from
committee members.
Thank you Mr chairman
so I hate to make a the sponsor
talk talk in the morning you
have to but a I just have a
question maybe for you or your
experts Center today home health
which is the six hundred
thousand dollars in the
appropriation is a recurring sum
of money.
At which feels like a lot for
planning purposes how many
employees to the cog employ.
So Mister chairman Mr chairman
and senator on the six hundred
thousand what is not recurring
it we it is there is it's
already in house bill two and it
would be six hundred thousand
over the course of four years.
So it's not six hundred thousand
that would be recurring every
year is that your question in
this that's what Mr chairman yes
center it was Mr chair just
because I read that it was
recurring but as I read closer
it is what it isn't it's
interesting it's actually
contradictory because the six
hundred thousand dollars
appropriation FIR says recurring
which implies that it's for
every year you're saying it's
six hundred thousand over four
years.
Which is which is a different.
F. I. R. yeah so with that being
said that definitely changes my
question because I was going to
ask if.
Two point four million dollars
to my kind of a lot for the CAGR
over four years six hundred
thousand is a different story so
I probably am fine with that let
me just ask this question for
the unit fund for you
Mr chair Senator and for experts
so would this be all the
counties in south western New
Mexico that are basically
legally able to tap into the
unit fund with this funding be
technical assistance to all of
them or any combination of them
for funding.
So Mr chairman and senator
that's correct it would be
technical assistance project
management and coordination for
the counties that are eligible
which includes catching County
Hidalgo County Luna County and
Grant County.
Got it okay thank you very much
I just.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and again I really think the
sponsors for bringing this
forward to for consideration but
but in that as I'm taking a look
at where Center headphone
Senator Diamond Representative
so we're talking about possibly
three counties out of the seven
counties and and maybe one of
the sponsors can help me to
better understand as we deal
with this
what what happens to the other
counties are they part of a to
two separate cards or maybe one
of the call is there is there
tight end again as part of the
the subcommittee on our water
crisis as we deal with it I know
both of the senators are are
very much concerned about how
we're going to be providing if
you will resources to take care
of a lot of our water needs said
throughout the state and they're
doing an excellent job in their
part of the state but again the
concern is how do we involve the
other counties in are they
already involved with possibly
some of the surrounding cogs.
So Mr chairman and senator
Campos thank you for the
question so just to be clear the
unit funds are specific B.
the results of the Arizona water
settlement act and this is
that's a federal legislation
federal piece of legislation
that is specifically for
capturing county Grant County
Hidalgo County and Luna County
so those are the counties the
only counties that are eligible
to use the unit funds for water
projects and the unit fund also
we had the state engineer
looking into whether the unit
funds could be used for
emergency response for flood
response and we they are not so
these are for ongoing water
projects similar to what Tony
Trujillo was mentioning
completing the he the regional
water project drilling wells
maintenance of ditches and as
psyche as that don't necessarily
fall under the emergency I know
it's crisis or emergency
situation does that answer your
question Senator Campos Mister
chairman Senator Hemphill it
does and and that really brings
to light the point that I'm
trying to make as we're dealing
with the Fund availability
throughout the state we're
finding that there are if you
will some of the breaches in
terms of the services that we
can be providing and that's been
a significant issue as we dealt
with the black fire as we
continue to deal with some of
the other travesties that have
occurred in the state so I
really appreciate the reserves
that you all have done to help
to move this forward and so it's
a it's something I'm very
supportive of and again thank
you very much for your due
diligence thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you
I'll take a motion just once I
just want to ask the question
from the the state industry the
gentleman on the zoom said that
the regional planning act
commission it doesn't exist is
that is well this function that
way correctly or not we.
This is actually the first is.
Relates specifically to the
enabling language for the office
and are similar.
We don't have our on.
Well of.
You said.
Mr chair and members of the
finance committee so I will tell
you in my work since I've been
with the council of governments
since nineteen eighty seven I
have to give you a little bit of
history so initially costs were
performed under what we call the
economic development
administration which is federal
is how it became what we call.
The regional Planning Commission
from there and early nineteen
seventies is how we reform in
the region apply not.
And I can tell you if I was not
a legitimate Agency out I would
not be able to receive funds
from the department of finance
and administration based on that
act as well as other funds that
a receipt from the New Mexico
department transportation so in
my career and this is my thirty
fifth year I have been receiving
state funds in this whole
duration and so I have
researched and I did work with
the the analysts to look at the
language of how we were
organized at the state and we
all have a comfort level that we
are considered a regional
planning a district and the
regional planning act as stated
in the state statute so I have
no concerns about whether or not
we can receive these monies as
we are and receive other state
monies to implement programs
thank you for the question thank
you
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chair at the thank
you Senator Hemphill and to
follow up on Senator Campos is
remarks earlier we we do
represent counties in different
costs at least I do I think the
majority of of a Senator have
pills counties do fall within a
Priscilla southwest but but I do
want to say this there's been
multiple times because I was on
this line item which she has
worked outside of the district
boundaries of her own cogs
numerous times and so I would
say that a hundred fifty
thousand dollars to fund that
cog annually to do the work that
they do she brings and you know
ten fold that in federal funds
outside funds so so I think it's
just a testament to the work
that I know that they're doing
their.
I I would hope Mr chairman that
that in in Priscilla knows this
but but the San Francisco's on
water district there is also
doing really good work that they
could visit offline both of them
do really good work in the same
area to to at least get on the
same page as this bill moves
forward to that we're not you
know in a disagreement with
within the same region otherwise
I support the efforts of this
whole heartedly thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you let me just clarify
some so Emily is actually.
Hello okay.
Yes.
To make sure that.
Yeah Mr chair let me just
introduce myself and my name is
Priscilla those federal and I am
the director of the council of
governments my zoom account is
is under Emily's name and so I
was running from an effective
meeting didn't have time to
change the name and here I am so
my apologies for that but please
feel free to reach out to me if
I can be of any assistance in
any way thank you Mr chairman
members will let the state
police know your alias.
The motion from the committee
members some of the motion for
two passed by Senator Padilla
second by Senator Rodriguez any
objection to them of Senator
forget direct call center and
bill.
We're going to roll call so.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz yes.
Yeah would you pass.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Charles.
Present to this senator Charles.
Chairman.
Members of the committee.
Name sailing on the LFC analysts
public schools and with me is
our Debbie director Charles Lee
will be working from this high
level packet here that says
public schools support.
Mr chair if it pleases the
committee I just want to run
through a few highlights from
the HSC substitute.
Start on the first page the HSC
recommendation mostly adopted
the LFC recommendation there are
few major changes on lines eight
and ten the HSD recommendation
increase funding for K. twelve
plus programs and instructional
hour requirements those are
contingent on a bill.
Line sixteen additional funding
from the LFC recommendation
about fourteen point five
million for EA instructional
salaries.
Moving onto line seventy the
agency recommendation reduced
teacher residencies general fund
appropriations but if you turn
to page two.
And go down the line one thirty
seven that was swapped and
replace with nonrecurring public
education reform Fund dollars.
And also highlight line ninety
eight and.
One thirty five the HSD
recommendation increased career
technical education funding from
both the general fund and the
public education reform Fund in
a nonrecurring wait to total
forty million dollars which was
part of the LFC recommendation.
And the HSC recommendation also
included additional
appropriations for security
online one seventy eight they
increase the proportion from
twenty five million to thirty
five million.
The next few pages starting on
page four.
To page twelve are the language
recommendations for your
reference because the HSC
recommendation adopted the LFC
Iraq the changes in language are
highlighted in red taxed happy
to go over any of those if you
have more questions on that and
on your last page page thirteen
this is the probably the biggest
policy question that's been
floating around the public
school recommendations which is
how do we handle extended
learning K. twelve plus and the
eight extended learning time
programs and instructional our
programs that have been flying
around this is a one page that
gives you a side by side
difference on the
recommendations for your
reference the L. E. S. C. U.
bill is house bill one thirty
and the LESC bill is house bill
one ninety four the ball far
sitting in committees at this
time and I turned over Charles
of the as their points to make
on this I just like to point out
Mr Chairman that the how the
budget treats the K. twelve plus
an extended instructional hours
there's a little bit less
funding sitting in the budget
for the overall proposal but
more of it is in the SCG than
what LESC had recommended so
anyone over those lines both of
the house bill two recognizes
and assumes that there would be
a bill to increased
instructional hours to eleven
forty.
The built cost structure assumes
that the K. twelve plus
replacement program the units
Pirmin the weighting factor
would be increased
Two point to two point three
three.
The bill is silent on some of
the other technical things that
will need to be worked out
policy wise the first one is
Whether the instructional time
that you're buying through the
eleven forty can be diverted to
other adult activities for
teacher professional time and
and parent teacher conferences
effectively would be buying as
much instructional time or
whether that is the executive
recommendation
found that that should be in
addition to
the eleven forty hours those
technical
provisions will need to be
worked out in separate
legislation house bill two is
silent on that aspect of it.
With that Mr Chairman would be
happy to answer any questions we
go more in depth.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman I'm not going
to get too much into detail
today but
one concern that I have and I
don't know if the public
education department was
notified that we were going to
go through this today but it
would have been nice to have
representation here but maybe Mr
chairman are present.
Talk a little bit about that
have the been directly in
contact with pet in and
particularly the new if you will
secretary designate for for Pat
and I what their thoughts and
ideas are specific to things
like the SCG the additional
hours when we start talking
about the eleven forty and and
within that are we going to
include if you will teacher
training teacher development
within those hours or those
going to go ahead and be
separate and you all bring up
some very good points and I know
there's a lot of work that's
already been done by alias C.
and of course the LFC in in
terms of dealing directly with
this so I have quite a few
questions but I'm not going to
bring them up to date I just
would like to know if pad has
been apprised and the if they're
not here today if there is a
reason why they are they're not
here and then Mr chairman when
we might have if you will the
new
the state secretary designate
brought in thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr Chairman we believe that that
PED's does know what was in
house bill two that came over we
were asked to go through what's
in the bill before you today to
help orient you to some of the
decisions that you might need to
make and I'm sure you'll be
hearing from the executive on
their priorities the executive
recommendation to send the
eleven forty of to be in the
budget so that's been Matt the
executive had a slightly
different proposal for K. twelve
plus but they've publicly stated
that they would work with the
legislature on how to form that
so we feel that there probably
okay with that aspect of it they
did have testimony in the house
advocating that the additional
teacher time come on top of the
eleven forty not at the expense
of it was there public testimony
and that that policy provision
will need to be worked out in
the in the substantive
legislation not necessarily in
house bill to the money's is is
funding all of that in house
bill two and the detail for that
legislation would be contingent
on that legislation being
enacted so along with that Mr
chairman as we start getting
into the categorical
appropriations starting to talk
about transportation.
