Excuse my voice.
Yeah.
We are we are talking about.
Health care benefits.
That we all for.
Our.
Insurance.
Company.
I system here I mean we are self
insured is what I'm trying to
say.
Madam chair and senator you're
you're correct we are we have
operated self insured plan.
Okay.
With operating that plan we have
controls over what cost.
So madam chair what Koster we
controlling by operating our own
plan instead of being in a
And this is where I really lost
because you know Presbyterian
offers a plan track or offer
support in some offer.
Their own plan so chillingly
We're saving money doing this.
Instead of just going to the
market.
And.
Sure me we're saving money doing
this madam chair so madam chair
and see and senator so you're
you're correct that there are a
lot of plans where that they're
fully insured right you go to a
company you purchase the
insurance and you're not on the
hook for any of the cost
overruns typically governments
including state governments
tended to and large employers
tend to offer self insured plans
because the C. savings in that
plan I think you're.
I can I offer specific data
right now to assure you that
that that is the case no I
cannot I think that's something
that the General Services
Department who runs the run the
plan needs to look at you know
going back to our conversation
from before
you know the LFC recommendation
included some
some some funding to conduct an
evaluation of the state personal
system and maybe that's
something that could be looked
as well looks like Mr Slee might
have a COVID you might be able
to reassure you more than I can
Mr chairman Senator the the
