Turn with me to the second page.
Towards the bottom there online.
81 the House appropriations
recommendation brings the
recurring general fund
appropriation for public school
support.
To 4.43 billion online 82.
That's a $253 million increase,
or 6.1% in recurring
appropriations.
And everything below this page
is going to be your non
recurring appropriations
recommendations.
The House appropriations
substitute does about 200
million and non recurring
appropriations. There are few
that I'd like to hit on today
that
The House has essentially
intended for the Senate to try
and fill the gap on
But just to give you one brief
Change that you might want to be
aware of.
If I could turn your attention
back to page one.
The
House appropriations substitute
takes the LFC recommendation
except for lying 27 in which
they added 10 million for
additional educational reforms.
That was the only change to the
recurring recommendation that
the committee adopted all other
language and provision for this
recurring section, uh, remained
the same with the LFC
recommendation.
And if there are any questions
about recurring
Happy to take them now, Mr Chair
if you would like me to continue
This journey and sunny
10 million
That would be considered.
Below the line.
Mr Chair, Everything above line
35 is part of the SCG. Okay,
It's about the line. SCG stuff,
okay?
That's the only question I had
Good morning committee.
The only thing I would note is
that the matches the
LFC recommendation for the
percent average in the 2% Cola.
and then also, I think it was,
uh um welcome addition there to
see the 10 innovation and
flexibility for school.
They need to know because we're
gonna have to clean up. Go
ahead, Mr. Chair. I am. I think
we can move into the narrow
curry and go over those
differences. So, Mr Chair if I
could turn your attention to
page three
The handout. This begins your
section 56 and seven non
recurring appropriations.
The overall recommendation for
Section five General Fund you
can find online 145.
Which was about a 70.
$73 million increase from the
LFC recommendation.
The I could turn your attention
back to line 98 on Page three.
This is where the letter
structure literacy programming
recommendation was and request
the executive request was 30
million for this line, the House
appropriations recommendation
went up to 15 million with the
expectations item.
Another.
Set of items for your attention
on lines, 112 and 113. These are
the supplemental and non
recurring requests for universal
school meals once again to
train.
Reach halfway from the executive
recommendation for these two
appropriations.
Line 120 for educator fellows
once again halfway from from
house appropriations to
The executive request.
And on the next page line, 132.
5 million for summer enrichment
programs.
Online 151. You'll note that the
House appropriations
Recommendation does take CT up
to 40 million, which is flat
with the current year. There was
no need to
Add to that further but online
162 for secondary literacy, the
executive ask was 5.1 Million,
and the House appropriations
recommendation gets halfway to
that With that, Mr Chair. I
think those are the major items
and we will be happy to go over
any specific other ones that I
didn't cover.
The 15 million. There is half.
um, that is one of the things I
would also draw your attention
for the Universal Meals program.
It's about half of what might be
20 Educator Fellows program.
Across the board. Very, very
school districts. Um, um all
areas across the state. It's a
grow your own program into the
communities supporting educator
candidates to be, um
One thing that I will note for
you, Um, the H A F since which
is lined 94, or 90. Several
health might also be warranted.
Um, one of the things and it's
um as well as behavior. Haitian
department the executive
recommended or line 132 to wrap
up that page. That's just on
that page.
That's correct, Mr Chairman, um
that page alone Exactly.
Um And then if you're so
inclined, I would recommend
again. One line 132 the summer
enrichment internships right now
are about $8 million and they've
been very successful Education.
The reach down in terms of
students in high school. Is that
where word
Mr Chairman. Those are the items
there are total, the total
differences can be seen on line
140 Mr. Chair. Yes, You're
right. It's about 60 million
Do you know the number? You can
tell me the number if you know
it.
Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. Yes, Mr Chair
that That is correct. I think
these
Initiatives are the ones that
the department has had more
detail and planning around in
certainly are willing to
champion. Thank you, Chairman
and thank you, Madam Director
and Sunny. Um, I'm just gonna
all of my questions really are
on the bottom of Page three. So
if you were to look at lines,
I'll come to universal school
meals here. Just a moment Lines
1 18 1 2126.
So, uh, preparation fellows and
residencies.
What are the differences in all
three of those? I mean, what?
What? It's always sort of
confused me. Um so I'm going to
describe three.
Programs that are very
successful in their own way.
Program. Evaluation both, um
residencies. Those are the gold
standard. If you will Cadillac
have a teacher in place for It's
like to be a teacher. They're
not on their own. They feel very
supportive. Really good data for
the past 20 or 30 years
nationally around to improve
student outcomes, school climate
Ah, Student achievement data,
the whole gavit, So they're also
very expensive because teacher
residencies offense essentially
a teacher 35,000 model great
data.
Packaging. That's a traditional
model where the candidate is in
place has their people do in
their undergraduate programs.
Last but not least you have
bedfellows and Ed Fellows
program began so it hasn't been
funded yet with state dollars,
and it is also expensive but
essentially was modeled off of
an AmeriCorps type program where
you gather
People in your community go into
the schools, they act as an
educational assistant.
Um and you sweet side, not
necessarily going through an
undergraduate programs. So all
of these are sort of designed to
be Madam director. So they all
have different focuses and okay,
I just, You know, I see more and
more of this, and that's great
descriptions. And so when we
have successful, so are these
all vendors that are providing
these services or is this
something that you do, or I'm
sorry that the p D does.
Mr Chairman, Senator play? Um,
what happens right now? There
are also other programs out
there that are a fantastic that
sort of fill in gaps in terms of
also really afford the and so,
Mr Chairman, when this budget
governor signs and what have you
this is Chairman Senator
Policia, um, itched on but in
line 198, the educator there
first.
Um
That's 60 million right now.
That's in the budget from the
house currently, um, funding and
so it's really that particular
program
Thank you Chair just quickly.
I'm gonna turn two lines 112 and
113. I think you know in this
thing, but a couple of questions
there. What?
With these with what's online,
112 and 113. What is the
recurring amount become now?
Because I'm told that what they
really need is somewhere north
of 40 to 43 mil. What does this
put the recurring It?
So, Mr Chair.
Senator if I could turn your
attention to page two, okay?
Line 69.
This 21 million for universal
school meals is the section for
recurring amounts.
If you look over to the
executive recommendation, your
to the number you're you
referenced the executive was
asking for 43 million in
recurring for this line item.
If you go back to page
Three lines, 112 and 113. The
112 amount is halfway to the
supplemental for this current
fiscal year to get to
The shortfall that's been
projected by the department for
fiscal year. 24.
The bottom line on
The 10 million for 113 is to
supplement the recurring amount
for 25.
As the department starts
developing meal quality
requirements. Both of these
appropriations both find 112 and
113.
If you went to the other half
Of that amount would get to the
full request for universal
school meals that came from the
executive.
Appreciate that Mr Chair and
sunny but so at but at the
moment with this at about 30 of
the 43 Mr Chair, it is at 30
Total for fiscal year. 24. Yes,
So you would need another 10 to
get to the full ask for this
fiscal year, And so, uh, the
governor and I were speaking
this morning that scratch
cooking is probably
Right with you, chair of the
deputy secretary Assistant
secretary is here.
Do you have any
Mm hmm.
So the question system always
read. Assistant Assistant
Secretary. Thank you Apologize.
So is what What? Where are we
with scratch, Mr Chairman. And
and Senator. I'm sorry, I will
have to follow up and find out
from our program. Okay? And I
appreciate that chair. So so we
were going to try to
We're going to implement this
thing in one year and then you
know it made total sense to meet
him.
Very well. We will be in the
second year work. Um I just hope
that you all are funny to to
bear now that they're using
There's a lot of them just got
rid of him, Mr. Chair. Uh, there
have been instances of that. And
then there are new places as
well that are just picking up.
School food, uh, authorities
their districts that did not
have school food authority.
So one of the goals if you're
willing to comment on it is that
you know we create
relationships, Beef fish
chicken.
You know, vegetables and all
that. How's that going?
Mr Chair and and Senator. I know
they have been working hard in
this area. But in terms of, uh,
data. I don't have any prepared
to provide for you at the
moment. But I will follow up.
Appreciate that. Thank you.
Chair and I would love to see
where all this is and one of the
big We put the word healthy in
in the so I had the bill in 17.
And then we updated that the
biography student Bill of Rights
with healthy hunger free student
Bill of rights.
So I just want to know where the
healthy portion is a
Seven ish months into the
implementation and we have a
body here. Thank you. Thanks.
Chair.
Mr Chair, right?
Alright if we could turn our
attention back to page four just
to help you navigate through
lines, 146 and 172. These are
just non recurring
appropriations from the public
Education Reform Fund.
As you note the House
appropriations substitute goes
up by 2 million from the
LFC recommendation, mostly to
cover career technical education
programs on line 151 and to
provide additional funding for
secondary literacy online 162
Last thing I want to touch on on
Page five. Mr Chair is
These are other state funds and
interagency transfers. The House
substitute does not include
funding for the structure,
literacy.
Facility or building which is on
line 185.
And also they reduce the section
nine appropriations which you
see on lines 195 through 199,
also known as grow or gate.
It was originally in the L. C
recommendation to have a four
year pilot for these initiatives
with an evaluation at the end.
The HSC recommendation reduces
it to three years but keeps the
funding for each year the same
so rather than 60 million for
differentials for four years,
15,000,004 3 years
Happy to answer any other
questions about Section nine
appropriations. But without Mr
Chair, I think
That concludes the presentation
on the high level for us, You
know, Sonny
There's a lot of things I think.
Number one rule is you can't
create
I as a chair years ago,
notwithstanding language like
four years ago when I came in
I've heard rumors that the House
committee
Well, the kid to eat lunch.
What is a year?
For creating bills and
parameters.
But I guess you know my main
concern is
P D never gives up their faith
programs and aren't working
right?
They keep the programs that
don't succeed.
Yes.
Can get paid.
I'm not. I'm I'm all for trying
Give up, Give up the failures
that aren't working right
You know, we agreed to the food
program and show the government
that we support them.
$50 million.
Yeah, and Gwen and I and and
Greg were in a meeting and it
wasn't anything in a short
session. This is
Composting questions.
Of the education, Mr Chair, the
Education Fellows program is one
thing.
That's been pretty successful in
the Clover school.
And I'm so far away from
Education.
I don't know.
What new
Silver bullet.
We could bring all things
To help at one time.
I think we need as you say, We
need to concentrate on a lot of
things we're doing successful.
And Yeah, we did We We cheered
the leadership program on
But
Can we just concentrate on
having little trouble digesting
this morning chair?
Thank you.
No, I ain't in those paid.
Really important because then we
then we pay more money.
Loan, something we're gonna have
to deal with in this community,
presenting two bills. I just
work carefully and, uh
Very concerned on the recurring
part.
And we have to work with that
and seen. You know how how it's
going.
But overall, you know, there's a
lot of funding.
Gone from?
23 years ago from the 2.3, was
it
2.3 billion.
And we're at four point
4.4 we
Have to really work with
everyone to understand. You
know, the large recurring part
there.
B.
But
Senator Bradley. Thank you, Mr
Chair. We've heard we've heard
from you and really through the
interim and and especially in in
this session so far, really,
just a couple.
Programs that have proven
success records. I'm writing
this down. We have structured
literacy University News mills.
We have the fellows program.
Summer enrichment, the learning
management system, all of which
we collectively seem to agree.
Those are successful programs
and need to be well funded.
The reality is that other than
that?
And we're looking through pages
and pages of stuff that we've
never even heard of. Look, let
me ask you, Sonny. What is
education is calling media
campaign.
Mr Chairman understanding of
this request from the executive
is essentially a PR campaign to
recruit more teachers to the
state.
Thank you and and it's well,
It's not a lot in the big
Picture. It's almost like death
by 1000 cuts because none of
this is really come before.
Legislators was that presented
in the interim to L. E S c Mr
Chair.
Mr Chair. My understanding is
this came to lfc two weeks
before their hearing in
December, and that was the first
that we had heard about it.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think
that's the point is that
everything else is just a lot of
lot of lot of stuff. But I
appreciate you guys highlighting
again, really the successful
programs that we've heard about
this whole time and recognize
that those need to be funded.
While it's difficult to want to
invest any more in
Other programs We know so little
about statutorily.
And then we do.
Statutory. Yes, Mr Chair. All
agencies are required to submit
their budgets by said yes, Mr
Chair that the department
submitted their
Agency budget on the 1st
September first, but they
submitted public school support,
which is the
Mr Chair. The hearing was on
December 14th 2 weeks
effectively to
If we did that, to
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
maybe you already addressed
this.
On the
Number 114.
On the outdoor question was not
all there a reason that it was
left.
Mr Chair Senator. The
recommendation was not part of
L. E S C and lfc recommendations
but was part of the executive
ask HFC did not add it to their
budget, either.
I think they concern was that
there were so many
To the chair's point requests
coming from the department that
The recommendations chose to
limit the number of
New initiatives and focus on
things that the department had a
lot of evidence to suggest what
Mr recommend Gonzalez.
Mr Chairman.
I'll be real brief, and I've
already stated this before.
Um
Just like about a month and a
half maybe two months ago.
There was a teacher from
Albuquerque Public School.
That took some fifth graders.
Yeah, they were.
Studying the river, studying
everything that with the Rio
Grande
And the interesting point here
was
When he was doing this.
The attendance was 98 to 100%.
And he did this for, like two
weeks.
Then went back to the regular
classroom Attendance dropped to
80%.
And you know, here again, we're
talking about
You know?
Absentee and, you know, working
with
The interest, but
So I don't think we have given
the outdoor a fair shake.
And then yesterday we had
Also
Um through one of our
departments.
Economic development, whether
they're doing the outdoor
recreation
And, uh, in my part, they go
hand in hand. I mean this to
really just
Need to really blend in.
So why would really strongly
consider that we would
reconsider that because we
haven't given it a chance.
You know, and I'll even go
further.
You know, I have been making a
request several individuals
because you and them. Taus wants
to do a project with the
surrounding areas and outdoor.
And I still haven't gotten an
answer.
So I mean, how can you move
forward? You know when, uh
We don't have things really
moving in action.
And so that's my part. But I
really feel we need to and I
think with
A state like ours were just wide
open that you know it's
The imagination station into
Having this component, you know
part of it.
Thank you, sir. Good morning
again. Thank you for all your
work. Truly both our staff
probably have you haven't slept.
I don't think sunny question
here. I don't know if the ped
Secretary Romero is here. You're
here for him. Okay, if you
wanted to add anything before we
move on, you can come up here.
And if you'd like to say
anything? No. Okay. Thank you
very much. Good to see you.
Yes. And thank you for following
already. Um, I don't have myself
any questions specific, but I
can tell you I had looked at
Quite a few just at a glance
budget, but I did look at the
deficiencies.
That you face and there are
quite a few as has been
discussed. Here's um, if not
all, I think I would say all of
them deserve quite a bit of
attention, but there are a few
that are pivotal change quite a
few of them. So we were gonna
We're now getting the we got the
bill and we're analyzing it and
seeing how we can fund those
things where we came out short.
And when we know that it's
absolutely the least thing we
wanna do is short change. Thank
you for all your work, and I
don't have this is nice. Thank
you, Senator Compose. Did you
have anything else to add and
Senator Gonzalez already spoke
Thank you very much, and we will
continue to move forward with
