So I just want to make sure
we're.
The correct hand that out before
we start house bill two and make
sure everybody means that came
at six fifty seven last night.
Thank.
We took public comment yesterday
and house bill two so we'll be
taking public comment today.
we're just.
Question amendment Senator
Campos your copy they're gonna
send one over to.
Thank you and I think it's the
one over you guys get a copy of.
I guess we should all the
universities are aeration make
cuts to.
They have.
How quick can you get a flight
out of New York.
Wait one second they're waiting
for etcetera etcetera the it can
you send me a copy Senator
complex.
Not not coffee Cup the.
All for.
Making sure both of you will.
The copy to the wrong person and
I
am and will be finishing a
motion I was going to make a.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
Mexico better this you know you
just get.
Well early Mr chairman of the
last.
For some of it I thought you
guys so.
For on house bill two there
Steinborn you said you want to
make a motion you read the
emails you've seen.
Three different emails now.
Mr Chairman thank you had to
this one so of the service I've
had conversations with the
executive.
I think it's clear well then the
emails we've gotten that.
The intention is not to spend
all this money Bernalillo
county.
And there's a lot of different
things going on at the end of
this final session here.
So I think we have no I have an
understanding with the with the
executive that I'm comfortable
with such that I don't need to
promulgate is the members this
morning I do believe the issue
needs to be fixed someone else
want to move the amendment I
would vote for it.
I will say this I worked really
hard for the last ten years to
try to grow film industry in my
community the help grow
statewide.
When they did the last revision
the film tax credit I led the
effort to create a roll film tax
incentive which states to do
more film The New Mexico
Louisiana New York have done to
try to reach a communities that
have been uninsured by this
industry.
I'm passionate about Missy you
know that language yesterday
designating this major new
investment the next frontier in
film training being exclusively
once again your towards outlook
County.
well it flew in the face of the
agreement that I've had all
session but also
It's just a.
One of the king that we need to
push back on it and always
require these investments the
statewide so I think the issue
will be fixed so I don't need to
make the amendment.
But
I do think it it needs to be
fixed I do still think if the
running us.
And I'll just leave it at that
it's good that that in the
capitol bill which funds the
other half is project and as I
said yesterday this is not two
separate projects although it's
it's a project that will be I
think spread around.
You know there's a part of money
here explicitly that that is not
packed Bernalillo county so
hopefully this language in house
bill two will also be fix the
online.
That is my hope in something I
think we should all push for but
with that I will not be
introducing an amendment this
morning is to thank you.
Right center dollars.
Thank you for the members of.
I pretty much I have the same
phone call from the executive I.
You know also assuring you know
that would be statewide pretty
much well Senator Steinborn has
mentioned that are just for
everyone you know all this has
already a long history in the
law.
Way back during the time of for
of the late speaker Ben Lujan
and you know we go way back when
we were fighting for the film
industry.
And I remember when we were
looking at our neighboring
states of what our neighboring
states we're doing and how we
were going to be able to keep
intact you know in the region so
you know we have a lot in the
state you know in this you know
and it's always been a you know
to my part you know and
understand the needle the more
we can.
It could lead to a state wide
and I know that for many years
that radius models you know and
night never quite really agreed
with that but you know that's
what it was you know and but
eventually you know well we have
a.
Any parts of the state that
could benefit from this so not
one sure that Mr trump.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
thank you Mr chairman good
morning to staff to everyone and
I also first I want to commend
Senator Steinborn for bringing
this up and discussing it and
find in it and now there could
be a potential discrepancy and
so on and the language
I do recall during the time when
I sponsored the film tax credit
bill a few years ago I think
it's two thousand and nineteen
and it was through Senator
Steinborn I think that's fair to
say because I work directly with
them that the rural communities
including Dona ana county and
others got an additional five
percent tax credit the governor
was very supportive not only the
full state but to it add an
additional five percent so that
we can bring film on to rural
communities and those that are
so underserved and usually don't
get much film productions and so
I know that Senators Mister
chairman Senator Steinborn you
have been working very hard on
this and and that along with the
governor and so I I also got a
call last night and it's very
clear that the governor's intent
is to to spread this this
funding around the state it was
never intended to have it just
in Bernalillo the the main film
building academy will be
Bernalillo but everything
there's tops throughout the
state that are planned in the
one also apparently in in Dona
Ana and I I do appreciate very
much the governor's I intend to
follow up on this so I don't
have any any doubt that this
will be done and accomplished
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Steinborn thank you can
I have a motion on house bill
two some of Mr chairman.
Mmhm some motion from Senator
Rodriguez second from Senator
India.
Senator Campos make the second.
Call the roll.
Thank you for.
Thank you for yes Senator Campos
yes.
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Diamond yes Gonzalez yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator sure.
To hear yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and senator Munoz
yes Senator many of you have
eleven yes.
Thank you so we have to pass on
house bill two maybe they'll do
a Netflix movie about center
Steinborn and how he learns to
speak Spanish correctly.
Correctly and not derogatory and
Spanish let me finish that no
appreciate that at all.
People caught on to that and my
phone got lit up a little bit so
we don't appreciate that all
David Abbey to you and your
staff and to Dawn into a very.
Thank you.
We spent a lot of money I hope
we spend it correctly I think we
did we did our best in the
thirty days to do that and
throughout the year I know was a
little I mean the Supreme Court
and then get moved out and and
now let's see we have to get
this money in the economy if you
want to make New Mexico state
stable and grow and have
budgeting that really works
make New Mexico's economy growth
that's my message to the exact
thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator Campos you want to do to
to real quick.
Copy another copy Senator
Padilla.
Are you gonna coffee are you
talking.
At my end of life of.
I was willing.
What's going proceed on Senate
bill two oh two thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you very
much members of the Senate
finance committee this is the
Senate bill two oh two
would increase the compensation
for service of our elected
officials the last time this was
done was about twenty years ago
and the ones that would be
affected.
Would be our governor and that
would be taking.
The governor's compensation from
a hundred and ten thousand two
hundred fifty thousand.
Secretary of state from eighty
five thousand two hundred
fifteen thousand.
The state auditor from eighty
five thousand two hundred
fifteen thousand.
The Attorney General from ninety
five thousand two hundred twenty
five thousand.
State land commissioner for
ninety thousand two hundred
twenty five thousand.
It is this is what this does.
Is it helps to bring forth
Particularly with their elected
officials and their salaries it
gives them an opportunity to be
more mid range of this this
entire region with those
salaries and compensation that
in essence is what it does and
so were on sale for questions Mr
chairman thank you we don't have
anybody on to.
You don't have a list any but
anybody in the audience and
support anybody in opposition
questions from committee members
etcetera.
There would.
We'll go back if there's anybody
center was go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
Senator Campos you know when the
judges came in here they made
the argument that we need to
raise the salaries to get more
confident people into our system
are you making the same argument
the Mister chairman Senator was
and I really appreciate that
that is part of the argument but
at the same time as we move
forward the whole key is going
to be that within this area
within this region we need
parity and what it does is it
not only would allow us to to
set up a situation where we can
attract
people from other places that
would want to come to work here
in New Mexico it's something
that we haven't done for about
twenty years and we want to make
sure that we're at least lifting
all these individuals up with
their compensation to try to
keep them here in New Mexico and
of course continue to attract
those with the best credentials
possible thank you.
And Mr chairman and senator.
Of.
The problem I have with your
argument.
Is that
We have a lot of people that run
for these offices already.
And we have choices for people
the.
That we can choose for these
particular offices so
would you like to comment on
that do you think if we raise
use ours we're going to have
more people run for elective
offices in these positions that
are are more qualified.
Sure thank you very much Mr
chairman of course Senator Woods
so one of the big issues as we
move forward and I'd already
elaborated on this it's parity
but when you really take a look
at the compensation you're
seeing many of these people who
do run for elected offices and
they are are they would go and
currently get to get those
salaries but along with that we
have many of our
Public officials who are serving
were making in some cases two
and three times what the the
elected official is is making
and so in essence it's saying
here's the person who ran for
the office here's the
compensation they received
here's the person who is serving
possibly as a as a deputy
secretary making more money than
with those elected officials are
making so what this does also
again as and when I go back to
that part of the argument and
that is it raises the parity to
that level for
we not only attract good people
to run for office but we also
show that those people who are
in leadership positions within
those offices are also receiving
fair compensation.
But Mr Mr chairman and and
senator.
You're not applying for the fire
the office.
They're not allowing for the
opportunity for someone to make
a name for their so you're not
allowing for the I hope to to
serve the people of the state or
New Mexico is being part of the
compensation.
So
You know I have some real
problems with that so Mister
chair through thank you very
much.
Thank you senator share of.
Thank you Mr chair so as I look
at this you know we just we just
passed a budget that's going to
give people a seven percent
increase or maybe even a sixteen
percent increase depending where
they are.
How which is all good but then
we want to give the governor of
forty two percent increase the
Attorney General of thirty one
percent increase the land
commissioner thirty eight
percent increase the PRC a fifty
five percent increase while
with messages that sent to all
of those people we just if
you're only worth seven U. P.
on.
I have a problem with that Mr
Miller final language that is.
And it wasn't me that called M.
P. on it looks to me like it's
this thirty forty fifty percent
increase versus seven.
Senator Diamond or.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Campos you mentioned
that one of the reasons why
we're doing this is because
we're trying to attract those to
come to work in New Mexico but I
can't see how that correlates
the governor's salary with
trying to build business and
make New Mexico at a more
business friendly state I want
to echo a little bit of what
senator Wirth said if we were
having a hard time filling these
jobs I could understand you know
we have a workforce shortage in
in New Mexico and so we tried to
collectively as legislators
address that by raising salaries
this year I think in in the
Republican primary alone for
these races we have what eight
nine and we've never had a
shortage of candidates for these
higher offices.
But you know I still be I'd
still be open to supporting
something like that if we could
we could add some contingencies
so we're trying to bring the
governor's salary from forty
fourth up to nineteen can we
make that contingent upon her
bringing New Mexico CYFD child
welfare from fiftieth to
nineteen or for education from
fiftieth to nineteenth I mean
I've got to say that our return
on this governor and arguably
the last governor hasn't hasn't
been too great we don't have a
hard time filling these jobs
there is no we're not moving the
needle in ways that we need to
for New Mexico and and to echo
what Senator shares that I have
a hard time getting a thirty six
percent to raise to these top
officials that we are not seeing
results from when we gave our
teachers a seven percent raise
those who need it most so with
all due respect I cannot support
this but I appreciate your time
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Senator Steinborn.
Good morning Mister chair Mister
chair good morning question
where did you pick the salary
levels what are the key market
said that already and I missed
it thank you very much Mr chair
so in terms of the salary levels
over the years what we've done
is we've been part we continue
to go ahead and compare if you
will our compensation and so
what we've done is we've looked
at the surrounding states and
this is are creating a
compositor and an average of a
resources that would be paid in
each one of these areas so it
came from
from the from the regional
assumption and an assertion and
of course more than not
what what we had to from a
salaries within people from
Oklahoma Texas from Utah from
Nevada and what they were
making.
Good thank you Mr I thought they
were a really reasonable kind of
mid range of that that helps
explain it so thank you for that
thank you for your time this
thank you Senator Rodriguez
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos for bring in this
fourth I know you've been a very
big supporter of this and wanted
to do this for here so thank you
very much for bringing this at
you know that I respect the the
comments being made everyone has
their opinion and and the thing
that's the way the system works
here but I just you know feel
that the public service the
amount and the hours of public
service that it's been put in by
the governor and our I'd like to
officials if we were to tabulate
that it would still be below
zero what we're giving them
because this is been truly
public service and I I think
this is reasonable and there's
no reason why we we can't
increase the salaries to a to an
amount that at least is
reasonable I don't think it's
exorbitant I think you just
bring some up to a level four
it's not embarrassing this has
been very bad here in New Mexico
on the way we have the salary so
low so I support this Mr
chairman thank you thank you
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos I just have a
question on page two
line two section B. continues
explain that a little bit better
and so if if say the lieutenant
governor or the secretary of
state become the acting governor
which is essentially what would
happen I or you.
Saying that.
They both would not be available
to for someone else to receive
two hundred fifty dollars
compensation pretty well when
they just simply receive the
salary that they received today
maybe there's a reason for that
I don't I'm not following thank
you very much Mr chairman and of
course center for the analysis
of what we're indicating if they
are to becoming incapacitated
and not able to go and fulfill
their duties specific to those
two offices of David the amount
there to receive each day would
be the two hundred fifty dollars
in terms of the reason those are
two of the jobs that
They're they're they're
traveling the state there
Doing that job separately and
they're not the building those
those regular hours so that
would be the that would be part
of the reason.
Thank you
Mr chairman so so say the the
lieutenant governor the
secretary of state would to
become acting governor what they
receive the salaries are
receiving today plus the two
fifty four they only receive the
two fifty it would it would be
the two fifty today and then it
would also be the this our.
So there would be an additional
pay on top of that it would be
the compensation the two hundred
fifty dollars per day.
In addition to the current.
We're looking for you so so so
so with that that that is
current law and so there would
be a change there but that's
that's built on the statute
okay.
thank you.
Yeah I'm I'm pretty foreign on
these this item as well I mean I
have to say that you know I I I
think that
Of.
I really appreciate everything
that was said I mean I think
Senator have pretty good point
you know seven percent versus
what we're doing here but when
was the last and and this is
probably one of the big reasons
we really need to do this right
now and I support the measure
but when was the last time we
change these so this is about
two thousand and two I believe
about twenty years ago and that
was the last time are we have
tried to to bring this forward
on.
Two or three other occasions and
it continues to go ahead and
meet if you will with
with some of the opposition but
this is been twenty years the
inflationary rate about two
percent per year so you figure
that for about the last twenty
years that's a good forty
percent so here you are again in
the situation we're trying to
bring up some equity but in
essence what happens then is
that we continue to go ahead and
call fall further and further
behind when it comes to the.
to the compensation for
proactive officials.
Thank you and I was hoping you
might say that so I thought it
was at least ten or fifteen
years we have made an adjustment
there and how many state
employees are there now.
Totals state employees I'm not
really sure what two thousand
okay so I was just informed that
there's twenty two thousand
state employees that would be
overseen by the elected
officials and and of course some
of the pointed officials as well
as twenty two thousand employees
and you know roughly an eight
eight billion dollar budget and
no no change to this and you
know twenty more than twenty
years now so I think it I think
it's definitely do I just you
know I am concerned that we
continue to I hope that we
continue to focus on the rank
and file employees as well thank
you.
Thank you senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the conversation
appreciate appreciate Center and
and and what we're trying to do
here we talk a lot of us special
with this budget cycle.
About.
Increases in pay and and I think
there right deserve to a certain
extent but especially I think
we're looking at.
Maybe not apples and oranges the
little bit different here.
We're looking at judges who have
gone through school have paid
big bills have gotten a degree
and pass the ball R. and and
going through a career where
they've gotten to a point where
there may be a Supreme Court
justice teachers who were
working to get masters doctors
to better themselves working on
this list we have various
political figures I think
there's a difference in that and
the the but and I I appreciate
some of the comments that have
been made I think.
What we have to hold our
political leaders to is a higher
standard and quite frankly
there's no performance measures
the base.
These salaries other than
they're not comparable with
other states possibly I don't
that's a real good measure to go
by.
So it's hard for me to justify
increases thirty nine fifty five
percent so so forth.
When people are running for an
office and having the money to
get into that office and then
they're attempting to do a job
and I think that's wonderful for
the state I don't think
increases of this magnitude are
going to make a big difference I
I would much rather see some
performance measures just like
Senator chair and diamond we're
talking about
Can can we guarantee that we're
going to get out of being
fiftieth in education can we
guarantee that we're going to
increase our economic
development so we diversify off
of oil and gas.
I just it's hard for me to I I
look at these is apples and
oranges professional people and
created a a career path and paid
for that and and work hard to
get to a certain level and and
political figures who are
willing to work in and provide
to the state and I appreciate
that but that's a different
category of folks in I don't
know if they really are
justified in seeing the size of
increases so for me it's hard
for me to justify supporting
this particular measure thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos for bringing this
forward I really appreciate the
the effort that you put into
this I think for me the way that
I see it is even if we do have a
lot of candidates to run for
these offices I still think that
this is something that could
increase the the diverse pool of
candidates that we have to
choose from so people coming
from different walks of life
that I think are incredibly
that's more valuable than
anything else being able to
serve in public office when you
have a different level of
livelihood this is gonna find a
better pathway for people who
may come from
less advantaged backgrounds so I
really appreciate this effort
and I do support this
legislation thank you.
I see no other questions Senator
Campos the problem we have is
some of the deputy directors
make more than the executive and
so when you do that.
It becomes a problem in the
institution twenty years with no
no CPI adjustments no nothing
I don't know in comparison to
populations what other states
are paid our population is two
million I don't know what South
Dakota North Dakota those states
and current population they do
you know that.
They don't have the information
in front of me but in terms of
some of the ones as you are you
had indicated I can I can go to
Texas the governor's paid a
hundred fifty four thousand
you turn a hundred sixty one
thousand but in terms of the the
entire country out I don't have
the the numbers and in the other
key issue is if you're paying
attention there's an S. J. R.
that would give pretty much
given up our our front door the.
To
Can you raises and give it to
the ethics commission the minute
we give up that a thorny ethics
commission will be able to
control the legislature by
saying oh now and give pay
raises to them knowing in pay
raises to them and that's even
more dangerous
If you look one day in the
committee I sat there and figure
out of time and deducted our
expenses and we make about we
don't get paid we get reimbursed
for expenses we make forty two
cents an hour.
On the Sunday morning.
February that's what we're going
to make forty two cents an hour
we've almost been here our so
that.
That that is a little bit
difficult to handle I mean
everybody knows it costs going
up.
I think that we need to kind of
push this so we can get it taken
care of the extra hours is not
popular with me because the way
it's structured the legislature
should never give up their
appropriating forty they want to
say who should get paid that's
fine but they can't set the the
rates because of formed a budget
crunch they can center right in
those to us and the women in the
mandate is to pay those even
though the legislature that
represents the state is in
agreement that a five body board
could do that
Senator is also a question of
Noam of trouble ready for to
pass so.
As we move forward just remember
that some of the deputies make
more than the executive if you
take just I see I think that
salary is at two hundred fifty
thousand dollars correct me if
I'm wrong it's in the two
fifties we take P. R. A. I think
they're in the same range right
around two hundred a little bit
lower E. R. B. is the same rage
there managing billions of
dollars but we don't payer
executives in that level that we
should Senator Padilla any other
questions I just wanted to
answer your questions which are
one of the questions so with
that I looked at the about what
the the information related that
puts this puts this little right
middle for the governor like
literally right in the middle of
the state so just wanted to.
When you don't receive a rate
increases over twenty period.
It's pretty hard and and people
should never this is my personal
view if you run for an office
based upon pay.
Then your integrity is not there
if you run for office space
based on public service and
you've been here I think you're
the senior member here now in
this legislature's your
integrity is intact because you
stayed here and made a
commitment to the people in New
Mexico yeah hi less back then
and no page to do what you think
is right for New Mexico
I think these people running for
office whoever they are doesn't
matter public in Democrat
independent that when you get in
office you give up quite a bit.
and so there's nothing wrong
with bringing them into line.
Over twenty year period so with
that I have Senator Campos
Senator Gonzales.
What the motion for do pass
second of second by Senator
Rodriguez that we call the roll.
Thank you for.
Thank you for no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond.
No Senator Gonzales this Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator could be a
test center here no.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn.
Yes this with.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Judy youth
yes.
Right.
Senator when you yes.
Yes they have seven yes for now
thank you at two one explain the
road over here Senator thank you
Mr chair.
I'm not opposed to give them a
raise this would be a great year
to give a seven percent rate
maybe even an eighteen percent
range.
But not forty percent.
I'm on the vote.
So.
I'm lines this chair public
servants G. being wanting to do
public service I needed to pay
your bills are two mutually
exclusive concepts.
So I I don't agree that if you
want to get paid work and the
public service and pay your
bills that that becomes evil
concept.
I agree if you're doing it just
for the money you don't care
about the public comments the
the public mmhm.
How the public part of it and
then you're probably not the
right person for the job but
that you know when it comes to
legislators it's true.
we don't we don't make a salary
is a very exclusive job and to
say that we're not gonna pay is
actually just.
It's very exclusive on who were
labeling to serve because people
have to pay their bills us
reality we all made Karia built
differently.
Some of us work in sectors that
are not as lucrative and so it's
and some people work hi I jobs
that frankly their job will not
even allow them to take the time
off so.
So the fact is people need to
pay their jobs and their pay
their bills and that's not a
negative thing so paying
honorably for that public
service is the right thing to do
and and just like everything
else we're talking about it just
helps attract people so thank
you thank you.
You Mr chairman thank you very
much members of the committee we
are going to start Senate bill
one forty because we can't get a
hold the other Sanchez on to
make sure they're in the room
Senator Diamond you want to set
up their.
Listening going to that they're
reduce bill one forty with the
secretary and Adrian.
We have to have a Senate sponsor
of their miss you don't want to
do it we can put Senator
Steinborn up there.
Holders.
No she may come in Senator of
onyx's.
also Senator Gonzales when she
said that there.
We just need to Senate sponsor.
So we were diligent and kind of
figure out the opportunity
scholarships.
trying to get guardrails and
parameters and make sure it's
functioning in and it'll work
for the students in New Mexico's
Sierra students in New Mexico
and so
Incentive provide it's a dream
in the secretary of Matt and we
met with the executive and they
worked on these over a couple
days or maybe a couple weeks
that we got there figure out how
we really do opportunity and do
it in a way that sufficient that
gets people educated and and
and has some guidelines
you have a substitute so madam
secretary you want to introduce
a bill and and we're going to
because it's Sunday morning.
more gonna shorten our public
comment about five minutes a
piece of we don't have assume
operator she's working from
opioid and Adrian helped get the
project is because he's running
a couple jobs madam secretary
wanted to introduce a bill and
then we'll go to public public
comment I think we should go to
public all of go to public
comment and then we'll come back
and substitute the bill.
Understand phonics mate is under
way and then we'll we'll talk
about the substitute Adrian you
have a seven guardrails.
For us and so madam secretary on
interest milk real quick
absolutely thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee for allowing me to be
here today and I want to thank
the Senate finance committee
analyst and chief of staff for
working with the executive on
the committee substitute that
you'll hear later today but
governor Lujan Grisham has
worked hand in hand with us as
policy makers to lay a strong
foundation for early childhood
all the way up into the work
force of cradle to career
systems the opportunity
scholarship act New Mexicans an
opportunity retire whether they
are returning adult learner or
working parent or someone who
just started college and not
finished now how does it work
it's simple the opportunity
scholarship covers all tuition
and fees for any New Mexico
resident enrolled at a public
college or university in the
state a student can work towards
a training certificate and
associate degree or bachelor's
degree additionally both part
time and full time students are
eligible and they must maintain
a two point five GPA while
enrolled in college investing
into that students today will
benefit our state as New
Mexicans obtain degrees and
certificates earn better wages
rely less on public assistance
programs and enter careers that
benefit families so with that Mr
chair we can go ahead and go to
public comment and then we'll
bring the committee substitute
for after.
Thank you
Let's go you check the audience
Mr chairman and ours in operator
for me that there is public
comment on soon and she will on
me or something called them one
by one we're gonna take public
comment on Senate bill.
One forty.
And we're gonna take five on
doom and and then I in the
audience for and against and so
we just don't have the time and
I don't want to have to go to
confession and tell the priest I
didn't make the eleven o'clock
mass so.
However wants to go first
I see the president of I feel
the presence of the
universities.
image you present you want to go
first and then we're gonna take
five in there and I in person.
Thank you Mr president chairman
and and members of the of the
committee my name is Dan are you
on.
Yes and president of New Mexico
State University and vice chair
of the council of university
president and on behalf of our
county jail president Josep for
I am pleased to say that cancels
university presidents are happy
to support this bill
it provides much needed
financial aid support for
students the on just the tuition
fees but also substantially
contributed intended the overall
cost of attendance through the
other financial instruments that
we have available to us we know
that healthgrades and lottery
together supporting our students
actually provide for better
student outcomes significantly
better retention.
And we believe that in addition
to the opportunity scholarship
and copy intended with the other
place the financial aid will
really allow us to have a
similar sort Cruz.
We're very excited about I want
to thank the the the hard work
is going on by the executive
secretary by the Senate finance
committee the LFC and with all
of those with part of this
journey and we will very very
pleased to know that would not I
think something that we can all
support I in the interest of
time and and so we get a mass Mr
Chairman I'm going to complete
my comics just say thank you for
the opportunity to be here in
the favor of SB one forty
completely helpful to this to
the students of the Mexico and
state general thank you very
much thank you.
However once go next is in we
can't see all I can see is a
time clock on the screens are
going to have to just jump in
and say your name we got four
more on zoom in the north.
This.
President Mr this is John
calling on the president New
Mexico university here in
Roswell and also the president
New Mexico facility colleges we
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you today in the
other committee members.
This opportunity scholarship
would simplify the application
process like Mexico six dollars
easier for families students
counselors of high schools and
also the advisors in financial
aid workers in the colleges.
It would expand community
college access and university
access to have time and also
students as you know the
majority of community college
students are part time and so
the goal is to allow more New
Mexicans to complete college
degrees and that effort is
intended to leave New Mexicans
workforce additional critical
needs on our campuses also that
would include working in
aviation and sourcing Education
feels and we were to support
legislation thank you.
Thank you whoever is next to
that.
Three more.
Committees of our meeting of
president of northern New Mexico
college.
As the New Mexico and also
Mexican president Enrique of
Irish community support the
opportunity Bill Clinton thank
you Secretary Rodriguez for her
efforts and the efforts of all
those who have been involved in
putting this together as you all
know that our students are
future and education as a
pathway to that feature so I
appreciate your cooperation and
participation getting is through
it really is a milestone moment
for New Mexico to move towards
this.
Thank you thank you guys for two
more runs in.
Mr chairman my name is Steven
clearing on the enterprise New
Mexico junior college Mexico.
As a past president and interim
president my job to advocate
students is absolutely my
responsibility to do so so
please accept my endorsement
Senate bill one forty the matter
Representative advocating for
every any judges today as well
as all the callers to to
translate passes all of the
institutions of New Mexico thank
thanks for your time and I.
Thank you one more.
Zoom.
Senator this is gonna present
in New Mexico and I want to say
thank you for considering this
really important bill for the
state of New Mexico we strongly
believe in the value of higher
education credentials for I
improving the lives of all New
Mexicans and creating the
economy of New Mexico I and we
know that the financial barriers
continue to be one of the
biggest issues facing families
in New Mexico so this is to
really provide financial
supporter for learning
credentials I think it's just it
is an important moment I'm
grateful to the executive and
the secretary continuing plus
access to higher education for
on New Mexico so we are firmly
support themselves thank you.
Thank you should review your
policies on sexual harassment
madam president
we don't have anybody in I don't
have anybody else on the zoom
and in the audience will take do
we have anybody imposed on June.
Not opposed we go to the
audience will take five.
Whoever's just stand up and go.
Mr chairman of the committee yes
Representative spoke about the
council we do have three
presidents in the audience that
we like them Stephens for the
bill first that was involved in
that President reserves because
of all the news committee
members thank you very much for
considering this bill like ones.
David wells you have to
introduce the secretary can.
Mr president wells I know your
name but do people the million
in the state will president of
the New Mexico tech I want to
thank you for can.
The.
Okay is it.
Gonna push the button and hold.
Thank you for I only come from
high tech universities to
appreciate instructions so
K..
I'm done.
I want to thank all of you for
your consideration of this bill
I really appreciate the
collaboration that's been done
to bring it forward and I know
this will have a dramatic impact
for all the students here in the
states so thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Well could you have New Mexico
tech at we do our Mike's over
the income so we can have some
high tech might.
Good morning chair my name is
Becky rally on president Santa
Fe community college and chair
of the New Mexico independent
community colleges I speak in
support of this bill anything
that we can do to assist in with
financial aid in the state of
New Mexico is is a boon for the
state of New Mexico and for
students I'm especially happy to
see the emphasis placed on part
time students and also the
coverage for credential so we
thank you for your work on that
and we are in full support of
the bill thank you.
Hi I'm Tracy hearts are
president of central New Mexico
community college I want to
encouraging your support for
Senate bill one forty and
particularly the bill as amended
a two items it's particularly
important to our students in
awards the largest number of
students on the opportunity
scholarship we are incredibly
excited that you're continuing
to support the preparation and
the program up particularly as
all of our federal supplemental
financially the came through
cares has been has been awarded
so this program becomes even
more important for part time
students and also really
appreciate that the department
and secretary willing to
consolidate a number of our
programs I think that effort
continues because anything we
can do to reduce barriers for
our students and administration
of aid will only support greater
educational attainment so thank
you.
We've got one more and maybe
from the university we have
could.
The morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's types
are you on the executive
director of the New Mexico
association of community
colleges my institutions include
Roswell Ruidoso Alamogordo
Carlsbad done and community
college grants Gallup Los Alamos
tiles and Valencia and all of my
institutions and all my
presidents and chancellors and
representatives of my
institutions completely support
the since the support this
legislation it's gonna be great
for students so thank you.
Mr chairman I had and then we
have.
More.
Mr Chairman I'm I'm
Representative Robert remotely
registered lobbyists for
highlands University of
president mentors unfortunate a
funeral today he can make it and
I'm just here to express support
from highlands.
They are.
Right here
trying to get first.
Okay I still think we have a
state okay.
Mr chairman and committee
members.
I'm a product.
Education here in New Mexico.
I utilize the I'm eighty years
old and I've utilize the
Reduced tuition Act.
More recently I just applied for
a scholarship I did receive in
college scholarships and I'm not
taking.
Thank you senator Senator Paypen
community college.
So I want to thank.
The people of New Mexico that is
allowed me to continue my
education.
Your.
I'm sorry Mr.
Turn this into I live here in
Santa Fe New mattress.
That's one to get a mailer.
Thank you.
Mr chair we do have one student
online if we could listen to her
just once.
I guess you could be on the time
clock.
That's okay Senator about this.
The student is.
Senator members of the committee
my name is not
religious serving as student
body president for New Mexico
State University I just want to
stand strong support of this
legislation I know countless
calling here's mine who rely
solely on.
I actually like this to be able
to help through that whole
experience and
this legislation some point to
make sure that that continues to
happen and that since all across
New Mexico have the ability to
improve their livelihood and
hopefully making Mexico thank
you.
Thank you madam thank you.
We've been.
That that we do have.
The motion.
The motion by Senator Rodriguez
the families for the we are on.
Agencies.
Senators this.
so your Senate finance committee
says two percent of the one
forty captures the efforts of
previous scholarship initiatives
that the legislature and the
governor have tried to to pass
so if you look on the three part
sheet this was the framework
that kind of started the talks
right you look at the lottery
how it works you look at the
opportunity scholarship that you
passed unanimously last year and
how that worked and then you
look at the opportunity proposal
of the original Senate bill one
forty for this year and we try
to combine elements from all of
them into this committee
substitute so that we we have
appropriate guardrails but at
the same time ensure that all of
New Mexico has the opportunity
to pursue higher ed so if you
look on your SFC preaching
please you have a.
Basic breakdown of what the
substitute does so the
substitute bill.
Doesn't touch lottery all the
original opportunity scholarship
would of taken lottery and had
just one scholarship for the
entire state we've separated out
so lottery still lottery it's
not touch that all opportunity
will however incorporate the
Legislative endowment
scholarship and the ops and the
college affordability act and
that would take the money from
those two funds and put them
into opportunity instead
with the substitute we
incorporate a few guard rails so
the guard rails are basically as
soon as a student earns a
bachelor's degree they're done
we're not funding them after
that after that it comes to the
individual to fund if they
withdraw from school meaning
they decided to not pursue
education anymore well that's
their choice and the state will
not continue funding them if
they decide to come back
They must be enrolled in a
minimum of six credit hours so
they have to be at least part
time and that's during the
spring and fall semesters they
need to maintain a human if you
pay the two point five and then
if they fail to meet
satisfactory academic progress
within the institution they
would also lose out on the
scholarship we've also
established an upper limit right
because the original bill did
not set that so we basically are
saying we will provide you up to
full time full time as defined
as being eighteen credit hours
beyond that they would have to
pay if they want to take more
credit hours a semester
the scholarship also in
corporate summers so this is an
opportunity to be able to
capture any lottery students for
example who want to you know
advance education little bit
faster but the lottery wouldn't
cover summer so they can now
qualify for summer education
We would cover anywhere from
three to nine credit hours
and that would apply for also
opportunity scholarship
recipients.
And then on top of that we've
also said it so that way
individuals have an operational
done how many credit hours
appear under transcript once
they reach that we won't find
them anymore because by that
point you should have received.
Multiple law degrees in essence
right so
with one highlight that I want
to mention is we do incorporate
professional certificates within
here as defined by a workforce
solutions that has to be within
ten areas that workforce
solutions has determined are
critical need in the state and
those programs are the ones that
would be funded by opportunities
so it's not just any certificate
has actually professional
practical and it has to be a job
basically in in the works for
them
if they are pursuing an
associate's degree they're able
to do that after earning the
professional degree and we give
them up to ninety transcript
hours so what that means is
those ninety hours they can get
their certificate right and they
can keep going for their
associates without eight
impeding or messing up there
funding.
And then if they want to keep
going for a bachelor's they can
do that on top of that so this
is a way to be able to stack up
education will at the same time
allowing individuals to work and
it covers all students including
nontraditional students the last
thing we added is consideration
of flexibility for disabled
students so that way they are
protected and we also
incorporated flexibility for
students experiencing
exceptional mitigating
circumstances so for example if
they've had
Right they have to communicate
that with financial aid.
And for that semester it's like
it is what it is and they're not
they they can still be eligible
for the scholarship upon their
return so we provided that level
of flexibility to try to
encompass the best of all
possible worlds.
Mr chair with that we stand for
questions.
Secretary yes the amendment for.
Mr chair thank you for asking.
On this question Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman yes just I
feel our hands up all the
universities that are supporters
of food just raise your hand.
It is very very opposed to the
substitute.
Okay.
Question about the drop out
provisions.
And I love fifty here the ration
now
about that
So let me just see if I
understand it so somebody drops
out.
They lose the financial support
is it is it just a list of
finance for that semester where
they lose the opportunity to get
up the next semester Mr chair
Senator thank you for that
question the goal is to keep
students enrolled consecutively
because we find that they will
finish their degree that they're
going for however please note
that we work with the committee
on putting a mitigating
circumstance class so let's say
there's an emergency that
happens there's a death in the
family the student becomes ill
they are able to actually get a
semester off and then continue
to be eligible for the
scholarship.
Thank you in Mr chair madam
secretary could a mitigating
circumstance the having to take
care of a family member who sat.
Mr chair thank you for the
question Senator it could be
tested her meant by the
institution so they would send a
petition for to the institution
the institution would review
that and then go ahead and do an
approval or denial typically our
institutions are very
understanding of the types of
students they serve in New
Mexico.
So Mr chair Senator said
generally speaking no if you
drop out then you are no longer
eligible moving forward property
scholarship unless you have a
mitigating circumstances that
affect needs Mr chair Senator so
you have to stick with it.
But if that's all I have for now
Mr thanks.
Thank you Mr a notice your
transfer of vision.
The college affordability the
and the.
And if I'm reading that right.
That fourteen million dollars is
that endowment
Invested in then we pay the the
of those seeds out of that or is
that a fund that.
Is this the amount that we have
to pay out for scholarships
every year Mr chairman and madam
secretary Mr chair Senator Woods
thank you for that question I'm
gonna defer to one of my experts
Dr Rommel who's in charge of
overseeing the indictments.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Woods.
Because of the bill the
endowment corpus has a minimum
distribution of three million
dollars per year in statute
right now so that is an
investment corpus that's sitting
but we we put out at least three
million dollars a.
So
Madam chair.
The secretary.
To
prove these go on little.
The other item scholarship the
Legislative envelopment
scholarship I could not find
that in my little book here
could you tell me that
approximately of the value of
that is it same thing and how
does that Fund come about the
legislative development for Mr
chairman I would have to go back
and look at the history for one
and first came about it's a
little bit older than the
college affordability in down it
only has about two point seven
million dollars invest in the
Corpus and we have another five
hundred thousand sitting in cash
and share a typically we
distribute and that with that
particular purpose we can only
spend the interest so we've only
been spent about a hundred
thousand dollars a year on that
and and make sure it's fully go
commission chair and and Sir I
was wondering about that.
How is it funded do you know
that at all.
Mr Chairman the there were
appropriations made to that end
down in many many years before I
took this position on and so I I
again I would have to probably
go back and look at the history
for every happy to look that up
for you Mr chair and and could
you give me that information on
how that was funded have that
How that is is determine how
that comes up who directs that
funding
is it applied for at this point
in time to get that for
scholarship and also the same
for the colleges four million
down the funds give me that same
information on how that was
funded
how that scholarship is given
out who's who.
Who does that stuff for for
fiction to bring that.
Into another funds here.
And will we be.
Using the same criteria are we
going to completely change of
criteria.
Well we are going to change
criteria and have issues of the
so Mr chair and madam secretary
Mr chair Senator absolutely will
give you some of that
information but let me answer
some of those questions for you
the college affordability grant
only awards up to fifteen
hundred per semester however the
criteria is very similar to the
opportunity scholarship in which
you have to be part time or full
time and it's only for associate
degrees and bachelor's degrees
so not your technical training
certificate that we're talking
about as far as the legislative
endowment scholarship is
concerned it's only one thousand
two hundred fifty dollars per
semester that is also for part
time full time students only
associate degrees and bachelor's
degree so it's very similar
criteria to the opportunity
scholarship and I'll go ahead
and have made to pass the sheet
over to you and that's what I
was wondering shares you madam
secretary is that of.
The scholarships I'm assuming
are being given out now.
And so
Under the new criteria.
It's a whole lot different
criteria.
This opportunity scholarship.
And and.
I've got a couple of questions
about that criteria.
Of.
It says home page two line to.
Eligibility is eligible students
may into New Mexico residents.
The.
That's a pretty broad definition
under voter rights act.
So how are we going to use the
definition for this.
Miss madam chair.
Madam chair Senator we actually
have that defined at the higher
education department and our
rules a New Mexico resident has
to live in the state of New
Mexico for twelve consecutive
months and they must remain in
New Mexico while they're in
school so that's something
that's determined by our and our
agency and our higher education
institutions up help hold in
their schools.
Okay under the is there any
eligibility Mr chair.
The gun.
Madam secretary.
Is there any eligibility that
they have to
The New Mexico taxpayer or
anything like that and what I
mean by that is that
You know if I would if if I want
to send bring my grandson in
from from California.
And he lives here with me for a
year.
Although he was a
The gentleman.
Resident of California now he's
the state here for here in New
Mexico now under this act he's
considered a resident of New
Mexico
because he's been here for
twelve months it miss your.
Actor Mr chair Senator will
remember they have to verify
that their residents so there's
intent of them living here and
stay here they have to do that
their driver's license they have
to have some sort of bills or
rent or housing that they pay
for and that is verified by part
of the higher education
institutions when they become a
resident of New Mexico so they
in order to get a New Mexico
driver's license they have to
verify a residents so we're
going to use that top of
residency verification for this
scholarship Mr chair yes that is
one of the types of residency
that we use the other question I
have.
Is the word that this.
I mean every time we use it it's
just amazes me.
and I think you know the
definition of it but if you
would on page three line
eighteen after the letter the
there's a word there.
And it says not withstanding.
Could you possibly Mr chairman
madam secretary explained that
works to.
Madam secretary can you respond
to that yes I'm.
Mr Mr chair notwithstanding
other provisions
So madam secretary I'm not of
the children okay I understand
very well what it means I don't
like it in this bill.
Of we need to re word that
subway so that we know exactly
what we're not withstanding.
If you understand what I'm
saying it's too broad.
Did this go through Judiciary.
Madam chair.
Now madam chair members of the
committee it went through it
said and Education Committee.
There was the substitute bill
we're working on came out of
Senate finance.
And in Adrian you know why that
notwithstanding we're doing.
Yeah so that not withstanding
word is with the clause that
allows the flexibility for the
disabled students right and
considerations for thank and
what was it excessive.
Mitigating circumstances so it's
just so a way to allow the
universities to go forth and
have the appeal process for
students that's why the the word
was used but if we need to use a
different word we can do a point
six real quick and change the
word out.
Mr chair madam chair.
Lever.
There was a third one in forty
five minutes going to be father.
I don't want to keep going on
this but.
We really should think about
trading or by the same.
Of.
We're all citizens.
The state of New Mexico.
I don't know how you can changes
in a shorter time.
But I have heartburn with that
non withstanding clocks.
Thank you Mr madam chair center
operations thank you Mr chairman
I just wanted to thank the
sponsors and and higher at and
Adrian for all your work and all
staff but I am I do have a
couple of questions to get
clarified here maybe you can
help me at you because I see
that many times our students
with special needs and remember
special needs means something we
need to do something extra to be
able to accommodate them and
depends on the level of severity
of the impairment for special
needs we need to tailor our
system to fit their needs so
that being said I just wondered
on the on on the tuition and
fees after all other state
financial aid has been used it
says that's when this will come
in that's no care can't and if
that's the case and how is the
students who have special needs
who needs that extra help to
guide them literally take on
their show them what to do who's
going to oversee that can you
tell me I just want some
assurances that we have a system
in place that's robust enough to
really make a difference an
impact in a positive way our
special needs population thank
you Mr chair Senator thank you
for that question so yes we
wanted to make sure that there
is a clause to protect the
students this also actually
exists within lottery
scholarship as well as far as
services on campus to make sure
that the students are successful
all of our higher education
institutions have student
services center success centers
which students of disabilities
can go and manage the system and
navigated in a way that the
institution is helping them
state aid is applied first and
then opportunity scholarship
will kick it you are right
however many of the students
actually receive other
assistance through private
scholarships federal aid
institutional aid that can be
applied on top of tuition and
fees for the cost of attendance
to ensure that they're
successful.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
cabinet secretary and I'm
talking about somebody for
example who has a visual
impairment hearing impairment
who need those special assistive
devices and so on the person
walks in to a university for
example needs that a little
extra help I just want to make
sure that there's this place
where they can go to to get help
and and and be and and and their
apartment be recognized as
something that needs that extra
staff other than you know little
developmental delay maybe or
something like that that that's
about it madam chairman I'll
madam chair I can speak to one
example and I think every campus
is different the Santa Fe
community college has assisted
has a an adviser that is
assigned to each and every new
students to assess their needs
and in fact one of my the fuse
had that opportunity and needed
some special assistance as they
went through and that advisor is
assigned to them their entire
time at the community college to
determine if they need aids
issue fiscal aids issue
mentioned or extra tutoring or
mentoring so I do believe it's
set up differently and every
college or university thank you
Mr chair I can also American
with disabilities act has to be
followed by our institutions
which requires that assistance
for every student that is rules
thank you thank you very much
for that and one other quick
question so I don't prolong this
anymore I think it's a great
bill by the way thank you
senator but like on the grade
point average students that have
special needs many times can't
meet the two point five grade
point average even with
assistance and so I I just hope
I know that you mentioned that
there would be some special
accommodations I just want to
know that that if they don't
meet this grade point average
that they're still able to
proceed with the scholarship and
that it not be canceled on.
Mr chair so the key word for the
grade point averages cumulative
so if they have a semester in
which they do have some
hardships so long as there are
G. rate isn't go below two point
five they should be Kate right
the cumulative GPA however if
they do have a semester where
they do have something below two
point five there is that.
Mitigating circumstances clause
in which the institution will
help them to get that GPA back
so that they can continue to
qualify for the scholarship.
Thank you thank you for the last
thing I promise is that three
credit hours there's a
requirement for six credit hours
if a student with special needs
again whether it be ill or for
special needs for intellectual
challenges or whatever they may
have that they can't take six
hours.
They can take three and that's
the most they can do other
trying their very best so I want
to make sure that that there are
commented on that too and then I
promise to let you answer but I
wanted just to add a little copy
it to that because I know the
governor's intent here is to
help every New Mexicans who
wants to go to school wants to
get an education who wants to
succeed to be able to get there
and not have the inhibitions of
our restrictions are laws or
policies are rules are
ordinances and so on we are
trying to remove these barriers
that have for so long inhibited
our ability to help every New
Mexico and we want to make sure
that there's no unintended
consequences here in that's why
I'm bringing this up so that was
my last question I'm gonna go
back to it cabinet secretary
thank you on the on the three
act six credit hours that we
talked about and that'll be my
last question thank you Mr chair
so you're absolutely right this
clause right here allows us the
rulemaking authority to go ahead
and have some of those
provisions in which it's three
credit hours for student with a
disability similar to what we
have for lottery scholarship
instead of doing the full time
in the lottery scholarship they
do have time in the lottery
scholarship to accommodate that
students so we will be doing
that in the rulemaking process
for this thank you for your
concern thank you very much for
your responses in your work
that's all I have Mister
chairman Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and and madam secretary
and Adrian everyone that's
worked really hard to make this
happen and pull this together I
just I have a real
little concerned something we
haven't talked about and you've
been great madam secretary
coming by to see us and talk
with us and walk us through
everything but on the whole
first stop out component like
when someone stops and I was one
of those students myself and we
had nothing growing up and so we
all had to work in there was
just you know there was some
emergencies and all these other
things just like that happens to
people can you describe what
happens to a student that is
participating when they stop is
there anything else that that
stops for them as well at the
same time and then so we can
have what happens when the state
decide to start again want to
make sure I understand the
court.
Mr chair if I'm understanding
your question correctly Senator
by the at it's emerged that
mitigating circumstance costs so
what they would do if they have
to stop they would submit a
waiver to the institution to say
this is the issue that I am
facing and I need assistance and
I need help and I need to take a
break the institution and
reviews that denies or proves it
I will say that our institutions
are very accommodating of our
students in New Mexico because
of the risk that we have and
everyone will student population
so the student can then focus on
those issues if it's working
because you have to provide for
your family if it's because you
are sick and you need medical
treatment or you had a loss of a
family member you will be able
to focus on that in a semester
and then go back contact the
institution and say I am ready
to come back the scholarship
will be back into effect but
they do have to do that
emergency clause just to make
sure that we have checks and
balances and we understand that
the student is going through a
hardship we have to confirm that
I hope I answered your question
Mr chairman and secretary yes
you did in large part so so
that's I'm glad to put that out
there so it's college so so the
scholarship can begin again I
think I heard you say earlier
though that it's going to be a
part of the institution so I
would actually like some
consistency and I I run a
business and I have multiple
sites and I can't be doing
everything which we every
witcher from Tuesday the clients
don't know what's going on so
basically that's the students in
the center of so I want to make
sure that they know what they're
what's going to happen to them
it is it institutional
institution are they developing
policy procedure rex or whatever
to how to handle that slice of
time because you said one
semester I mean I don't know
what I mean sometimes you know
the the the the stop the restart
again excuse me it's gonna take
a little more than a semester
doesn't make sense Mr chair yes
it does Senator so and if they
could reapply and the next
semester I have to be the full
year
it is the policy of the
institutions that they have to
put forward for the most part
it's very can.
System across the board we also
made sure that was in effect
during the COVID nav to tell you
all of the institutions
basically went through every
approval and did approve them
during COVID nineteen because of
the hardships our students are
having during that time and so
Mr chairman and and secretary so
the what about college
affordability and all the other
things that are going on in
someone's life does that stop
when they stop ordered does that
start again when they start
again.
Mr chair so college
affordability you for that and
excuse and when they stop the
first time and then does it read
read this begin again when they
start again at some point the
future Mr chair Senator are you
talking about the college
affordability scholarship for
college affordability in general
politics I guess both.
Mr chair the college
affordability scholarship will
be now the opportunity
scholarship if this is passed it
will be wrapped up into this
piece of legislation in the
scholarship as far as other
states eight I can't really
speak to that it's dependent on
if they're still.
Trying to do a certain type of
degree path and that's the
scholarship that they qualify
for but in large this
scholarship opportunity
scholarship will be able to go
back into a fact when they come
back to the school once they
were approved for that
mitigating circumstance that.
Thank Nico
I'll go to your office and see I
just want to make sure that
we're not D. incentivize Sir and
you know not incentive to do the
D. incentivizing tickets that
might as I can tell me that's
where we have a bunch of very
academic focus in rural
the I don't want to do
incentivize somebody that.
To harm them later because we
really wanted to come back.
Mr chair and that's our intent
as well we want them to come
back and this is why the
scholarship is so forgiving for
students so that when they have
hardships or things happen in
life they can continue to be
successful and they make that
decision to come back in school
and right at the role where they
can be successful.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the madam secretary I just you
know with your permission Mister
chairman Senator during the
president's or anyone in the
room want to speak on this
particular piece and if anybody
has any comments on this.
I think I see my president over
here president Hartzler.
It is so if I may some prisoners
are present of CNM.
I appreciate the secretary in
the governor's approach to
making eight simple and I said
that earlier I think was of
great concern is to make sure
and perhaps it's in statute that
students have the ability to
come back.
That there is an opportunity
that is mitigating circumstances
that are standardized across all
institutions that we understand
the ultimate goal for all of us
here and I think for all of you
is that we want our students to
earn their bachelor's degree in
the keep going and we want to do
that and give them all the
supports they need including
aids and advisors and everything
else that many of you at the LFC
it focused on for that last year
really help them continue their
education as they can because of
work or other stuff out so I
appreciate that clarification
that the senator asked for we
certainly hope that we can
continue to work with the
governor to make sure and
whether it's in statute or and
rigs that is really clear that
there's always that backup
backstop I think everybody wants
are adults particularly adult
part time students to have so
thank you for that opportunity.
I think Senator Stefanics Mr
chairman had a follow up Mr
chair madam chair of the Senator
the council of university
presidents the independent
colleges the Latino education
Task Force several nonprofits
the Navajo Nation counsel's
office of the speaker Senator
institutions are supporting this
piece of legislation.
I think that's fantastic and I
thank you very much and I think
this is a move in the right
direction I think that's about
all I have Mister chairman I
just want to ask this gentleman
that spoke earlier the student
that you spoke I think it's your
name Sir.
The
Senator I serve as president New
Mexico state.
Thank you thank you we'll have
someone in the room.
And I live here in Santa Fe
should we give them a hand
eighty years old going back to
school.
On that point etcetera but yet
there's another college student
in the room is sitting over
there in a green shirt is going
to.
Maybe the youngest one besides
are so there's three students
that care about looks an awful
lot like you Mr chairman.
We never know.
Then delivers mail once in a
while thank you for your
commitment Sir thank you for
thank you for allowing me to go
back to school you're the best
thank you thank you Mr chairman
that's all that matters here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
know it is philosophically
opposed this but if you have
some some financial questions.
This other financial aid the
Pell grants whatever's out there
of a scholarship does that kick
in first.
Or is that on top of.
Mr chair Senator it would be
state financial aid would be
applied first then opportunity
scholarship to fill the tuition
and fee gap however federal
financial aid such as Pell
grants the GI bill private
scholarships would be applied
for the cost of attendance after
tuition and fees.
So.
Mr Chairman madam secretary.
The cost me.
Ten dollars to go to school I
know that's not true because we
make forty two cents an hour
but.
What I'm trying to get right my
hat to a cost is ten dollars and
I'm gonna get a dollar from the
GI bill
and in seven dollars from
whatever Pell grants.
This that reduce cannot reduce
should reduce the amount of the
opportunity scholarship was the
opportunity scholarship fixed no
matter if I got everything else.
The Mr chair opportunity
scholarship will cover full
tuition and fees dependent on
the state aid that the student
receives but it will cover the
tuition and fees everything will
be applied afterwards.
What I'm looking at here Mr
chair is it would be is it.
The better use of our money if
not everybody got the whole ten
dollars but because they only
needed three they got three
because that other things
coverage that that would make
our dollars go further.
Mr chair so if the only needed
three to get the full tuition
and fees it's only the three if
they needed the full tend to get
the full tuition and fees we
would give them the full tax.
So Mr president because we have.
Substitute here how accurate is
our FY are on all of this now.
Mr Chairman so here FIR the the
blue FIR from LFC that one is
not accurate because they don't
publish it until you adopt a
committee substitute
In terms of your briefing sheet
you have the summary of the bill
there so that part is accurate
and then in terms of the amount
that the opportunity fund would
have I can give you those
numbers V. ninety two million
total in the fund based on what
you approved in house bill two
earlier today and if you adopt
the substitute the movement of
the money for the legislative
endowment scholarship and the
cost of portability scholarship
into that fund so that's the net
amount the actual fiscal impact
on tell LFC.
Processes the committee said if
you choose to adopt it we don't
have that information at the
moment.
Okay.
This.
Today is the issue here is that
hunger for.
State of.
Mr chair if this were to pass
that money would revert back to
the opportunity scholarship fund
manager know what the number of.
Sector there's no reversal from
things.
Well if I if phase in the fight.
And and senator Byrd to that
point the reason you would want
to stay in the fund because the
spring and fall semesters fall
differently in our budgeting so
you could revert and you would
cut at July just say June
thirtieth this year you would
cut the funding for September
you have to come back and so
that's why there's no
reversionary language because of
the way this semester sent thank
you.
Senator so one of the other
things that I know we talk about
secretary and Mr chair.
Is.
The Economic.
Prospects after work so I know
that we've we've talked about
certificates but then you
pointed out the most community
college figure how to make to
get the.
fall into this but.
I think that welding and
plumbing in auto mechanics and
all that have far greater
economic possibilities then
interpretive dance.
For example.
So.
Do we pay for both equally even
though one has great economic of
perspectives and the other one
doesn't.
Mr chair Senator this is a
concern of your colleague on
here as well so as you remember
in this committee substitute we
will prioritize credit bearing
certificates on the basis of the
top high need fields and growth
in the state of New Mexico which
include your welder plumbers
your pipe fitters electricians
CDL all of that will be in the
credit bearing certificate part
to your other point though in
your concern of associate's and
bachelor's degrees forty percent
of our students enrolled in
these programs are stem eight
majors the only the other is
career technical education so
teachers those types of grease
only twenty percent is arts
things of that nature but those
are important as you know in our
conversation to our tourism
economy are part of our economy
here in New Mexico things of
that nature so students know
where the money is students are
enrolling in the programs that
we need in New Mexico it's the
tuition and fee component and
being able to pay for that is
what is driving a lot of the
students out from those
opportunities.
So.
Mr secretary.
yes in in I saw here indicate
underlined it in high demand New
Mexico employers.
We we have any rules for that
for example there may not be a
demand for a welder in reserve
but once they get the welding
certificate they're going to
weld in the oil field in Hans
are important to.
The reserve the state will know
what they need is something
else.
Mr chair Senator we would be
looking at the data from the
department of workforce
solutions which would be all
encompassing of the state and I
can tell you right now based on
that data it would say that a
welder somebody who wants to be
a welder can enroll in school
and get that certificate or
degree.
so I I decided to retire from
here and I just want to go to
the Bob Ross the painting
because he's all happy and you
know he used to be a drill
sergeant in a and it's not such
a happy guy and so maybe I need
to follow him.
This put a little tree over
here.
But you'll pay for the if I had
six hours of it.
Mr chair no we would not it
would have to be dependent on
second satisfactory academic
progress in which you are
working towards a certificate or
a degree.
You have to be working towards a
certificate or degree we would
not find a if you were taking
our classes just because you
wanted to do something in your
free time Senator that I could
tell you what was working for.
Associated in some okay just the
way other things at finally Mr
chairman I think this is the
important part.
I know because.
Teach classes myself I've done
at the college of Dunham in the
public if people have skin in
the game.
They succeed if they don't have
skin in the game if it's free.
It's working exactly what you
pay for nothing.
But if they have skin in the
game into scandal have been much
they can be a couple of dollars
we five dollars.
But they have to put something
in and I and I know this from
personal experience of of doing
classes myself.
So anyway Mr chair I'm done you
know my concerns is more
philosophical but I wanted to
ask those money question.
Thank you Sir sure won't buy you
any can Senator Hemphill we're
going to.
There's time when we're going to
kind of wrap this up because
perspective.
Quick question on page four.
the kind of detail a question
was asked earlier about when
these funds kick in as kind of.
Will we require.
Federal funds to come in first
before these funds like Pell
grants now.
I would I'm just curious why
would we want to do that just to
maximize use of state dollars.
Mr chair because our students
who take out Pell grants or
receive Pell grants are are most
at risk students in the country
those dollars are reserved for
students who have a low expected
family contribution therefore
the need more assistance and aid
to be successful in college so
that's why it's applied last
after all tuition and fees so
that they can afford the cost of
attendance associated with
housing transportation folks
materials etcetera.
But yes that that only furthers
my lack of understanding of why
we would want to have them use a
program before we make up the
difference.
Maybe you can explain that to me
offline.
Mr chair more than happy to do
that senator I cannot be
explained that self help grant
and if a student really needs
money for college we should put
the money for college first and
the Pell grant maybe helping
with their apartment their food
everything in the background and
so we take credit for that up
front then they get less of a
tuition and so then they
struggle to get by that so
that's.
That because the Pell grant
covers more than just education
covers all that other stuff new
cars and Mr chairman I'd like to
offer another comment on that
Senator Steinborn is
In our case with our nephew
their parents would not release
any income tax information so
there was no opportunity to
apply for federal funds in when
they went for federal funds it
was very minimal because of the
lack of the information from the
parents.
Okay.
Thank you I don't see anybody
else on the list of the me ask
some questions what about fast
but they have to apply for the
faster the first.
This may not because of in a
certificate they may not need it
but that's that's one question
that I always.
Mr chair for the opportunity
scholarship it is not required
however a majority of our
students in the state of New
Mexico do apply for the fact
that.
Is that a university
requirements because then in
order to get fast but yet that a
trigger all your Pell grants and
everything else first right so
but it's not a requirement for
opportunity now I think I
understand why not agent can
explain to me later Mr chair as
I just said some parents will
not release their personal
information which is required
for the past month so that some
students don't have the
opportunity to even go that
route and it's a big debate at
college level because everybody
assumes that a student's parents
are going to sign the papers
release information and some
parents will not.
On that that's parenting that
they should if they want to
educate their children and save
themselves money that's a
different conversation the the
other thing at.
You I'm a little bit worried
about how the the certificate
program is is used in the I.
Angie and I know in LESC next
year we're gonna come back and
we're going to start looking at
I. Angie and and maybe scoring
those certificates because some
universities have have a.
Use those to enhance their I. N.
G. when they're not really that
great of a certificate in the
sale it will offer your
certificate program counted in
your I. Angie because its
certificates it in and get it
both ways the other thing in the
bill credit system.
Are we gonna let.
I read count dual credit or we
can let high school count bill
credit and not be able to fund
the SCG over here and more and
I. N. G. over there that's a big
question for me too because I
think a lot of these people are
going to use that and I'll use
that young man is simple he got
to associates at UNM well the
school district paid for it we
pay for is SCG in the school
district and they pay that when
they got him in the SCG you got
to associates and counted in
that I NG at UNM Gallup so.
That's a double building and and
that's as a high school student
so somehow we got a hat we're
gonna pay once but who's going
to get the credit and that's a
big question for me.
Mr chairman thank you for that
we're looking forward to the
higher education subcommittee
reconvening after session so we
can continue that conversation
and dialogue I do know there are
concerns of you and many members
of the subcommittee so we're
dedicated to that.
We make more opportunity for
everyone when we only spend
money once not spend money twice
in universities are kind of good
it.
Will there be a certain areas so
we'll have to really track that
I any other questions from
committee members thank you to
have a motion on on.
We have the past motion from
Senator Padilla second by
Senator.
Misinterpret real quick can the
motion before an updated some
with the win the not
withstanding but leaving the
clause for
This is the disabled an
exceptionally mitigating
circumstance students.
Adrian center.
If we can work on that as we go
to the floor I don't think that
will be a big issue right I'd
like to get this committee
report read out because we need
to move this bill over Senator
we have your commitment will
provide we will take out that
not withstanding I understand
that an inmate and don't don't
commit to that and may or may
not need to be there but we
could find something else but if
if yeah yeah if we don't if
we'll just circle back around
that you have to work on it we
have a command work on madam
secretary so we adopted we did
this substance for discussion
right now we need to adopt the
substitute.
Have a motion to not serve to by
interpreting and Senator Diamond
right.
You call the roll on in the
sixty.
And then we'll pass.
Twenty they do not pass on the
motion for do not pass on.
A I move a do not pass on Senate
bill one forty and a do pass on
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
forty with the provisions that
were outlined by Mr opulent.
Thank and the second from
Senator Diamond singing
different motion that we call
the roll Senator.
Yes Senator Burt yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales.
Yes and if you have to yes
Senator could be yes.
You yes and two for no.
You can find.
Thank you Senator Woods.
With with no Senator Rodriguez
yes throughout the yes yes and
senator Munoz yes if you if you
nine yes to not.
Thank you thank you Senators
thank you very much Mr chairman
chair members of the committee.
Thank you you know our staff
does want to go to church and
and Representative we will come
back I will tell you for the
committee we're gonna figure out
whether gonna come back.
For the floor or after the floor
I'm thinking after the floor for
just a few minutes to get the
bills out I did promise
Representative we give her bill
out and move forward you may
want to call your members and
save this limit public comment
so we can move forward and not
have that many.
We will keep you informed the.
Thank you guys for coming in.
The session.
