Just as we move forward because
of the the work the
disaggregation if you will of
many of the issues but at the
same time as we do move forward.
Where all this is leading and
we're hoping that over the next
week they'll be many of these
issues that will be addressed at
the same time but they'll be a
balance as we move forward so
that at least for this session
as we talk about the next
generation session which is this
will be able to come up with
many of the solutions to the
work that you all have been
continuing to perform not only
over the years but in
particularly during this session
and and I really appreciate your
indulgence and your experience
and of course your patience with
us says with a you have to go
back and forth to AGFC incoming
to Senate finance and try to go
ahead and balance all of these
things and then follow us with
all the water bills and other
bills that that directly affect
you so again it's a it's great
to be here this morning.
Working very closely with
Senator Diamond and not just a
kind of a heads up there will be
some legislation that we're
going to
put together that hopefully will
address many of the concerns
that that she has within the
district that she represents
she's been very very strong as
an advocate to ensure that this
information continues to not
only be brought forward but in
the legislation that will be
prepared it'll create part of
that balance that in essence
helps us to support if you will
the needs of of Southern New
Mexico.
Before we get started with a
presentation as J. will will
start with that and of course we
have
no more sheets that will be
handed out to you
I'd like to introduce a a
student from and losses and I
those people that have been
working with me over the years
know that whenever there is a
young person that we're working
with to help so that their
career to will will blossom and
we'll sort I don't introduce
some by name I let them do that
because I want to give them that
opportunity to feel comfortable
in presenting before an audience
and today what I'm going to do
before we get started with the
presentations is just have a our
student introduce yourself say a
few words about herself and then
we'll get started with
presentations and again thank
you all very much for it for
your attendance in the respect
you continue to go ahead and
show us as we work to formulate
if you will the consensus.
Legislation that is before us.
If you will yeah just just go
ahead and sit down and and yeah
there you go yeah.
hello guys my name is Manny
Cepeda and I come from at the
New Mexico I'm asking your
guests in high school and I'm at
a loss the incident happened in
the last for three years now and
I'm an advocate for myself and
for others that don't know how
to speak use your voice to
speak.
So so if you will it's it's a
great opening but
Not slow down a little bit
because I want everyone to catch
your name this is this is again
we talk about our future leaders
you have someone here and I'm
gonna let her tell you a little
bit about herself because she
wants to get into an area that's
very similar to the one that
most of you are are very much
involved in.
so my name is Melanie Cepeda.
And some of the goes a half
after graduating from high
school is going to and I miss
you and my majoring in film and
media studies and minoring in
environmental science to help or
plan to become better very good
thank you very much you for
months.
thank you very much proceed.
Thank you Mr chair so I just
wanted to start office
acknowledgments first to the
experts and department members
for their assistance in tackling
all these water issues Senators
obviously for your work on the
subcommittee it's much
appreciated and the
bipartisanship and then also to
the water policy and
infrastructure task force for
their work and identifying some
of these water challenges and
also for their respective
recommendations and the work
they've done that.
so as many of you know in the
session there's a lot of
discussion surrounding the
unprecedented opportunity that
we have to fix some of New
Mexico's longstanding issues but
we also know that with the
opportunity comes unprecedented
challenge and the water policy
infrastructure task force
identified some areas in water
supply state government capacity
community capacity and also
within watersheds rivers
aquifer's and just a kiss.
which we will be talking about
today and dividing the
legislation into these
categories
on inclusivity and equity
another very important
consideration from the task
force was water equity ensuring
that all communities have access
to clean affordable drinking
water that they all share in the
economic social and
environmental benefits and that
they have resiliency and
programs in place to mitigate
floods drought and the the
impacts of climate change.
so going on to the legislation
in front of us we have a
comprehensive legislation lists
which kind of contain some of
the similarities and differences
along with the fiscal impact
report summaries that's the
packet here we have a table of
the legislation as it relates to
of all water legislation as it
relates to other relevant water
legislation how they compare how
we can maybe
Find some overlaps in that
legislation and then we have a
table provided by the office of
the state engineer thank you to
and from Mike Hammond for that
that details the task force
recommendations for various
water issues so the goal is
going to be to kind of
categorize this legislation
figure out where the overlap is
where the differences are and
crafts some sort of package to
get help out to people in New
Mexico who need.
So so with that estate do people
have copies of the the the
information that you're
providing or how can we share
that with them so that we're all
basically on the same page as we
move forward Mr chair there are
some additional copies here but
the desk if anyone would like
them there is only if you I
apologize for that but I'm happy
to share my materials as well
with anyone needs and but yeah
all of the information I'm
presenting is is up here as well
if anyone would like it so so
again as we do move forward if
anyone feels comfortable to come
to the table to be part of the
conversation please feel
comfortable to do so along with
that
there are copies of what the
presentation is going to entail
feel comfortable to either share
it forward to prove that
information and again working on
the consensus piece and and this
information will be taken back
to members of the Senate as we
go forward so that people
understand that there's been a
lot of work that has been put
forward but at the same time
with the recommendations this is
coming from the input of people
that deal directly with the
delivery of water of the issues
that are surrounding our water
crisis in New Mexico and then
from there of course what maybe
some of the larger on the best
pieces of legislation may entail
so with that as to what what is
your thought an idea in terms of
how we're going to proceed thank
you for that Mr chair yeah I
just wanted to reiterate the
this is going to be R. my
thought for this was to be more
of a conversation and to have
people from relevant departments
and experts in their respective
fields to come up and just talk
about whatever they feel like
they have input on so again as
you said Mr chair please feel
free to come forward and speak
on any of these bills.
In front of us I think first
maybe we could go through the
legislation list either the
physical packet for the data
sheet will be fine just to look
at similar legislation and see
if either of you have any
questions about how this
legislation overlaps or differs
that maybe some of our
Department so with that the the
people in the audience are you
keeping up with this are you
gonna just maybe basically
listen at first and then then we
get into some of that discussion
what are what are your thoughts.
Thank you know what I can tell
so.
okay so what we're gonna do then
with this J. he'll be going
through through that legislation
again in privative I believe
most of you already know what
most of these pieces of
legislation entail but again
just to let you know that were
providing if you will a
collective effort together
thoughts and ideas that will
make decisions no one piece of
legislation will be left out of
the conversation before we go on
to the just very quickly Center
Diamond do you have any thoughts
in terms of procedure any any
issues that you wish to address
up front.
This is the state of.
And
the bill.
Okay good Mr I thank you Senator
Diamond Mr chair so.
I think we should service Senate
bill fifty seven which should be
the second listed bill just
because I had it listed that it
relates also to Senate bill one
seventy six which is the city of
fund for disaster response of
that bill distributes to a
different fund called the state
can community ditch
infrastructure fund which are
kind of disperses in a similar
location and it provides
permanent revenue sources for
grants and loans to these
subdivisions and then there's
also a five million dollar
transfer
which for context has been four
million dollars in previous
years since July two thousand
seven
So yeah it does.
I guess I would open it up for
questions on how this
legislation how this legislation
differs from Senate bill fifty
seven so so probably the best
way for us to to go through this
is again this is very informal
why don't you continue to go
through the different pieces of
legislation that you want to
highlight and then that way the
members that are here or those
that maybe would have questions
that are online but we're able
to do is to then have that
conversation where we see the
differences in how we need to to
approach that so
thank you Mr just going to go on
please that's an excellent idea
and in addition on Senate bill
fifty seven just one more I had
that it also related to the
water protection permanent fund
and that it was also
establishing a permanent fund
for water protection.
So as we go forward and and not
to interrupt but here now we're
starting to go ahead and talk
about if you will those those
trust funds the permanent funds
other ways to go ahead and start
to garner resources have them in
areas where there be more
resources available if you will
for the kind of projects that
you all feel we really need to
initiate as we continue to
resolve some our water issues
please proceed thank you Mr
chair moving on to Senate bill
fifty eight the introduction of
new guidelines for Interstate
Stream Commission members
I have this relating to Senate
bill two thirty nine which is
the Stream Commission which
establishes the Stream
Commission which deceptions the
state acequia bureau within the
Interstate Stream Commission
excuse me
In that these both are relating
to the Interstate Stream
Commission and that also.
Sorry one sec.
Yeah in that they're both
relating to the Stream
Commission first is the
membership adding professional
requirements and then the second
would be adding another bureau
to the Stream Commission which I
guess raises the issue of
capacity however the the
analysis suggests that there
will be able to.
Into the capacity issue so that
Senate bill again fifty eight
relating to the Stream
Commission sicuro.
K. proceed you'll move on to
Senate Bill.
One seventy six.
One one ninety one ninety five
sixty five.
The water protection permanent
fund again this had been
relating to the water trust fund
and also Senate bill one ninety
seven which is the
infrastructure planning and
development office
Late this piece of legislation
because although it's not
explicit in the title it
establishes a water projects
Capacity with under the office
of the governor
To disbursement for these
projects so again just relating
to disbursement who's handling
which projects and do we need to
be more specific or less
specific with who's receiving
and and what if I may the
members of the subcommittee the
issue as we deal with these and
it's very open and to the people
that are here these are for
discussion purposes so if there
are some modifications some
suggestions we can we can have
those open discussions but again
with the ideas that are out
there how we gonna make this
work for those people to deal
directly with the environment
with water with the issues that
we're dealing with as we move
forward please proceed.
On thank you Mr chair so if you
move on to the next bill Senate
bill one ninety seven as I
mentioned the planning and
development office creates a
water projects team I had that
this also relates to the
permanent the water protection
permanent fund however that fund
to specific to reservoirs
diversions and dams and it also
operates under the state
treasury S. I owe and DFA rather
than of the office of the
governor so there's a slight
difference and disbursement
location and again the US Stream
Commission acequia bureau
because under the proposed
legislation they would be
responsible for facilitating
acequia specific capital
projects also under the office
of the governor.
Senate bill two hundred is a
regional water projects
procurement this isn't a piece
of legislation that ask for any
funding or request for an
application anything but it does
relate to a different US piece
of legislation relating to
procurement code changes Senate
bill seventy six would remove
exemptions from the procurement
code for a lot of existing
entities where as Senate bill
two hundred adds an exemption to
the procurement code for
regional water projects so there
could be a slight discrepancy
there that might be worth diving
into.
I'm moving on to the Stream
Commission insecure I think
we've covered that that one is
relating to funding and
oversight locations.
Relating to the infrastructure
planning and development office
one ninety seven and one seventy
six the acequia fund for
disaster response
and there is House legislation
as well the only one that
relates to any other water
legislation would be the a joint
resolution how straight
resolution for which is
Identical to Senate joint
resolution number six aside from
one word which would be
environment
versus environments and as my
first you're not sure if this is
that a technical thing us and
both bodies need to pass it but
I just like that there could be
some overlap there.
so with that.
Would anyone like to come talk
about acequia as or
disbursement under the office of
the state engineer verses the
office of the governor.
And with that feel comfortable
to go ahead and come on up to
the table all the microphones
are are working we are of course
live so there may be people that
are paying attention to these
particular pieces of of
legislation discussion is very
and and I don't want you to be
shy with all this this is this
is helping us put this together
because it's an enormous task
and with that if we don't have
the discussion innocence than
the ideology becomes if you will
the mindset of a few and we want
as much outreach input as
possible as we move forward you
all know how to operate the
microphones that are there at
the table.
And then of course you're going
to be you'll have some of the
forms there.
Thank you.
There you go now to get rid of
the shyness surveillance coming
up that's good.
Of course thank you Mr state
engineer and I you're you're
starting to listen this up a
little bit there you go that's
what I love.
We're not we're not going to go
ahead and try to go down the
line if you all will just sure
the mikes and and let's have the
discussion there could be some
of the points that we're not
agreeing with but which might be
better use the justification as
you move forward also is sure
some of your thoughts and ideas
and Senator Woods has just
walked in he's in another very
strong advocate when it comes to
water dams and all the
infrastructure this related.
please proceed however you all
want to want to go forward.
The store if you some of the
questions.
Okay Sir okay.
Good morning Mr chairman.
Thank you.
The state from the small.
There's a there's a Mike good
morning hello my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico state
association and I just want to
briefly review some bills
relating to a second and I also
have a.
some slides I could share with
the committee as well but I just
want to share that that there
are a second statewide there are
about between six hundred fifty
and seven hundred a second and
third twenty three different
counties across the state and
while there's a high
concentration in north central
New Mexico there are as sick as
in numerous counties in other
parts of the state including
Grant County a dongle
Lincoln County Otero
and Sierra County as possible on
San Juan so the the majority of
them are are and we have the bus
some again tells Mada center
office and a one.
And by the look at so Mr
chairman I just want to thank
you for the opportunity to share
some information with you we
have some.
Legislation this session that
would address some really
critical infrastructure needs
and the first bill is Senate
bill one seventy six and that
bill would.
amended the second committee did
infrastructure fund and the A.
C. T. I. F. was created in
statute in two thousand nineteen
what it did was simply codify or
to
formalize an existing program
that had been at this the
Interstate Stream Commission for
of probably that since the
nineteen eighties as what but I
when I've been able to to
determine and that program has
been administering a second
capital projects for many years
and they also had a a ninety ten
program that had been in place
as well so the A. C. T. I. F.
what it did was formalizing
codified the the
appropriation of two point five
million from the irrigation or
construction fund to the
Interstate Stream Commission for
that purpose so that was passed
in twenty nineteen it had a
delayed enactment until fiscal
year twenty to.
In fiscal year twenty to the
program still had not been
established had not been stood
up it was still operating under
the previous
where was going with with the
year two year appropriation and
hospital to so it didn't stop it
but it was but the A. C. T. I.
F. as a program hadn't been
established but by fiscal year
twenty three the program was up
and running it's being directed
by Jonathan Martinez he has a
very capable staff they're very
knowledgeable about a second
they are understaffed for the
number amount of work that
they're doing and see but the
the the number of a second step
in asking for help has increased
in recent years and I have a
infrastructure master list that
we've developed since twenty
sixteen and this list has over
two hundred a second but it goes
back to twenty sixteen I think
the number's been whittled down
but I know that the ICS check
your program is has their hands
and the vast majority of these
like ninety nine percent of them
so they have a lot of work to do
these are capital projects this
is also tracking
I see I see a piece that are
done by a second and I'm happy
to share this list with the
committee actually a.
And so you can see that there's
a lot of these participate for
thank you at funding and.
So we're going okay thank you so
as you can see there's a lot of
a great need for secure funding
and the types of projects that
these programs are funding are
typically diversion dams
improvement of the the ditch
itself culverts flumes and the
typical diversion structure in
pre ninety pre COVID nineteen
dollars was about two hundred
thousand dollars no that's going
up.
Yes.
Zoom zoom zoom yes okay yes but
yes thank you for that
clarification so I just wanted
to to clear of a share with you
some background information
about how much work that I just
he's doing but the Interstate
Stream Commission the new fund
is
Okay perfect.
In fiscal year twenty three they
they had a work plan in which
they will use
Probably spent on the full two
point five million dollars and
the work plan which I can also
assure the committee
has narrative and then there's a
list of projects that you could
see and you can see the name of
the just seconds and the short
description of what those
projects are so that's to say
that the project the program is
up and running as it should it
has an annual funding so.
Of of these these of the sec is
apply in March and then ideally
they would have money by by the
fall for that window of
construction of it's a
construction project they can
apply for either
design they can get an
engineering design and in one
funding cycle and then they can
come back with the completed
design and apply for the
construction cycle so it's
really meant to be a one stop
shop for a second so that they
get assistance with planning
engineering design and
construction
do this over time improve
outcomes for completion of
projects in a timely manner and
the getting back to Senate bill
one seventy six it's doing up
for different things one of is
to add to disaster recovery to
the purpose of the fund
for the first time this year the
Interstate Stream Commission has
taken a very active in important
and meaningful role in
responding to the disaster there
have been studies done to do
cost estimates and it's been
Jonathan Martinez I just see
that took the initiative to work
and get some of those studies
done because without cost
estimates hard to ask for
disaster money from even other
disaster programs and and and at
some point the
engineering and construction
phases might also be deployed
for those purposes so disaster
recovery is very important.
I also have a list of a second
to in been done much in the
funds this list is
list of around seventy eight
seconds in the one area
we've assessed most of them and
there's about forty five to have
major major damage this other
list has the black fire and
we've estimated of course it had
a black wireless as well and in
that area about thirty seconds
have been damaged so that gives
an idea of the extent of the
damages so as B. one seventy six
ads disaster recovery to the
purpose it also ensures that
there's not a cost share
requirement we've heard back
from a second is whether it's
disaster non disaster that the
culture requirement is
send some cases prohibitive and
they choose not to participate
in this program and the local
enough to do capital outlay
instead of going through the icy
program and
the reason that the AC DIF is is
a better route for a second
project is because they have
access to planning design before
doing construction and if
they're all going to go to
Google only because there's no
pressure we're going to continue
to have some issues with
incomplete projects and so if
the more that we can assure a
seconds into the A. C. T. I. F.
it's it's and it's it's going to
lead to better outcomes
yes.
What available funds are
available to sec is today what
are all the funding sources.
I would say Mr chairman and and
Senator Diamond do that this
program is one of the primary
sources the second committed
Jennifer structure fund at the
Interstate Stream Commission.
And then there's capital outlay
thank then there's
These those are the two places
from also second get their
funding from the state
they could also ask for money
from the water trust board but
over the years we've seen very
few a second supply there and
even fewer make it through the
application process because it's
such a rigorous process so
theoretically water transport is
a source but it's rarely rarely
used and much reoccurring money
other any record recurring
sources for sick yes and or or
is it a one time application.
Your bonding only thank you Mr
chairman and senator Diamond the
recurring funding that's going
to affect us now is two point
five million to the A. C. T. I.
F. and that only became
recurring in twenty nineteen
nineties and it's and it only
got stood up in fiscal year
twenty three.
And so the the estate kia Fund
this this S. B. one seven six
what establish six million
dollars recurring on top of it I
think that we agree that you
there's a need out there for it
for it can you speak to the
capacity are you able to spend
you spend that two point five
million dollars annually and if
we if we allocated an additional
six and and recurring do you
have the capacity to the state
K. have the cat capacity to put
the money on the ground
Mr chairman and Senator Diamond
the the the increase so the of
the four things that the bill
does one of them is to increase
the recurring appropriation from
two point five million to two
point five to five million.
And
And and.
It the the capacity the need is
out there the capacity really
depends on having enough I just
see staff to administer the
projects hello would could I add
to that a little bit so our
I just want to mention with
regards to the the two point
five million this year we have
encumbered essentially all of
that money except for a a
fraction that we're holding
given we we don't know what the
actual cost will be because of
the just these inflationary
pressures but we fully expended
expect to encumber and utilize
the two point five million this
year we didn't last year I know
that's what's on your books
right and and the reason for
that really goes to the the act
itself it required guidelines to
be put in place and the public
process to do that and in a
significant amount of
communication and coordination
with the acequia commissions and
the safety association so we did
that in front of the Interstate
Stream Commission and public
took what eight months or so and
so by the time we've gotten
through that we had that in
place and then we needed to
start the application process it
it took a good part of a year to
get to that point and so this is
the first fiscal year we're
actually putting those monies on
the ground.
Thank you that clarifies a lot
so we wouldn't be in jeopardy of
reverting funds because we
couldn't get it out the door let
me ask you both a pretty basic
question when it comes to just
be two thirty nine.
What what the SA Kaeo bureau do
that interesting Interstate
Stream Commission doesn't
already.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
the the bureau would be located
within the S. Interstate Stream
Commission act and the bureau
would creating a bureau
in in our estimation would
formalize the program better and
make sure that there's dedicated
staff to to a second the thank
you program at the Interstate
Stream Commission in recent
years has been understaffed the
staff tend to be pulled off into
other projects another needs
around the state M. in general
the IC is an understaffed agency
and so the the thank you the
staff who have a second
expertise are not dedicated
staff if if there were an
executive euro ideally that
would change and there would be
stuff that would be dedicated
otherwise nothing would change
they would still have the same
purpose and function in terms of
how the service I guess what
what it not just instead of
creating an entire bureau would
not just make sense to fund an
FTP within the I just need to
focus on thank you.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
that's something we've been
trying to do for the last four
five years and I know there's
progress that has been made and
perhaps Ralph Mr chair appears
in Schmidt would want to share
that
so the the and the L. the end
goal is to have more staff and
to have staff that are dedicated
if if there wasn't a second
bureau it would be something to
build upon upon to have
programmatic capacity but I
think you raise a good question
and senator and Paul just add to
that so when I started at the I.
S. C. and and for the first
eight to ten years we have five
to six people working on a
secular related projects and
programs less than less lesser
number of projects that we
actually have today and then
after two thousand and eight we
lost through retirement and
other things a good portion of
that and we had three staff that
we're dealing with the state
capital the comedian river
system eagle nesting Cristea
primarily set up to the and
that's actually what they do
today now we're we're at today
though is that they also have a
hundred and seventy five
individual contracts that
they're operating running for
you know various types of the
state care projects and I I just
want to bring that up because a
lot of these are not large
projects in and many of them
don't meet the overall need that
the state key is looking for but
that's the money they got and
their volunteer organizations as
Mike you said like you all right
and and when it comes to putting
that money on the ground there's
a significant amount of
interaction that has to occur to
say what can really be done with
the available dollars and so
anyone of these projects it from
my perspective having done a
wide range of projects it's it's
strange the you know what would
maybe normally be a workload for
a hundred thousand dollar
project or two hundred thousand
dollar project is the same for a
twenty thousand dollar project
for twenty five.
And it just because of the
nature of those capital
appropriation so a lot of time
and effort going into that the
ACD I F. that we just spoke
about and then also the issues
associated with disaster
response I actually think the
bill that's out there is one of
the the biggest things it does
is recognize and and help to
kind of set a framework for for
looking at disaster response you
Mike you know what I'll do this
again you know you look at the
climate change assessment by the
New Mexico bureau of geology and
mineral resources sources and
you look at where the impacts of
that are that are going to be
felt most in first it's our open
mountains we're seeing it today
right missing it from those
fires and so on and that's where
our CQ communities are it's
really important I think that
the able to be able to respond
to that type of disaster
situation and we currently are
struggling to find ways to do
that I think this bill helps to
to actually kind of recognize
that need and and put some
people to it so as well as
building the bureau we have two
staffers of seeking to hire but
the workload is is really
enormous.
So effective at yeah so with
that are you saying that we do
not have funded FTE positions to
do this.
Mister chairman Senator no
that's that's incorrect we have.
We have three funded FTE
positions now.
In large part to act thinks also
support from the acequia
association in commission for us
to do it we're hiring two more.
and with those two more we we
start to get a handle on the
existing kind of that capital
projects we have and so on but
we're not in a situation where
we could take on very much more
than that while some of us is.
The president we have the money
to are you.
Mister chairman Senator which we
we currently have the money to
hire the authorized people yes
which are two additional staff
and then the three existing so
what do.
Mr Chairman it basically
recognizes the you know the the
that the state care group and
then seeks to elevate them I I
you know we've we've had these
discussions with the state
commission so on the Legislature
normally you know that puts in
funding at a program level so
the I. S. sees a program under
the office of the state engineer
and it doesn't really go below
that right so it's not clear how
that fits but I think the intent
that Paul and others are trying
to put forward is to raise the
awareness of the need and then
to basically get a focus that
there is a long term need that's
greater than we're meeting
today.
I would add Mr chairman and
senator woods that.
The existing three are are not
full time you know they've
because of other demands in the
agency they've been pulled into
other projects
the the the the resident expert
Jonathan Martinez has been there
for many years and and does a
really excellent excellent job
at what he does is pulled into
multiple directions you know
he's he's working on the eagle
nest project eastern New Mexico
pipeline and when it could this
is the this is a major piece of
work the big body of work and
and and that the idea of having
a bureau with dedicated staffing
that are consistently there for
a secular work would help these
projects move along just to give
an example because of the
multiple steps it takes time.
Of student federal.
This is a mansion yes.
You're you're trying to dictate
managed still understand that.
Really it's a management okay.
I'm not sure.
We sometimes.
We try to make the executive
agencies.
Through legislation but at the
end of the day.
Their decision was.
Understand what you're trying to
do all proceeds are.
And we'll try to hold their
feet.
What you're advocating.
But sorry Senator that in the
interrupted you
Mr chair I'm sorry did a job in
the middle of this back out
here.
No Sir Mr Mr chair if I can
follow up on that Interstate
Stream Commission in your budget
you requested additional three
hundred thousand dollars to
expand for to pay to positions
for lower or lower we are ground
ground water depletion you are
funded with vacancies now and
you're getting a two thousand
two hundred thousand dollar
expansion for two more vacancies
which the recommendation
supports we don't need a law to
do this we need in our state
streams.
To fill your vacancies and to
make someone do their job
dedicated to the acequia but the
money and the structure is in
place.
Mister chairman Senator I want
to just go.
Here is this pay the all you got
to turn your.
so with regards to the two
hundred thousand that's just a
replacement of trust fund it
doesn't change any of the
staffing ability or the hiring
ability you're absolutely
correct we are.
Currently moving on hiring from
last year's
legislative approvals of a
couple of additional staff about
actually about four right and to
those are for a sake is there it
the hiring process takes some
time so we're we're going out
we're working to hire them and
will bring them on board and
they will definitely be helpful
for the existing amount of
program work that we do we also
have the two that are there that
we highlighted for the lower Rio
Grande depletion program and
we're actually hiring an
additional administrative staff
to help and so we're doing that
to build up the overall staff
for all of our needs across the
the of New Mexico we believe
there is additional to staff
that that we are hiring this
year will allow us to as I
mentioned before to better take
on the existing contracts we
have in the A. C. T. I. F. now.
It would not allow us to take on
things like disaster response to
any decree I mean we're we're
just that Jonathan has been
pulled into staff has been
pulled into meetings after
meetings after meetings over
this summer from the black fire
you know to the calf came in and
others over the community ditch
issues and so on trying to move
some money find ways to do that
that is the right thing to be
doing but it's not what they're
you know what they were really
hired to do and so it means
we're not doing our work if you
present for her not doing some
of our contract pieces that's
you know with the situation that
we're dealing with I think
that's what I've mentioned
before the thing that I saw and
and believe in a provides the
the biggest benefit from the
things Apollo put in place is
this aspect of the state taking
on some kind of disaster
responsibility and then for us
that being the ability to be
able to move money during a
disaster time period quickly so.
Mr chair I just see this is a
duplicate of something that's
already in place they're asking
for money for infrastructure
needs in the event of a
disaster.
Disperse the money.
R. I'm done Mr chair I don't see
the chair.
The agency needs to ask for more
money or more activities.
If this is a problem.
About what you've asked for so
the ball's in your court.
In that.
In that.
Is the way I see it Mr chair so
if I may just very quickly in
terms of of some of the
discussion part of the
observation is if there are
additional resources needed for
contract work because of some of
the floods and fires and that
then if you will to those
contracts would address those
issues then how do we take care
if you will the permanent FTEs
to ensure that they continue
with the work that they're doing
instead of over burdening them
with not only the urgency is
that are occurring because of
the fires and floods but also as
we deal with that how we're
going to deal directly with the
on going needs and and the work
that you already have that is
scheduled so again that's a
that's another point that as we
move forward will will fully
consider and I really appreciate
the the responses by members of
the subcommittee because you're
you're seeing a very direct
there there are some issues and
we do need that communication we
need to have the FTEs filled we
need to ensure that their
are contract resources if you
will to address some of the
other needs that were
anticipated and so those are
things than to to to place into
consideration is as we look at
for the legislation.
And any other thoughts in terms
of this issue
Mr state engineer Mr of this the
the topic came up in in our
house finance the budget hearing
regarding the irrigation works
construction fund of the
doubling of the acequia funding
for that purpose and and we had
a discussion about it David
Abbey said that you know that
without reducing of our drawn it
from of our operating side the
that we a transfer from that
fund for part of our operating
budget and and doubling the the
fund the the uses for this
ecozone also the million dollar
year fund
drawn up for the force to fund
it yeah that was a water for
conservation for conservation
fund of the solvency of the fund
could decline over time so it's
just that's something that the
due to just want to make of this
you know committee aware of so
so we there are you know plus
the fund up at any time but also
We would like to of continue to
wean ourselves off on the
operating budgets and and move
all of our our needs on to the
general fund so that'll help
both of our permanent funds
going forward the Rio Grande
we're gonna work fund to so.
So so as a level of assuredness
for the members of the
subcommittee if you will again
just in privative indicate and
they're they're not commitments
but some of the things that you
see as we have that the open
discussion how are we going to
address if you will the issues
that are before us when it comes
to dams the work there too our
our water flows as we deal with
the a sec just and if you will
the other related projects that
are going to be there how how
are we going to work to ensure
that in in the near future we
have the necessary FTEs we have
the resources and that's going
to be balanced out if you will
over the next several years
going into the out years and
hopefully this decade how are we
going to definitely address that
again just with a short
statement in your own words
because we don't want to miss
the point in terms of how all
this is going to be connected.
Thank thank you Mr Carroll take
a stab at that I I I think our
the the thing that we've been
working on through the water
policy Mr task force was to put
together a lot of these policy
and and and funding ideas in the
three categories that that that
we've been talking about and and
it's driven
a lot of what's happened in the
Executive recommendations in the
special so we haven't seen the
capitol recommendations of the
executive yet but we also do it
that's driven some to the extent
on the capital recommendations
from from the LFC
and and lot of the legislation
to is under twelve.
Intertwined in some of the the
infrastructure water and
infrastructure task force
recommendations there's one on
the list that I think should be
added in that Senate bill three
three seven which is a
Water of regional water of
security planning act which
really helps kind of time a lot
of issues together
across the spectrum on on water
resources challenges
that we're facing to re eight
reinstitute the the the the
regional planning effort in
order to begin to get the
priorities identified in all the
regions
and two of integrate that in
with the the legislative agenda
that we have before you here
going forward as well as to
implement kind of this five year
plan and funding of of
recommendations coming from the
executive so so that's another
I went that that fits into all
this a number of these overlap
in many ways but I think we can
we can we could talk about some
that it directly from our agency
of perspective is is I I think
we've come to agreement on the
Interstate Stream Commission
membership process went through
the the amendment went through
hearing again yesterday and it
it will that was Tuesday right
now anyways
the that will be going forward
of the state that that we we
said we support and it it it's
in line with a lot of with the
Interstate Stream Commission
recommendation commission's
agenda would would advance in
terms of its membership so so
that that that is
of the a new issue going for
reduces support the strategic
water reserves the executive
request was for ten million the
bill calls for twenty five
million so that will be
reconciled going forward but the
strategic strategic water
reserves it's a very unique
pieces of need for compact
administration around the state
but mostly in the sent you know
San Juan basin area as well as
the Rio Grande but and also in
the paper so there's the
endangered species issues there
that kind of that need to be
addressed as well and then we
were talking about our
integration with the secular the
the executive also requested
with our footballers five
million additional dollars for
secular work going forward that
at the for adequately staffed
like we've been talking about of
those funds can be they they
have twenty twenty six deadline
to be you know be used so being
able to focus our attention on
on the ability to to manage
those are funds in that Senator
Wirth.
Yesterday with the environmental
of.
Alright.
This same issue came up.
Statement was made in order
regular.
Supervisors project.
And I think that's a disconnect
we're talking about funding all
these funds which is good the
state money everybody needs
money but we need someone to
look over the construction
projects as a project manager
and I think maybe that's.
The the pieces that were missing
it is
we've got this we've probably
got a way to.
Read the money.
Application process.
But we have people on the ground
to actually say I can say Mr.
The the project itself.
That's the.
So let's talk about that.
How do we solve that problem.
Thank you for that question
Senator
I'd like to.
Point to the.
That works there like like to
point to the the Senator
compasses Bill
the the SP one ninety five as an
example it it's it's trying to
fund up reserve fund for to
address the severe backlog of
the of our dam safety program we
have a regulatory group that
identifies the dams makes
recommendations to the dam
owners what they need to do to
fix it and then we would oversee
the inspection to make sure and
and and the designs to make sure
they're done in accordance with
with proper dam safety standard
right so that's our role in in
in the office of the state
engineer now the bill as I see
it has an overhead component
administrative overhead
component and it that address is
the ability to provide those
project managers and that they
could be housed in our offices
dam safety office but they be
separated from the regulatory
side so our regulatory folks
aren't are not overlapping with
project management right so so
the idea would be that we do you
know three or four staff with
that degree of of funding a
process to work with the
amendment owners to get them at
a point where they can manage
the resources the projects and
we can put the money on the
ground so so that's an example
of how that could be used by
having in the in this the
funding sources themselves the
ability to have an
administrative component to
provide the staff to.
Question on that and I a little
bit.
Question on that.
Is do you need to request that
in your budget are we need to
pass legislation to.
I think that the.
But the the Mr chair the center
was I think it's some of both I
mean we we have you know we made
we made our are requests this
year in September and and our
full request wasn't addressed
but we got we were happy to get
what we got through the LFC at
our
To it you know with this
specific positions but we we
we've been we did a bare bones
request we didn't have this
expensive you know
you know what I mean so that
that's where the fun part comes
into play that is committees up
we're trying to figure out what
we need to fund at this point in
time connection this these all
these great photos we're talking
about getting.
How do we make functions.
And.
A couple of us with a budget
amendment saying I'm a project
engineers are on the the the
need to contract.
With contracting for prop if you
can't get that the staff
yourself are there forms out
there that do this kind of work
can we set up such that they can
do multiple jobs for small.
That's what I think all this
talk about we've got multiple
things and the big one save time
so.
Thank you this committee chair
how do we make more efficiencies
and
But it seems to me that we need
another Senator shop.
To make all these funds from
should.
Close.
Underground without that for.
Mr chair and the server which
John Roderick with the New
Mexico environment department
and I weigh in on this all the
particular bill we're talking
about isn't directly affected us
but to.
The need to manage these
projects this is something we
deal with with all capital
outlay and there's currently no
mechanism to provide us funding
to manage the projects to hire
the additional staff currently
our construction programs bureau
who oversees the capital outlook
outlook projects which short
engineers because we just can't
find.
To hire my current staff is
occurring between a hundred and
twenty five hundred four hundred
and forty projects per engineer
that they're supposed to manage
and that is
way about what anybody should
try to effectively do and what
it what it winds up doing is is
not allowing us to get into the
field like we would like to to
inspect those projects to
confirm the work and things like
that we just physically can't
do.
what one of the things that we
have talked about with regard to
capital outlay mistakes to
question whether there needs to
be legislation not.
Is the fact that if.
Capital outlay projects
regardless of what they were
for.
Came with a
New Mexico is set aside for if
there was five percent of the
total.
Value of that project that was
available for us to manage to
use to pay for that management
that would allow us to continue
to do what we're doing now
because we're engineer shorts
night is contract with a third
party engineering for to do a
lot of the work
but that's that's more expensive
than that haven't staff so we
know that we can move those
projects forward so I think that
this part of the long term fix
we need to discuss how we could
potentially.
Take some funding and ensure
that project management funding
is available currently we
utilize a corrective action fund
money to cover our costs to to
manage a lot of these projects
and that's money that could be
spent for other things but it's
the only option we have right
now.
Thank you.
Share.
I'm not.
I don't want to thank you for
that that I don't understand
you're telling me you can't do
it.
Now because of what it.
the staff you know we have the
evening did not work all this
stuff so maybe we we need to
change the process on some of
the stuff maybe we need to
include that project manager
when the.
Capital outlay projects to.
Maybe that should be
additional cost there is this.
We've got to do something
because we're not getting in the
with our
too many projects out there not
getting it done the family were
murdered G. situation that save
you I.
The possibility of.
Everything you want to talk
about the environmental safety
of all of.
So for more.
You guys.
Our department.
You know where they.
Think about it and use the out
of state and.
You tell me the perfect solution
right now but I am saying.
It's not the fact that we don't
have money to do project.
There's something else.
That money would run off of the.
Here and there again it's a.
So thank you for the and so so
if if I may just very quickly I
know that there's people want to
respond let's respond to this
and then from there I want to go
back to STA and I think we have
enough information to continue
to process so that we can get
ready for tomorrow's meeting but
if I may just go down the line
and talk a little bit about what
you've heard today if those
issues are not the significant
issues what do you see as the
solutions as we move forward.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee I I would just say
I've been doing this a long time
right including private industry
and so on and the and
historically in a and I you know
we're we're all out I think it
in both the executive side in
the legislative side there's
been a real hesitancy to see in
a worry to hire and maybe you
know recurring staff are the
last ten years has been don't do
that do you use one time money
you know find some way to make
things go and and I and I get
why that's been the case now you
know in private industry and
also back in the early two
thousands when we actually had
some money in state government
you know what we what we did is
we got projects the legislature
and us work together on
different programs and projects
that we're gonna go forward
figured out what the the on the
project cost was going to be
added on amount that would be
administrative overhead and we
hired term positions right and
yeah because a lot of times
we're talking projects that
might last a couple years or
five years right and so once
those projects were over those
people lot of times they had
left or if the project continued
well then we we order for
recurring dollars for them we
don't have a lot of that same
ability today right and so a lot
of the specials and stuff like
that don't allow you to do have
any admin costs you can't do any
of that with capital so that all
comes on is kind of unfunded
mandates to take on more and
that's in my mind that's the
place we're stuck and it's kind
of a you know it really is kind
of a catch twenty two situation
that we're in I right now I
think we have with maybe five to
eight years of project that
could be done.
And and a lot of it and and
that's you know pretty
significant amount of time for
people and so term positions
could do that if the specials
and so on have language in them
that allow for some
administrative costs.
Thank you Mr chair.
Members of the committee we we
we talked at length about this
very issue in the task force and
there's lots of recommendations
about
of building the water workforce
and and and that's that's that's
something we need to think about
throughout all levels of
government the state should not
have to shoulder the full load
we have we have counties we have
because we have water come
through the soil water
conservation districts that have
capabilities and and the idea of
of of a you know building that
up over time with this in this
period of time when we can
afford to do it really starts to
diversify our workforce it
starts to allow for other up
deployment opportunities in the
rural parts of our state if
we're helping build that
workforce out there where it's
really needed we also have of
this circular problem of how
we've trained essentially all of
our small community water system
folks and and even the a second
to some extent to to not engage
in a full solution we just wait
for getting the the the capital
outlay that doesn't have any
loan requirements or anything
with that range but but there's
all these other possibilities of
piecing all these funds together
through you know really well
designed legislation however we
put it together to actually
build this whole system up over
the next five to eight years so
that we're more self sustainable
at the local levels and the
state can help advance that but
we shouldn't to be on the HSD
shoulder low altogether so let's
make that pitch as a way to
through this and if it's a
matter of of of us funneling
money down to the local
governments with oversight
that's great but we certainly
want to be in a position to
raise float everybody's both up
well we have this great
opportunity.
That includes the federal
leveraging funds as well.
I could just add to that a
little bit Mr chair my name's
Hannah writes the white I'm the
deputy director at the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission so I work really
closely with both of these
gentlemen
I want to thank you Senator
Woods for your participation in
the as a legislative adviser to
the water policy infers and
infrastructure task force I
think one of the things that
really stood out for me and that
process is that all of the
workgroup so whether they were
working on community water
systems or planning and and
management or watersheds and
groundwater the th the same
themes came up of a need for
increased state agency capacity
and local capacity and so I
think when it comes to the state
agency capacity obviously
supporting the additional steps
staffing that's requested by the
agencies the session is
important I think we have to
have a long view we're going to
need to ramp up our capacity at
the state agencies similarly
what feels like a harder nut to
crack in some ways is the local
capacity piece and I think
that's where I really want to
thank Paul and the work of New
Mexico acequia Association they
do a lot of support at the local
level that's tremendous and
they're great partners with us I
think there's a few other things
moving this session that I think
have the potential to to support
dot local capacity including the
water planning Security Act SB
three three seven that the state
engineer mention which would
enable us at Interstate Stream
Commission essentially to revamp
our regional water planning
program in a way that could
potential the long term provide
additional support the local
level and really support local
entities and and developing that
capacity at the local side and
then also Senator Hemphill is SB
seventy is helpful in that it
would give money to the call in
southwest New Mexico to help
those folks develop local
capacity to tap into the a New
Mexico unit funds available
through Arizona water
settlements Act.
Those types of things I need to
I think we need to be thinking
more about like where how are we
building out local capacity to
take this stuff on and then last
they would just say you know
obviously there's an a number of
things moving the session that
involve rethinking how we fund
water infrastructure including
your bill SB one ninety seven
and I think that it's great to
see that because obviously
there's some things that are a
little broken and how we fund
infrastructure we have a lot of
partially funded projects or
projects that don't come to
fruition whether that's from
state capacity or local capacity
issues but re looking at how we
fund those things seems really
important and all the that that
thank you so much very good
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator is a again I appreciate
the opportunity to engage in
this conversation.
it is exciting to be part of a
team because I feel like that's
what we're coming together pants
I've never seen an erection
between state agencies like
we've seen in the last year
pulling in the same direction
I've never seen really the
opportunity to sit down with our
legislators and work on a common
problem.
A look at the solutions and and
for that I applaud everybody in
this room.
It is very complex problem.
But I had my sense is that we as
a team realizes that we're at a
juncture in in New Mexico to be
able to lay the foundations to
put the state on the path it
needs to be on moving forward
not just this year not next year
but over the next ten the next
twenty years and you know I I
hi.
So much is about managing
expectations in all directions
and the understanding that there
isn't a one size fits all fix
the only thing that's true about
a one size fits all anything is
that it doesn't put anybody just
ride.
And so this is a dynamic thing
it's it's
you know it's going to.
Hit the ground one direction and
then in in six months to a year
we're going to recognize it will
need to tweak something we need
to make it different change.
If if we can get it right on the
first pass into the been done a
long time ago but I think with
the effort the to be input in at
all levels we can get to
solutions that are going to
benefit to St and
We are here the streamlined
calling set here we're here to
be part of the solution and find
a way that ultimately makes it
better for all of us I'm excited
about the opportunity to re look
at how we handle some of the
funding and how we make
determinations on projects
you know because it's not good
to have a lot of money if we
can't figure out how to use it
in a smart man and we as much
money is out there we need to
make every dollar count and I
believe that we're well on the
way to the actual thank you for
allowing us to be part of this
and look forward to to work with
this committee with our
legislators with my co workers
moving forward.
To continue to make progress
here thank you but I know it's
going to be other questions I
just apologize and I'll come
back over on the side of.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
really appreciate the format
that you're using to have this
discussion and thank you for
your inclusiveness the
perspective that I bring to the
table is that of a local of
local communities and I think
that the systemic problems that
you're addressing are very key
and I appreciate the hard work
that you're putting into this of
problem solving because the
communities that have the most
critical needs often have the
least capacity to address those
needs and I'm talking about our
rural areas not just a second
but mutual domestics rural water
systems that are governed and
managed and operated by
volunteers and that's where the
eight to build upon the points
made earlier by
resting colleagues at the state
engineers office Interstate
Stream Commission that the water
task force did highlight the
need for both local and state
capacity and
The local capacity is a
complicated thing to address but
if we could just focus on state
capacity today the the need is
for
robust programs that can deal
with limited resource
communities and I think that the
yes I can committed
infrastructure fund as as we've
attempted to build incrementally
at the Interstate Stream
Commission can address a second
if it has enough resources
because you have dedicated you
can have dedicated staff who
walk a second through all the
steps it's not they're not
Townsend and cities or counties
to have staff that are doing
these projects that have.
May have the means to have
project managers but you're
dealing with volunteers and
there are multiple steps in the
process and you need continuity
of stuff you need people that
have expertise to have
sensitivity to the needs of
rural communities and that's
where of our attempting to do is
build out that second program in
a way that we meet those needs
of working with those contours
to do problem solving during the
planning engineering design and
construction phases and that's
how the programs designed hope
we can build upon it to include
disaster recovery and to address
the cost sure issue mainly those
are the really priority issues
or trying to address with S. B.
one seven six and I just wanna
thank you for listening and
thank you for your leadership
and appreciate being part being
part of this conversation and
look forward to working with
everyone going forward thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
we gonna go back to a few other
remarks I'm gonna go then to the
subcommittee and then I'm gonna
go ahead and close it out with
this today so please proceed Mr
chairman thank you and thank you
members of the committee I yeah
I just was looking back through
the bill and I think you know
how a pen is right if you look
at the water regional water
resiliency system bill the water
protection permanent fund the
infrastructure planning and
development office it is really
great concepts and all of those
for taking things on the that
the piece that's not there in
any of them is the people and in
my mind there's two parts to
that we can talk local and state
or wherever right but I'll stay
away from those
right now my experiences we
don't even have within the
universities right the the the
basically the streams of water
resource professionals that we
had twenty years ago and and for
those that have you been come
through our systems and we have
great universities right they
have to go to other places to
get jobs well so we we have an
ability to try to help those
people move forward are.
Universities come into play to
do that that built our future
but in the short term we're
gonna have to find retired
people to take stuff on right
and and I bring this up because
I have like five projects in
southwest New Mexico some of
going good in others and haven't
but the ones that go really well
is a retired engineer who's
living on a ditch right and
knows how to put that project in
place or of a retired Forest
Service employee to understand
the permitting system that can
cut through everything to get
the project on the ground and
those people just make things
move right and there's other
projects that just all got to
provide because otherwise
they're not out there they're
not out there in state
government they're not out there
in the engineering firms there
is engineering firms are
completely swamped with work and
they got all kinds of federal
money coming in so just you know
we the university piece that's
in there supporting those to
bring good scientists and
engineers forward and people who
can operate you know miscible
water systems I mean we heard
that a number of times right we
got a bill that piece of it and
then we gotta find a way to fill
the gap that's a few years
before we can put that in place.
And then I'm gonna go to the
committee.
Mr chair just wanted to echo
maybe what John wrote Rick said
about the coordination amongst
the agencies and thank Ralph and
Mike for initiating that through
the work that we did in the
fifty or water plan and the
water task force I also wanted
to acknowledge there are four
five water task force members in
the audience here today and it's
been really fruitful process
working with them we hope to
continue to do that and also
have had some conversations
about how to continue to engage
with you all through the
internet interim process and
otherwise to have real
coordinated focused efforts to
to get some of this the stuff
done and so much appreciate the
committee for your time today
thank you very good members of
the subcommittee any thoughts
any closing thoughts for this.
Are you know the you guys are
the experts.
On this the home side.
We need solutions the new that
is.
I.
With this.
To get the money out we would
only grow there's Mersey
situations across the state.
I don't know how to do it I
don't know those people that
about rob if you do and you can
see come out and you know the
same of the environmental
Department
the people are that can can do
these projects and.
Hello if there's a change in of
that needs to happen.
To facilitate this process.
But we've got what you're.
We've we've slept.
Is.
Would you all that you can only.
And I encourage you.
If there's budget amendments
that need to be made us make on.
That budget is is not finalized.
So that's all I have Mister
chair by points well taken
Senator Woods Senator Diamond
place thank you Mr chair because
we have follow here today I want
to I want to response the
specifically to the needs that
she brought forward of the
acequia community and they are
great just two pages of projects
that need to be done I I don't
see as much of a money problem
here as a management problem and
I honestly don't believe that it
takes laws to correct this I do
believe that the acequia is have
been underserved as I was
digging through these numbers
here it looks like in the last
two years including just arpa
Fund seventy seven million
dollars of our funds were
allowed to be expended on
the following and the safety of
maintenance we put eight million
dollars towards the following
program and only fifty thousand
towards the state kia Management
you've only spent ten percent of
that money there's part of money
right there that is earmarked
for sake you management they can
go out today as as we talk about
the needs of an entire different
bureau then to come in here and
and to make sure the needs are
met I just don't see that that's
necessary I see that there is a
a process that has been
identified here it's not even a
money problem if you
specifically need funding for
FTEs that take a very specific
close look to make sure that the
safety is needs are being met
that ask us for the money and
let's get it done but I see.
I see that we've got the money I
see that we've got a revenue and
a funding source here and so
I guess I'm just gonna ask
Interstate Stream Commission
before the budget is elected to
bring forward any necessary
changes to make sure that these
is sick and needs are done in
the event that these laws don't
get past and I'll be quite
honest with you I don't see a
need to passes don't think again
it's a money problem I don't
think that this is structure
problem I think right now we're
facing a management problem and
we need to put the priorities of
the essay kia's a little bit
further on the list little top
of the list and we are
Interstate Stream thank you Mr
chair.
Thanks well taken and when we
start talking about the
infrastructure officer if you
will a management system and
again this may feel very uneasy
as we move forward but there
definitely needs to be at least
an attempt in the solutions so
that we do have better control
in terms of that the resources
that have come and that will
continue to come in definitely
want to put to good use and
close and I would just say let's
keep our minds open to how we're
going to structure this because
if it does take additional
legislation that so we're gonna
work on if it's going to take
our than better coordinate the
resources will be working on
that and of course we still have
time and tomorrow whenever you
come back those that do think a
little bit about some of those
things that we can start to
intertwine if we don't do that
and we all figure well this is
just another exercise of what
I've seen over the years is
there's a lot of legislation out
there it all goes through the
process lot of it makes it to
the to the chief executive's
office and then from there
twenty days are are looked at to
see what they can pick and
choose but in reality a lot of
times the thoughts and ideas and
the words that we bring forward
are left out of that process
just primarily because of that
process that we've been using so
it's really time to see if we
can hone in on some of those
priorities as we move forward
thank you all very much for
