The state employee receive to
fifteen dollars per hour and it
applies to both the state
employees that are under under
the governor's the agencies
under the governor's purview it
also applies to health the two
of the higher education
employees has well has PED
education employees
And and the the regional bill
went also
included contractors in the
intent intent of that was so
that agencies would not.
Field to pay fifteen dollars an
hour or do it by firing their
employees and then hiring
contract work that was the
original intent however that
will the chair pointed out how
how broad that was and how
difficult that would be and how
much that had disrupted that was
so I agreed to to remove it.
And that's part of the amendment
that I offer today or the
committee substitute that I
offer today
the other change is my regional
bill if you look at page two of
had an appropriation of eighty
five million dollars and we
remove that appropriation
because that was my calculation
of of what it would be working
with with analyst to figure it
out and then it also listed
every single day agency and
department the public at higher
it and the chair pointed out
that was unnecessary.
And then my of my bills a
sentence of seven since the
salary increases will be
effective the first full pay
period beginning or after July
first and that was at the
suggestion of the treasurer who
said you don't want to start to
life first because that might be
in the middle of a pay period
and that will be very disruptive
so I did that we're we.
With my Senate.
With my substitute retains which
is.
Point two two two five eight
five.
When you're building for use or.
If you minutes okay let me just
explain them subsection C. of
the regional bill so
The sickly the original bill has
subsection C. and that that what
this does is if the laws enacted
during this session the
legislative salary increases and
we believe we know that if you
will we will.
This bill specifies that this
act the fifty dollars an hour
minimum wage for state employees
will take effect higher.
To the other the other increases
and the reason for that is
Employees who are working who if
we have a minimum wage and an
employees only go up to fifteen
and then somebody gets higher to
fifty they would be at the same
rate and so what this does is it
addresses that issue and raises
them to to fifteen and then they
get the regular rates so their
rates will be larger than than
everyone else
the percentage will be probably
large larger than most but we're
dealing with such small amounts
of money in that range and my
appropriation covers it
the appropriation in this state
and this covers it and my
understanding is a large part of
it is included in the budget in
the house bill two but perhaps
not all of it so it's a policy
decision and I think it's a very
important policy decision that
when we bring these employers up
employees up that then they
don't get.
They don't.
Through get cheated out of the
race that everyone else would
get from from the minimum.
And that's the difference the
oil and the so that's the bill.
Thank you and we do have a
committee substitute you have a
committee subs let me let me go
to the zoom.
In favor of the bill and I have
Phillippi.
On the other states.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee but in this big of
a nine workers rights in New
Mexico Center on sentences order
by Senator in support of this so
we know that all workers we
standing selves.
According to the economic policy
institute family budget
calculator in New Mexico C.
mobile to average thirty
thousand eighty eight thousand
eight hundred eighty five
dollars for your what a full
time worker making fifty dollars
per hour rocks.
Which is a modest at the
committee.
Additional wage no we just spent
almost all the staff in a
particular vote March.
In the on the Middle East.
Representative wasted.
For all public employees or
contractors the state New
Mexico.
At twelve hundred workers
friends public responses of the
center John statements that
schools ladies these workers and
added.
Strong support.
Thank you.
Thank you a lot of room for the.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm here on behalf
of the nearly sixteen hundred
public workers represented by
the communications workers of
America currently
servicing our state workers
like.
In a public worker for twenty
five years anyone who still
earns less than twelve dollars
an hour.
It's because because making sure
you have a claim is potential.
and I twenty that this bill
would send a clear message to
those people.
Service to Mexico to be valued
their work a living wage would
change the lives of thousands of
New Mexicans.
We strongly support this to
committee to decide thank.
Thank you
I don't have anybody else for on
zoom is there anybody against
on.
Gonna go to the audience anybody
in the audience and support.
Anybody against okay Center were
back on the field we do have
Committee said that you're
proposing to the committee and
so do you want to explain
yourself.
Yes.
This this takes into account the
points made by the chair in his
proposed amendment except for
when.
And that is.
Subsection C..
Which is explained if the laws
enacted if whatever races or
included in the the budget plan
and H. B. two that the that this
change this anymore this change
to pay everybody a minimum of
fifteen dollars an hour will go
into effect first and then there
raises will be calculated based
on the fifteen dollars an hour
minimum wage for the state of
play will be.
Paying.
Question.
Etcetera etcetera yes.
Questions on this
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I just want to make sure
I'm following I I've got some
analysis a little while ago on
the.
Portion of when you go to the
fifteen and then add the seven
percent after what what is worse
the dollars to cover that of
course was the funding to cover
the seven percent now for this
group of course is an already Mr
chairman again trying to learn
all the lay of the land on the
stuff is it already somewhere
else in the budget or what what
we.
You're talking a hundred and
forty million to two hundred
fifty million is what this would
wind up
for that extra seven percent.
Understanding is there is in the
budget money for the raises.
The one percent of a of a raise
for all state employees is set
thirty nine million or nineteen
million to somebody no I don't
know I think it's nineteen
nineteen let's just say it's
nineteen million at seven
percent that that's
approximately you know a hundred
forty million is that somewhere
else I don't know if you heard
me you were talking to so Mister
chairman is that somewhere else
in the budget because I don't
see it here in this bill my
understanding is that raise
raises or been calculated in the
in thanks be to the races what
more but what I understand is
there is money in the budget to
pay for state employees to have
a fifteen dollar an hour minimum
wage plus the race.
what I think is a little bit
less clear is whether
education higher education or
PED whether that's in their
budget however.
Has we have had and we're
targeting thirty three percent
thirty two thirty three percent
reserves I maintain that that
adjustment.
Is relatively easy
and and not an enormous amount
of money I was actually
surprised in I don't have the
latest.
FIR.
Fund up but.
The estimate for
For raising all of them to
fifteen dollars an hour in
higher education is eight point
three million.
So.
Again the adjustment and and
that I came to this committee
knowing that I did not have the
analysis but knowing that the
committee analysts to
So Mister chairman if I could
hope for certain would be
something if it's something much
less than eight point three
million.
Mr chairman for that one piece
as far as I can tell because you
have your for state employees so
really if you do the fifteen
plus the seven percent the
minimum new minimum wage and I I
want to do as much as we can for
state employees I I wanted to be
an honorable
a profession that everyone wants
to see to strive to to to say
Hey I I do I work for the state
of New Mexico I mean you know
this is something that I want to
do with my career but that makes
minimum wage sixteen oh five not
fifteen if you do fifteen point
seven percent and is it funded I
mean you know we can't just.
Do this without funding and I
have another set of questions
thank you thank you know I
appreciate the question and I I
believe we should ask an analyst
exactly how much it would cover
asked how many employees would
affect but I have a gun that
figure back so I haven't gotten
over the data budget that
requires but I think the analyst
over here it is thank you
So Senator I can help you out a
little bit the point the point
three million if I look at.
For higher education and for
public education ten point five.
Is the figure initiatives to me
but my point here is is this is
the place to make the budget
adjustment to make this happen
we have such enormous reserves
and our employees particularly
when I heard that the I have
spoken to a woman if you NM
who's been it who's been a
janitor at the law school.
For about twelve now probably
thirteen years and she's making
thirteen fifty but I heard about
somebody's working there twenty
years and barely making eleven
they have been in the works.
The essential workers that
continue working through the
pandemic and they are exceed the
extremely loyal employees and it
is time.
To put our money for where my
office and value them.
And that I believe that that's
very important as you know I
made the point on the floor last
year and I was told it was too
late to make that point on the
floor the budget was fixed and I
am trying now to ensure that you
have the time to make the
adjustment.
And make this make this happen
for state employees.
Mr chairman I think the fifteen
dollars as far as I understood
was budgeted for that was
already but but I I again I just
been full respect them you know
I really want to make sure that
we get this done the right way
but if there's another seven
percent somewhere here we need
to make sure that it's it's
covered and then we would debate
and make sure that we all agree
or what have you so so that's
one thing I don't know Mr
chairman I deeply want to get
into that that part but but full
stop the second question that I
had before other members is on
the contractors I guess and
other companies doing business
with the state I'm can you show
me in the substitute where that
is dealt with because I don't
know that I it is it is a very
short bill I just wanna make
sure I understand if you look at
the committee substance that is
eliminated.
We eliminated that.
You want to do that so if you if
you look at the bill the bill is
is longer and it contains the
provision about the contractors
and if you look at the committee
committee substitute it does not
contain the provision about the
contractors.
So it is eliminated from the
bill it was somewhere else in
here than before it's not the
original the original bill that
was filed contain the provision
of contractors and at the
chairman suggestion I removed
that provision about
contractors.
And so it is not in the
committee so much shorter now
than yes.
And if you look at the original
bill of the chair suggestion so
I went through all of it judges
per minute legislative employees
agencies at the higher ed and I
listed all that in the chair
noted that that was unnecessary.
So I think.
Yes that is the substance that's
five eighty five point one is
the substitute.
So by using the term Mr chairman
state employees which is in the
original title also that just
captures everybody them.
Well the salary increases
provided for in subsection a of
this section cap captures
everyone but you do in the
regional bill decided to just
list everybody makes you to miss
anyone yes okay in the in the
present and the and Mr chair
pointed out that was unnecessary
and I accepted that change you
know I I hope that employees
employers I'm an employer I'm a
business myself and that they're
paying their employees in a the
wages they want them to where
they want to work there and that
they want to provide to meet the
quality standards with the
contracts they have with the
state but I really don't think
we should tell them how to do
that I mean that's you know they
can choose to go after contract
or not and if it's not you know
gonna be something they can turn
a return on investment and they
shouldn't have and they have no
business going after state
contract somebody to care that
but I do want to make sure that
you know we're all comfortable
with the suggestion of the
additional seven percent after
the fifteen percent because I
don't think that's budgeted for
that is correct that is not
budgeted for the seven percent
is budgeted for to bring him up
we have we've had long
conversations with CPO in the
executive and how they're gonna
handle this and so in this
substitute that that increases
not budgeted but it R. in the
next amendment everything is
budget in taking care for so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thanks for working on
this that's all the questions on
the subject Senator Steinborn
well Mr Chairman
It would be helpful to see the
other member when you say it's
budgeted for I really don't know
what's the other option that
we're dealing with and with all
due respect them into we pass
the budget.
We invest a budget everything's
budgeted for nothing is budgeted
for at the same time so we're
we're we're part of that
decision.
Cause its future tense but I
just want to ask I think it's
really important is absolutely
fair for point I mean how much
is it going to cost how does
that fit in the scope of things
so I have a couple questions
number one and Mr added thanks
for showing of me put you on the
spot to we have a sense what the
fiscal impact of this will be.
With the substitute yeah the
substitute Mr chairman what's
being presented here so Mister
David
Is the can substitute so it
increases the seven percent so
you don't have a the Senate the
house passed a bill.
I hope the contact with the
house.
The bill passed the house I had
sufficient funding that's the
language in the bill to provide
a minimum of fifteen dollars an
hour for full public.
Bills coming.
Chair woman wanted to review the
other day that was what you
present.
The issue question you did but
what I'm really asking you did
away alright what I'm asking is
this bill if you don't if you
see the sub to get David but it
basically says that we're going
to give that fifteen dollar but
then we're going to put a seven
percent on top of that.
To people who aren't necessarily
making this this.
Explicitly.
House Bill to didn't do it that
way there's
she has a language that there is
an average of seven percent for
all public employees which gives
employers discretion of that
with us then mandated so for
example in the pet projects
there's a ten million dollars.
For hard to staff positions
which could be used for that
purpose of the.
And.
As for the anti compaction
issues with your current this
bill is intended to address the
program to where one group of
what about the ones were at that
level yes compaction will the
SCG has ten million for time
compaction without getting too
much detail I know that you're
Senate committee is not an
option is to provide a little
bit more to this class I
services to do anti compaction
so again between average of
extra money hello.
Rectus.
To address the concerns.
Okay thank you thank you.
Thank you so if you see.
Plus possibly yes Boeing has an
average of seven percent for all
costs for employees.
No to do fifteen for everybody
and then your committee is
looking at some options to do
some additional amounts for anti
compaction that thank you Mr Mr
Mr Abbey so I guess I'm
wondering are there any other
any employees that.
Making less than fifteen but
close enough that they get
bumped up to fifteen but they
don't get the full seven percent
range.
Everybody else is going to get.
That would be again that's
the discretion of the employer
we know.
See you know you're chairman of
spent a lot of time with CPO and
they have a plan for anti
compaction thank you for
prominently on that there's
sufficient funding for them to
address their plan and that item
specifically.
Yeah.
In the seventies we may have
some amazing that in there I had
seven percent they don't get.
So if we do the the the straight
cost guarantee the seven they
get a higher rate.
It this is something that in
order to do
someone sent for.
Eleven they're not getting.
Our goal is to get their fifteen
with the seven percent at
legislature but I think what the
with the sub does is it says
they get to fifteen and then
they get a seven percent on top
of that.
So that's something that's what
this up right that's what we're
asking about it so if the bill
would make that mandatory
funding could accommodate that
because there are experiments
for a time.
But it's not mandated.
the way the house.
That we passed the Senate Mr
chair that would mandate.
There is that high but I mean if
that pass through it thank you
though for that good to know
that there is some extra money
there that could do that but
I'll listen more debate yes.
Thank you have a look we've
we've talked to spoke of ours so
dont done let explain it to us
and and what the problem is with
CPO if we do it so that this
would be an option it would
mandate that the seven for that
the fifteen come first and the
races come after there's some
questions about some of the
language in the way that the
substitute frames that because
there's actually two salary
increases that would occur this
year which it it's unclear how
that timing would impact that
piece of this is the question on
the the timing but in terms of
the intense fifteen and then
seven percent this would mandate
that in our conversations with
special their plan could
potentially accommodate more
than what this committee but
this language would require them
to do in in in effect it could
limit them to only this where to
the fifteen plus seven where is
their plan is to do a broad
range of anti compaction across
not just those who make fifteen
but the scale to sixteen
seventeen eighteen it is a broad
anti compaction measure that
they have a plan for New by then
in the funding that is available
in house bill two right now
accommodates that full screen
point however if we mandate that
the fifteen has that this
fifteen has to be the additional
seven percent it could limits
blows flexibility in being able
to deal with anti compaction
across the broad range because
it's focusing entirely on
dealing with it at the fifteen
dollar mark as opposed to the
scale house those plan is
attempting to do it now the
house bill two has funding to do
this both plan goes up the full
scale this is an option but it
could potentially limits both
ability to do that full plan to
just focus on fixing it only at
the fifty level.
Thanks for explaining since
dollars Sherman of the New
Mexico in the state.
Of the questions that I would
have some.
So the individual that you
madam at eleven dollars and
some.
This person at fifteen.
Now what happens to a new person
that published writing they
would started fifteen that's the
that's the compaction issue that
I'm trying to address so that
the person who's been working
there fifteen the of fifteen
years would be making more than
the new person that comes in
that's precisely what I'm trying
to address.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
so the the other problem with
the spoke plan it is a nurses
were capped at four percent and
so if we restrict the
flexibility then the nurses
won't get the seven percent of
so there is some.
That's why we spend so much time
on compaction and and all and
so on under point Senator
Gonzales
with the spoke plan again this
amendment is trying to guarantee
it in statute that it happens
but the conversations we had
with well what's funded right
now it's still that
new employees existing employees
who make fifteen will get moved
to fifteen and then they will
apply adjustments based on
conversaciones where they've
been within their salary bands
etcetera so employees making
fifteen now will get fifteen
plus.
And and then I will adjust all
the way up the scale depending
on where they're at within their
level for their pay bands verses
the existing pay band levels so
you might have for example
someone
who is making
Levin dollars in another person
was making twelve dollars and
they're a different pay bands
and they're different places in
our conversations with their
patients are right now if they
both get bumped up to fifteen
they may not necessarily want to
be bumped up at the same level
of five fifteen with this
substitute would require it
would say fifteen plus seven
percent so you would have your
person who makes maybe eleven
dollars in your person who made
twelve dollars we now both make
fifteen plus seven percent
however the spoke plan what
state first bump them up to
fifteen and then see what
they're adjustment needs to be
based on where they were in
their copper ratio on their pay
the end so someone might have
fifty plus fifty cents someone
might have fifteen plus the
dollar it just depends on where
they needed to be for that plan.
And that's how slow has
indicated to us they're going to
use the funding that's available
for them in our house bill two.
To make that plan accommodating
for that issue now this
proposal.
What just say take them to
fifteen plus the street percent
raise so CPO would be limited in
their ability to implement the
full plan
for this if this were to pass
the the Mr chairman again the
new person comes in at fifteen.
A new person would come in at
fifteen the scope plan what is
sure that existing would make
fifteen plus depending on where
they are in their paper so on
the Senator statement that
person on the set they have ten
years for twelve years that
would get that accommodation for
those twelve years for their
their back it would be directly
related to the number of years
because that's not how slow does
their ratios they're doing it
based on where they were
relative to their case for the
close to the point where they
well below the mid point for
that level and need to be tested
closer to the mid point so
they're going to be looking at
the rather specifically the
number of years but it will make
those relatively Justin's and it
would do it up the pay scale
rather than only at the fifteen
level
but doing this only at the
fifteen level would create that
compaction between people who
make less than fifteen hours are
eight different salary levels
and that could limit the ability
to implement the full plan
further up the pay scale.
Mr chairman of just the last
part that I have is so to.
My experiences of.
I guess it's fair you know that
part of small.
But if it's not you'll have it
even though we're station you'll
have a morale issue.
Point taken and we are we are.
I think this is if I'm correct
me if I'm wrong Senator I think
this is part of the concern and
even raising this substitute is
that we are relying on still to
implement the plan as they have
described it to us which the
plan appears to be fair and
equitable and how it would jobs
to those pay scales but.
The language in the bill does
not require CPO to do that plan
nor does the language require
them to do fifteen plus seven
percent so this would require
them to do that but again this
particular requirement of the
fifteen plus seven
is not in line with the plan
that so had set out that would
I.
Address not only what happens
right at the fifteen level but
where people were before they
got to the fifteenth and then
further up the pay scale.
Mr chairman my last part is so
what is the deadline for spoke
to come up with that if.
Senator Ricky's gonna be joining
this I think we're sending the
simply right now who is this so
we can go back and ask
that question but I don't know
how many hours we spent talking
disposal in the DFA secretary
about how they're gonna do this
how they're going to correctly
in some of these on the lower.
May get more than seven I think
the low in may get up to thirty
three percent increases in their
salaries so if you limit This
are from with a sense to the
limit this year Lynn limiting
the department flexibility and
you're adding compaction and so
you don't get those other people
to move up where they need to be
in the fifteen if that's what we
start with CPO and exacts rack
to us on on the amendment on the
bill so we gave them the
flexibility I believe I trust
Ricky Serna I think it's going
to do it the right way we know
how many hours are spent ten
twelve hours just understanding.
That's the.
Right he is on the house of the
center for a.
Committee center a consolidated
questions about possible in the
time frame to implement the the
races.
If you're talking Rikki.
Yeah we got you know the did you
hear the question that we asked
you.
I know if you can please
repeated all all all I can hear
now Senator Gonzales one of the
questions.
Go ahead Mr chairman Ricky that
the the question is what time
frame is photo gonna do to
affect the pay raises.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
this is a strategy is is not
only hammered out right but the
actual increase for worker has
already been identified so we we
don't anticipate that it will
take very long at all to
implement the rate increase that
we've proposed and worked on in
partnership with DFA and C. W.
A. in asking you to represent
the members of our state Mexico
so we did spend several months
looking at the information
looking at the data and the poll
similar to Senate bill seven
used to increase the minimum
rate of pay all state workers
fifty dollars an hour but at the
same time press compaction by
noon will be every workers pay
relative to where they are in
their.
And where they're rate that is
in the into the overall schedule
fund conservation in short you
can occur as described by the
dissolution typically the first
full pay period up to life.
Very well thank you thank you Mr
trump Senator Rodriguez.
Okay Mister chairman thank you
thank you Ricky and thank you
senator for bring in this fourth
Let me let me just make sure
we're on the same page Ricky so
we don't move out of here
misunderstanding something did I
just hear you say that your plan
is can't accommodate because the
numbers are Eddy on there pretty
much can accommodate a fifteen
dollar per hour.
Eight
yeah fifty dollars per hour
minimum wage at this point.
It regardless of whether this
bill gets through or not your
fifteen dollars an hour can be
done.
Correct Mr chair Senator that's
absolutely correct not only does
the executive director provision
that this that every single
employee in the classified
services makes it is fifteen
dollars an hour that language in
the executive director includes
judicial legislative staff
including higher ed staff and it
includes public employees spend
sapo when we were after after
reviewing house bill two when
released by House Appropriations
we legislative language on the
executive director to Senate
finance committee leaders that
included that fifteen dollar
minimum for all those sectors.
Okay so does that Mr chairman
Ricky does that already take
into consideration the seven
percent for it explain how
that's going to work towards a
fifteen dollars an hour minimum
thank you Mr chair Senator so
our our number will be provided
to but we provided to this
committee and if staff is the
recommendation remains one if
they're not to receive any.
Okay prior to fiscal year twenty
thirty it will still bring them
up to fifteen dollars an hour
and a dress taxes.
If there is an increase for
state workers prior to FY twenty
three we lay our plan if we were
to lay our plan on top of that
then it would further increase
the minimum rate it pays for
existing state workers provide
that increase our Senator
previous so of our plan the only
reduce are provided to state
workers would need a fifteen
dollar minimum if it comes after
in FY twenty to increase for
example then it would further
advancement on page and.
Because for all workers.
The.
Thank you for explaining that it
is we know there is that and and
pursuant to David Abbey in my
recollection that thank you
David for you work the ten
million dollars is available to
address the compaction issue
that we've talked about thank
you Ricky for your plan and
working so hard and trying to
ameliorate the discrepancies
that we have in state government
but I just wanted to to see if
that ten million dollars that we
have in there for compaction is
that the amount you're depending
on to be able to to streamline
the process with your plan or or
is it going to take more than
that.
Mr chair Senator all we're we
the eighty five million in this
field which I'm assuming you're
referring to the eighty five
million dollars in this field
when you look at the various
sectors from.
Classified employees provided
additional charges higher public
it except for a.
We don't believe based on the
general fund cost estimates for
FY twenty three companies you
don't believe that the five
million you will a key a fifteen
dollar minimum and address all
compact for example Ricky let me
just let me slide it because the
eighty five million has been
stripped from this bill so okay.
Thank yes.
Is your question Mr chair
Senator I cannot see of that the
ten million dollars would
address the compaction that's
that's been our our struggle is
separating the two our plan does
the fifteen anymore and it
dresses compaction all in the
same now when we began of truly
there are about twelve hundred
workers making less than fifteen
dollars an hour starting then at
ten fifty right before the
change to minimum wage moving
workers to fifteen dollars an
hour is very affordable it's
easy doing it is the compaction
right and proclaimed that the
increased all other state
employees that becomes the port
costs the measure centered
reviewed so I cannot be
confident and all that ten
million dollars.
Thank you thank you Ricky and
and it's my understanding
correct me David Abbey Mr chair
members dated the step out okay
somebody okay to that perhaps
the ten million dollars me just
address the at the public
schools pursuant to CPO Ricky it
would just address the public
school portion of the of the
budget.
Yes please and Dawn can look say
something because David just
stepped out for a moment thank
you sure thank you Mr chair so
that I think it's ten million
that you're referring to is just
the amount in the SCG and yes
the amount budgeted to get those
to fifteen now there's a lot
more that is available in house
bill two not only for public
schools that for so and for
higher and it and for judicial
to implement the seven percent
as well and when spoke
references their plan their plan
incorporates the fifteen dollars
in the seven percent altogether
is one joint plan as opposed to
just the way our budget
documents haven't that have each
cost item separated out.
Okay thank you so that question
last question Mr chairman Ricky
so basically your plan is very
much doing all what you planned
right now is you spoke is
already accommodating the the
plan that Senator us to deal
Lopez has in her bill but the
only difference is that it would
be in in a bill and in statute
the so as opposed to your just
be in a plan that you're working
on as it is your you know your
your work that you're doing it
with with spokeperson ploys but
this would merely be requiring
you to do it but you're already
going to anyway correct.
Mr chair Senator that that's
correct and and we believe that
the executive director language
in compensation section of the
house bill to the budget bill
believe that the executive
director language will will
establish the minimum rate of
pay for state government with
forward.
Okay I don't have the substitute
bill correct.
The to the team and Mr chairman
so no I I do not.
Yeah and what the subs to build
that your information that
requires a seven percent prior
to the fifteen the other way
around choirs of fifteen before
the seven percent and so that's
what the substitute that we're.
Salary increase.
Hello Sir so Mister chairman
right now the lowest here people
are gonna get a thirty three
percent increase based on the
school plans so what this bill
does it would require fifteen
dollar bump and then whatever
salary increase is going to be
given would go on top of it so
based on supposed planet they
pulled through with it a pop up
to fifteen and thirty three
percent the lowest people.
But right around that point Mr
chairman what is.
I promise Senator thank you I
will defer to you in just a
moment but that goes back to my
main point then that was PO is
doing already is doing what
you're build us Senator
and and and they do and they're
going to do it with basically I
mean I don't know how long it
would take you Ricky to get all
this implemented I think that
was one of the questions but do
you plan do you support see that
this can be done and we can be
pursuant to your plan that we
can be guaranteed employees have
a minimum of fifteen dollar
minimum wage is that a fair
question.
Mr chair Senator absolutely that
that's what we have proposed in
the executive director languages
that anymore right absolutely.
Yeah okay thank you Ricky thank
you Mr chairman that's all I
have want to make sure.
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
well we stay in the exact rack
language is that the language
it's been adopted by House Bill
to order by the legislature.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn
that's been the exec
requirements provided to Senate
finance committee to this
committees leadership and staff
as a proposed amendment to the
house bill two language on
properties so we haven't agreed
to that yet Mr chairman we
haven't agreed that the
executive rectified which he's
talking about I mean that's the
way it Ricky is talking about
saying its language is been
recommended it so I just think a
couple things number one the
fifteen dollar an hour raise Mr
chair and it's good to hear you
say that Ricky that everyone's
going to get fifteen an hour
because that's.
We're getting conflicting pieces
of information it sounds like if
we adopt it will be a fifteen an
hour we haven't yet adopted yet
as a committee this bill would
mandate it.
sounds like everyone's talking
the talk like that's the
intention this would this would
mandated I guess I want to ask
you this though Ricky is far as
the seven percent the bill
doesn't actually say seven
percent the substitute
unfortunately you don't have it
but the with the operative
paragraph physical law it if a
law is enacted during the second
session of the fifty fifth
legislature to provide salary
please increases salary
increases in subsection angel
take effect.
I which is a fifteen hour fire
the salary increases so.
Just for my recollection have we
passed a bill providing the
salary increase or is it just
money and we're adopting a CPO
giving some flexibility.
Anyone is to that.
We.
Center we're we're asking of the
substance and I'm a real this
summer so we can get ready to
serve you the substitutes so
he's he's looking at the correct
thing and understand so we do
that because you know a lot of a
lot of competing on that point
Mr chair it's exactly the same
language see that was in the
original bill that I discussed
with him at length and I applaud
very much what he's doing in
fact a
secretary went to six secretary
in rural
said that he perhaps school
could be the model for the other
for higher ed and four of.
For PED and so he's very
familiar with what C. does and I
will just.
And I I I say this with all due
respect it has happened in the
past that we have provided for
an average salary increase and
the people who don't get it or
the people at the bottom
consistently consistently and
this ammendment is to make sure
that the people at the bottom
get the raises that other state
employees get.
And when you do the average
you'll see administrators
getting raises you'll see all
kinds of people getting raises
and then nothing happened at the
bottom that's how you get
somebody who's worked at UNM for
twenty five years and gets
eleven dollars an hour and so
that's why I felt so strongly Mr
chair that I accepted all of
your other recommendations
except for this one because I
think we need to stand up for
the people at the bottom and
make sure that they get the
raises the other thing about
this is it doesn't specify seven
percent it doesn't specify
anything whatever this committee
ends up doing with the budget
and with the raises is is what
this committee into doing this
chair fits into the for just.
I'm not sure she she.
Senator going to finish before
I looked at the yes I I
apologize I forgot Mr chair
Senator Steinborn I don't even
know if identity press to well I
think that's the point I just
wanted to make is is and I don't
I think there's some confusion
right now honestly that that we
could benefit from clarity from
but it sounds like what with the
three two is a CPO plan with
money to give them flexibility
to deal with stuff if that's the
law and all that so or if that's
going to be all the senses it
puts it is that puts T. two
fifteen an hour and then it says
that whatever raises so then
agrees to on top of that to go
on top of that it's still gives
the flexibility as we may be
saying the same thing but they
were saying different things.
That I just I think it's fair
for supposed to be able to see
this Mr and then the square with
us you know I don't want Ricky
commenting on something he has
seen so Rikki what that what
we're gonna do is roll this over
and and then we'll hear it again
tomorrow but the problem is when
you do this and and this is my
problem that I see with the men.
Is you restrict CPO into just
giving the fifteen plus the
seven when they're certain plays
that could get up to thirty
three and that's the problem
with the substituting subsection
C. that's the way I see it and
that's why I read so those
employees to get rid of
compaction the need to move
advanced up to thirty three
percent to get away from
compaction
would not be able to do that
under the substitute so then
you're limiting CPO on how they
do that and it creates even more
compaction.
So that that's really but Ricky
to be fair to you I don't want
you to comment on the substitute
that you haven't seen expressly
you know we how how many hours
is that so let us get you the
substitute we have an and
Committee
amendment to so we'll get you
both of those since you're going
to be Senator to deals expert
witness and maybe just plan on
being in the capitol tomorrow
afternoon to to hear this bill
Mr.
I know just a second okay so
maybe just plan on being the
capital so so that we can get
the questions answered from the
committee Senator Gonzales.
The Sentinel.
Artists will.
Just maybe to help the entire
community and my question would
be more to repeat it to all
trapping.
So.
The right direction two seven
statute.
You know a number the reason I'm
saying this so I've years from
now fifty dollars will be
obsolete.
And then here we have the staff
to.
You know.
What has been in the past.
On page Mr chairman I think
that's a great concern and in
fact we don't.
The fact the work.
Right now.
Workers give the for.
So.
One
point four.
There was specifically.
that was litigation.
I find.
There's.
It was just sort of make back
pay and then even further to
reimburse the funds because the
paper.
Incorrectly so I I just I would
like to collect the.
Being too prescriptive on a pay
plan in.
If you will and and I I also
want to activation.
The LFC bird all full which is
the chance.
For the with recruitment and
retention so I think it's clear
that everybody.
That is a priority to
productivity that.
Action is a key part of that.
But I'm concerned that the
executive plan with the school
system what's your sense the
executive plan issuer or
expressing rate increases for
many occupations there about
eight of them and there's only a
four percent anymore so make it
work there is a lot of requests
and brother many of you know
that the executive
recommendation only had four
percent the legislature the four
percent judicial branch.
The recommendation was
significantly higher rate than
the executive the HSD is a
little bit higher than that so
of the thank you Mr chairman J.
Strickler and just one other
comment that you know that the
factor doesn't get us to the
minimum wage and that's the
other issue.
Thank you.
So roll this over Ricky will
plan on seeing you tomorrow
sometime when we come off the
floor that way here here and and
and we got a good grasp on it
because it gets very confusing
Center what.
So I'll be there thank you
senator.
Somebody would give me a school
world on what the hell we're
talking about.
We got we got for our that is
absolutely worthless right now.
You've got different things
going on here.
And I would just like to see
what it's going to cost us in
the school.
The cost in the scoring is
pretty close to the same it's
just going out between public at
higher ed in the total for those
institutions but if you look at
the probation up above it's
eighty five and then you add the
other scoring and you wanted a
total of I think it's two eighty
seven David Abbey right around
two hundred eighty.
For the entire.
Fifteen dollars and seven
percent.
So either way we do this this is
going to work the state correct
Kate.
Dollars is open things are
recognizing the lawn service so
let me just say this we're gonna
roll over this and and be done
Ricky could you come the capital
spend some time with individual
members either medium in their
office poem on the floor and
explain how the CPO plan works
because that is a very difficult
thing to do and that way they'll
comprehend how the CPOs and the
exact is going to do that okay
thank.
In order to in in members of the
committee thank you so Senate
bill one twenty five is just the
state spoke plans that's just
the back of bill that I drafted
just in case
something happens we want to
lead on the floor if if minimum
wage gets hung up in the house
or they try to change something
that's not in the budgets we
need to lay that down there
laying down the both at the same
time Center Stewart you got
Senator I'm sorry Senator
Hemphill you got Senate bill one
thirty five.
And then the language
committee's gonna gonna meet and
school or talk about
conversation about language real
quick and and what's in there
and what we received.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
best committee my mic I.
I have my expert witness with me
today to go over Senate bill one
thirty five Dawn Iglesias the
Senate majority office principal
fiscal analysis and.
Thank you so Senate bill one
thirty five is a follow up to
Senate bill fifty nine and that
was passed during I didn't pass
but it was from the last
legislative session and it
passed the Senate but stalled in
the house after the chair of the
house tax committee hadn't made
a recommendation to have it
vetted in the inner on from the
revenue stabilization and tax
policy committee so what Senate
bill one thirty five dass
incorporates recommendations
from the LFC briefing that was
prepared for that committee at
its July twenty twenty one
hearing and the but the bill
wasn't propped in time for an
endorsement due to the special
session for redistricting in
December their December meeting
with canceled and so we ran out
of time in the bill didn't
receive that endorsement but
stress testing of the state's
for revenue suggests that we as
a legislature need to maintain a
high reserve level however at
the current relationship of the
two states reserves fund the
operating reserve and the tax
stabilization reserve
limits our ability to
it it will continue hold on let
me get this right.
This is all these are new con
these are new things for me so
this.
A bill that were I was able to
learn a little bit more about
this
reserve funds so the state's
reserve target currently creates
a risk of growing more
restrictive reserve accounts at
the expense of less restrictive
ones so that limits our
flexibility to address important
state needs if we have
unforeseen needs we don't have
the flexibility to tap into the
tax stabilization reserve likely
do the operating reserve and so
under the current statute when
the operating reserve exceeds
eight percent of the prior years
probation the excess is then
transferred over to the tax
stabilization reserve so what
Senate bill one thirty five does
is it keeps the provision in
place but provides for the
transfer to occur only if the
balance of the tax stabilization
reserve is less than twenty
percent of appropriations so
when the balance of the tax to
stabilization
The state and the operating
reserve and so that just gives
the legislature more flexibility
to address any States needs that
might come up thank you Mr
chairman and I'm gonna see if
our my expert witness has
anything to add.
Thank you Mr chair members I'm
just here to help answer
technical questions on the bill
if there are any.
where we got to go the other
centers.
And we have economy of John
thirds this is for.
Mr Chairman sorry we are not
your personal one thirty five
thank you.
Okay anybody on June fourth.
Any millions them against
anybody in the audience for.
Anybody against we're on the
bill Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
thank you.
Senator and the John.
We discuss this so.
During the intro.
And the you know the right now
and there is an additional.
Once with the legislation the
also ask you so.
It takes a major one or two
thirds of the oil.
Make provisions of the.
So Mister chairman Senator thank
you for that question the tax
stabilization reserve is the
more restrictive account can be
accessed with a simple majority
vote during downturns in
revenues fall short of
appropriations and the governor
declares that necessary or by a
two thirds vote from both the
house and the Senate.
Very well thank you and I know
that we discussed it in the
basement or
thank you Mr thank you thank you
questions from committee
members.
The man can have the presenters.
So what is the the purpose of
this is that just so that more
money doesn't go into the the
TSR Mr chairman senators in our
hands we can spend it.
Mister chairman Senator gives us
as the Legislature more
flexibility to appropriate that
money if necessary to be able to
respond to any state needs
instead of just continuously
growing the reserve the tax
stabilization reserve and
definitely it'll keep the access
in the operating reserve so we
can utilize that to invest in
our constituents invest in our
communities invest in
infrastructure and continue to
allow that money to be
circulating in our economy
growing our economy if it's just
stagnant sitting there it's not
creating more
Revenue within if it's moving so
if we want to contribute to the
prosperity cycles the cycle of
prosperity we have to make sure
we're investing in people and
that money is circulating within
our local economies and that
creates more revenue and and we
have more revenue to invest in
our school systems and create
strong institutions so that
people have the the education
that they need to health care
that they need Mr chair and
senator.
So when this was created we
called our permanent funds
permanent and then we decided to
call our permanent funds rainy
day funds so that we could take
all of the money out of them
that was just a burning desire
this people had to to deplete
those funds so that we could do
all the things you said.
The permanent funds would be
permitted to the work we're
we're not even making that now
we're going to go rated again
even though we got three billion
dollars early childhood we're
going to do that because we just
can't control our credit card
spending.
The the
severance tax permanent fund was
actually established of by the
legislature in nineteen seventy
something.
By Democrats.
With the understanding that
eventually we run out of
resources and so we needed a
permanent fund the groups so
large.
They could fund the state
government relief fund education
that was the goal so large that
it would fund education.
We have continuously tried to.
Destroy that even we got a bit
it's a good one it's not big
enough to fund education.
So the whole idea that the tax
stabilization fund here would be
the rainy day fund.
So because because our budget
does that all the time because
when oil and gas is good we
think we've got money forever
and then it crashes two years
from now we'll do it again
despite the fact that we think
we're going to have money for
over two years from now will be
back on holy cow we have to cut
every agency by ten percent or
twelve percent whatever it is.
The tax stabilization reserve
was so that that didn't happen.
This so if we start taking stuff
out or at least not putting
stuff in.
Then we have less of ability to
react to that.
And that's what this whole fund
was for which to react to that.
And so I'm just.
I'm concerned that that.
Even though people have been
here a long time we forget that
we were rich for two years and
we were poor for two and then
we'll be kinda average for about
four and will be rich for two
and poor for to an average for
for.
This one was to make us more
average more often.
So I think it's behooves us to
let it grow.
To however much we can possibly
let it grow because in two years
from now we're gonna say holy
cow why don't we have more money
in their now we have to we have
to.
Relief agencies so so thank you
Mr chairman and and senator for
bringing up that point so there
was some stress testing that was
done to determine what the tax
stabilization reserve should be
in order to cover the current
fiscal year and then the budget
here and that's where the twenty
percent came into place so that
if the tax stabilization reserve
continues to be at twenty
percent will have enough funds
to cover our current fiscal year
and then the next budget but it
budgeted here so it's still
allowing us to circulate more
money in our economy and invest
in our constituents and our
infrastructure communities.
Interview done you know just a
second here so well the last
time we had this much money and
then we grew from up up five
point eight billion dollars
budget to a six point eight
billion dollars in one year.
In then we do fine for the next
year and then it went down to
five point seven billion dollars
less than where we start.
There was a seventeen percent
decrease in one year.
Yes to the dress the stress
test.
Stress.
I think it's the mask and get
into much recycle CO two on
here.
Probably said yes we can do it
because the worst we have with
seventeen percent.
The man I am so concerned.
that the that it's.
If you take that if you take it
down to just where we just got
three percent because we wiped
out seventeen percent of it.
You can't do it again.
Take a long time before we can
do it again.
So.
Are you.
I understand why we want to do
it.
I don't think it's a good plan.
I think we're I think we're so
anxious to spend every penny.
That we fail to think very far
down the road.
And and I do want to invest in
people of the one invest in
people by having our economy
stronger one invest in people by
having our economy during
diversified I know I never talk
about oil and gas which pays all
the bills in the state of New
Mexico I just never bring that
up.
But I would like something else
now we keep this from going like
I don't know maybe copper mining
coal mining lived in mining all
that would make a great too
because those things don't go up
and down your spine put anything
else I mean I'm not limited to
what I want to see in the
economy but that's what fixes it
but the rainy day fund.
Is the rainy day fund.
And I know most of us in America
don't have enough money to fix a
roof before roof leaks tonight.
The state of New Mexico can't
have that much money.
We should.
Thank you Mr.
And what.
No question.
Any other questions on the bill.
Have a motion Mr chair
legislative constant server I
just want to follow up on on
Senator shares comments Senator
you want to share during that
time.
In we ask every agency to to
reserve.
And they did.
We were working on giving
teachers a policeman.
judiciary will fund raises and
so on so forth.
And.
Within two years we had to come
back.
With the clawback reserves would
claw back with stop raises
that was very painful time
because I have teachers called
me saying am I gonna have a job
I mean that's how bad it was.
And as our budget rose and we're
going to grow this next budget
by eight hundred million
dollars.
We're gonna go from seven point
six to eight point four eight
hundred million dollars and that
is a promise the people New
Mexico teachers fireman
everybody else in state
employees that we're going to
have money there to cover them
over the next years and there's
no guarantee to that because the
tax people told us one gas is
too volatile and so when the
budget goes up reserves must
compensate for that they must go
up as well.
And if I remember correctly the
recommendation is reserves at a
thirty to thirty three percent
level in there were there were
the only that by the way
I just don't think it is prudent
business for the state of New
Mexico to build in this
flexibility so that we can
there's an old adage of death by
a thousand cuts.
I believe this provides yet
another cut.
We're we make it so deep we
can't get out of it I live in
California in the eighties hi
Center and I was not politically
astute but I would watch the
news every night and I just was
thinking to myself these guys
are going to.
Very themselves in debt and
never get out in their hundreds
of billions of dollars in debt
today yeah the economy goes on
but they can't do the things
that they need to do and they're
always going to have that
obligation so kids grandkids are
always gonna be obligated to
that that that I just think this
will add to the death of New
Mexico I don't think we can
afford to do it I appreciate
what you're trying to do I love
flexibility I want to give
people raises and I I'm just
tickled to death what we're
doing for teachers especially
but the judiciary and and cops
and everything but I think
adding this tool will be used in
the wrong way and I don't want
to go through another seventeen
eighteen whatever was when we
had to do that those cuts I
don't want to that not only
teachers and firemen and
policemen in the I say I can't
guarantee we're not going to do
cuts and I can't give you a
raise.
So I can't support the bill
but I want everyone to to to
remember the pain of that time
it was not fun.
It was not fun and I don't have
to go through that again and I
think this is a tool to make it
is there politician that but I
just can't support thank you Mr
chairman Mr Chairman can may I
respond she is just making
comments we want to on the
comments that Senator Steinborn
you have a question is there
question what is our operating
reserve right now is that the
same thing I mean is it not
around thirty percent.
That's what budgeted the.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn your
question is how much is our
operating reserve right now so
are we have five different
reserve accounts in the general
fund operating reserve is one of
them there's roughly of four
hundred million.
I'm not excuse me I don't have
my general fund financial
summary right in front of me in
our total reserves all the
reserves there's roughly two and
a half billion dollars.
Currently sitting in the tax
stabilization reserve right now
is one point eight billion
dollars that's the equivalent of
twenty five percent of recurring
appropriations.
If with the current
reserve target for this year the
reserve target changes based on
what our budget level is but
that reserve target this year is
thirty percent so thirty percent
for all reserves and out of all
the reserves that we have the
tax stabilization reserve alone
makes up twenty five percent of
recurring appropriation.
Mr chair.
Senator dot just to be clear we
have thirty percent reserve and
then we have the tax
stabilization on top of the now
Mr chair Senator Steinborn the
tax stabilization reserve is
part of.
The total reserve so there's two
and a half billion total in
reserves of which one point
eight billion is the tax
stabilization reserve and then
you have two hundred some
million in the tobacco
settlement permanent fund you
have the appropriation
contingency fund the state or
support reserve fund and the
operating reserve.
Thank you Mr chair to tell us
again what is the threshold what
is the threshold if we start.
just distract us in the
parameters under which we can
access the tax stabilization
funds.
Mister chairman Senator
how you access the.
Which fund the tax stabilization
reserve so you would need to
have
either the majority vote during
downturns in revenues fall short
short short of probation and the
governor declares an nest it
necessary.
Or a two thirds vote of both the
house and the Senate.
Okay so a simple majority vote
if the governor declares that
necessary and or a two thirds
vote of both the house and the
Senate.
Okay so Mister chair you know.
So here's an interesting
scenario you can came out
different ways.
When when our economy tank
before we didn't have the
governor and legislature the
same party so as I read this
what's to say the economy tanks
you think you'd want to tap into
that fund but if the governor
says I don't agree cap in that
fund.
Funding comes in excess of
course the governor could also
be to a budget just because it's
there doesn't mean you can
access it during rough times
although you would hope we
would.
But I think that's.
But you know you're right we did
have tough cuts in that's
because no other alternatives
were were acceptable to the
executive we had to make really
tough cuts so if the economy
tanked and governor in support
tapping into this fund we would
also have to make tough cuts
even though that fund would be
sitting there I think that's
probably the point of this
legislation Mr chair and senator
is that.
We need that flexibility.
Including for the down times as
a savings account.
That's really interesting that
of our reserves I guess I didn't
really appreciate that so much
of what we think of as our
reserves is in math fund as
opposed to a fund that is more
readily accessible.
So I think that's the argument
is from a governing standpoint
as you want I totally agree that
we want those reserves high not
everybody does agree with that I
agree with that because I've
been here through the volatility
and
And if we know will be there
again I mean historically
speaking for not just that that
would be the anomaly so having
said that it needs to be
accessible I think that's the
point of this bill so I I
support hi reserves but I
supported being accessible so I
could unless I'm wrong that's
why I support this bill I think
that's where the Senators coming
from the protect the thank you
Mr any other questions from
committee members of the
community have a motion on the
bill to
we have to pass a motion for
deep passes the second by
Senator Rodriguez path we
called.
Is here for the third.
Senator Burt no Senator probably
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond.
Go Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Padilla.
yes I hope that Senator Woods
does would love the next time.
Christine Valentine's day is
coming right around the corner
and.
I think that is yes.
Senator share.
Hello.
Up the phone and there are no.
More yes.
Thank you yes Senator Woods.
Senator would go Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Rodriguez.
Yes to many of yes senator Munoz
yes that is seven yes and for
no.
Thank you center your I thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
So it the language committees in
the state in the.
Senator Campos has language
David and Charles are here and
daughter's go over language for
house bill two what we've done
is people of similar languages
counteracted up and and so we
can go through and then there's
priorities in there for the rest
of us everybody knows we're
having dinner tonight not going
to bring a guest your your self
a little bit careful the great
there is a package for everyone
in my office.
make sure you go to back your
offices that you pick up that
package and you'll have to drag
it back
The spoke plans just go back to
that bill that.
Learning what compaction is and
raises and how to do it
correctly and the numbers and
and everything.
I'm gonna make sure that
wrecking CZ each and everyone of
you because that is such a
difficult thing to complete in
compaction and the way we do
what increase first and one
increase second and how we
budgeted the money but people
really need to understand the
compaction problem but that's
not going to fix the problem
with hiring a water engineer
that we're only in the pay band
of eighty five thousand in a
water engineer and in the open
markets one twenty that's the
problem we're gonna have to
resolve the next session is how
we hire those hi in our
attorneys engineers costing more
than what we have in our payment
in order to move forward from
that that's a difficult issue
results of
we're gentleman that the
language committee can stay here
and and David and and Charles
are here to help with language
and sheets and and that's it
we'll see tonight thank thank
you very much Mr chairman take
about a five minute break and
then those at the.
to the subcommittee for you to
come back and so that we can
start to go through the the
language.
Thank you members.
The server.
The.
Because we see that Mexico.
actually there million.
You're listening.
Workers in the.
What we.
That.
That.
With thousand from.
That that.
Yes but I miss them.
Not on this.
And we're not recommending.
Labels you.
Come out.
Yeah.
We will.
That we.
Thank you.
Why is that.
Thank you.
Because of the policy.
So if I think they will.
Action okay the store after we
get to I'm sorry doctor thank
you.
Okay.
Yes.
In.
For for for which we're.
Of.
There's.
When we were.
This is all.
One recommended we.
Changes in place.
Okay.
What I'm gonna do is a.
Okay the subcommittee of the
language for HFC for the
information that we have before
us.
will come to order and what I'm
gonna do first of all it's just
Pat to identify the
subcommittee individuals who are
going to be serving on this
committee and of course the
members are more than welcome to
sit and to to pay attention to
participate but when it comes to
the actual recommendation at the
end what I'm gonna be asking for
from the subcommittee would be a
recommendation in order to go
ahead and pass the information
on to the
to the full committee and of
course that information itself
is to help us to best prepare as
we move forward to prepare our
budget so in in doing that
though just a couple of things
and to help the committee as we
go forward
the intent of the individuals
that are here are to go ahead
and find
the language information that
has been scrubbed it is
basically prepared for Year
review your perusal and that
within that we're open to
questions but the one thing that
I do ask is that if at all
possible that we can keep
some of the final questions in
in getting close to the
recommendation
there until the end but during
that time if you do have
questions we'll do our best to
try to respond to that
information
with us we're gonna go in have I
believe Mr David Abbey who is
now okay so Dave it's going to
be
in the room but he will not be
participating right now in terms
of the information that we're
going to be providing so with
this we have Mister David Salim
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
ask a David to go ahead and
dignify the individuals that he
believes will be in here to help
respond to these questions so
we'll do that and to also
Between the panelists if they
would
Help us to go ahead and do know
I want to this procedure is
going to be and the areas as we
move forward and what the they
believe within the issues
themselves on some of the papers
that you do have before you
they're color coded again I'm
gonna be asking for the
individuals that are here
making a presentation to help us
to identify what what that means
so with that being said what I'd
like to do is David if I could
turn it over to you
to go ahead and help us in terms
of what the individual
spreadsheets consist of in front
of us and also with this is Mr
Adrian this last so you'll be
participating as well so they're
going to be serving as the
panelists because they've done
quite a bit of work in order to
go and get us to this point when
it comes to the language but we
do want to have the
participation of course of the
subcommittee so with that being
said and if I left anything out
if the members so and the
panelists would help me to
fill in those gaps that we're
able to do so so to begin I'm
gonna turn it over to Mister
David silly and then from there
members if you would identify
yourselves within the the
panelists fruit and.
Okay Mister Charles Lee yes I'm
sorry the local Mr chairman what
was.
I was just calling you if it
David David okay so I guess I
went ahead and I was looking
over David Hernandez continue
with Charles.
Anyway so I really appreciate
that and I I we're going to be
moving forward so so in terms of
the members of the subcommittee.
we're going to go ahead and have
of course senator Byrd who is a
member myself Senator Diamond
who is a member Senator Gonzales
who is a member Senator Padilla
who is attending and then also
Senator Steinborn who is a a
subcommittee member of this
particular committee so with
that being said again not gonna
call you David this time I'm
gonna going quite a Charles
Charles if you will please I get
a started in terms of of the
direction that that you foresee
is taking sure Mr chairman I'll
turn it over to miss Iglesias
your chief of staff for the
committee if she wants to make
any opening comments otherwise
looks like going through the
materials.
Miss Iglesias please and thank
you Mr chair and members of the
subcommittee so what you have
before you are the materials
that have been helped prepared
by LFC we and just to give an
overview of the process for this
we've been receiving input from
Senate finance members from
agency
cabinet secretaries and other
senators on us suggested
language or changes to House
Bill to
these items that we reviewing
now are identified as language
only items in the
of skew of of things that we
have received to propose that
we've identified the ones that
are language only and we have
asked LESC to help us in
identifying and looking at this
language and help us and making
recommendations on whether or
not those proposed language
changes should be made and it
also help give us a background
or answer questions that we
might have on some of those
language items and so that is
what we have here today of all
of the items that we have
collected and receive our staff
has collected them.
Turned it over to Mr Saly and
you'll notice you have two
documents here in front of you
part of that is has to do with
the timing in which some of our
items were received so we
received a various items from
have members Senate finance
members or senators on US Senate
amendments to house bill two we
were able to collect those and
pull those together and hand
those over to LFC relatively
timely and then we later
received a packet from DFA
collecting agency
recommendations for language
change which is in the large
longer items so these were the
specific recommendations just
from the agencies in this larger
sheet and for time's sake
merging the two became difficult
so what we're have here in front
of you are two separate sheets
each with recommendations from
LFC that have been reviewed and
if there's any additional
questions about the process I'm
happy to answer those otherwise
I'll turn it over to Mr so lead
to discuss the items that we
have here before I go to Mr
silly what I'm gonna do is just
the subcommittee if they have
any questions regarding is the
protocol the the if you were if
you will the direction that
we're taking.
Mr chairman center for I want on
the record and and this is not a
reflection on anyone here or
this process because you guys
worked your rear ends off I
understand that.
This is supposedly a transparent
process.
I just got three she's lane from
the five minutes ago I'm in a
chance to redeem I have a chance
to think about them and and
decide for them a little bit
hopefully you guys land some
color to that.
I think the process is wrong and
I think we need to change this
process we need more time to
look the budget over and to look
over not only the the dollars
and cents it will come from the
other subcommittee but the
language here and I'm very
uncomfortable with that and I
just want that on the record
that this is not the process it
should be years thank you Mr
chairman thank thank you very
much senator Byrd and so the
intent today is to go through
the information that you have
before you so that you can
become a little more familiar
with the information and then
pose those questions and then
from there if it looks like
we're still uncomfortable with
the information in the process
of return in the morning but to
give some time so that we're
able then to take a look at that
two other issues as we move
forward number one is that
we're running out of time and
that's not an excuse it's going
to be one of the issues that
will have to face and then the
second with the language issue I
hope that the members become
more comfortable with the
information that has been
presented because I believe that
a lot of the real issues are
going to be coming with the
budget itself and of course
that's where they'll be more
infants and more time to to be
taken but again senator Byrd I
really appreciate the fact that
you're able to not only
expressions self with that but
as we go forward hopefully we
can respond to those questions.
Thank you anyone else Senator
Padilla please.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
she not a member of the
subcommittee but I want to learn
as much as possible so I'm here
really thank you for all the
work you guys are doing I think
I really can maybe confused on
with sending her three different
emails on the same subject so
I'm just sending in a little bit
with so is act just we're
Senator birds you know COVID is
this the way this is been done
every year also I'm just curious
okay okay so so I'm glad that
we're doing maybe breaking into
some subcommittees and doing
this kind of work in a I think
it's fantastic so what we're
looking at here just isn't
everything because some were
just related to dollars so
that's going to be in the
subcommittee that I'm actually
on.
But there were some people that
have been asking me to to you
know I mean I've got my goodness
my email box is blown up and I
and I try to read every single
email that comes to me and I try
to follow up on it
So there are some items here
that I I don't see did you have
you already included everything
that you received I'm just
curious on language.
Mr chair Senator Padilla I have
attempted to
if something fell through the
cracks then it it's entirely
possible so I I don't want to
say that I it one hundred
percent without a doubt have
collected every single thing
because I if if if you notice
something that you gave to me
and it is missing from this less
than it is
I I was not able to put it in
together in time for what we
have prepared for you today Mr
chairman and and on it could
very well be that I don't
understand which subcommittee
this thing is supposed to go to
so that's also but I more likely
what's going on but I just know
that you know a lot of people
have asked me to do saliva
forwarded on some things that
I've committed to folks that I
will do I guess I'm a little
confused why we would do the
language without the money to
well I think you were gonna put
together but some I thought were
language and money so why would
you have to sub committees to do
totally I'm trying to you know
maybe you can help assist you
been doing this act on longer
than most of us are so so thank
you very much Center for the a
couple of things that we're
going through right now are
gathering information.
Membership in order to go ahead
and compile that information we
still have quite a bit of
information that has not been
received in order for us to go
and deal directly with the the
the budget slash the fiscal
aspects of it with the language
aspect of it we're trying to
sort this through so that we see
at least we have the starting
point and hopefully a point to
what we're almost complete with
at least fulfilling the language
piece and so that's part of what
we're doing today but to go
ahead and answer your question
today and I want to go back to
senator Byrd because I know that
he has a
You had a question of all of
your want to know how we we've
done this in the past but but in
dealing with that the intent
right now is to go and handle
the language piece which is
going to be separate from the
the budget piece with that with
the resources and that's going
to be handled hopefully in the
next couple of days and the
reason for that because we're
running out of time again and
I'm not trying to use that as an
excuse but the issue right now
is how do we take care of some
of the larger language pieces so
I know that doesn't fully answer
your question but it's to say
that this is going to be the
route that we're gonna try to
take at least a today thank you
Mr chairman and I see one very
critical point my number one
properties it's in here some
thank you for that I see it but
there was also money attached
that one so even though it might
not get a recommended flag on it
with with with what I've been
see it appear in the next
subcommittees which I'm actually
member that's a committee but.
Mr chair is Senator Padilla to
depending on how this
conversation goes a bit if it
seems like there is an issue
that is flag in the language
committee that should then be
referred to the budget committee
that is part of the help of
doing the language first because
there's some items that really
are language only and that don't
need to deal with the dollars
and cents so to speak but if if
this committee feels like a
spectacular thing needs to be
moved to a budget committee item
then that is something that this
committee can can choose to do
but I think part of it and if
I'm not speaking out of turn
here Mister Mister chair I think
part of this is to help speed
along the process there are some
items that just in language only
might be a little quicker to
deal with so that we we don't
have to bog down the budget
committee with some just
language only items that fun was
had by all so all right well
thank you that's all I have I
just want to make sure it is to
items that had two components to
it if it'll appear on both lists
so thank you so we appreciate
that Senator for the in the
bottom line is there are some
Issues that we can address this
evening and then there may be
others that are going to have to
be addressed later but this
helps us to to vent the process
and move along so I can Mr
etcetera but the I appreciate
that I'm gonna be going to
Senator Gonzales in a minute but
I want to go back to senator
Byrd to see if there's anything
else that you wish to go ahead
and bring forth in terms of how
this process sandals before.
No I mean.
Subcommittees like this I don't
think to my knowledge.
For.
This.
This process is.
As they were today and she.
And.
All of this.
Some.
So sometimes.
Very good.
And and senator Byrd I really
appreciate that because the
intent is as we move forward to
become more more comfortable if
you will with the language piece
specific to this subcommittee
and then as we move forward and
and we move towards the full
committee whenever of the issues
regarding the budget are going
to be considered hopefully we'll
have more comfort in terms of
the resources that are out there
and some of the modifications
are being made but again I
appreciate that so thank you
very much for that Mr thank
anything else see the okay
Senator Steinborn I'm sorry yes
it was Senator Gonzales and
Senators time for.
So Mr Chairman also gonna asco.
This is a moving target.
The.
The crucial day.
The.
I mentioned every day you keep
getting requests so will there
be a possibility that you could
say we can't take anymore.
So so again those of us it's a
very good point because with a
moving target in the
information.
requests submitted or even
recommended the issue then
becomes how do we put that in
print how do we take action of
it and right now it's my
understanding that there is not
a cut off date but it will be as
soon as possible and I say that
because if we can get the
language information and and and
start to get that script it and
then from there move into the
budget itself then then what
we're going to be able to do is
try to take care of most of this
information in preparation for
the Senate finance committee
hopefully in in the next couple
of days and I don't know if any
of staff want to make a
reference to the urgency in
terms of what it is that we're
dealing with but you're open to
do that center I'm sorry Miss
Iglesias please
Mr chair members of we are
running up against drafting
deadlines in order to be able to
get everything moving with house
bill two that's also part of why
we need to split up into the the
two Canadian city that we can
deal with language and deal with
budget I would say in terms of
these language items if we can't
finalize it today if there is a
need to tell review after today
we would really need to finalize
the language pieces tomorrow
morning and have action by the
committee on the language pieces
so that we can get rolling with
it and then proceed to the next
step because we we really do
need to be looking at getting
the for the full budget piece
done so if your your question
was on like a cut off for the
language we we really needs to
be tomorrow morning in order to
keep us in a time line that will
be sufficient enough to get us
at of drafting instructions to
vote on those a bill with enough
time to send it over to the
house we we have a fair amount
of time it's going to be needed
in order just to draft the bill
to write it with with the moving
target we probably do need to
set a hard stop and for for
land.
Which items for sure that hard
stop we need to be tomorrow
morning to keep us and in a good
time line.
Mr Chairman just the last part
is so.
In life.
We probably need to be
consistent.
But you know it's like the flood
gates are open you know and.
No all these.
Agencies and individuals that
come that want to add to the
language or to the budget.
And you know it's not that easy
you know
But you know I think you know
like the Sanchez tomorrow
morning you know that would be a
good.
Thank you Senator Gonzales and
the intent is that if we're not
able to come forth with a
recommendation on language this
evening my intent would be to
come back at eight in the
morning so that we could
continue to go ahead and review
the the language but again there
is an urgency in the other issue
is many of the agency's of
already submitted additional
language and so within that what
you see are the the components
that have been submitted to us
for consideration regarding the
language and we can get into
some of that discussion as we go
throughout this presentation so
again thank you going to Senator
Steinborn center Steinborn
please you Mr chair well I just
want to kind of agree with my
fellow member of the red hat
Akaka's over there.
Senator Burt
you know as as a as a Redekop
this.
Long one okay my bad I think
they're both looking this I made
that mistake before.
Well okay early.
There you go our understanding
about any race my first time
it's it's it's my first well
first thirty day on Senate
finance and that I agree it's
really interesting the budget
starts really with the LFC and
then of course starts in the
house but dealing with a half
billion dollar budget I think in
a matter of days leaves a lot to
be desired maybe for as a member
as the public has agencies as
advocates it's a.
We were in need of reform I
think it's a state that and it's
it is frustrating in these
documents is miss work and I and
I then I think the world of you
don is really tough because she
needs we need more staff I
think.
We as legislators need more
staff
Then I I think it's a little
unfortunate that we split up
really these two committees
because we're all members of the
finance committee we are all
interested language we're all
interested in budget and and
really it's all about the
dollars so we should be all part
of that discussion as well and.
This is what it is but I know a
lot of good work is going on
here from people who are working
on year round so it's not as if
people just making this stuff up
the last few days is that we're
seeing it in a few days time so
it's a little like to digest but
but but others a lot of good
work here and I I just want to
get editorial.
Madam so that rely on that I
appreciate this understand more
and I'm gonna go to Senator
Diamond of accident for this
thank you Mr chairman and and
Donna to the whole staff you
guys have done amazing work
you're just doing what you're
told but brace for it I agree
with Senator Steinborn.
This.
This is not an efficient and
effective way for us to move for
the sake of time because the
right hand doesn't know what the
left hand's doing I think it's
fair to say there is mass
confusion about what's happening
the subcommittees but I'm gonna
give you an example we added
several members on this
committee ask for ask for some
language changes and some
additional funding for health
professionals loan repayment and
the sexual assault programs that
I think Mr Gonzalez or Senator
Gonzales was originally so it
would be helpful if we could see
the paperwork of the other
committee to see if maybe the
reason why it's not this is
because it's in the other
paperwork we could easily go
through this is just adding more
confusion I think to every
member if if some language is
missing or or or or why I don't
know where that is or if it made
it in the you know if we can
discuss it but and then I'm
gonna tell you that the next
committee's gonna say the same
thing they're going to budget
dollar amounts and not know if
there language was added it's
the seems to confuse an already
confusing process Mister
chairman Senator if I may please
before we continue in first of
all thank you very much Senator
Diamond and and these are the
the concerns that not only need
to be expressed as we move
forward and and went with the
freedom that you all are doing
this but as we go forward it's
also ensure that the staff
members are going to be able to
help us so that we can put those
those there so I'm gonna go
ahead and before I go back to
our Charles Lee I'm gonna go
ahead and go back Center for the
unless Senator that's all okay
so at the center for these and
then from there I would really
like to our staff to go and get
started with the presentation
will this gentleman and again
thank you for allowing me to
join you for this one because I
just Hernandez that's was trying
to say earlier it seems like to
make any sense we're doing this
in two different but I have a
question specifically about two
line items all wait until
everyone's done Mr silly is done
in the last about that unless
you're gonna do that now but I
it's a specific.
We would probably be better if
we get started with a
presentation I'm gonna go to Mr
silly it right after I go to
Senator Steinborn and then we go
forward so if you would please
Senator the question on process
excuse to manage did you finish
I did but I would like the you
know the the the permission to
talk about to specific items
whenever you're ready thank you
okay center staff thank you Mr
and I don't know is the
attention to go through these
one by one and then if you we
disagree with it take it up and
then or is it if we agree with
all this we can just dive in on
things that we don't see here
what's the process Mr so I
really appreciate that center
stand for and someone to go to
Mr so we to help us with that
process and and of course to our
Miss Iglesias to help so that we
can not respond to that and then
of course to Mr the last we move
forward in case he does have to
or has information to go ahead
an offer so the intent right now
is to go back to our
professional staff so that they
can give us the the the
framework if you will as to how
this process will proceed Mr
Saly please Mr Chairman I would
propose that I'll go through
this in pretty good detail
because they came from the
committee
and the items that are shaded in
blue are recommended by staff I
would recommend that you take
those up is kind of a consent
agenda item and adopt those if
you see something you disagree
with you can obviously signal to
the chair and pull those off.
And then the other items are
there is no recommendation I can
talk about why and those and I
can also flag for you whether it
you could go ahead and still
adopted it with do what you
wanted to do in some cases we
just didn't have enough
information to know whether to
make a recommendation some cases
it may have been better if the
agency had that money in our
operating budget rather than
like of our for example most of
these things that you see that
you'll see on these items are
fairly technical and and an
oculus there are some that have
big policy implications that
will flag for you but most of
these are you know you need to
identify the fund that the
appropriation is coming from
there were some technical errors
that we may have made you coming
over from the house with that
need to be adjusted so most of
these are are very technical in
nature and then I'll move to
after you finish your actions on
the the Senate finance committee
language items then we'll go to
the executive and there aren't
LFC staff recommendations for
all the executive some of these
are duplicated and RT and Senate
finance maybe HSD came to you
and said can you put this in and
then they put it in here so
they're duplicated and we don't
want to double up on those in
some cases there might be a real
technical details of why
recommending not to do that or
in other cases we're
recommending not doing it for
substantive reason so with that
Mr Chairman if I can get into
some of the
By the funds were these
appropriations are coming from
the money's already in the
budget and this is simply
identifying the funds from where
they're coming from number six
there is contingency language
and the house version of the
bill that eighty million dollars
is contingent on Medicaid not
getting the enhanced federal
half map going into the
beginning of next fiscal year
the way that that was drafted
was problematic for the
department and this would break
up that contingency into two
quarters rather than just one
eighty million dollar lump sum
so you want to make sure you're
not over funding Medicaid in
case it continues to get and
enhance F. map but we also want
to make sure the money is there
if it doesn't they can access it
and so the language is is needed
to do that number seven was a a
request to clean up some of the
language for the external
diploma policy at the higher
education department we're
recommending that.
Line eight the in the detail
that came with this actually
conflicted we're not
recommending it and the detail
was.
Thank all of MSU's fund balances
and give it to this new project
new Carlsbad a college other
parts of the language we're take
the money that's attributable to
the branch campus and give it to
the college this is kind of way
in the weeks for what we
normally see and in budget
language and so we're not
recommending it if you decide to
move forward on something like
that we would.
Commend carefully scrutinizing
what that language looks like in
a way that doesn't constantly
impaired to universities.
It's basically that we would
have
A some oversight
responsibilities where they come
back and report progress to work
this out they are my
understanding trying to work it
out right now as an alternative
to doing language but if I go
back to that Mr so we so the
issue is not for recommendation
on that if there was not a clear
recommendation that came over.
Years.
We
will have that this is.
What did not agree with.
This is before the.
Okay please proceed.
Line nine hundred Eleazar
already.
Thanks for state.
Online nine the only As you
could do this it's not required
because utilities are already
reporting to PED on how they're
spending their federal pandemic
eight so that's a decision for
the committee.
Nine eleven this would require
the outdoor the Economic
development department in
conjunction with the truth
commission to work with state
parks trying to get better
coordination for that Rio Grande
trail appropriation as in the
bill for about seventy five.
Thousand there was a request for
language authorizing the
appropriation from the forest
land protection fund to be used
for conservation easements of
the fund definitions already
allow for this so it would be
redundant but you could still do
it if you wanted that's why we
have didn't recommend it.
The line thirteen this is to
clarify that the supplemental
for Medicaid is for brought
Medicaid cost and they're not
specifically tied to the premium
surtax increase.
Line fourteen this is an
important one so in the LFC
recommendation and the way the
house bill two is set up there
is an assumption that the
federal government will give the
state a slug of another enhance
federal F. map of ten percent
for home and community based
services and so that's going to
give us a bunch of federal
dollars that we had expected
which could be used to eliminate
the DD waiting list the
mechanics in the details of that
really work prior year to re
appropriate the money that's
going to be freed up from last
year and this year's budget and
appropriate that money into FY
twenty five to pull down the
federal funds to eliminate the
DD waiver waiting list to
provide some temporary enhanced
provider
a rate increases for home and
community based in related
providers and then there's a
whole slew of other
spending items that the
department is working with the
federal government on if there's
money available and so this
language is basically your
authorizing spending those
balances that are going to be
created through FY twenty five
it gives you a point in the
budget to say this is where
we're eliminate and providing
the funding to effectively
eliminate the DD waiver waiting
list and help with providers
with their comment related costs
in the in the short term on line
fourteen.
Line fifteen is similar it's
part of that plan that we
developed with the department
we're using some unspent funds
from FY nineteen and this should
say to FY twenty one not to
twenty two.
If you can make that adjustment
on your sheets to FY twenty one
this would also be used by the
department for that same purpose
line sixteen is not needed we
met with the department this
morning this non reverting and
and re appropriations will be
taken care of in line fourteen
and so all of that action will
be going on through the Medicaid
program at the Human Services
Department.
Line seventeen in line eighteen
would clarify the cybersecurity
funding for public education as
well as public schools so that
the state can have a more
efficient approach of dealing
with this as well as pulling in
the department of information
technology to make sure that
those contracts are in line with
the security measures where they
have that expertise.
Lines twenty in twenty one this
is changing the agency where the
appropriation will go because
this is a more appropriate
agency so instead of the having
DFA administer the drought
relief money the state engineer
would
instead of
and then this would also change
the appropriation for soil and
water conservation district to
NMSU the department of
agriculture who deals with those
entities are ready.
Lines twenty two and lines
twenty three our technical swaps
there is funding attached to the
appropriation for the economic
diversification Fund that is
over at NMFA their fund balances
there.
And there is an appropriation
for the business space
development that will be
utilizing NMFA already if that
bill is enacted and so this is
just making that fund balance
available for this new purpose
rather than having NMFA's in the
back to DFA and to other
agencies and and be really
complicated so it's just the
method of finance swap on twenty
two and twenty three.
Lines twenty four would add the
phrase non medical
transportation services to the
hospital and nursing home staff
shortage funding.
Sometimes you'll get people come
to and say this is only language
when in fact it will result in
some spending so it's either
you're going to add to the
spending item we're gonna be
taking from somebody else this
would be a small amount of about
two hundred fifty thousand
department estimates it could
probably absorb it but that's a
decision point for the committee
we did not make a recommendation
on that.
Lines twenty five there were
requests to in the
transportation appropriation of
about two hundred seventeen
million there's a whole list of
statewide major infrastructure
projects that are listed the for
the apartment to use the money
on there is a desire to add some
new projects and those are
listed online twenty five online
twenty six HSC had recommended
including per se double con that
did not get into the bill and to
reflect HSC recommendation we're
we're recommending to include
that one and then finally online
twenty seven.
There is a request in a
recommendation on the part of
staff that's consistent with
past in it actions that you've
got a list of these major
projects but their permissive on
how the department uses the
money so they're not tied
specifically to individual ones
or even those projects if they
have other ones that come up
that are shovel ready and and
better able to move.
Line twenty eight is a it's a
totally technical a need for
staff to have the ability to
fully allocate all of them are
for the money that's in the
appropriation contingency fund
when you get to the spending
items tomorrow you're gonna be
making major decisions about
rearranging stuff and we need to
make sure that the the the
general fund that's funding all
of that is coming out of the ACF
properly and it's coming out of
the General Fund properly it
won't affect the spending levels
but it's just which prey which
popping becoming out of lines
thirty through thirty three were
requests for additional spending
authority for the second
judicial court we didn't have
enough information
to really make a recommendation
on that if you wanted to do
those you could it wouldn't you
know they need to have contracts
in place with.
CYFD and and have additional
revenue to bring that money and
it's not automatic online thirty
four
the cultural affairs department
does need authority to bring
money in from the rural library
program fund
that was supposed to be a
recommendation and it didn't it
did not make it into a house
bill two.
Line thirty five this authorizes
PED to spend money for a purpose
and of the fund
to basically hold districts
harmless
there is a bill I think that's
making its way through to change
how the funding formula treats
this another comment here so
that would be decision on your
part if you want to do thirty
seven this is one of our issues
with our new budget system that
pulled in
a bar recommendation that the
agency did not vote on in the
department and not a further
request in this next packet.
Last three ones line thirty nine
is the only actual spending item
madam chair and if you Mr
chairman and this was a
technical error on LESC part
we're the dust were intended to
be part of the salary package
and it did make it into the bill
and you need a hundred seventy
thousand to fully fund that.
Line forty is clear find the
different types of justices and
judges and which salaries they
would
get to to just clarify section
four of the budget.
In line forty one Mr chairman
just clarifies the existing ERP
increase which is for two
percent and it's just saying
that one percent of its already
scheduled by law and the other
one percent would be an increase
if the legislation authorizing
it is is enacted.
So with that Mr chairman that at
that covers this particular she
did you want to take action on
that now or.
But let's go ahead and start
with some of the questions that
the members have verify those
and see if we can work through
that particular part so we can
try to take some level of action
recommendations so we can move
forward so on this I have
Senator Steinborn and center for
the or for questions Senator
Steinborn place.
Many of
those kids all right I will be
here all right so I have a
couple questions committees I
have a couple questions on icy
there's some things on here that
didn't make the list in time so
I can deal with what's here
first if you like and then we
can do clean up on things that
are here later however you want
to proceed but I'll deal with
some things that are here just
ask questions and maybe clarify
number one online eleven the Rio
Grande trail I think what I
meant there was I think that
would be better to flesh that
out with language to the
Economic Development apartment
where they outdoor division is.
We have recently appropriate is
you know millions of dollars
seven million dollars for trials
to them just add some language
to the preparation that they are
to work using trials funds to
actively plan to Rio Grande
trial.
In conjunction with the
commission as well as planned
infrastructure.
Okay as opposed to the state
parks work all the other stuff
and adding language to EMNRD
it's really having language to
economic development we're we're
we're giving some directions Mr
chairman if you would like we
can change the it the receiving
agency of the language the
economic developments and
accomplish the same but the
light but the language that we
have here Mister chair because
we're directing state parks the
work and all this other kind of
convoluted stuff that's not
hitting the mark it's really and
they're kind of a junior player
in the whole thing is really
about the the operator vision is
now in charge of seven million
dollars planning trails to
actively get in the business and
they are but just that we're
staff really giving them that
that charge to work on
reoccurring transplanting with
the commission to remove state
parks and and move that to the
Economic Development the outdoor
yeah a program yes in direct
that to work it's just language
only that funding assess
associated with it.
And and Representative they're
doing great work and they're and
they're into it it's just kind
of putting pen to paper that
The committee amending that
recommendation Mr chairman.
So so on that will go through
the recommendations that at the
end if we can and I I just I
don't mean to interrupt you but
I'd like to go back to a Centers
Steinborn part of what we're
also trying to do is the
overarching P. so that with our
state agencies they'll know that
they're the resources and
hopefully part of the intent and
is going to go ahead and be this
is what we're doing and it's a
bigger picture that I believe
that's what your intent is that.
That I think they should be
absolutely integral to this
process to make sure if mark but
the second one there Mr chair
number twelve that I guess the
LFC doesn't recommend that we've
had a lot of lot of us been
hearing about is adding the the
word allowing that fund to be
used for conservation easements
and I see the it says that the
fund or to allow for that is it
a problem to specify that the
language is not Mister chairman
Senator okay I think that would
make a lot of people feel good
that's an important concept so I
would I'm sorry just understand
where and so number eleven and
number twelve R. two that you're
looking at looking at possibly
modifying or clarifying language
is that correct correct Mr all
right and I think I think
Charles is clear what I'm what
I'm suggesting yeah the center
I'm sorry Senator Steinborn
nothing else there I do I do Mr
when I'm almost.
Yeah that number fourteen I I to
support and then I really want
clarification on twenty two and
twenty three Mr chair and
Charles because I'm confused
about that one.
I really am because I'm not sure
what we're doing there's like
the other three or four way swap
there and I guess my question is
is how does that end up leaving
leader of funding at the end of
that the traditionally to fund
this is totally separate from
the traditionally to fund this
is simply moving seventy million
from the economic
diversification appropriation.
And swapping that with general
fund at the business space
development appropriation.
So there's no change in
authorise spending levels for in
either of those appropriations
it's just changing the source of
the money I got to so we're
doing that it's just it's all
NMFA census new programs going
to be and NMFA it makes sense to
just for them to use that fund
balances NMFA for new purpose
that would so we're taking money
out of the economic
diversification fund for this
but then were planning a
shooting at the general fund
okay and then very technical.
It is well and then in the
budget.
Senator person yeah yeah you
that.
Thank you
So this is.
Which which.
And so there's a shortfall is
this.
Mister chairman Senator that
leader question will be taken up
tomorrow that's a separate one
that's sort of I'm here more to
Lida this was funding that you
set aside NMFA in the regular
session of last year for
Business requests and this is
the unexpended balances that are
being re purposed for a new
appropriation I was would go to
businesses for business based
development.
They would be going to there's a
bill house bill four that would
create a business based
development fund that would help
expand businesses and business
space statewide.
Correct and so that that
appropriation is contingent on
that legislation just like the
economic diversification is a
money is contingent on
legislation creating a fund on
that point thank you Mr.
All right thank you very much
senator Byrd I'm gonna I'm gonna
go back to Senator Steinborn to
finish and then also on that
point I'm going to center for
the understand well Mr chair yet
I know that we is I mean it's
kind of it's in the same vein
really because we're now saying
this language and that's a whole
lot budget that we're moving
around in that language and you
know we're we in the budget we
took on use leader money and we
put it into another fund and
then there's gonna be discussion
about how we get leader back up
so in but that they have yeah Mr
chairman to Senator Steinborn
this is not the lead issue that
you're hearing about the lead
issue there's twenty five
million to the Economic
Development Department and the
bill as it sits now they want
that to go up and that's what
you'll deal with in the in the
budget subcommittee that money
to the Economic Development
Department this money is the
leftover money sitting NMFA I
actually used I'm just raising
that issue in addition because
it's it's a similar similar type
issue that that's all I have
right now Mr chair there are
other issues which are not on
the sheet that I I want to raise
but that's all I have on the
chief thank you very much
Senator Steinborn on that point
I'm going to center for the and
if you just have the points
because he was this next on the
list there are plenty of please
we thank you Mr chairman and and
Yes so I'm looking for that
discussion on on raising the
twenty five to fifty or even
eighty if we can do that based
on the data and information we
got from economic development
and since the super chairman has
walked back into the room I want
to get into trouble at all but
so what is that seventeen and
this is one of my questions Mr
chairman what is the twenty two
and twenty three so that just
goes to the expect space there
is that what that's going to do
so when I go to build my
business a call center I will
look at various communities
around the country and find out
who has spec space available to
just a shell just to show I have
to go in there and put all the
technology in the down to the
flooring the walls the
technology everything is that we
were would be be would be able
to do with the site that that is
a really great way to develop
economic developments on.
Mister chairman Senator yes I
believe that's the and there the
build details out exactly how
that would work in which
businesses would qualify in the
types of guard rails you have
for for those types of projects
but I believe the intent is to
make more business space
available so that you can go out
and get leads for companies to
say look we do have some space
available you don't have to wait
eighteen months to build
something you know with all the
kind of delays you've got a
construction right now this is a
really great idea by the way
this is we've been wanting this
for a long time a really clever
trying to do this I just wanna
make sure we're not going in is
it for one particular type of
industry or is this whatever
might be on the docket with the
numbing Development or and
Mister chairman Senator that
would be covered by the
Legislative companion
legislation to detail that would
be driven by house bill two it's
just gonna be very broad
language that's already in the
budget now it's just this is a
different source of money for
that purpose.
I think Miss Iglesias Mr
chairman of the COVID yes Mr
chair Senator Padilla just to
follow up on that point the
language in the bill says it's
to the opportunity enterprise
revolving fund for business
based development and is
contingent on the passage of
that enabling legislation which
is house bill seven so if you
were in so if you were
interested in finding out more
about exactly how that
particular funding would work I
would recommend visiting with
house bill seven so this is that
the companion to that if that
legislation succeeds this
funding will succeed if the
legislation does not neither
with the appropriation for its
purpose they will all look at
that bill but I just wanna make
sure to so the state would own
this space that we're taught
this term space we would own the
space.
Mr chairman I can look at the
other bills and the state would
not on the space it's kind of
like a lead up type projects
specific for business base
expansion I think a little
closer look at but that was one
of my questions Mr Chairman on
the on the whole I know that
these are separate issues on
leisure space versus leader for
economic development I really
hope that we'll have a as
detailed conversation much more
complex in the second item that
I had Mr Chairman was on lines
twenty four through twenty six
on page two.
So I'm grateful that that that
specific item that I wanted to
have added in there looks like
you got added in there so that's
good news but the this is so the
two seventeen point how did that
number come together on the
seventeen the reason I ask that
is if we have all of these
projects in your it seems to me
like what what was in the
original language would be what
would account for two seventeen
so how are you gonna do these
other ones because Mr chairman
you broke this appropriation up
and did some of it in the
special session and so the same
list of original projects that
came out of LFC are listed in
that bill the other only with
other dollars you have no I
don't expect you know everything
Charles with the total amount of
the total policy three for three
hundred.
Three fifty the inclusive of the
two seventeen or okay so there
may be residual amount that you
needed to meet the LFC
recommendation after you did the
special might have undercut the
amount that I put them okay all
right well thank you that's all
I have Mister chair thank you
very much sooner for the and of
course we've gone through the
list and I have number eleven
number twelve twenty three
twenty four and twenty six that
have been flagged so we'll go
ahead and will will consider
those in a few minutes hopefully
but I'm going to senator Byrd
next your birthplace thank you
Mr chairman and and also try to
be brief
item number eight emission.
We have to put in clarifying
language to allow that money to
transfer to Carlsbad is that one
and understanding here.
We would we would recommend not
adopting this one and if you
wanted we can draft the language
for you to consider
that would require that you
entities to work together to
identify the proper amount and
report back to LFC during the
interim the the details behind
this that we received were
conflicting and how it would be
executed.
Okay and I appreciate that
because I I I it was my
impression when we did that that
the money would you know any
remaining balances would
transfer to a certain date and
then and then it will be cut so
you need to clarifying language
in New Delhi
So secondly the DD waiver issues
on fourteen and fifteen this is
it will allow to unlimited DD
waiver waiting list is that I
mean everybody on the list.
Line fourteen Mr chairman of
fourteen I think in fifteen both
Virginia fifteen go together yes
so lunatic but a system here
to add to the waiver slots and
temporarily right temporary rate
increases so you are increasing
for one and then you have to
bring them back down or the
department has a plan for how
it's going to make like
temporary payments to strengthen
the
the home and community based
services system I don't know if
you want to add any more to that
agency.
So with our federal are planned
patients Steve basically put a
plan into do temporary
COVID relief payments and it's
going to be scaled up in three
years it'll be the first you'll
be like fifty percent and then
will be scaled up to ten and I
the plan was always to be these
temporary rates just kind of
build the system up as we start
bringing so many different
individuals into the provider
network thank this committee
also heard about a permanent
provider rate increase that is
built into the budget it's about
ten million dollars plus federal
matching revenue that will
continue going to the provider
network on top of these
temporary rates okay.
and it uses are for money is
that correct isn't that
temperament is a recurring right
Mr chairman Senator the enhanced
F. map that was authorized in
our but is temporary and it's
going to create along with the
the hundred twenty million in
state money that's going to be
re appropriated it'll create an
a wash of a temporary federal
dollars that then we're gonna
have to build into and back fill
over the next four or five
years.
And and that's my question and
that's going to get a little
concerned about using money for
certain things because you know
we we start program to get into
something and then the money
runs out and you have that cliff
and and and how how do you go
back in the of that money to do
those so Mister chairman Senator
we've worked with the department
to develop kind of a five five
year financing plan for that I
think it's in your volume three
I can't remember the page number
to take a look at that if some
if by chance some of build back
better came to fruition you
would need to build back any
state dollars because that bill
would have been a permanent the
ten percent enhanced F. map so
that states could eliminate
their waiver waiting lists for
home and community based
services that's not moving
forward in Congress right now
but if that piece of it will
I the federal government would
pay a hundred percent of the
cost into the future.
I just think that's wonderful I
mean do waivers been appointed
by side for an forever I guess
you know so inference you
unfortunately have to use that
those funds and they're on the
list but there are others who
are not so I'm just real happy
that that is finally being
addressed
Let's see.
Projects.
And I need one.
She.
The rise myself a little bit
more with these things but I
guess last question I had was
and there's a bill for twenty
million dollars for the courts
to
apply designing instruction for
courthouses and that was pulled
and do we know where they went
and and secondly is there any
mechanism that we can.
Used to apply it and get that
money back and put it into that
Fund Mister chairman Senator
agency do not recommend that
funding and so it's not an House
Bill to and that would be a
budget subcommittee
that's where you take action on
something like that okay.
Thank you for now that's all I
have Mister thank you very much
senator Byrd going to chairman
and ex member Senator when you
know center one yes please it
just to go back to number eight
for Senator Burt we did find out
in the field when they made that
transfer you have to do by April
first so they don't need
language okay okay thank you.
Thank you Senator Williams good
thank you.
Please.
I see that yeah I do have one
more there was on the sexual
assault.
language I think there was a
language it change that needed
to happen I don't know.
is another member of this
committee the subcommittee that
wanted to make a change there do
something with that I don't know
about any language changes when
it comes to that I do know that
there are desired increase
spending.
That I do know that there was
language components admitted
issues.
We take a.
Okay want to make sure that it
was covered somewhere so right
now some of the funding is
covered by a contingency
language for of for legislation
to make that funding available
and there was some concern that
are up in the.
Take that up in the actual
commits a committee that I'm on
thank you.
Thank you very much Senator for
the any other questions on
language.
Going back to center Stanford
Senator thank you Mr well it's
that appropriate now to talk
about things that aren't on this
list with that we're hoping to
get to language or the language
are all in which.
That's fine please proceed thank
you Mr chair so page one twelve
of the budget.
We have the budget segment so if
I may Senator Steinborn we're
really trying to go ahead and
stay within the scope of the
language this is a language that
okay so if they're going to be
the the language related issues
again what would be doing is
affording the the other members
in case or some other language
issues that they wish to go and
discussed beyond what is on this
list.
So I'm gonna go back to Senator
Steinborn to see if he does have
language issues that are
directly related to hopefully
this list and all the others the
course that would be that's what
I'm Senator I have things that
are not on this list that didn't
make it on the list and time or.
so.
But I very much I'm actually not
on this of thank you C. R..
But I waited facilities at the
right thank you thank you the
language things that I need to
bring up sure but so so with
that in in in terms of the
thoroughness that we need to
have any particular for the
language do you have those
issues that already outlined or
did you want to go through
issues individually how would
you like to proceed now I I have
about four things to bring up Mr
this isn't you always have been
so please proceed thank you
well we might just dealt with
this although I think it the I
heard about sexual assault is
deals with domestic violence
treatment contingent upon
Representative is also bill
passed in this is on page one
twelve there's some contingency
language I don't know if that's
the same thing you were just
talking about okay everyone
shaking their head so I'll move
on.
regarding department of health
there's three language items.
And number one and I can give
you the exact language but in FY
twenty two.
the help of borrowing which
basically for health
certification life licensing and
oversight program.
A request transfers from other
programs to assist with
development implementation of
the incident management system
Mr chair Senator that's in the
executive packet right and staff
to recommend that.
Staff recommends that okay great
so good now moving on to FY
twenty three DLH far language.
The health certification
licensing and oversight program
may request transfers.
Six thousand from other programs
to assist with the development
and implementation of the
incident management system.
And the Felix replacement
project I understand that super
important in the executive
package and staff recommended
okay great and then and then the
the third thing.
I have there is on page two
twenty five this is somebody
spoke with we've done about and
but we recognize we need to get
LFC your guidance on this I do
is also for delays giving a more
authority after what they
requested to add to authorize
them to seek for thirty to get
funding for personal protective
equipment for New Mexico
residents at therapeutic
treatments and at home testing
related to COVID.
We've not seen anything from the
department on that right I've
spoken to the secretary about it
yesterday and it's something you
know we've been talking about
this whole time and this is just
this is just contingency and
we're shaking our heads with
COVID is with us and we don't
know where it's going to go and
so this is just providing
contingency that and the
secretary I think did testify in
this committee that he's got a
warning sign that FEMA may cut
off funding to the state that
they provide for these things so
I realize and it's disappointing
if they haven't requested it but
this co equal branch I'm saying
that we need to give them the
fund the tool to seek funding
for those tools if the situation
should be worn at the that's all
it is time and senator we would
need to know what the source of
the revenue would be how much
they would need right page here
they need the bar's Authority so
there's a lot of technical
details that we don't have on
that one at this point in time
and we okay sec direction from
the chair and how to deal with
something that the executive
didn't recommend.
Right but we can recommend it
right.
Yes but I mean you kind of want
to have something in front of
you and what you're recommending
with and having some research
behind it we can be more
specific that's why I'm asking
you and that's I preface that by
saying we need more guidance so
on page for what it's worth on
page.
Twenty five there's a section
there that I think maybe the
best place to add that on to but
means we can flush it out more.
The appropriate location.
Okay.
With the.
He managed to.
With the.
Those are excuse me Senator
Steinborn Charles with the.
What are the findings.
This this is an example of
trying to.
View of Bill to approach loans
to this purpose this is an
example of
trying to achieve the goals
without putting much and
therefore it was the rest of the
certainty of the living the
other things that are much so
that's a choice of the committee
but we would like for you when
you add the duties that are not
in there may not.
Some that they're doing it.
But to the extent to do more
you're diluting the other actors
so that's your choice but I
would be a flag for you yes a
new system of her.
Still right on the Mr chair I
just want to say it's a really
good discussion is that it's
it's not because it we're not
appropriating money what we're
doing is we're giving them the
authority to seek funding for a
potential cost it's an insurance
policy that if god forbid they
needed and we didn't have
federal funds we actually have a
department health reading help
like this about Mister chairman
Senator if they get a federal
grant they can automatically bar
that in they have that authority
there's another federal grant
that comes in.
That would give them more money
for COVID related costs they
have the authority under the
broad bar forty two budget that.
Mr chairman and but what if they
didn't get a federal grant and
that that's kind of more my
point what if they need if they
got a private grant for some
reason there is a language in
the budget to allow agencies to
bring those into their budgets
as well.
Private grant I don't know what
that means I don't I'm trying to
think about what other grant
thing we get from the government
and non governmental entity for
that purpose Mr but that's kind
of my point what if they don't
have funding and they need
funding to do things that they
are getting federal funds or any
other funds for.
Yes.
Mister chairman Senator I'm
trying to figure out who they
would be getting that funding
from.
Well that's that's what I'm
recommending is that they would
be able to get it from another
state funds from the state
treasury for this purpose.
Then you just appropriating
money for that purpose that's
not a.
Well with the allowing them to
contingency thing of the request
funding the appropriating is
what part of Florida town is
learn thirty is a appropriating
that money if it becomes
available and certain funds.
Either federal funds either
other state funds which there's
you know hundreds of them in the
you know K. protection fund is
an example where game and fish
you know collected more fees
than what was in their budget
and so they asked for a budget
adjustment increase how much
they can spend from that fund
well this chair anyway I'll keep
working on that's got for that I
hope we don't need this but
this is almost feels like common
sense to me at this point but
there you have a million dead
it's obviously not
I just want to move on to one
final thing Mr chairman again
which is the department of
environment.
A request transfers from
programs up to one million
dollars between programs that
bring about that's in line
twenty five on the page six
percent twenty okay.
It's in the executive
recommendation LFC staff do not
recommend program transfer
authority before the fiscal
years even started.
We just made this you're making
decisions about how much each
program should have been funding
and this would allow them to
start on doing what you're gonna
be having to take action to do
that.
The.
There are enough I think if they
needed yeah I'm sorry Mister
chairman Senator if they do need
flexibility you can revisit that
next session and give it to them
mid year but to give a program
transfer authority right out the
gate before the budget years
started kind of windows which
here the whole point of what
you're trying to do here Mr
chairman I agree to a thanks a
point the thing about this
department the is that their
budget they're juggling a lot of
crisis public health
environmental type issues that
we ask of them but we finalize
their money such to the point
that they need a little more
flexibility I think to move
funds around to meet the demands
that we have for.
For those kind of crisis things
that aren't so predictable so I
think they deserve a little more
flexibility but up a flag that
Mr chairman because I know that
there's some disagreement
between the executive and
Environment Department that so
if I may Senator Steinborn all
right the questions that you're
bringing forth they do bring up
valid points and so will
continue that discussion staff
is very much aware of the fact
of that those are some of the
concerns raised and will
continue to work towards trying
to resolve as many of them as
possible so is that is at least
for for this evening so that we
okay thank you appreciate it.
any other questions so so what
I'd like to do if.
Yes Sir I'm sorry senators
senator out of woods.
Process servers and trying to do
is to.
Was.
Generation.
The the act.
Yes Representative.
Senator Woods I I didn't say
that.
I just want up to the record
because I didn't say that and of
course as you use that
clarification yeah stand there.
any other questions so so what
I'd like to do it at all
possible is to pass this on to
the subcommittee
and of course they'll probably
continue restaurants
particularly as we deal with the
fiscal the budget issues but
with this at least a
recommendations so staff can
begin if you will preparation of
the language if the subcommittee
the deems it it's appropriate to
be able to go ahead and do that
and so investors any other
questions I would entertain a
motion of the subcommittee to
adopt the listening for this.
Mr Chairman is part of that
motion just to clarify for
purposes the committee with the
adjustments that we're the staff
recommended online C. Levin and
then adding line twelve.
So some of those two and then
some of the other questions that
came up and I know that you all
were taking notes but number
eight number twenty three number
twenty four twenty six number
fourteen and number fifteen and
not to say that those we're
gonna go ahead and be changed
it's just that I was flagging
some of those also because those
with the concerns are being
expressed by the committee so
with that with that particular
edification
I would entertain a motion to
that effect by this
subcommittee.
We have a motion for I'm sorry
okay so so we go ahead and we
have the the motion by Senator
Gonzales seconded by Senator
Diamond any of the discussion.
Scene and then members I want to
thank you very much for your
work on the language some
committee and of course now
we're going to be headed in
towards yes the full preparation
our budget so thank you to we'll
go through this executive
recommendation and with the LFC
is input as well and then you
can do a motion on this or have
other questions so there's some
but but in this we're going to
go and buy for Kate we're gonna
keep the separate and Justice
you're gonna go ahead and go
through the high level and
privative unless they're going
to be some specific questions.
You very much the gentleman you
all pass this is adjusted for
moving to the DFA spreadsheet
you can see in the far right
column whether it was
recommended by LFC staff or not
flag just a couple for each page
so line three Senator Woods the
current executive is
recommending pushing the
moratorium out into next the
following fiscal year in a way
that doesn't make the school
districts online there there
school calendars from this
fiscal year we recommend doing
that.
You did this online eight are
ready this was the DD waiver
eliminate the wait list language
for the extra ten percent.
Learning.
Eleven you did this and the
other sheet again this was for
department of health portion of
the waiver.
We're not recommending shifting
any items from house bill two
into the capital bill at this
point in time so no on the line
twelve if I may please Mr so we
if you clarify that a little bit
so the membership understands
that as we go for the the
executive requests to move some
probation out of house bill two
and into the the capital outlay
bill given where you're out with
that bill and where you're at
with house bill two we're
recommending not trying to like
mix the two and if I may we're
we're not getting any
consideration except with the
language that we're talking
about please proceed
line fourteen this implemented
the flexibility for the
transportation department this
is the same as what you already
adopted.
Line fifteen recommending just
to clarify the the charter
schools also get the money for
the FY twenty two raises.
Nine seventeen you already did
in the other spreadsheet.
there some bars thirty from
early childhood and Department
health that we talked about they
were recommending Alliance
twenty one through twenty four
not recommending the program
transfer authority on page six.
PED's already has the statutory
authority on page twenty seven.
we don't have any specifics on
the purposes for the using the
fund balance and we do recommend
the the bar language for a
higher education to be able to
pay out the lottery tuition Fund
this this year.
Thank you very much I miss
Iglesias please and and Mr chair
I just wanted to point out what
additional things and for going
over this executive request item
there was one additional item
that had come in it it was not
on LFC is greater which is why
we don't have a recommendation
for them but I do recognize that
I I had received it from the
committee and I want to raise
the issue is for the public
education department
and I would
It is to amend language for
is this what it is.
fantastic I apologize for that I
just wanted to make sure that we
were covering all of the the
items that we had flagged here.
and I really appreciate that
thank you very much for the for
the Mr slowly the so with that
Mr chairman we stand for any
questions about these items or
the committee action on the
staff recommendations so again
as we go forward any questions
concerns any kind of discussion
regarding these particular
recommendations.
You know and then we have a
motion to go in may approve
these to move moving forward
that was by Center Gonzalez and
so second by Senator Diamond any
of the discussion.
Not on this after this that's
pretty good I like that with you
that would make sense thank you
very on this.
Here
is.
Indian.
Create problems.
Right there process.
For
those.
Mexicans axle.
Thank you very much sent again
to of the members thank you very
much for the public lands and
hard work with that we're
thinking of doing was just the
recommendation but.
if the the committee would
dissect me with feel better with
that we can do is going to go on
a roll call center your concern
just sitting on the thank you
take to legislative numbers of
those so so we have those and of
course those with
recommendations to move forward
but what we're gonna do now is
you know okay so what we're
gonna do is we're gonna go ahead
and go then with a roll call
vote by the subcommittee members
the clerk would excuse me the
secretary will call the roll.
Senator yes Senator Burt yes
Senator prompt yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes and senator that's
interesting.
The.
Okay so that being the case I
want to go back because gonna be
asking for a a roll call vote on
on on our other a request or
other.
Rations which is this page here
just to have the form below
that's been requested in that so
we'll go ahead and find so with
that we have the motion second
and then of course we're not
going to go and be on a roll
call vote so if the secretary
will call the roll.
Title of the title technical
adjustments to that this is
going to go ahead and be the
Senate finance committee
language in other state federal
funds and technical adjustments
yes.
Thank you for.
In this Senator yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
your time is yes Senator Diamond
but this
the vote is very important yes
yes the time of of with kavya Mr
chair that obviously you know I
requested several these changes
so I need to see how language
changes I you know I think we're
on the same so I I really
appreciate that Senator
Steinborn thank you very much
for the explanation of your vote
they'll try to get you
additional information to have
further clarification in terms
of the action that has been
taken these two items and have
been formally adopted in order
to go ahead and move forward I
am going to go back to the to
the staff to see if there are
any other questions that we may
have and then from there I'm
just going to open it up to some
final comments and privative so
any members of the staff if you
would please so.
If there any questions that we
might have.
Mr chair
I would just was looking to
confirm so given the action that
was taken here and staff can
proceed with trying to
incorporate this language with
adjustments as recommended and
adopted by the committee for
full committee adoption once
we're ready for drafting
instructions so my understanding
is at this point we do not need
to come back tomorrow morning
but instead the adjustments that
were being made and discussed
here would be made when we come
to the full committee with a
full recommendations what's
budget and languages merge
together those will be the
drafting instructions will
explain how the subcommittee's
recommendations were
incorporated in the language
pieces am I understanding that
correctly or are you asking for
a meeting tomorrow to confirm
that the pieces that we just put
together here or my
understanding is we acted to
vote here and that would bring
that to the full committee along
with the changes that were
recommended by this committee.
And this is going to be for
clarification so we started out
with the discussion and then
from there we were taking
that type of recommendations for
for us to move forward the
request was for formal adoption
and that's what we did so the
now we're gonna be moving
forward with the information to
go ahead and prepare in language
form so that's been taken and
then after that will confer with
the chairman and then from there
what he'll do is he'll give us a
further direction in terms of
when the full committee will go
ahead and meet with the
documentation prepared in order
for us to move forward.
Any other questions.
So.
Thank you very much senator Byrd
that again I'm not too sure of I
know that a lot of the at the
direction of of our chair but
with that maybe there is someone
who wishes to go ahead and talk
a little bit about the urgency
and maybe some of these other
issues our chairman person has
entered the room so from there
the question is when do we move
forward with the with the budget
so.
So you can be adopted all the
yes we have talked about the
language except there's a few
technical issues right in the
and some of those are going to
go ahead and be further
elaborated and conferred with
the the members of the
subcommittee.
Eight so then tomorrow the
budget committee's gonna meet so
we can look at some of the exact
movements and changes are
happening and then once we bring
those will bring both could end
up the rex probably the next day
or two for drafting prop issues
in the in house bill two will
get drafted will come back and
look at some cleanup if there's
language missed or misspelled or
or changes and then they'll wrap
up house bill two and go to
printing that's about three to
four days.
Okay Mr chairman it'll take us
if you have to hope you were
ready to act.
I don't think spreadsheets
instructions directing the
Thursday we think it'll take as
forty eight hours to bring a to
prepare amendment.
And the so that would be
Saturday where we would have
amendment break and at that time
we have some additional
adjustments to make or not
before goes to for.
So again the course with your
recommendation Mr chair the the
initiative would be that we've
taken our action
We get the call of the chair
near discretion as we move
forward in bringing the full
committee together is that is
that appropriate and is correct
thank you thank you very much Mr
chair any other questions.
Please proceed Senator
Steinborn.
We were handed a third piece of
paper regarding the health care
affordability fund and there's a
lot of concern I've talked to Mr
Abbey about it and in the
insurance superintendent here
and I hope maybe we can all
huddle after this meeting but
you know it's a new office in
the fund which will allow the
legislature to appropriate a
forty five percent of it.
Someone else the other side
percentage goes towards health
care affordability policies.
So I guess the there's a lot of
concern about advocates that how
that was done in unity of the us
so I don't know if that the
intention was for us to discuss
with the line that's what we got
handed the sheep but perhaps not
but Mr Abbey if I can ask.
Yeah okay so before I'm gonna go
back Center stand we're not
raising kids we were handed the
papers on we have this control
here could.
And and and I appreciate that
and these are going to be some
of the conversations that will
continue if that'll meet with
your approval and I'm gonna go
to the chair is that okay
continue like that okay going
back to Richard Simmons please
we have an appointment here in
about twenty minutes so Senator
time when you want to meet with
agencies and David Abbey on your
own you're still free to do so
I'm happy to Mr Stewart just
handed the papers so I assume
that that's this was but I'll
have it taken offline after this
meeting.
You have Mr chair Senator
Steinborn that paper was handed
out as an accessory to some of
the information that was
provided in case there were
questions that came up on some
of these language changes that
that paper provided
justification for some of the
answers but it seems like that
paper was not needed to help
answer some of the questions
that may have come up which is
why it wasn't the really
reviewed but it was there and
supporting documentation should
have come up.
Come up thank you Mr chairman if
any of the discussion.
You know and then we stand
adjourned I really appreciate
all the work to all of done move
forward again thank you very
much
you Senator thank you.
Okay.
All.
Committee.
When we look at that.
Representative of quick.
Thanks rules that fences.
Have.
