This is you know Mr Chairman
deals with that the
restructuring of the law
enforcement academy in the
creation of the two entities we
did last year.
The.
The standards and training
council in the certification
for.
Thank.
Investors of.
We're just gonna do the the
language when today Mr chairman
the one nine six point one.
Representative I know they need
to do is is.
I have three amendments all the
they're all different versions.
forgive me this is one sixty
nine this is one sixty nine
that's a.
This the.
The climate.
The Clemente investment act the.
One for yes.
Thanks to.
Yeah.
So Mister chair we want to thank
the staff we wanted.
There was a at the correct and
then the numeral nine in the
word professions.
We want to take up more money
from for initiative.
Representative Senator we need
to first adopt amendment let us
get the correct amendment.
One nine one point one.
I would.
The.
Senate bill nineteen Mr chairman
unfortunate public safety
Tellico.
Is the right one.
One nine one point one yes.
The.
Have a motion to adopt the
minutes for discussion.
Have a motion by Senator yes
second by Senator dollars.
Talk to us about the amendment
Senate bill nineteen thank you
Mr chairman this was just a good
old fashioned type the
compilation commercial probably
fix it but we want to fix it now
and change from night vision for
sessions to professions.
And we don't have any other
equipment what we do we want to
put a an effective date Mr
chairman July first.
They were typed up us to
amendments is that a one.
Okay so we have this one and
then amendment which just fixes
the line is professions gonna
have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
The motion by Serbia's second by
Senator.
Any objection to the motion.
Okay we have one more amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
one eighty seven point one.
And we need no effective date of
July first out to us.
And and that's consistent with
the language in the house bill
sixty eight promaster Mr
chairman where.
For everything kicks in July
first it'll be way easier for
the we don't have that
amendment.
Correct.
You can have a motion to.
Dr Mehmet for discussion
purposes posted by Senator
Gonzales second by Senator
Padilla.
Start about this man.
Thank you Mr chairman we ninety
up all the changes that we did
last year kick in July first I
think it just be easier for the
transition of this bill could to
July first as well as opposed to
a couple weeks before so would
ask the committee to put in an
effective date for sections one
through three and section seven
July first twenty twenty three.
Questions on the amendment.
To Senator.
One one it does have an
effective date.
Way back on.
Does.
Correct Mr chairman we want to
put on page eighteen.
Okay.
Here.
What.
The title Mister chairman
Senator the title isn't
necessarily the law it just
reflects what's in the bill so
we got to put it in the bill to.
So there's no confusion.
So Mister chair.
And senator.
I'm looking at the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute.
And on page one below the title
section one.
That version of sections of that
is to become effective July one
twenty twenty three.
It amended to read all this
other stuff.
Yes miss Janet very and we want
to put the effective date of the
provisions of sections one
through three and seven.
Effective July one twenty twenty
three just sounds like it's
duplicating things and that was
all that I was.
Question No good catch Mister
chairman Senator the up the
title.
Reflects what's in the bill but
it would it wasn't in the bill
so the titles actually correct
but we just got to correct the
bill.
That tracks correctly.
Sections one through three and
sixteen.
We.
Committees.
One section one state or the
reduces the thing down here to
the provisions of section.
I was at current on.
These are dealing with the board
the board in the council we want
we want the language to of.
To go into effect July first
section who says the same thing.
Share.
Mr chair certainly section one.
Begin saying effective July
first section to all understand
that I understand now if I may
thank you Mr chairman Senator
that that reflects last year's
bill that reflects last year's
house bill sixty eight so that
so the current language in the
bill even though it's law it
hasn't gone into effect till
July first we the implementation
of last year's bill.
Didn't going to affect kids this
coming July first and so that's
why we want the new language to
going July first as well now I
understand your your concern
it's kind of a weird deal last
year's bill had a eighteen month
delay.
Okay.
Consider.
So that right.
This is.
It's existing.
It's here why do we need it back
there this deal with the the
language that's not under line
we need this.
Just to make sure that the
underlying language goes into
effect the same day.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee.
So I missed the beginning of the
presentation of the bill on the
amendment.
Right from house bill sixty from
last year you all changed law
right you separated out these
two boards from DPS so you have
to pay for what this bill does
is it allows DPS to parallel
their current system for
officers to have current LED
nineties we want everyone in the
current system to be able to go
through it in be completed we
also want July one the new Ellie
a nineties that they come in to
go under the new system that you
created the HB sixty eight so
that's why there's different
effective dates in here so you
can parallel the two systems I'm
not letting any officers that
are currently in the queue lose
their due process.
Here maybe I think you just so
so but it does happen we passed
a bill last year in effective
date and effective date for
these class officers.
Won't affect them but the new
ones coming in we need to change
the effective date on that
portion of the bill to make it
current so the new ones the new
ones coming in we'll be able to
get the train.
Mr chair I I I I think I
understand it but I also.
Think I'm still confused because
everyone of the sections.
That's referenced in here the
effective date of the provisions
of sections one through three
and seven all say the same thing
that's become effective on July
one twenty twenty three thank
you Mr that's why I'm wondering
why we need what do we need this
one since all the sections
already say this infrastructure
Senator that actually is is a is
existing law dealing with the
non underlined words so so house
Bill Sixtyeight was signed and
became law chapter two fifty
four and that goes into effect
July first so when you read the
bill the non underlined words
are not law yet until July first
this is an amending an existing
statute that hasn't gone into
effect yet so the reason we need
the effective date on the bill
is so that the underlined words
going to affect the same day.
And Mister chairman Senator what
was done in house bill sixty
eight was a delayed effective
date and I think that's what
causes the confusion when we
when the bill was passed last
year with the delayed effective
date that's why this version
also has to have we need them to
go into effect at the same time.
And just trying to true up when
everything is implemented with
with the two boards and the
existing structure our center
shared in the may I ask a
question I'm sorry to interrupt.
On page five section three it
doesn't have that language the.
Line six.
Those lawyers District get stuff
right.
And Mr chair when we remanded
back to Judiciary.
So they could rewrite it make
you happy.
I think that.
Sen correctly and we'll be all
right.
That's what we need to make sure
did you look at section three
says on the second amendment
says.
Effective date the effective
date of the person's of sections
one through three and seven of
this act July one.
Section three doesn't say is
that so Mister chair I see so I
I look at one I looked at two I
looked at seven.
And I looked at three you look
at three fine so one of us on
this committee can count.
Because it doesn't.
Thank you Mr chair I don't want
says back to Judiciary.
What was Helen to can get Helen.
Once you go in the back of Helen
to take these amendments just
make sure that everything is
correct as a little confusing
Helen can tell us.
When do that will do
Representative Lente here we get
this just take a minute thank
you so much yeah that way we
know what's we're correct
because the sections when we
read the amendment doesn't track
the way.
The blue eyes and meet with you
in the back Helen the two men.
Thank you.
Representative the hill here.
Representative Caballero.
Trying to get your time yeah.
Representative Chandler ice
nurse in their.
You want to do one thirteen the
wonderful.
Thank you chairman and.
At one thirteen yes.
Hopefully I'm as perky as I
usually am we were up until
about two thirty last night
that.
We appreciate that yes and I'm
happy to be here and I
appreciate the scheduling of
this bill House Bill one
thirteen changes the
qualifications for magistrate
judges and adjusts their juror
the jurisdiction of the
magistrate court and find some
other additional provisions that
we hope will facilitate and make
more efficient the activities of
the magistrates and with that Mr
chair and committee I will turn
it over to Chief Justice bacon.
Got a good defense Chief
Justice.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee into this to the
sponsor and this outline this
doesn't a series of things to
the magistrate court judges
their jurisdiction their
qualifications and putting them
on the record.
So first the qualifications
focus on an age limit right now
magistrate judges have to be
eighteen years old and have a
GED
this would move them to thirty
years old and have to have a
just a combination of things
eight years of experience in the
judiciary
or an associate's degree and we
believe that increasing those
professional qualifications
qualifications for the
magistrate judge's helps them
meet the moment of where
magistrate judges are today
magistrate judges forty years
ago it was a part time job that
accompanied other professions
now it's a full time job and the
magistrates make really
important decisions of
constitutional proportion
they're dealing with detention
arrest warrants search warrants
taking people's property away
and the like and we think that
that development of the
prefrontal cortex is important
interned terms of age and then
having some intellectual
curiosity that that shows that
they're interested in in the
work of the Courts on the other
two significant changes in this
bill are putting magistrates
courts on the record I think
most people are surprised to
learn that hearings in front of
a magistrate judge or not
recorded in any fashion there's
no court reporter there's no
audio recording and this creates
problems kind of both sides of
from two different perspectives
one without a recording once
again it there's an appeal from
that case if they get to start
all over again and District
Court so it's this idea that the
certain magistrate court you get
four bites of the apple.
And second if something goes
sideways in a case whether it's
from a demeanor perspective
behavior perspective the judge
has no recording of what's
happened but the litigants have
no recording of what has
happened so it creates a lot of
finger pointing and he said she
said which is less than
desirable for judicial standards
and they try and sort through
those types of issues that makes
it hard for managing judges as
well because they don't they
can't look at the record and
reflect upon what is happening
use that as a teaching
opportunity or discipline
opportunity for the magistrate
judges and then third it's
changing the footprint of their
jurisdiction I use Santa Fe and
the first judicial district as
the best example of this the
Santa Fe magistrate court judges
are drowning in cases they have
thousands of cases the
magistrate judge in Los Alamos
has two hundred cases.
And there's no easy transparent
way to help share the work load
with that judge in Los Alamos
and not judge in Los Alamos is a
lawyer by the way and is calm
approach me and said please
please please make this happen
so that I'm earning my keep in
my docket is full so those are
the three big I ticket items in
this particular bill and I'm
happy to answer any questions
that anybody has.
Thank you anybody in the
audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
I think ma'am you work for the
court.
Mr Chairman just your.
Five hundred people once in.
Relentlessly.
Questions from committee members
Senator share.
Thank you Mr chair
representative justice.
In San Juan County I believe
every magistrate is retired law
enforcement officers.
So none of them would qualify
under this even though they've
been in court probably as much
as any judge.
Mr chair Senator very good
observation one thing I forgot
to mention is that everyone who
is currently serving in this
position is grandfathered in
under this statute so that will
those qualifications won't
change for those that are
currently serving in that
position
we started off with a list of
different kinds of jobs that we
thought would meet the moment as
well your colleagues in the
house disagreed and wanted to
simplify the bill for now what
we're very open to and I've
talked with the administrative
office of the courts and my
colleagues at the Supreme Court
because I think another one that
that really we should be
considering going forward is
military experience
and so next year we would this
has a one year delayed
implementation date so it will
not take a fact and and for a
year I think you can imagine
that we will be back in front of
you adding.
Possibly law enforcement and
military experience because we
think those are important
categories.
Mr Chairman dressed as I.
There are there simply are not
enough.
Court clerks in San Juan County
to fill all those positions in
the future so offensively all of
the magistrates will retire.
Yes Sir and we don't have enough
court clerks to fill those spots
in the clerk's we have probably
don't want to job because well
you can get fired from four
years.
So I think that's I think that's
a serious serious problem I
don't have an amendment to fix
it or change it.
But.
But that is where our judges or
magistrates judges come from and
half for a long time I think we
in my recollection of twenty
years or so there may be two or
three that were not.
Law enforcement officers.
In San Juan County.
So I I really see that it's a
huge problem you do away with
magistrate court in San Juan
County if we do this
Mr all around for Senator we
have no intention to do away
with magistrate court I want to
be really clear about that it's
been clear about that for years
we can't operate the judiciary
without magistrate court and we
cannot make them lawyers because
we don't have enough lawyers
this we believe gives us some
room for movement because it
also references language or
equivalent that would be left to
the secretary of state to
determine but I think you can
Be confident that we will be
coming back to add categories
back into this we have the year
it delayed implementation we
need that year frankly and
that's why this bill is in front
of you because we need to figure
out we need to train the
magistrate judges to be on the
record and be prepared for that
work and we want to do that
really thoughtfully we need to
prepare the court of appeals for
the cases that are going to be
coming to to them so we think
this is a logical first step to
make that happen and build the
space and time for us to to
Conduct that training but I
absolutely understand your
perspective.
Mr chair as it is I I don't
think I can support no I can't
support it.
because there's no guarantee
that will add law enforcement
leader specially if the health
authority rejected it.
And there's not enough people in
San Juan County that qualify.
We have to court clerks will
have a five member committee met
for two of seven right.
Mr we've got to clerks where we
can get the other six Mr Mr
chair and Senator if I may those
aren't the only qualifications
you'll know it also says or has
a two year degree or other
higher from an accredited
institution of higher education
so
that's wide open essentially if
you have a two year degree at
least you qualified to be a
magistrate on I believe I'm
reading that correctly Mister
chairman Senator.
Mr Chairman representative so I
can have an associate's degree.
In history that has nothing to
do with.
Anything to do with the courts I
could have Greek history
associates degree and I am more
qualified.
Then somebody that serve twenty
years as a law enforcement
officers Mr chair and senator I
don't think we're saying that
and actually Mr chair and
senator presently you all you
have to be is eighteen years old
with the GT.
Our high school degree that is
the the minimum qualifications
so we are at least putting I
think somebody on trees around
who should serve and in some
educational requirements as to
who should serve and some
maturity a requirements as to
who should serve Mister chairman
Senator.
Mr chair I I I'm in favor of
that.
The the qualification yes I'm
certainly in favor of the Courts
record portion.
The the the one thing that
bothers me is the.
The pool to hire from we've
excluded in this bill.
The single pool with San Juan
County hires from and I think a
lot of count is higher for.
We've excluded.
So maybe a lot of them have
associates degree probably most
do.
But.
But I strongly believe that law
enforcement has to be included
in.
Otherwise I think that we.
In in the you know what promise
of maybe we might some time in
the future considerate maybe.
Doesn't give me a warm fuzzy
feeling.
So with that Mr chair thank.
So there was.
Thank you Mr chair
this legislators put a big
emphasis on the importance of
trade and technical we've often
said that we made a mistake I
just funneling everyone to four
year college degree and and and
sending a message of that's the
only way you can serve your
community or be successful I
feel like these requirements are
taking us a step back you can
cannot you know
there's a difference between
you know wisdom education I know
a lot of educated idiots and I
know that some of the most
successful people that I've seen
one of most successful business
owners in the town of truth or
consequences has nothing but a
CDL license and started with one
truck and now runs a multi
million dollar business one of
the largest employers in that
town would he be I'm qualified
to run for this office it's a
it's a lot of the legislators
that represent you want and the
legislative body have less
requirements many of us don't
have degrees at all and wouldn't
qualify to be a magistrate judge
but could serve for twenty years
in the New Mexico legislature in
a in a remote area like catching
County I can't think of one
person who would meet these
requirements we wouldn't have a
magistrate judge.
Because it would collude people
who have the life skills who
have have put in the work you
understand what's needed and
instead you could potentially
have the only one that makes
meets these qualifications.
It is someone who is you know
what a convicted felon of some
sort or whatever whatever it is
certainly not someone who should
be elected to represent those.
Representative their community
it would be okay to put really
narrow guidelines like this if
you're if you're hiring for a
job.
But the reality is is that
you're not doing the hiring the
voters higher there magistrate
judge and so through an open
election where people can say we
don't it doesn't matter what
kind of education have done that
the voters get to decide who
they're going to hire for
magistrate judge we are
narrowing these requirements so
so much that you're not going to
have the most eligible that meet
the qualifications to run a
specially in rural and remote
areas and you were limiting that
the pool of eligible candidates
and that's exactly what New
Mexico doesn't need to do we we
I love this legislators this
because we open it up anyone can
write a mother of five who was
never worked outside of the home
is just is eligible to sit here
and serve their state as as a
lawyer with several degrees
behind their name and and I I
just do not like narrowing this
pool of who voters for able to
to vote for I think we're
putting and then to come back
and say in next year we're going
even put more guardrails on it
they're going to have to have
provided I mean they have to
have law enforcement or military
experience so someone who
retires from the legislature and
goes back to their small
community would even qualify to
be service magistrate judge and
in the problem that we see is
there are not enough people in
our communities for stepping up
to serve their states to serve
their communities the last thing
we need to do is limit the ones
that do want to serve and give
back I I I do not like this so
thank you Mr chair.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the opportunity.
The question I have is.
It says that one counties.
Up relations over.
Two hundred thousand.
Nice to be an attorney is am I
reading that right Mr chair and
representative Keith.
Mr chair in center yes.
So what are the questions that
have Mr chair and representative
what we paying then district
judge.
Mr chair a hundred and seventeen
thousand dollars a year.
Hundred seventeen thousand and
the qualifications currently Mr
Scott chair and senator are
eighteen years old and a GED or
high school degree.
But the the question I'm having
Mr chair and representative of
we're we're going to pay
require.
A attorney.
Two hundred thousand population.
And a.
Two year degree.
And four years of work
experience in teaching social
service law enforcement
arbitration mediation or the
court system for counseling.
The figure that's equal to an
attorney Mr chair and are
Senator and.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Mr chair and
Senator with those items were
amended out of the bill on the
house side so at currently it is
eight years of experience as a
magistrate court judge court
clerk or the equivalent or has a
two year degree from an
accredited for higher from an
accredited school those other
things were eliminated in the
Chief Justice Mr Mr chair
Senator the have to be a lawyer
language is already embedded in
state law that for the need for
the counties that are greater
than two hundred thousand and
that only affects Bernalillo
county in Los crucis and so
that's already a feature of laws
that you all have have passed
and
yeah so it's not that's not
something new in this bill and
typically when they run when
there's a primary and they run
for office typically Mr chair
and representative how many
people Germany.
Enter that primary.
And in those in those attorney
situation in the Attorney
situation yes.
I don't know
Mr chair Senator do you mean in
the the areas where it's two
hundred thousand or greater yes
ma'am we we struggle to recruit
for those particular vacancies
often times one person will
apply and that's the impetus of
Senate bill two which you all of
our Eddie heard and and move
moved along
for example in Gallup about
three weeks ago Senator there
was one applicant for the for an
attorney position in District
Court for the metro court in
Albuquerque and the magistrate
court in Los crucis those
numbers are are much higher in
terms of applicant pool because
it's an it's an intricate still
considered an entry level
foothold into the judiciary to
metro Courtin Bernalillo county
will have eight applicants for
the magistrate court in
Albuquerque and in Los crucis
there will there's an currently
an opening there and will expect
to see four to five applicants
for that vacancy in Los crucis
at the magistrate court level.
Mr chair.
Representative.
Madame Chief Justice.
What you're saying is in those
quarter of those population
levels.
These people are entering the
political.
The political side of being a
judge in order.
This is the beginning position
so that the hierarchy we can we
can move up in the scale of the
judge side by using the the men
restrictions such as a stepping
stone.
For the same dollar value.
As we're going to have someone
with the two year degree.
And.
And a less than two hundred
thousand dollar population area
of both to be the same pay no.
Okay tell me what the scale of
pay instant.
Mr chairman and madam Chief
Justice Mister chairman Senator
I'm gonna turn the early path
and to tell you what the next
what we call the metropolitan
court pay is I'm sorry I didn't
get to Carlos in her current
finances I have no idea how his
party you can answer the
question what's the current
salary for the metropolitan
court judge in Bernalillo county
I think it's about a hundred
forty five Mr chairman and
senator.
What that's metropolitan court
because the statute they get any
more in the two hundred thousand
population of Los crucis.
County okay the one seventeen
that legislature paid with the
new requirements of two degree
or that experience the
difference in Los crucis is we
just have mortars that.
In most of the counties twelve
thousand population if your
deposit requirement.
In all the counties you you
would not have turned these are
available interested in you
have.
To take those administrative
positions because of the fact
that pay one seventeen for more
or less we have the county in
which
one out of five people would
qualify under the qualifications
of this bill where we have
actually one attorney in that
county who would not be
interested in running for my
district so that's what I think
the chief justice's saying with
regard to
not making all of them have to
be lawyers but requiring this
these qualifications that are in
that.
But the question I would have.
At that chair.
In order for the chief justice
for the Representative.
Are they deciding.
The same law.
Are the cases coming reform can
they be.
The line basis.
We're law has to be decided.
Are we having the same.
Quality of judges deciding the
same cases and though it could
be.
Appeal to the District Court I
know that.
But.
It seems to me.
You're broadening the the duty
of five making it.
Across the bigger area.
And yet.
I'm a little bit.
A little bit this is a little
crazy to me.
I I don't see where you know
maybe eighteen years old agency
to the.
If someone's matured thirty
maybe and maybe not.
The two year degree could be.
And anything.
Would have to do anything to do
with with law enforcement would
have to do anything to do with
the law whatsoever it could be
in anything in the world.
And yet.
They're deciding the same case
were.
As we're requiring an attorney
somewhere to decide the same
case work.
So.
It's a pretty crazy deal me and
I'm I know a lot to amend
restricted in my local area.
And to be honest with you.
Then pulled in front of.
They have been very fair to me.
no doubt about it but they
generally.
Do a repetitive.
The case was.
From what I understand.
so if am I wrong about that
shared and madam spring court.
Justice.
Chief Justice you got it.
The truth they have a
repetitive.
Mrs Mr chair Senator the the the
seed similar types of cases D.
Y. traffic violations eviction
and the like you are correct in
that one thing that I think I I
should have said it at the
beginning or possibly during
some of your colleagues
questioning is the magistrate
judges support this bill which I
think it makes it unique
compared to bills that we have
carried in in the past we worked
really hard with them over the
course of the last year to make
sure that they were comfortable
with the bill coming forward and
they support this bill so I
think that's just an important
additional item for individuals
to consider thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator thank
you very much for your
information thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Of.
Thank we have a ten point motion
that's not debatable.
Senator yes yes Campos.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales no Sir Gonzalez knows
Hemphill excuse Senator Padilla
is here.
I just called him that.
Thank.
to table house bill one thirteen
center video.
Do you like to vote no.
Senator no Sir share.
This year yes Sir Steinborn
there's no Senator Woods yes
with yes Senator Rodriguez nope
Mr chairman.
For yes.
I know.
Motions to table.
Back on the bill.
To do that well then ask
questions here first.
Why was that language stricken
in more P. what everybody said
about my to magistrates or three
magistrates well as a police
officer now in the other two
came from the courts as clerks.
And I understand why the
magistrates are supporting this
because it doesn't affect them
but how many magistrates right
now either came from law
enforcement or came from the
court.
Third system
We know that the majority the
two year.
Many of.
Mr chair I don't have we don't
have the exact number of what
the backgrounds are but a great
number of them we do now will
meet the two year degree
qualification.
Okay.
But
in I'd rather have I would
rather have the house language
in here right.
I would have rather had that
house language in here to get
more people there because in
rural parts in New Mexico it's
it's gonna be hard to qualify
them with a four year degree.
Mr Chairman just for clarity
it's a two year degree or a four
year degree and she struck we
are returning after on page two
line eighteen you struck
everything after education that
till Mr chairman that's that's
correct and not you know I can't
speak for everyone who supported
that but there was a concern
that this was too narrow that
the of because if you fall
within one of these categories
Mr chair then you had an issue
so it's it's an interesting
balance we're trying to
To accomplish here Mr chairman
and if you go to Madinah
magistrate quite a bit on civil
starting in.
What are intimidated by judge
anyway.
And so if you add a lawyer and a
lawyer quick to statute to say
I'm a late percent of every
statute.
Right and then you have no idea
what they're saying.
In the and that the lawyer
that's the job now the judges
say according to the statute and
then and then and in the other
person's life this is a civil
case I'm here for.
Non payment whatever it is
right.
Meeting take it whatever it is.
I just think there's going to be
a bigger disconnecting specially
in my area right.
to our judges are Navajo which
is good but I think people are
still intimidated by the court
system no matter what the
layperson's gets a speeding
ticket I mean the the biggest
fear is going into court and the
judge is going to.
Not work with them or not try to
help them but the fear of going
to court but if it's someone
that they know right that they
then around it's around the
community I can't speak for
Albuquerque Las Cruces large
Committee was high volumes of
lawyers I I just think it's
going to be almost impossible to
get.
those qualifications
I'm just saying in requests is a
grants magistrate judge have a
four year degree.
Used to be the sheriff now he's
a judge Mr chair glider judges
now the share.
Mr chair this doesn't require
anybody to be a lawyer except in
the two counties that you've
already previously put into law
this requires a two year degree
not a four year degree it's two
years or higher.
so I I and then I would
reflect upon the courts where
they do have lawyers Metropark
being exhibit a you know it's
the it's the busiest magistrate
court in the state and the
feedback that we get from
parties in magistrate court in
metro court where they're
largely self Representative is
that they are just as
comfortable with those
individuals because they're
trained not to take out the
statute book and read the
statutes to people it's a very
different kind of court and they
they work really hard to make
tane themselves as a people
court and then last but not
least because this is my
opportunity to brown nose a
little bit I'm pretty sure you
know the landlord tenant code
just as well as anybody
represented by a lawyer in in
magistrate court.
A lot of years to learn that
yeah.
The so how many vacancies have
you had in the metropolitan
court in magistrates in is there
currently any right now.
There have been Mr chair there
have been a number of vacancies
in the metropolitan court in the
last.
Two to three years currently I
don't believe there are any
vacancies in the metropolitan
court in Albuquerque and then
they run for office or they
appointed.
They well they have the Mr chair
as you know whether you're
appointed or not you have to run
for office as a judge in the
state of New Mexico so we're all
subject to those trials and and
tribulations I believe that the
the latest crop in metro court
More appointed ran and nobody
ran against them in metro court.
So there was no competition for
those jobs they would pretty
much.
Mr chair at the time of the
nominating commission there was
robust competition the last
metropolitan court
nominating commission I sat on
had about twelve applicants for
that magistrate level position
if you go to District Court to
it's a very different
calculus and and all everybody
wants to get appointed but until
they have to run a campaign and
it's a different story so that's
the easy way out right and so
I wish the other language in
back in back in there to get
more flexibility.
Thank you gonna hamstring.
People in rural New Mexico it is
just harder for us we don't
have.
Lawyers in the DA's office we
don't have lawyers in the public
defender's office we don't have
lawyers anywhere
and very few people that have
higher education degrees really
want to become a judgment I mean
did they worked in the school
system and they retired and and
don't want to come back I mean
we have a few contested races
in our magistrates system but
but just the way it is it's
nature of it but they don't need
any of these qualifications with
anybody that would run for
office that I've seen that I can
think of I was on the ballot
other than the two people came
from the courts.
And but without that language
would have nobody and and and
so.
That's the that's the dilemma I
had for my district right.
I want good experienced judges
but I know that we don't have a
pulled.
Maybe we have twenty five
attorneys in town private
practice right maybe twenty
five.
Mr chair just to be clear for
your district the person would
not need to be an attorney there
are only two districts that
required that have the tourney
qualifications that's for the
metro courts for larger urban
areas
so I I understood to realize
that but it's really I mean it
usually attorneys will be the
best judge of metropolitan
courts are doing the right
because I know the law and the
statutes and in otherwise we
training that we do that in a
lot of problems within our court
system from a clerk that came
into the metric system.
And so I think that's.
Take a motion.
The.
Okay
motion you pass from Senate
Padilla second by Senator
Steinborn.
The number.
Server no Senator Campos yes
office yes Sir diamond diamond
no Sir Gonzales yes it is all is
yes Sir Hemphill thank you.
Sir Padilla yes dear yes in your
share to share no Sir Steinborn
Jeff.
Yes Senator Woods.
With no zero Vegas yes
Representative yes yes Mr
chairman no no.
I.
I.
Thank you.
Senator masters.
We are getting sent out to fix
an amendment.
So
let's let's start off are we
taking the other amendments back
off.
And we're only doing this single
men.
Yes.
We need to take a vote on the
bill but we added them to the
thank so we're just doing the
technical fixes to take away the
line item in the effective date
that's all included in this
ammendment that a member Mr
chairman what I'm not proposing.
Amendment.
I want to get into that third
amendment about.
This one that just came and got.
Yes Mr chairman but I don't want
to get into that third amendment
I just want to pass the first
two and because the first two
caused a lot of of confusion the
third amendment is not I
withdraw that amendment and and
two and would prefer not to
discuss.
The third one just came in so we
can have it was never meant to
come in sorry about that tell us
what happened on the amendments
and thank you Mr chairman thank
you members and thank you
Senator it is a really weird
anomalies never happened in my
career never happened in the
staffer's career but it's
important that last year statute
and this year's proposed bill go
into effect on the same date And
so last year's of.
Last year's portion of this bill
from house bill sixty eight The
effective date was pushed out
until July first of the next
year July first of twenty twenty
three we're amending those
sections of law that have been
amended but have not gone into
effect yet and so we would want
the amendments to those statutes
to go into effect on the exact
same date of July first twenty
twenty three and would ask the
the the committees of passage of
it so we adopted.
Point one one one nine one point
one is that the first doctor.
Yes what so that's adopted at
the dock
the second one we are on
discussion purposes.
Not just the one eight seven
point one correct Mr chairman
thank you so.
Some of the past motion by
Senator share on the amendment
second by Senator Padilla.
On the amendment
yes.
Senator Campos.
Yes
there Diamond yes.
They're Gonzales yes it's also
yes that are Hemphill I was here
for the discussion so I'm not
going to.
W. F. yes seventy S. center
share yes yes I'm born yes I
would yes and Woods this there
would yes and Rodriguez yes.
me mills yes Sir Senator
Hemphill I I'm I think the rules
if in your chair.
I devote it's we're all
committees of all yes just so
you know.
yes.
We're great Senator sure
supports the second amendment.
Yes.
Thank.
Their confidence.
Yes.
Yes.
Seven zero Levin's.
Okay we're back on the bill
anybody in the audience and
support.
Anybody in opposition.
On the subject.
Okay questions on the bill.
That's a motion for do pass us
and then the by Senator Gonzales
seconded by Senator compost.
Call the roll if I may Mister
would be a committee substitute
point one.
set
the amendments so we have a
motion for to pass on the Senate
finance the Senate finance
committee says the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
as amended.
Senator Gonzales made a motion
to.
The past second by center
complex.
Server.
Yes.
Senator Campos yes Campos yes
Senator Diamond.
I'm in there Gonzalez yes
they're Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yeah Senator Hemphill
yes Sir Padilla yes Sir could do
a test and share.
No.
So here no Senator Steinborn
Jeff Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
So there was no Senator
Rodriguez yes yes yes Mr
Chairman yes yes.
Seven but I'm sorry server.
Campos I'm sorry Senator Campos
is yes right yes.
Seven yes or no.
Seven forty seven the past thank
you Mr.
Representative thank you your
there.
Is.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am here to
present house bill eight which
would create at creative
industries division at the New
Mexico economic development
department and.
The reason that we have brought
this bill forward is we really
feel that this is an economic
sector that is right for focus
and development
we have had an outpouring of
support from creative
professionals all over the state
and this sector currently
provides five point six billion
to New Mexico's economy what
this division would do you
envision for this at that new
area of focus is really about
creating a center for workforce
development support for new and
burgeoning businesses assist
technical assistance for
professionals many artistic
professionals some of them have
been doing traditional crafts
that have been passed generation
to generation so this would
offer them resources and
training to bring forward
business plans grow their
businesses yeah maybe even as a
first half registers businesses
begin to pay that gross receipts
tax really investigate all of
those economic development
opportunities and the vision for
this is to apply to businesses
that are small and large so we
have some great examples of
large businesses are under state
that have been for example
syzygy tile in Silver City is a
great example of that a creative
industry that that could be the
future of New Mexico
and with that I would stand for
questions Mr chairman.
I thank you but in the audience
and support.
Opposition.
You have to people the poor on
field.
Okay for the yep.
Twenty four of ten.
The morning rose.
The morning good morning members
of the committee thank you so
much for this opportunity my
name is Rosie Senator active
director of our which is the not
have a counselor serving guests
in McKinley county and I would
like to testify today to the an
enormously positive impact that
this bill would have especially
rural and underserved
communities across the state the
creative industries are already
an enormous slice of the pie in
terms of New Mexicos economy but
in many areas they are untapped
potential and making the county
is the perfect example of that
where we have one in four
residents making at least part
of their learning through the
arts with a creative industries
division would be able to do
exactly what representatives to
PNC said start and grow more
small businesses create
workforce development and career
pathway programs for young
people put in place public
infrastructure that's necessary
for our creative seconded thrive
such as an artist live work
space downtown so really this
those of us sitting communities
at every society economist and
finance kind of me and ensuring
that we have a a a a statewide
economy when families arrive
thank you very much.
Thank you.
The longer.
Me where you all merry merry are
you there.
Many others.
I'm very Walker iPhone leading
UP here in downtown Dallas.
Part of we hope we've got I
think downtown we were in dozens
of people year after year who
are just more for the creative
opportunities here and this bill
will help to increase those
opportunities it also reduced
what I do is marginalization of
some of our artists and people
in the in addition will help
bring it into the mainstream and
I fully for everything that
we're all set in.
Early support the bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Question from committee.
Senator Woods.
Okay we're right.
Created in the.
Or.
We were.
We.
In the region the.
That they.
That
is created.
There is.
We are creating element of our.
Part of it and.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
Woods Pat languages cleanup
language from Legislative
Council Service I think it's
just moving that raised below
but the intention of this bill
it does not I do anything at the
department level it simply on
page two line twenty four.
that the focus of this bill is
that new section G. could the
new creative industry division.
So I.
If you.
Right.
Mr chairman and senator I on
line thirteen district through.
Existed in it existed a lot
right now so there is created in
the executive branch the
Economic Development Department.
So I think it's just
reformatting that sentence
From Legislative Council Service
that's just a clean up that had
to happen that they'll start.
Mr chairman and senator
is there a couple of other
states that have a similar
division and one way that this
division would function is by
for example creating here some
business plan templates here is
if you're looking to expand your
the marketing of your product
here and here some models for
how to do that here's how to run
an effective marketing campaigns
so that's the kind of
information would I would also
expect them to have information
about both lending for small
businesses as well as other
grant type opportunities are
financing mechanisms for artists
both large and small companies.
Mr chairman and senator we had a
wonderful meeting with our
tourism secretary
one of the differences I think
between that what happens in the
creative industries and tourism
is that not all creative
industries are producing a
product that can be sold
sometimes they're producing a
service that's not necessarily
at a tourist attraction so for
example you might have someone
who is
providing a service that also
wants to workforce training to
train others I recently met an
artist in Gallup that was doing
that very thing she has a beauty
salon and her desire is to train
the next generation of hearing
PED that isn't necessarily a
tourist attraction or something
that would draw more visitors to
the area but it is a creative
industries that could expand for
that business.
Yes Mr chairman and senator
there is licensing required for
that.
So
This to the.
Those on.
Version traded.
At the.
It.
Mr chairman and senator that
particular example it is true
you have to you do have to get
licensed however it's very
difficult for new trainees to be
hired without one year of
experience so her particular
concept and this is just one
example was to provide a
workforce training where people
could get that one year of
experience and then they could
go out and either start their
own salons or be employed
another example might be for if
you have production of some kind
of craft or that you metalwork
for example where you're wanting
to do community building and
training of individuals in that
craft
and so the workforce develop
development piece of this is is
critical and is is sort of went
into the thinking of placing
this economic development
department.
You are also.
Use the.
Money.
Creating the.
Mr chairman and senator some of
the existing vehicles that
economic development department
has like Leda or J. to are
difficult for smaller businesses
to access because they require a
lot a lot of preparation and
some of these are some of the
creative industries are
occurring in some extremely
rural areas as well and so the
reason for the fund is one we
believe it provides an
opportunity to leverage federal
funding that currently is not
coming to the state for creative
industries through the national
endowment of the arts in other
federal funding vehicles but
then also one of the things so
that we did a statewide survey
some of the folks are working on
this bill.
And there's a real opportunity
for capital infrastructure
through this mechanism and so if
we can draw down federal funds
continue to make the case for
state funds and invest in things
like she shared makerspace
shared recreation space for some
of our creative endeavors like
theaters artist gallery space.
those mechanisms would require
this I.
So we are.
Sure General Fund.
The this money at the.
Asian as the district so is the
money measures.
House Bill to.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
there is two million dollars in
house bill two.
To do this so.
With that.
In.
That is out of the.
Or.
that.
four thousand.
That's correct is.
House Bill to that creates as
well.
There is a Mr chairman and
senator nonrecurring
appropriation to the economic
Development Department that is
contingent on the passage of
this legislation.
Sure.
Thank you questions from
committee members for to us.
I'm sorry Senator.
It's an arm extension.
To get my
What's the set on thank you Mr
chairman and thanks for present
for of bring this for.
did this where did the idea of
concept to this generate from.
Mr Chairman representative
actually generated from
and meeting that I had last
session before I creative
professionals that brought
forward the idea of creating it
a hub within the state for this
industry.
Okay
Yeah I I like the idea of
creative is anyone here from
economic development to support
this bill thank.
Mr Mr chairman and Senator no
although we have been meeting
with them regularly about the
the legislation.
Well I am too.
Representative and and Mr
chairman I I'm just a little
concerned that this is going to
come under their umbrella
they should be supported but
there's no one here from
economic development to support
that
So I I I'm just kind of.
Questioning how tight that
relationship is and and how
much.
Or they want to give you and I
don't think it's fair quite
frankly do if you're gonna do
this thing and it's going to be
in their department.
I personally I would like to see
somebody here supporting
something like that so I'm a
little concerned over over that
I like the concept but I want to
make sure that that the parent
the umbrella is going to be
there to support you in
something like that
it that's all I have are just in
person concerned about that
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
A few questions.
Sierra.
Mr chair thank you I think
overall this is this is exciting
not and I think about like small
communities if you've been to
the consequences lately you'll
see all the murals and stuff in
the the economic developments
you know the the art galleries
there don't just bring people
it's not just a bit of for for
the artist there but it's our
coffee shops in our boutiques
and hotels and everyone benefits
from this Hillsborough the same
way we see really neat things
happening dimming because of it
I'm I'm overall generally I'm
supportive of the idea I want to
verify a couple things Senator
Woods was asking you Mr chair
about what was already included
in the budget you stated that
the two million dollars
contingent upon passage of this
bill is included in its B. two
could you clarify Mr chair if
this the original bill had sixty
five million dollars is is that
appropriation imagery to Mr
chair Senator no okay so we just
have we just have is that
recurring the two million
dollars Mr chair is that one
time money Mr chair Senator my
understanding is is
nonrecurring.
Okay so we just have to two
million one time so this entity
would still need to be being
heavily invested in to make it.
Where we go that that would be
my only concern I appreciate
that fifty percent of that is
going to be earmarked for rural
and smaller communities because
I think that there's some great
opportunities there and and I
also want to echo a little bit
of what senator Byrd said by the
time if this was to make it to
the four by time it gets there
it is a little alarming usually
are our cabinet secretaries will
have at some point supported the
bill and in our analysis it
looks like it's just it's
traveled through the have nots
they've not stated in the
supports if you could connect
with them so we can be sure that
they don't feel that this is
just an unfunded mandate or
something that they don't want
to take on that be great but
generally speaking I think it's
a great idea and I think you can
bring a lot of good
opportunities to run to Mexico
thank you.
Thank you Senator and.
Thank you Mr chair.
Is this.
Is this for film.
Mr Mr chair Senator I'm glad you
asked that question we actually
did an amendment in its first
committee and house to remove
reference to film and to
specifically state that projects
that are supported by the Film
Office are not eligible for
this.
So Mr chair we're gonna put two
million dollars into this how
many how many people is that how
many FTEs system Mr chair
Senator at the department had
expressed that interested in
I FTE
but you know I it's up to the
Department to to implement that
not specified here.
Mr chair I think that's one of
the things that no I FTE
in a in a department that
already has vacancies in a state
that already has a lot of
vacancies in a state that has
only fifty four percent of the.
workforce participation or where
we're gonna get him
What would be what would be the
expected outcome I mean if we're
going to say that this had a
good return on investment what
would that would that return
looks like history Mr chair
Senator it I think it would look
like workforce training.
Business planning and assistance
for small businesses that were
interested in growing
I or or craving their bottom
line I think it would look like
investment in capital
infrastructure that would
support both business and
communities so creative industry
professionals as well as
community development some of
the things that I Senator
Diamond referenced are are
really important and sort of the
backbone and I think one of the
things that there's already
sixteen shovel ready capital
projects that have been
identified through local arts
council's that are located in
communities around the state and
that was just sort of an initial
casual survey so ask my
expectation of the after year we
have a catalog of what those
opportunities are and I would
just and listing Colorado's
invested a hundred and ten
million into I this type of
initiative and that's where we
sort of looked at that sixty
five million dollar price tag
but I think there's a lot of
potential under certainly been
an outpouring of interest from
every corner of the state.
Mr Chairman representative.
We've had a a pretty vibrant
skin
creative industries in New
Mexico for I don't know a couple
of thousand years probably.
So what how would this be
different than than what we have
here today I mean there's
certainly Santa Fe Gallup
Farmington maybe even down
Alamogordo I don't have of.
It will they have is they have a
cool so
but
So how would that be different
than the than the industry we
have today.
Mr chairman and senator I think
the real tribute to our creative
professionals that are in our
communities now as they have
succeeded without much help if
there aren't programs for
these folks except for what our
little local arts councils have
been able to draw down from
grants from the federal
government from the NEA so those
and those requests are small
they're usually like ten
thousand yes my friends so I
think having this is a hard
having a vehicle for investing
in community infrastructure
that's not necessarily also tied
to a main street because a lot
of our rural communities don't
have a typical of main street
structure but they have creative
assets they might have things
that could really benefit from
some infrastructure focus I
think
my interest was making sure I as
we're growing our economy that
we don't forget that her
additional that thousand
thousands of years tradition and
make sure that's just a strong
and vibrant as some of our other
things like biotech and some of
our newer initiatives.
So Mister chair representative I
just don't see certainly we have
the small business
administration which helps small
business with all of those
things to help some with the
Business administrative training
and business planning and things
like that would this be
duplicates duplicating that the
small business administration
Mister chairman Senator we have
met with a lot of these creative
professionals and ask them that
because I did not want to create
something just for the sake of
creating something and we do
have we have small business
development center we have
tourism departments wonderful
services but this is really
designed to meet in need that is
not currently being filled based
on numerous folks that we have
met with.
So I'm I'm still confused
because I know there's an awful
lot of artists out there Mr
Chairman
So there's an artist of do that
I know his name is bill share.
And he started his sports career
after we left the marines here
in Santa Fe.
And he was the the starving
artist for a while and his
brother and of.
And his sister in law fed him.
Of for a couple years but since
then he's been very successful
artist and now he's eighty four
or eighty five years old so
but he's he's had a very good
career after the first couple
years.
What would we have done
different for him.
Mr chair Senator.
Some of the resources that we
have in Santa Fe are very
specific to Santa Fe and so I
would say that is a really
common story in Santa Fe because
we have
a thriving art market we have
shared community resources we
have shared pottery studio
makerspace we have many many
places to sell art for both
inexpensive to very expensive
but you to at
Mr chairman and and senator for
example
if the front one of the reasons
that your community has been
supporting this bill is is I
think partly and seeing the
success of former representative
Taylor's you know it the way
that that has turned into sort
of a shared community space
coffee house gallery space and
that growing from the small seed
ended up with these community
benefits as well as
opportunities for artists to
sell and there's a lot of I
think communities in New Mexico
that don't have the resources at
Santa Fe has to support artists
just built in but they should
and I think this could be the
vehicle for that.
Mr chair I think that's exactly
the point so Farmington number
which was what it was when I
remembered it is is now this
great it's called artifacts
beautiful looks like a old
lumber store that has already in
it now.
but the store itself is pretty
cool.
But they did that without the
Economic Development step in and
they did that without any
government in
interjection and what they were
doing or anything like that so
the bill share that I'm talking
about was my uncle Tom Taylor
I've known for a long time both
of them succeeded without the
government
So I'm just I'm reluctant to
expand government into anything
but I'm not sure that the art
world needs it at all I think
that I think the art world.
Mexico.
Those well I think there's lots
of support this natural support
from other artists and other
what do you call people give
money away.
Given what they're called.
Service philanthropists yes.
The big awards I can't speak no
good.
But yes philanthropist the
school.
Anyway so that's that's my only
reluctance I don't think that
you know the idea of helping our
community of creating a bigger
of industry that's.
Laudable.
My concern is that we're adding
something.
That I don't think we need so.
All right Mister chair it's all
yours now.
I just have a few questions no I
agree with that.
Thank you all for the jury but
it's a little bit difficult
little bit too far presuming we
have we put forty million
dollars in the film and.
School and I don't know where
that money went.
But then you have media and
here.
Entertainment.
Make sure all money from forty
million to do some other stuff.
This is a question and then.
Yeah I've seen that.
But I I understand in Gallup.
Somebody wants to make it to
start out small and
large part of the there some
parts of this that I just don't
don't think should be here right
because I don't want.
Someone saying I want to do a
entertainment.
That's the chair of that this
bill when we have.
Resources in other places.
And then we go to.
What is on the section including
architecture.
That.
In the school landscape
architecture because
architecture landscape
architecture gonna have some
type of.
Even if they're gonna do less
than we we have to permits for
landscaping to.
you have to have some type of
license to do that I understand
you want to try to get in there
but.
In the college.
Maybe give you some insight on
on on.
Architecture.
At the thank you Mr chairman for
that you we used to at this
definition was tied to a bureau
study that was done ten years
ago on the potential of the
creative industry that was a
huge it was funded and after
that study there was no
investment there was nothing
that actually happened with that
study and we want to this
definition to be consistent with
this as well with that city as
well as like eligibility for
federal funding
but I think I don't think see I
don't see workforce development
happening under this for
architecture landscape
architecture because there's
already well defined degree he
said there are programs some of
these other topics is there more
certificate based right now so
community colleges offering the
certificates and you get coating
it cetera
is that we talked a lot about
should we include the digital
media it the entertainment
media.
Part of that is to be on the
cutting edge of the virtual
reality technology that's coming
and really wanting to make sure
we were including that.
Mr Chairman.
Campos and economic point two
topics one digit.
What was going to say that the
bill has an amendment that
anything involving the film
division is not included in this
just to be perfectly clear so
you know there's digital art
forms that can be called media
but it's not to be confused with
entertainment meteor fell and
the bill has an amendment that
says anything under the purview
of cell division shall not be
included.
The crystal clear.
Representative me ask you
another question I understand
so.
If we do a digital media.
that product right thank you
stay home.
Everybody's got a different
personality I get I get that so
they do digital media home how
do we get a might a certificate
or something so so when they go
out to companies for training.
Craig spend our space culture
right this is included there how
do we get them to say okay I
have a license I have a
certificate so much something in
the world and maybe you don't
need I don't know maybe gets
congested on the computer and
then also come back and say
hello I got a contract in in the
work I don't know this.
Yes thank you Mr chairman it's
it's great it's in like exactly
where things are involving
really fast which is why we ask
the secretary of higher at this
I think
there are certificate program.
I'm most familiar Santa Fe
communication I think CNN has
into where you come out and you
you are competent the
certificate shows that you are
competent and this particular
unit.
So you can take that and say
I've been trained in this and
because this plan help exactly I
was thinking rivers but I see
that we should have a little
more districts that we would do
that but this because people
think I just wanted to media for
the New Mexico state of my
computer and get this great but
I think we need to.
I think it the cause
I think some of the sisters they
come out of school I guess.
I don't know why the economic I
think they have to have the
funding for new businesses.
NMFA does right.
So I understand.
In the process of helping to get
process I still think some of
this says economic development
and have the space for that.
We get that worked out we're
gonna put number Mr Chairman
we've been meeting with them and
they they have been generally
very I know they have not taken
a formal position to be clear
but they've been super positive
about this.
It says on page forces.
For the growth of creative
industries pursuant to the
criteria listed for so those are
the only ones are gonna be a lot
of requests.
The series it's on page four
line seventeen it and then the.
Subsection C. and I think it is
what it was.
Subsections.
I just.
Tell me how that that program
the money's going to go out of
the thank you for pointing that
out Mr chairman but we so first
of all fifty percent of that of
funding is designated for rural
or underserved underserved
communities but they're also we
put in priorities on page five
working with a lot of the
creative professionals
because we don't.
Like you said like you pointed
out we don't want to be a random
person on the computer we wanted
to have a project that has
meaningful support from local
government it it's connected to
community that its focus on
small business so we put that
criteria in there to put some
guardrails on this.
On page three.
The line I said for small
business.
Ten employees what we dropped
that number down even lower
because.
Talk about a Navajo artist to
make chili right for the for
for.
These we don't have any
employees that creative.
There are growing hopefully get
those.
That's.
Employees.
I have a jewelry store coming
to.
Advisory from native Americans
the creative arts and I want I
want to expand.
State one put a cold medication
and their more stories.
Eight other people with less
money.
Mr Chairman that's it it's a
great point and I think part of
it is.
Ten or fewer employees the those
businesses are not are gonna
have a hard time accessing the
other prop programs likely to
need to have some of the other
programs for example at
that I'm aware of business that
has stayed they import.
The storage architectural
elements like screen doors
windows they have probably eight
employees and they would love to
do you need to but the paperwork
etcetera is is way too much for
them so this allows for a
business like that that could
grow
and has employees to to be
considered for this.
To get about ten there.
They are if they are not
prioritized so the priority is
for ten employees are below.
what is that I see census small
business with.
Someone close to ten or more.
Mr Chairman is so that the top
of that page I it is supports
one or more of the following so
you could have a project that
this demonstrated broad local
support.
It could that that
Years has any of those I just
don't know where the.
Final question I don't know
where to put the FTEs.
I got a little bit of worry
about.
Someone it right up ideals I
can't think of Navajo arch
School.
It.
If they don't have to import
into the product please.
I think it's really really
pretty unique idea and a good
idea for small road to a lot of
that work and so I would think
so.
I have a motion for.
Senator Gonzales yes the motion
by Senator Padilla the call.
This is the.
Yes yes.
Yes they're done yes it's out
yes of the yeah there have.
Yes yes yes yes no.
Yes yes.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Thanks for.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'd
first off one accomplishment of
the presentation.
with virtually no support in the
hall I do.
Yes that's one of the main
things that I notice certainly
the the money's appropriated and
I think we have to.
Look at opportunities to help
support our small businesses
because in the state we always
say we're going to do a
statewide
you know program or something
like that and it ends up being
in the re record or not so I
encourage you to make sure that
it gets outside the corridor I
guess a whole lot more but
I'd.
I would like to see this be
successful thank you Mr
chairman.
I think it should be on the call
for prayer for.
Password.
Worship so.
Thank you Mr chair there so
we're going to years and and we
got to go to the floor.
So.
Representative went to try to
get to my twenty come off before
we get that house bill out.
For.
Thank you Mr chair as we all
know of a strong judiciary is
part of an important part of a
strong democracy what this does
people bending point know that
lots of times people trying to
get out of jury duty and partly
there's a financial hardship and
all we do is pay minimum wage
what this would do is raise the.
The payment for serving on jury
duty two hundred fifty percent
of the greater of the federal
minimum wage of the New Mexico
minimum wage.
Questions from committee members
of the past second let.
To.
Right.
