Um, great. Uh, I'm, uh, good
morning. Thank you. Uh,
Uh, to the committee. I am a
doctor. Amanda Weinstein. I'm an
economist at the Center on Rural
Innovation.
We were kind of scrambled.
So you may have to log off and
log back in real quick and see
if that fixes it.
OK, I can do that.
Good morning. Is this any
better?
Much better.
OK, great.
We're ready when you are.
All right.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to the committee.
Would you like me to start
sharing my screen now with the
slides. Yep.
Got it. You may try pulling your
mic a little closer and see if
there's something there. We're
still getting a little bit of, I
don't know what you call it.
Maybe I'll
And we'll let you start and
then.
Let's see. Is that any better?
Oh yeah.
Loud and clear.
All right.
A little bit too loud. You're
clear now though.
All right, uh, let's see, I
think I need permission to share
my screen.
Is that right now.
OK, perfect.
All right. Uh, can you see my
slide? Yes, that's much better.
Awesome. Let's do this. All
right, good morning. I'm Doctor
Amanda Weinstein. I'm an
economist at the Center on Rural
Innovation, and I'm excited to
talk to you about quality of
life as an economic development
strategy. This is based on
research and work I have done
with Doctor Mike Hicks and
Doctor Emily Warnell at uh the
Center on Business and Economic
Research and at Ball State
University.
It's still a little, a little
too loud, a little too loud. Let
me see.
Is that a, is that better?
Well, now you're too old.
Like the gold, I can't find the
Goldilocks. How's this? All
right.
Perfect. I will try not to move.
Uh,
Uh, so this topic I love talking
about. I know you all are in New
Mexico, and actually my husband
is from New Mexico, um, but I
just wanted to show a little
picture of my cute little
downtown that I love, cause when
I think about quality of life, I
think about, you know, the
places that I live and the
places that we all live.
Uh, so I am an Air Force
veteran. That's actually how I
met my husband, who was from
Albuquerque, um, and, uh, done a
few different things, um, so my
background is in agricultural,
environmental and development
economics, so studying places,
uh, small places, rural
communities, up to a metro
areas.
I, at this, just to give you a
little background at the Center
on rural innovation, we focus on
rural economic development, and
we think that small towns are
home to big ideas and that new
models and new ways of thinking
of economic development can help
empower communities, especially
rural communities, to um be a
thriving part of the nation's
growing tech economy.
Uh, so why do we do this work?
Uh, we know that, oh, let me
know if you want me to tell you
what slide I'm on. I don't know
if that helps at all.
Um, so we know that there has
been a growing gap between rural
and non-rural America that has
been widening for decades, and
we think this calls for new
models for economic development
to um help rural areas, uh, grow
and thrive in the nation's
economy today.
Uh, so we know this is true, uh,
for rural areas on average, uh,
across the country that they've
been winning for decades, uh,
New Mexico, as you are likely
aware of, over 33% of the
population in New Mexico is
rural, so the fate of New Mexico
and how they've been doing is is
closely tied to rural areas.
So often what we see is that
when struggling communities,
small towns or large towns, uh,
when they are struggling, they
often turn to kind of what we
call traditional economic
development policies, um, fiscal
incentives to attract large
plants, and it's often viewed as
this kind of superhero that will
come save the town. Uh, so I
actually had AI generate this,
you know, what an economic
superhero might look like for a
town, so this is AI's vision of
what an economic superhero.
might look like, uh, but really,
when we look at the research and
when we take a longer look at
what these traditional economic
development incentives actually
do for economic development, we
find that they tend not to be a
superhero, so they're more like
syndrome. Um, I have 3 kids, so
a lot of my references come from
children's movies now, but
syndrome is this guy who really
does want to be a superhero, but
the problem is he's just not a
superhero. And what we end up
seeing is, it ends up creating
this kind of vicious
cycle where struggling
communities use these incentives
to attract these firms, but on
average, these incentivized
firms um failed to create more
jobs in similar firms who never
um got these incentives, and
that these incentives can
actually crowd out economic
activity and end up lowering
business startups in the long
run. And part of the reason why
is that we know that promoting,
you know, traditional export
activity can come at the expense
of local goods and services and
residential.
services, um, that can end up
backfiring and affect quality of
life.
Uh, this is especially true for
rural areas. So this is a look
at how large these tax incentive
programs are to try and lure
these large plants and how rural
areas in the state are doing. So
on this X-axis, what you see is
the size of the tax incentive
program, the farther to the
right, the larger the tax
incentive program is, um.
Uh, in comparison, and on the Y
axis, what you see is employment
change for rural areas in this
state, and we see that the
larger these tax incentives
programs are for the state, on
average, the worst.
Uh, so when I have
Talked about this with
policymakers. Sometimes we get,
well, what if we just make these
incentives bigger, right? What
if we try and make this kind of
what we think of as a superhero
bigger, and we have done this
over time, the size of these
fiscal incentives has tripled
between 1990 and 2015. Uh, so we
have tried making them bigger
and really what it does is it
just makes that vicious circle
more vicious.
Uh, so
To think about this, I like, I
would like to take you to
Muncie, Indiana. This is where
my uh co-authors are from and to
ball corporation, so Ball
Corporation was headquartered in
Muncie, and this is a quote from
Frank Clayton Ball, one of the
Ball brothers, um, and talking
about why they chose to go to
Muncy, um, basically he says
sorry if anyone's from Muncie,
but there was nothing nice about
Muncy. They didn't move to Muncy
because it was a great quality
of life, place where they just
wanted to live.
Um, they actually said the town
wasn't particularly nice, but
everyone was, you know,
courteous and businesslike
there. Uh, they also had a
workforce ready to that was um
highly that was for the time,
educated, well prepared to be in
this manufacturing business. Um,
they also had natural gas and
some other assets, um, some
railroads there that really made
it appealing, and that was
really what, why, uh, if you're
familiar with the Bald Jars
companies, if
If anyone in your family was
doing canning, uh, this is why
they went to Munsey.
So fast forward, 111 years
later, the Ball corporation
actually moved their corporate
headquarters, and where did they
move their corporate
headquarters too. They moved it
right outside of Boulder,
Colorado, arguably much, not
arguably, it is much more
expensive to be located in
Boulder, Colorado, then Muncie.
Real estate is higher, you have
to pay people more. Everything
about this move is more
expensive. So if we think about
why did they make this move,
right? Are these bad business
people? No.
Uh, you look, they have a
growing aerospace sector, and in
order to attract the workers
that they need for their
aerospace sector, they decided
to move to Boulder, Colorado.
Uh, and I was, so when I was
teaching in economics course,
one of my students was nodding
their head vigorously when I was
telling this, you know, story of
ball corporation, uh, so this is
in Akron, Ohio, and I said, how
do you, like, how do you, why
are you nodding here? I know
this is not that interesting,
and she said, oh, well, you
know, I think we're gonna be
moving to Boulder, um, in the
summer after we graduate,
because her boyfriend got an
internship with Ball
Corporation, and I just kind of
imagine that conversation with
their
family of talking about moving
to Boulder and why they're
moving to Boulder, and we think,
oh well, they're moving to where
the jobs are, but we don't often
stop to question why the job is
actually there. And we know from
research why they moved to
Boulder was that the success of
cities hinges more and more on
City's roles as centers of
consumption. The places where
people want to be, so it's
easier to do business, it's
easier to attract people there
when you are located in a place
where people simply
want to be where it offers a
high quality of life. Most of
this research though was based
on larger metropolitan areas
like the Denver, Boulder area.
Uh, and we've seen, if you look
in the wake of the pandemic,
especially, I think kind of put
this a little bit more on
steroids where you saw a lot of
mayors really shifting their
focus from attracting firms to
attracting residents by
improving quality of life. All
of the various things that kind
of make a place nicer to live.
Uh, so when we think about this
research, it's mostly.
Be done for larger metropolitan
areas, uh, we wanted to create a
way to measure this for every
area, whether you're rural or
non-rural, and how we measure
this using economic data is we
use housing market data and
labor market data. So if you
have ever bought a house, which
I'm sure many of you have done.
If you've talked with real
estate agents, they have 3
favorite words, it's location,
location, location, right? We
know that when you take the same
4 bedroom house, and if you
could change its location.
Right? That house will be a
different price based on the
location that it is. It is
different based on Santa Fe
versus Albuquerque versus Taos
versus Alamogordo, right? The
exact same size house, same
floorpan, everything, we'll have
a different price. Why, right,
because there's some type of
location premium that is built
into that housing price. So what
we want to do is use the housing
markets to get what that
location premium is, what people
are willing to live.
in that place, but we can also
actually do the same thing out
of labor markets. We know that
if people really like a place to
live that they will actually
accept lower wages to live
there.
And this one sometimes people
are a little bit less convinced
of, um, but when I was working
with a different co-author in
Michigan, right? He said, oh
yeah, this is Traverse City,
Michigan, and I said, oh,
interesting, why do you say
that? He said, well, everyone
knows around this area, we say
this is where you get half the
pay for a view of the bay. They
know to live and work there,
you're gonna have to accept
lower wages because people just
enjoy living in Traverse City
that much, having access to the
bay and they're um downtown,
which has been revitalized, um,
and all of the amenities that
this place
offers.
When I also talked to some HR
professionals and some CEOs that
have multiple locations in their
corporation, um, they will
sometimes tell me which location
they have to pay an accountant
more, um, just to locate there.
If it's not a place they want to
be. So what we do is we use data
to get what that location
premium is out of housing
markets and labor markets. So in
the top left corner here, where
you see these darker blue. This
is our higher estimated quality
of life, where we have a higher
housing premium and a higher
wage premium to locate there,
and this is focused on small
towns, this is focused on
micropolitan areas or rural
places that have populations,
county populations about 1000 to
50,000
So there you can see places
pulled out like Hawaii, Hawaii,
the Garden Island, you see
Teton, Wyoming, uh, near
Yellowstone, you see the big
island of Hawaii, um, you see
Wasatch, Utah, uh, this is
Hebrew City where they have
someski resorts, and you also
see Taos, New Mexico, which I
know you all are familiar with.
Um, we see it pull out these
kind of very high quality of
like places. A lot of them high
amenity places, uh, and as we
kind of go in these different
quadrants from the top left we
see kind of great places to
live. The
right, I would say is a mix of
uh great places to live and
work. Um, a lot of these do have
some significant tend to be
federal employee uh employment,
so this might be like a coast
guard base or something there,
and in the bottom right is where
we see places maybe not great to
live, but great to work. Um, a
lot of these places have oil and
gas extraction, um, and so you
can as a company make quite a
lot of money um in oil and gas.
Uh it's a lucrative industry,
and
Uh, so you can see great places
to work, but maybe not great to
live. The bottom left is a
little bit where you're getting
kind of a bit of a neither
category where it's struggling
in terms of a great place to
work and struggling in terms of
a great place to live. So that
just gives you kind of a sense
for what we can get out of this
data.
Ah, so just to compare different
regions, so here we have rural
places across the US in the
Midwest, what you can start to
see is a lot less of those bluer
dots up in that top left
quadrant, so you see a lot less
focus on the quality of life
area, more focused in the red
there and in terms of that
quality of the business
environment in great place, uh,
kind of great places to work,
not so much great place, uh, to
live.
Uh, so for the Southwest, this
is now looking at both small
towns and large towns. So
basically all counties in the
southwest where the Southwest is
New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada,
Utah, and Colorado, and we can
see compared to the Midwest,
more in the quality of life, uh,
section. So we can see a lot
more up in the top left there,
um, a lot more places, as we can
imagine, with these high
amenities, uh, where they have a
high estimated quality of life.
When we look at the map, uh,
across the US now using these
housing premiums and wage
premiums, we can start to see
kind of these regional patterns
we can see people, like we can
see the coast, if you look at
those blue areas, people
probably like beaches, and if
you look at the mountains, the
Rocky Mountain areas, people
probably like mountains. We can
also see some areas struggling.
So if you're familiar with
Appalachia, so where West
Virginia, Kentucky, Pennsylvania
areas are, we can see some areas
there are also struggling with
quality
life.
But it also lets us do is
estimate the quality of the
business environment. So here
we're looking at the location.
So if we think about quality of
life, this is looking at that
location premium according to
households, and the quality of
the business is looking at kind
of the location premium from the
perspective of the business.
This is where businesses are
willing to pay more to do
business, and we can see some
similarities, Silicon Valley,
for example, is a place that has
high estimated quality of life
and a high quality of business
environment with a
of tech employers and uh tech
labor market there, uh, but this
is where people are willing
businesses are willing to pay to
be there. They're willing to pay
the higher real estate prices.
They're willing to even pay
higher wages in order to get
access to that workforce.
And what these two metrics give
us is a way to answer this kind
of perpetual chicken and egg
problem of economic development.
Do people follow jobs or do jobs
follow people, and in reality,
it's probably always going to be
a little bit of both, where some
people are following jobs and
some people are and some jobs
are following people.
But it can also be changing over
time, right? I imagine my um my
grandparents and my uncles who
are all from Michigan and very
much in the manufacturing
sector, and that's where they
all um had jobs that moving just
to a place because you thought
it was nice would probably sound
insane and not probably it did
sound insane to my grandfather,
where today it doesn't sound as
saying to much when you hear
people say, I'm moving here
because it's, you know, it
sounds like a nice place to
live, and I'll find a job when I
there, which is what my parents
ended up doing, uh, moving to
California and Colorado and in,
you know, now Florida, all of
the kind of nice places where
people have moved for quality of
life.
So what we can do is estimate
kind of which of these impacts
is having a larger impact on
economic development right now.
Is it that quality of life or is
it that quality of the business
environment.
So what we find is that quality
of life actually matters more
now for both population growth
and job growth, and it's not
only also true for small towns
and rural areas. It's especially
true for small towns and rural
areas. Um, and this is taking a
look at the Midwest, so what
you're, I'll show you, I'll show
it to you for the Southwest as
well.
So what you're looking at here
is our estimated quality of
life, um, for each county for
small towns in the Midwest on
the left is looking at
population growth. Right now
we're just gonna focus on
pre-pandemic, we'll get to post
pandemic, uh, so pre-pandemic
population growth, uh, is on the
left, and pre-pandemic
employment growth is on the
right. So we see on average,
higher estimated quality of
life, boost population growth
and boost employment growth. Uh,
so when we look at the
Southwest, this is looking at
Um, all towns, not just small
towns, this is looking at, uh,
both rural and non-rural places,
and we see a similar pattern
where higher estimated quality
of life increases population
growth and employment growth.
This is only comparing small,
uh, this is only comparing
Southwest places to other
southwest places and the
Southwest generally had higher
quality of life than the
Midwest. Uh, so we can still see
this pattern where higher
estimated quality of life um is
associated with this higher
population growth and job growth
for rural.
non-rural places. So when we
look at the quality of the
business environment, uh, so
once we put this in, statistical
regressions, we actually find no
statistical relationship here,
that the quality of the business
environment is just not
associated with either
population growth or job growth.
Uh, and this is true for the
Midwest, um, it is also true for
the Southwest. Uh, we don't see
a relationship here or a
negative relation, potential
negative relationship between
the quality of the business
environment and population
growth and job growth.
Uh, so really a lot of what this
tells us is that in that kind of
chicken and egg question is
right now what we see is jobs
are tending to move to people.
Businesses are tending to move
to people and where people want
to live, where there's higher
estimated quality of life.
Ah, so this was looking at
pre-pandemic, uh, post pandemic,
a huge trend we've had is the
rise in remote work. So you can
see even before the pandemic, we
see a steady kind of slow
increase in remote work kind of
creeping up, um, creeping up
slowly enough that I don't think
anyone really paid attention to
it before the pandemic. After
the pandemic, of course, uh, we
paid a lot more attention to
remote work, as you see it kind
of skyrocket there um with the
pandemic, and we've seen it come
down right as
People, you know, are not.
You know, don't have orders to
stay home. We see remote work
coming down, but still well
above the levels that it was
pre-pandemic. And so this gives
us a question of, well, what
does this mean for quality of
life, as this, you know, where
you live and work becomes
further separated as people can
work wherever they live and work
from home.
Uh, and so what we're looking at
here is this change in effect
pre-pandemic versus post
pandemic.
Uh, and what we're seeing is
that for this is for the
Southwest, that for the
Southwest, the effect is
actually 4 times larger, meaning
quality of life in terms of
population growth has a 4 times
larger effect post pandemic than
pre-pandemic. So all of those
kind of pre-pandemic, um,
associations I showed you are
much are probably much larger
post pandemic, as people can
live and work, uh, wherever they
want to increasingly.
So the other thing we wanted to
look at between this ah.
These very different economic
development strategies of trying
to attract specifically
businesses versus trying to
attract people. And what we
found was for the places that
really focus on the quality of
the business environment and
trying to attract people. What
you get is this kind of job
piracy. And so this is where you
get kind of one county can take
a business from another county,
right? It's not really creating
jobs, it's just moving one
county and at the cost of
another county. So being a
county that is near a county
that.
has this high quality of
business environment, and this,
these type of strategies
actually make your county worse
off. It pits counties kind of
against each other, where being
near a high quality of life
county actually has the opposite
effect. It has this more shared
prosperity effect. If one county
increases their quality of life,
it actually boost jobs and
population in the neighboring
county as well, um, which makes
sense, right, so you can drive
to the nearby county if you want
to go visit whatever makes it
nice, if it's a
ities or if it's restaurants,
things that make it a higher
quality of life.
So if I have convinced you at
all on, you know, quality of
life might be something we need
to think about for economic
development, um, the, the, the
natural question is all right.
So what does quality of life
mean, right? So we know it's
just something about this place
that people like, right? What
does this, what actually makes a
place nice. What increases the
quality of life? So I've talked
a little bit about amenities
already. If we use the USDA's
natural amenity index, we can
see that, yes, natural amenities
help. Um, it looks like our
natural amenity.
help increase quality of life,
not the only thing, but
something that likely increases
quality of life. A lot of the
counties I've already talked
about, Teton County and Wyoming,
for example, there's a picture
of it, known for having gorgeous
amenities, um, you know, same
with Taos and same with a lot of
these counties.
Um, but I'm gonna give you a but
on these natural amenities. Once
we include recreation
businesses. The natural amenity
score actually completely goes
away from our analysis. What
does that mean? Having natural
amenities helps, but only if you
capitalize on them. If you don't
capitalize on them in a way that
people can use them, uh, if
that's through rafting or skiing
or trails or biking, however
people like to use it, then the
natural amenities actually don't
help you. Uh, and so those
recreation.
businesses become very important
in terms of capitalizing on
those natural amenities to
improve quality of life.
Um, arts and culture, so these
are arts and culture businesses,
uh, also improve quality of
life. These are the things that
we might like to do when we're
not working, having lots of kind
of arts and culture uh
available, right? Taos, I know,
and New Mexico in general is
known uh for arts and culture
and, you know, what's available
there in terms of arts and
culture. Um, so what I, what I
also like to say in terms of
recreation and and arts and
culture, is that it likely needs
to be unique to that place. So
arts and culture in New Mexico
does.
doesn't look like arts and
culture in Ohio, recreation in
New Mexico doesn't look like
look like recreation in Ohio or
a number of these other states.
It looks unique, and I like to
show this picture at the top
right of this splash pad. Uh,
this is actually in
Lawrenceburg, Kentucky, a small
town in Kentucky, and it's a
bourbon barrel spraying water on
kids. Uh, and what I like about
this picture, whether you think
it's appropriate or not, I think
it's kind of cute. It's really
playing up on their identity and
their culture, they're known for
ur
trails, uh, and so,
Part of this is, right, is this
a little bit recreation. Is it a
little bit arts and culture, and
it's probably, you know, a
little bit of both, where
they're building on something
unique, uh, and in this case in
a way that's, you know, great
for families to have this splash
pad in the summertime.
Um, other things that help
quality of life, having better
access to health care, uh, also
food stores, um, this is one
where I've talked to
policymakers in large
metropolitan areas happen to be
Boston, who said, I don't think
grocery stores matter that much,
and I said, well, that's because
you have them, talk to a town
who doesn't have a grocery
store, and you will find real
quick how much grocery stores
matter. Um, this is something
that showed up again and again,
that grocery stores, food stores
really matter, and they improve
quality of life. Same with
personal care places, right? We
need places to
cut our hair, these are
barbershops, salons, different
places like that. A lot of this,
I think of these things that
increase quality of life are
things we need. We need grocery
stores, we need personal care
places. We need access to
healthcare, and there are also
things we like. We like access
to recreation, things that we
want. We want arts and culture,
um, being near a metro area
helps. This is pretty standard
in the literature.
Um, and also things like low
crime rates and good schools,
uh, we
People generally like lower
crime rates and better schools.
So specifically here we measured
better schools as how much
you're spending, uh, on your
students, and
What we saw here is this showed
up time and time again, the more
you spend on your schools, the
more people estimate a higher
quality of life in that county.
Uh, we also looked at work from
home. If you have the ability to
work from home, the more people
that are working from home, you
likely have a higher quality of
life place. This is probably
also a proxy for broadband. If
you have the actual ability to
work from home.
Uh, so this is just, uh, a map
this or not for me, but looking
at what K12 spending per student
looks like per state, um, and we
have another one looking at
outdoor recreation and arts and
culture, what this looks like in
terms of, um, value added by
state. Uh, this is 2022, so it
also might be a couple years
outdated, but just to give you
kind of an idea when we're
starting to think about um these
places, what it looks like
across states.
Uh, so
Really, when I think about
quality of life, um, a lot of
people think I'm not talking
about businesses, but a lot of
what I showed you are actually
businesses. They're usually
small businesses, um, so they're
the businesses that are the
local grocery store. They are
the businesses that are the
local salons and barbershops or
your local restaurant, your
local bar, um, so I put a couple
pictures of some of my favorite
quality of life places, um, so
on the left is Skyzone, um, in
Ohio, we
have winters here, which some
people don't like. I totally
understand it, and it's a great
place for my kids to go, whether
it's snowing outside or the
weather's lovely, they love sky
zone, so it makes it great for
me to have a place where my kids
can go, even if we don't have
great weather all year round.
Uh, and on the right we have
Farmers' Rail, which is a
restaurant that really builds on
the unique character of our
towns so historic dairy farming
town, um, and so it has a
charcuterie boards with the
cheese, and it also has, you can
pick your own cut of meat, um,
uh, from some of the ranching
and uh dairy type activities
that we have had. Um, and so a
lot of this again, I think comes
back to with the quality of life
are the things, you know, are we
providing the things that
residents both need, uh, and
want.
Um, and then also are we doing
it year round? So one thing that
I found, uh, working with some
Wisconsin towns that I really
loved about some of the
Wisconsin, their local um
economic development sites and
their local city sites, all of
them seemed to brag about their
place year round. They brag
about what they do in the
winter, they brag about what
they do in the fall, they brag
about what they do in the summer
and the spring, they uh just
love their town and the things
that there are to do in their
town year round. They're not
ashamed of any winter up in Wis
Wisconsin.
Uh, so one caveat I like to get
with this as well is a lot of
the jobs I'm talking about, uh,
so yes, a lot of them are small
businesses. Um, also, a lot of
them are tourism related, uh, so
a lot of them and also in a food
prep. A lot of the things we
need and want from restaurants
or from tourism, they tend to be
lower paid, so one thing to pay
attention here with quality of
life is those lower paid jobs
are very important for quality
of life, those small businesses
very important for quality of
life and for economic
development.
even though, you know, they
might not show up on traditional
metrics as being a large
employer. They have other
economic development importance,
but some of those jobs are lower
paid, uh, so part of quality of
life, I think, is also about
access to economic opportunity.
So if we compare pay here, if
you look at the top, I
highlighted computer and math
occupations. These are tech
jobs. Um, so essentially tech
jobs are among the best paid
jobs in the country, and also
tech jobs have the highest
access to
remote work. Um, so when we're
thinking about access to
economic opportunity, it's not
about attracting people to your
town as much as making sure town
is already a nice place for the
people that live there, and that
the people that live there have
access to economic opportunity,
whether that's a high paying
tech job or they want to start
their own business.
Uh, so I'd like to point out,
um.
Earth Quaker devices, uh,
because I think it's kind of a
cute story about how, um, an
entrepreneur, um, built on the
culture of, in this case, it's
Akron, Ohio. So Akron, Ohio is
the rubber capital of the world
or once was the rubber capital
of the world and had this kind
of
I don't know
kind of this gritty, hardworking
culture, and uh the man you see
up there, the entrepreneur in
the middle with a guitar, he and
his buds used to go to the same
bars that the rubber workers
used to go to, and uh so his
friend actually the guitarist
for the um Black Keys, if you're
familiar with them, and he
toured with them, and his buddy
who's a guitarist said, hey, I
really want a pedal that makes a
different sound for my guitar,
and, you know, being kind of a
tinkerer, he said, let me help
you with that.
Um, and built him a pedal, and
then people got to talking and
other people wanted him to build
these guitar pedals for him. And
so it kind of just kept going,
and now he has his own company,
Earthquaker Devices. Um, he's
very clear he would not want to
do this anywhere, but in Akron,
and it kind of built on this
culture of Akron, um, and we
also have on the left you see um
these porch rocker events where
the whole community comes out
and you can visit different
porches and see people, um, you
know, all the different bands on
the.
porches. And so it really shows
you kind of how this business
sprang from something unique in
the community that I think was
very related to um quality of
life and the culture of the
community.
And unique to Akron.
Uh, so, I think quality of life
cannot only high quality
attracts businesses, um, and
helps grow businesses, but when
you ask entrepreneurs, you know,
why would you choose a location,
uh, in a survey, entrepreneurs
said, well, I'm going to choose
a location, you know, where the
talented workers are and where
the quality of life is that
these workers want, right? This
is what entrepreneurs are saying
that they're looking for when
they're thinking about where to
start a business or where to
locate their business. Uh, so if
you look at our quality of life
measure, it's also associated
with more business growth. We
see
Um, a larger change in the
number of businesses starting in
these places that have higher
quality of life, and many of
them, yes, are restaurants and
these things that we love, but
they're also, for example, in
Traverse City, this example of a
hybrid robotics company that
started in Traverse City. So we
see businesses of all kinds
starting in these higher quality
of life places.
Uh, and the same is true in the
Southwest. We see actually an
even stronger relationship here
between higher quality of life
and businesses starting there,
and these are just a couple
examples here. Um, this is from
Wasatch County of some, we even
have some venture activities
starting to happen in these
rural towns, um, in the
Southwest, also building on, uh,
so entum is a uh they build
bikes for racing, um, building
on kind of the quality of life,
um, or just venture capital.
just, uh, investing in a lot of
startups in the mountain West.
And we see the same thing here,
we're looking at Rout County,
um, and steamboat Spring, so
there it's tequila, um, which I
know, you know, Santa Fe has
their margarita trail, um, not
sure the story of how the
tequila company ended up in
Steamboat Springs, but there
they have it, you know, tequila
company that started that's
been, you know, talked about.
Um, and so a lot of when I think
about quality of life, um, this
is, I know there are a lot of
pieces to this, but when I think
about economic development on
the far left here, you have all
of these foundational elements.
I think about the foundational
elements of of economic
development as quality of life.
It's where you're talking about,
do you have a nice lib work
downtown. Do you have a K-12
system? Do you have child care
availability? Do you have
housing? Do you have public
safety and health. All of these
things and all of these parts
are these kind of foundation.
elements to build more
businesses and more jobs, and uh
on top of their right, we talk,
we talked a little bit about
broadband, you need necessary
infrastructure to do that and
also the training and support
for that workforce and for those
small businesses to start.
Um, so just to give you a little
example, I'm sure there are Tas
experts that are there in that
room that are not me, um, but
Taos is one of the communities
that we work with in our rural
innovation network here at the
Center on Rural Innovation. So
if I can brag about Tas just a
bit, um, in New Mexico I know
Taos is known for its um great
skiing, and it's great
amenities, um, but they're
really working hard to build on
that, to give residents their
access to economic opportunity.
So using what they have to build
out their
infrastructure, a lot of this
work done with Kit Carson
Electric Cooperative, who
provides that fiber broadband
that's necessary, um, and, uh,
also done a lot with their solar
power there.
Building a co-working space
where either uh new remote
workers or existing remote
workers and can uh come together
but also get access to um tech
skilling space. So we heard um a
lovely story from Rose about how
one of the members of the tribal
communities there was able to
get um tech training and get a
remote job. Um, and then also
just their pollen the
pollinator, which is I know just
starting, um, but really to
support those small businesses.
And so I think what Taos is
doing is really working hard to
build on, you know, the, the
natural means they have, but to
make sure that they're doing it
in a way that residents can get
access to broader economic
opportunity, and they're using
what they have to invest in
their community, their
infrastructure, making sure
small businesses have support
and there's co-working spaces,
um,
To really help leverage what
they have for economic
development.
And I think really what we see
here is it becomes more of this
virtuous circle, where we
actually so if we look at this
correlation between quality of
life and the quality of the
business environment over time.
Um, this is true with our data,
it's also true with previous
data that looked at um large
cities that we see before 1990,
businesses and households really
disagreed on where they wanted
to live and what made a place
nice. But what we see over time
is that businesses and people,
as that number turns positive
and starts to
increase that businesses and
people are increasingly agreeing
on what places are nice on where
they want to be, and part of
this to me is indicative also of
that businesses are increasingly
choosing to locate where people
wanna be, where there's a higher
quality of life.
And you kind of get this
virtuous circle where high
quality of life, uh, yes, it
attracts people, but it also
keeps people, and a lot of these
people are highly skilled. They
end up starting businesses, um,
those, and we know that small
locally owned firms have a
larger impact on economic
growth, um, and that these
entrepreneurs can actually
increase growth, especially in
lagging regions, and that this
small, these small businesses
can increase quality of life,
uh, by providing local goods and
services.
then kind of continues that that
virtuous circle.
And so I know I started with
this kind of idea of
superheroes, um, really, I
disappoint my kids all the time
by telling them that there's no
such thing as Superman. Uh,
there's no one coming to save
our towns. Nobody loves our
towns more than the people who
are already there, and so really
I think the superheroes are us,
and it's really more about
fostering an entrepreneurial
culture where we kind of seek
out creative ways to leverage
our local strengths, um, to meet
the needs and wants of the
community.
Um, and other communities, uh,
and so we have these kind of 5
recommendations, um,
specifically, we usually work
with rural um leaders and first
one is kind of building those
foundational elements, investing
in quality of life, um, and then
moving on from there, investing
in quality of life, building up
that broadband infrastructure,
creating those places for people
to come together for remote
workers, um, increasing remote
employment, uh, so that workers
have broad access to economic
opportunity and
really focus on uh residents,
making sure that they are
connected with it within their
community and investing in
quality of life. Um, first to
retain residence and then kind
of attract and grow those
workers and those entrepreneurs.
And thank you. I wanna thank you
for your time.
Thank you.
Mm
Any questions from the
committee?
No questions from the committee,
so thank you, uh, Amanda.
I think we heard this over the
interim as well. I, I believe
so, so I appreciate.
Mm
presentation again and and thank
you.
Yeah. Appreciate it. Have a
great day. Thank you.
Department of Finance
Administration.
A small amount of frequing.
OK, so give us, give us a few
seconds. Let us know when you're
ready.
chair members of the, oh, sorry.
Yeah
back
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, we sent over a
one pager this afternoon or this
morning.
That we sent it to Adrian.
You managed to put your whole
pre you managed to put your
whole president in one page,
that's, that's pretty amazing.
Nancy, I believe, according to
uh
He honoring down in the Senate,
uh, chamber a few days ago. I
think that the entire budget on
some
I sticky notes, yeah, according
to Senator Trurilo.
You can't afford that many
sticky notes.
It's like the commercial where
the guy who sticky notes.
So, how are we doing?
OK.
What
OK, thank you, chair members of
the committee. Good morning. I'm
Emily Hilla, the LFC analyst for
the Department of Finance and
Administration. We have
Secretary props today from DFA
as well as Nicole Masius from
DFA talking about the executive
budget recommendation.
Before going over differences, I
just want to highlight that HAFC
went with the LFC
recommendation, however, they
also added 4,085,000 in
personnel, um,
Different allocations in the
local government division and in
the fiscal management and
oversight program and so that
gets the general fund, um, close
to what's in the executive, um.
us around $100,000 a difference
there.
Uh, so with that being said, the
main differences between the
recommendations, uh, it comes
from the opioid settlement
revenue. It comes from the
tobacco settlement program
funds, and it comes from county
supported Medicaid. If you have
any questions, I'd be happy to
answer those. Those are the high
level overviews, uh, other
changes in HAFC there is a
supplemental, as you can see on
your one pagers and on the
screen for 500,000 for the
fiscal management and oversight
program. So HAFC added some
changes that Secretary Props
will be talking about with you
all this morning. Uh,
With that, just that high level
overview. I'll just turn it over
to Nicole to talk about anything
before turning it over to the
secretary.
Thank you, Emily. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I have
no other, um,
Mentions uh for the department
budget, but, um, maybe there is
one I think civil legal
services, uh, for the recurring
budget, but the executive and
the LFC are both aligned, um,
there are no differences for
civil legal services, that's in
P 545 and that is pretty much
it. I'll turn it over to the
secretary.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I think we can
be quite brief uh this morning
as, uh, well, first of all, Mr.
Chairman, let me start off by
thanking Emily and and uh
And the call for all the work
that they do on uh DFA
throughout the year, we're
blessed at DFA to have two very
good analysts, um, and I, I
don't take that for granted, so
I want to mention that Mr.
Chairman.
Um, but as Emily noted, um,
there weren't a lot of
differences going into house
appropriations and finance
committee and coming out of
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee. There are even fewer
differences, so don't really
have anything to present to the
committee today in terms of
A glaring needs for the
department. I appreciate the
support that we received from
House Preparations of Finance
and also this committee, uh
during the two years that I've
been secretary and we're happy
to answer any questions you have
any?
The question is of the
secretary.
And.
Mm
Mr. Chair, thank you. um.
What I've got question I just
happened to look at the back of
this, uh, Mr. Secretary, was
talking about the audit
findings.
Is there anything you want to
talk about on that?
particular at finding.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh members
of the committee and senator
absolutely um.
Uh
This is the 4th, uh, I think the
4th state agency that I've been
the head of in 20 years in state
government, and I said this
before about other agencies. Mr.
Chairman, I actually welcome
audits.
I think they're a good thing for
agencies.
And I actually welcomed
findings, uh, because they tell
us where we can do better.
Uh, I'm happy to defer to Mark
Melhoff, who's the head of our
financial control division in
terms of any specific audit
findings that are listed there.
I do believe that we had fewer
audit findings this year than we
had last year. Uh, it is
certainly Mr. Melhoff's intent
that we have even fewer uh in
the upcoming year.
You know, we recognize the
findings and that um I think
we've uh generally agreed with
them, uh, perhaps not the level
of
Of, uh, you know, whether
they're significant deficiency
or not, but we certainly don't
uh have any issues with the
findings that are our auditor
identified in our FY 24 audit
and again, Mr. Chairman, happy
to go into details on them, um,
but Senator, we, um.
We intend to continue to do
better at DFA. It's a complex
agency, as you know, a lot of
money flowing in from different
sources, a lot of money flowing
out to different sources, so it
is quite a task to keep uh.
Keep on top of it all, but it's
one of the reasons why we asked
for some additional resources in
house appropriations and finance
for the financial control
division because it is the one
division that DFA that I don't
want to be short on, uh, Mark
needs the staff.
Uh, and the expertise to be able
to manage not only DFA's budget
but the essentially manage the
entire state budget.
And I realized that you're,
you're managing all the money. I
guess if you just kind of,
sometime.
When it's convenient if you
could get to me this kind of a
diagram on, on these uh
deficiencies and
Why they think that you lost a
little bit of a track of it, is
it, that's, that'd be, it's,
it's too much to ask.
Without you coming in prepared
to answer that question, so I
don't want to be, you know,
Raise hell about this picture,
but if you're just gonna diagram
it for me sometime when it's at
your convenience.
I,
I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
I, I know you've developed
senator relationship with Mark
over the last couple of years
and I'm sure he'd be happy.
Thank you.
Anybo else
Nobody else good to see you.
DOT Department of
Transportation.
know.
I think we're good to go.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Joseph Simon. I am the
LFC analyst for the Department
of Transportation and here at
the table is Ricky Serna, the
secretary of Transportation and
Diego Jimenez with the
Department of Finance and
Administration. I'll just really
quickly, uh, give you a quick
update on uh the budget for the
Department of Transportation. So
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee adopted House
Bill 3, so, um, it's a little
different than some of the other
agencies, uh, the operating
budget for the Department of
Transportation introduced as
a separate bill that thing gets
rolled into House Bill 2, which
you will see, um, as the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bills 2 and 3. You should have a
packet with an overview of that.
I'll just do some, some real
quick highlights of the overall
budget, so the, the, the
consensus, um, reached by uh
through the House Bill 3 process
included a total of $1.3 billion
for the department of
transportation in fiscal year
2026, including 240
9.5 million for personnel and um
For the first time you can see
there's a there's a little more
detail in the department's
budget. So, uh, there's a broken
out light items for things like
road construction, a total of
574 million for that for some of
those local road projects
through the transportation
project fund or local government
road fund, uh, and for road
maintenance or equipment
purchases and uh with that, um,
Mr. Chair, I'll ask Diego if he
has any comments before handing
it over to the secretary for his
presentation. Mhm.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
don't have anything additional
to add, just uh.
I guess
That's all.
All right. Thank you, secretary.
Well, I have a question for
Diego if I can.
Actually, I would just want to
start off by thanking uh both uh
Diego and Joey is, um, as Joey
mentioned the process for um for
incorporating the op but for the
Department of Transportation
starts with a series of, of
discussions and, and uh I
wouldn't even use the word
negotiations or really just some
concessions about where we need
to be as an agency on a number
of fronts and so I appreciate
that it's always a cordial and
professional, um, Mr. Chair
members.
The committee, we have a
presentation that we handed out.
Um, and it looks like this.
There you go.
Um, yeah, that's it.
Sorry, I have the one from last
night, so.
Um
On, on slide 2, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, we
just want to identify um some
figures here that stem from a
report that's done annually in
partnership with the Associated
contractors of New Mexico. They
work with the third party
organization to generate what's
called an annual trip report.
The trip report fundamentally
does an assessment of roadway
conditions and partnership with
DOT talks about the gap between
what we need to maintain and
bring our current infrastructure
into a state of good repair and
the gap between
what that would cost in the
funding that we have available
right now. And so that gap um in
the 2025 trip report is a $5.6
billion dollar gap in unfunded
transportation projects. It also
identifies how though the
current infrastructure
conditions impact New Mexico
drivers and it identified as
you'll see in slide 2, at 3.6
billion, um, uh, cost annually
to New Mexicans, 1.6 of which is
for vehicle operating costs and
829 million in safety costs and
so on the bottom right of
page 2 are uh the statewide
pavement conditions. This
includes local roads, 33% of
them in poor condition, 24% are
mediocre, and then 43% combined
in fair in good condition. And
so not only does this underscore
the need for us to um allocate
resources to bring poor and
mediocre conditions, um, up, but
also to maintain those roadways
through um general maintenance
um to ensure they stay in good
and fair condition for the life
of those uh roads.
On slide 3, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, we providing
similar data, um, except this
time for bridge conditions, um,
it was noted last night that the
Department of Transportation is
done a, a, a good job
maintaining bridge conditions.
There has been in the bipartisan
infrastructural laws significant
emphasis on, on, on and off
system bridges uh through BIL
funding, and that's been a
tremendous resource to ensure
that um we addressed um
historically poor bridges in in
the state and.
particular in partnership with
some counties and locals.
On page 4, Mr. Chairman, just to
kind of get into a high level of
the Department of
Transportation's operation, uh,
Ubud. Uh, you'll see here that
the $1.2 billion dollar budget
is fundamentally the sum of our
federal apportionment and our
state road fund. Our state road
fund is comprised of several tax
distributions and so it's almost
a fifty-fifty split um between
the federal revenue that we
receive and the state road fund
revenues, um, again reminding
the committee that department.
Transportation does not receive
recurring general fund
appropriations, um, but it is
important to note that since
2019 we have through your
generosity and the governor's
support received over 1.8
billion in those one-time
appropriations.
On the next slide, Mr. Chairman
doesn't have a number, but this
is it right over here, um, and I
apologize because I know it's
difficult to read, but it is
kind of a roadmap, if you will,
for how the state road fund
generates its revenues from the
various tax distributions put in
place in statute. And so the way
you read this table is on the
left hand side in the green
boxes, you have the various
taxes that contribute to the
state road fund, um, to the
right of those green boxes. If
you see the beige lines that are
highlighting various
percentages, those.
be lines are capturing the
distributions of the percent of
those tax distributions that
comprise the state road fund.
And so if you start at the top
gasoline tax 17 cents per gallon
just to the right of that,
you'll see that 76.27% of
gasoline tax collected in the
state, or about 13 cents goes to
the state road fund and in FY
26, it's forecasted that that
would generate about 112
million. And so you'll see
moving down um the, the table
here, the chart, um, the
various, um, the
revenue distributions. Just to
point out, it was a question
asked last night which was
intriguing is that of all these
taxes generated, there's only
one that currently contributes
revenue to the general fund and
that is the motor vehicle excise
tax, um, and you'll see that at
the bottom, um, the motor excise
tax generates about $163 million
to the general fund.
On, on slide 6, trying to
simplify things, um, in a pie
chart for you all. This, uh,
this light is just an overview
of um those distributions and
so uh you'll see that the state
road fund over 80% of the state
road fund is comprised of 4
distributions, um, in this
order, the gasoline tax, I'm
sorry, the special fuel or
diesel tax generates about 129
million gas tax 111, we
distance, 105 and then vehicle
registration fees about 87
million.
And then in 5th place is the
motor vehicle excise tax
distributions, about 61 million
annually comes from a motor
vehicle excise tax.
Um, on slide 7, just for your
information, um, to kind of make
a comparison of how other states
in the region, um, are faring as
it relates to a reliance on fuel
tax. And so you'll see New
Mexico here in the middle road,
Arizona, lowest at 31% in Utah,
34%, but we're right in the
middle between Colorado and
Nevada. And so, um, in a, in a,
in the next couple of slides,
you're gonna see fundamentally
what's gonna happen to our state
road fund revenues and the long
forecast. And so it's important
to note that uh
a number of states across the
country are working on policy
that essentially reduces
reliance on fuel tax
distributions as a primary
revenue source for
infrastructure, road
infrastructure in particular,
and so that's work that um
we're, we're hopeful to lead
over the next year as we lean on
the research and policy of other
states to make that shift here
in New Mexico.
On slide 8, we took the 4
revenue sources from that pie
chart that I mentioned and are
showing you here essentially
what's gonna happen between now
and 2050. This is driven
primarily by vehicle efficiency.
And so that's not just electric
vehicle adoption. Right now only
3% of vehicles in New Mexico
registered in Mexico are
electric or hybrid electric.
This is occurring fundamentally
um through the vehicle
efficiency and so that
is non-plug-in hybrid vehicles
that generate electric miles in
vehicles with um an average MPG
greater than 22, which is
currently the state's average,
um, and an important thing to
note that we discovered last
night in our discussion is that
if you look at just fuel
efficiency over the next 5
years, it, it'll cost the state
road from about 27 million over
5 years as vehicles become more
efficient.
On slide 9, because those
revenues for diesel and, and
gasoline are so great for the
state road fund. You'll see on
this slide how that has an
overall impact on state road
funds relative to cost of
construction. And so you'll see
here that the red line
represents the state road fund
revenues through 2050.
Fundamentally, it'll be about a
15% uh decrease to state world
fund revenues between now and
2050, a 6% increase between now
and 2030 and the 20% decline to
50% between.
2023 and 2050, it's expected
construction costs will rise by
about 160%.
On slide 10 just to enumerate
some of those challenges that
are going to drive um some
recommendations on creating a
more sustained funding for road
infrastructure. You'll see where
we are relative to other states
with regards to gasoline tax, to
registration fees where, um,
vehicle registration fees lower
than the national average, uh,
5th lowest in the nation for gas
tax, 10th lowest in the nation
for diesel tax, and then of
course it's been decades since
we've made changes to these tax,
uh, to these revenue sources for
New Mexico.
And it's not that we're
recommending that they be
changed or that they increase as
much as uh we have a discussion
around whether or not they're
the most sustainable revenues
for road infrastructure moving
forward.
So on slide 11, Miss Chair,
members of the committee, just
to show you a side by side of
the executive budget rack versus
LFC not on the op bud since
that's already been worked on
and on, on House Bill 3, but on
the specials and one time
appropriations again on the
right, the narrative there is
underscoring that your support
has yielded 1.8 billion in one
time appropriations from 2019 to
today, um, and, and that
inclusive of another $320
million in severance tax bonds
that we receive.
last year as well. This year,
the executive rack included 322
million in one-time general fund
appropriations, the LFC 350.
You'll see on the left-hand
side, the 150 million in
construction was uh prioritized
around two major projects that
are attached to more than $115
million in federal grant awards.
We also uh have a uh capital
outlay request for $62 million
which includes equipment for the
agency and electric vehicle
infrastructure in the middle
there.
you'll see that that capital lot
request is really uh amplified
by a $32 million request for
patrol yard and and district
improvements. Uh, I note that
the Department of Transportation
has the 2nd largest footprint of
any other state agency and
historically has not received
general fund for its building
maintenance and deferred
maintenance and, and upkeep and
so any changes uh upgrades that
we make to our patrol yard or
our footprint.
is funded by the state road
fund, right? And so that, that
comes directly off the highway.
Just to share, um, we have, um,
3 legislative priorities being
pushed by uh both the governor
and the agency and the agencies.
Governor uh Lujan Grisham bill,
House Bill 145 being sponsored
by a number of um uh um senators
and representatives Hoffman v.
Hill Landstrom de la Cruz, uh,
representative Brown, um, and
Chair Small reported last night
that he too has signed on to
House Bill 145, and we
understand that Chair Munoz will
sign on to that, um, when that
comes uh to the.
Senate so he'll carry that bill
for us. Senate bill, House Bill
145 fundamentally is gonna be
the first time since 2003 the
state transportation commission
would be authorized to issue
transportation bonds to the tune
of $1.5 billion debt service
being paid for by state road
fund revenues and uh federal
revenues not otherwise
obligated.
Um, that bill, by the way, is
going to be heard uh tomorrow
for the 2nd time in house
transportation.
Um, on page 13, slide 13, um,
Senate Bill 241 being heard this
afternoon in Senate tax, um, is
being carried by Senator uh
Gonzalez would allow the
Department of Transportation to
place automated speed
enforcement cameras in
construction zones, uh, we've
identified, um, in the bill, the
fines associated with um
non-compliance.
And then lastly, Mr. Chair, um,
on page 14, um, legislative
priority number 3, Senate Bill
289 being carried also by
Senator Gonzalez, would shift
motor vehicle excise tax
distributions from the general
fund to the state road fund and
to the transportation project
fund. This revenue we identify
as being the feed bill for House
Bill 145, meaning that it would
generate the revenues to um to
offset the debt service for
those transportation bonds over
a period.
period of time.
Uh, in addition, the, the
increases to transportation
project fund would also support
local governments who now have
access to about $92 million
combined in local infrastructure
support funds and so this would
be a recurring increased
distribution of about 18 million
to transportation project fund.
And so with that, Mr. Chairman,
um, I'll, I'll stop and, and be
available for any questions.
I thank Secretary Senator
Tobiasson.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um
Maybe this is a common sense
question but also is counter the
2050 initiatives, um.
So we're 5th lowest in, uh, fuel
tax and the states that you
showed um our surrounding
states. However, we have the
poorest population, so I don't
know if you're also hinting at
maybe potentially um an increase
on fuel.
But to me it would make sense.
Why aren't we taxing at a higher
rate electric vehicles and
heavier vehicles that are on our
roads. I mean, they're proven to
degrade uh the road structure
faster than any other vehicle.
So is that in discussion? I just
didn't see it mentioned here.
Sure, Mr. Chair, Senator, it's a
great question actually. And so
if um um
I think there's absolutely
consideration around um uh a
surcharge, for example, and
there's been legislation carried
in the past that would
essentially create a surcharge
for electric vehicle, uh,
registrations that would offset
that fuel tax, right? And um
right now, given the percentage
of vehicles that are registered
um with the surcharge of $120.
It wouldn't, it would, it would
generate minimal uh revenue for
the state. So right now it
doesn't create a lot of
sustainable or foreseeability
uh.
For us.
And so what other states are
doing is creating road user
charge policies that do that for
all vehicles, right, is you
essentially charge vehicle
drivers for the amount of time
they spend on the road, um, and
if you incorporate um a matrix
that is also taking into account
the weight of the vehicles and
it does exactly what you're
suggesting, much like our weight
distance tax. And so I believe
in general, um, states are
moving away from fuel tax
reliance, not just to capture.
vehicle revenue loss, but also
to capture fuel efficiency loss
from non-electric vehicles, and
that's policy that we can look
at in a number of other states
that have been part of a
consortia doing research on this
policy for for many years. It's
called the Rock America.
Mr. Curso Rock R O C K America.
Mr. Senator, are you see road
user charge and some states that
are are leading in this space
are Utah and Oregon.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
You, uh, Senator Padilla.
Mhm
Thank you, chair, and thank you
secretary and very wonderful
concise, as always, you know,
update and everything, um, I, I
guess the only question I have
is just
Um, so,
Executive, legislative, how much
time have you already spent with
appropriations on the other
side.
Because I'm, I'm, well, go
ahead. Sure, Mr. Chair, Senator,
last night we gave uh similar,
if not I nearly identical
presentation to house
appropriations. and chair and
secretary. The reason I ask that
is I'm told that there is either
no section 9 this year, or
there's a reconfiguration of how
that's gonna work and so as you
can imagine, many of us are
trying to, you know,
Figure out like how are we going
to get major projects that we
need to get done in front of uh
In HB 2 and then obviously in
front of you guys as well.
Mr. Chair Senator and and Joey
may have insights as to the
specific section, but we
understand that if the LFC rec,
um, last night in House
Appropriations that it no longer
includes the 188 million for
major construction projects. It
does include um other
recommended one-time
appropriations like
transportation project fund, um,
and, um, a wildlife corridors
and some equipment and so I
imagine, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
will come by way of special
section within house.
Bill too. I'm just not sure uh
what number it is at this time
in chair and secretary and, and
uh uh do we have a, uh, uh, any
information or visibility on the
size of that one time.
Um, Mr. Chair, if I had to
Estimate now, and I didn't see
the house appropriation sheet,
but it would be the 350 minus
188. Is that accurate? So I
just, Mr. Chair, flagged the
House Appropriations hasn't
taken final action on the
budget, so I wouldn't want to
speculate what's going to be or
not going to. You're kidding,
you don't think a lot of changes
will happen between now and so
um.
So I, I, I, I do think the
secretary is accurate in what
he's saying has been discussed
in in the committee, but I don't
want to speculate on what will
ultimately end up being in
special appropriations for
transportation.
I can appreciate that, Mr.
Chair, um, you know, uh I felt
very good about the work that
I've been able to get done for
my area the last couple of years
and it's been so now that with
this change, obviously we're
kind of all getting a little
concerned, like, well, what's
going to happen here? What
capacity is going to be there,
but on, on say uh local and
collector streets, um, how best
would you recommend to have that
dealt with in the budget.
Do you have any guidance on that
because um
That's some local and collector
streets that we really need to
get some work done on, so yeah.
Um, Mr. Church Center, great
question, and, and again echoing
Joey's comments is that there's,
there's time for a lot of, of
changes as you're well aware,
and you alluded to. And, but
we're also mindful, right, that
there's other priorities that
would bring recurring revenues
and some long-term revenues to
see uh to DOT like our bonding
bill, which is nothing to
snicker at for the next several
years and then of course the
idea of an additional 130
million coming to the state road
fund, even for next year when we
wouldn't necessarily engage in
additional debt service, that
would be a
surge of resources and so we're
seeing the need to really
balance one time appropriations
with what we're trying to
achieve for the long haul. And,
and we were mindful of that.
Uh, for local roads, the, the
recommendation to include an
additional $100 million in the
transportation project fund is
meaningful. Um, that would bring
next year's transportation
project fund budget to about 152
million and that's um that's
significant given that my
recollection is we had about 170
million of requests last year,
and so this would pick up a lot
of that and, and to be sure the
local governments would have to
apply, um.
We also, of course, have the
local government road fund, some
of the larger metropolitans like
Bernalillo and City of
Albuquerque typically tap into
that fund because it has a
higher match and they have
capacity to match that fund. And
so again, this would bring total
local government support by way
of those two programs to nearly
$200 million. If, if that
recommendation of an additional
100 million was included in
House bill too.
And thank you, chair, and I
appreciate you bringing that up,
uh, Secretary, the last one that
you mentioned, I think that was
about 70 million last year. Is
that about right?
Uh, Mr. Chair, the, the local
government road fund was more
like 28 million around there,
uh, last year and then 52
million for TPF, OK. And, and
does it make sense then to try
to get uh actual actual streets
with actual coordinates, uh.
Um, written into the bill.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
I think it can go either way and
in the past we've had a special
section with specific roads and
specific local projects and.
And what we typically do is
assess what we can get done
within the resources that are
allocated and I've been really,
you know, kudos to this team,
Rick, the districts and others
who took, you know, a, a finite
amount of resources like $70
million in touch. I can't
remember how many roads it was,
it was actually really
impressive to see that of the
roads that were identified,
putting some work on those that
didn't already have bigger
projects and so, uh, we know
that you all are the
appropriating body and bringing
in specific.
language that targets corridors
or sections or regions of the
state is your prerogative and
what we do is we go to work on
making those things happen. OK,
well, I appreciate that and I, I
just love Rick not because of
his last name, but he's just
such a good guy. It's the first
name I imagine. Yes, exactly.
Uh, but I kind of look over to
my right over here because I
learned from this hombre over
here how to get kind of some of
that stuff done. Um, a while
ago.
So, uh, I appreciate all the
answers. I really do. I just,
I'm, I'm, I'm sort of like feel
a little uneasy because of kind
of what's going to come over.
I'm not quite sure what it's
gonna look like. And so I
appreciate you giving some
guidance there. Thank you,
Chair.
compost.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary. Of course, members of
the DOT and the ongoing work
that you continue with, and I'm
gonna go ahead and start and of
course I compliment Senator
Padilla for uh his advocacy to
continue to deal, if you will,
the um the major projects, but
if you will also the arterials
that.
Uh, truly take care of our, our
small communities and so with
all that being said, the first
question that I have uh relates
to the safety for our DOT
individuals and contractors.
So as you work, let's say for
example, on the uh cameras that
are gonna be a long construction
sites, and I know this has been
a very strong advocacy uh on
your behalf, Mr. Secretary.
Where, where are we at with that
without the legislation that
that is being proposed and going
through the House and the
Senate.
Sure, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
it's, it's been a peculiar
discovery, um.
Local governments may request
permission from the State
Transportation commission to
play speed cameras on state
roads, but the state cannot
place cameras on those same
roads. And so there is local
authority or authority for local
governments to request the use
of automated speed enforcement
cameras on state roads, and we
have since I've been at DOT
approved that measure for both
the city of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo County, and we've had
some presentations by other
local governments that are
considering doing likewise.
or elevating a request, um, and
so we worked through the
districts to get those requests
processed, we request data that
supports the corridors, um,
have, um, are associated with
crashes, fatalities or high
incident rates. We ensure that
the corridors are not going to
present a disproportionate
consequences for certain
populations and subgroups, etc.
So what we're looking for is
that same authority only we're
going to target construction
zones exclusively through this
legislation.
It would allow for us to
promulgate the rules to work on
the relationship between DOT and
DPS to essentially identify
which construction projects, we
would place those cameras on as
part of a project selection
process and fundamentally work
with contractors to place those
cameras with a contractor to
calibrate those cameras to
certify citations and then DPS
would issue them.
So, so, Mr. Chairman, and of
course, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, as you can
tell, not only dealing with the
general appropriations Act as we
work to coordinate services,
whether it be for our elders,
veterans, or youth.
It's the same thing with our
capital outlay, if you will,
with the uh transportation.
And along with that as we deal
with uh our counties,
municipalities. We deal with the
state. How do we continue to
make uh this whole process work,
uh, a lot better as we go
forward, which leads to the
second question.
As we consider, if you will, the
uh implementation of our um
charging stations for EVs along
the major interstates will just
say I-40, I-25 as a as an
example.
Uh, how far along are we when it
comes to that and how do you see
that happening in terms of the
full development over the next.
We'll just say, um.
Decade.
Your
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, where,
we're making significant
progress just to share with you
here that um we've received in
2024 $15 million of capital
outlay, uh, for electric vehicle
charging infrastructure which
we're getting out the door, an
additional 63 million in a large
CFI grant that targets primarily
the southern part of the state.
I 10 corridor, $10 million in
2021 from ARPA funding and then
another 1.
2 million in 2021, uh, in
capital. And then, of course,
we've received the 1st 2 years
of the um Nevy formula funding
from Federal Highway. We, we are
right now in limbo only with one
portion of funding, and that is
the Nevy funding, uh, we've
received, um, some
correspondence that suggests the
remaining 4 years of that 4
years, uh, 3 years of that
funding, um, maybe a redirected.
We're not sure if the Federal
administration is going to be
able to hold firm on that pause
in every funding, uh, but in
total that would be 38 million
with the capital outlay that
we're receiving, we believe that
we can build out the state, um,
over the next, even just 3 years
between the capital outlay and
the Navy funding senator, and
that's really just the statewide
effort. So phase one added 106
ports, phase 2 added 80+ ports
and then phase 3.
will allow for us to look at
those maps, look at the map of
those ports and identify gaps
and then start to target those
communities.
So Mr. Chair, as we move forward
and that leads to the next
question that ties in local
master planning, uh, the use, if
you will, of the, the local road
fund along with that as we move
forward, what's happening at the
federal level and some of the
adjustments that you may be
required to make, uh, due to, if
you will, the redirecting of a
federal resources, so in, in all
reality, as the overall picture
for how we're seeing the
Maintenance of our roads,
purchasing of equipment,
continuous training for our uh
our in New Mexico DOT employees.
Tying the whole thing together
and taking a look at what your
budget is and in particularly
for the construction component.
Um
Where are we at overall?
In terms of the progress that
we're making for uh road
improvements, maintenance, and
again with the uh public safety
and training for our DOT
members, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cheeriner, I think that
first slide from to be technical
about what that gap is. It's
looking at that trip report,
that $5.6 billion gap between
what we need to get done and
what we're capable of doing.
That's, that's the technical
answer for what, what we need.
When we look back over just this
summer at the priorities that
the district engineers presented
um two tiers to LFC over this
past interim, they identified
1.7.
billion dollars in roadway
priorities across the state. And
it's from those uh priorities
that we identified that $1.5
billion bonding capacity bill
that combined with one-time
appropriations within the
executive reck would help us
chip away at that list and so
there's kind of rhyme and reason
to the funding that we're
looking at and we're trying to
do that in a responsible way
without suggesting to you all
that if you were to put a
billion dollars on the desk now,
we could get everything done
immediately.
We, we have to grow in capacity
to your point, that's going to
be maintaining a strong uh
vacancy rate, which we have been
chipping away at. It's ensuring
that we have capacity to bring
projects to construction more
quickly so that we can get them
done before cost escalations add
to the cost of these projects
and it's also exploring
alternative methods to just
design bit build like design,
uh, like design build CMGC and
even P3s which it was talked
about last night in house
appropriation, so.
The, the strategy for this year
is the bonding authority helps
us address those major projects.
The debt service helps us
alleviate the debt service being
paid out of state road fund now
and invest that $40 million back
into agency capacity so that we
can get these projects done.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, and, uh,
the point that I'm trying to
make is we deal with it. We have
an inordinate number of projects
and the demands on the
department.
We continue to go back and
forth, and we're still dealing,
if you will, with hundreds of
millions of dollars to take care
of billions of dollars' worth of
needs and as we deal with it.
We continue to take this
seriously, but we still don't
have, if you will, resolve as we
move forward, so Mister
Chairman, I want to go ahead and
again, thank you, Mr. Secretary,
for your, your vision for the
ongoing work that the department
continues to do, uh, but I still
believe that they're definitely
is a very large gap.
Between the resources that we
appropriate.
And the needs that we have when
it comes to safe transportation
in the state of New Mexico, and
I hope that during the session,
uh, and as you say, we still
have a lot of time to deal with
some of these things that uh New
Mexico DOT definitely becomes a
priority as we deal with a
non-recurring resources and some
of the bonding and other
mechanisms to leverage resources
to improve our roads. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman.
Being senator, Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome, gentlemen.
Um, I just have a couple of
little questions. Um,
First Secretary.
I need you to put your professor
hat on.
Because there's a couple of us
newbies up here. And so if you
can just briefly go through
A couple of little questions. So
the state road fund
What's the difference between
the state road fund and the
transportation project.
I mean, I think the name speaks
for itself, but
Absolutely. So the state road
fund is considered um the total
budget we receive from state tax
distributions at the Department
of Transportation and next year
that's about $526 million and so
if you look at that table that
really complicated table that I
provided to you.
All of these highlighted areas
going across.
Are the distributions that are
contributing to that $526
million. In statute, um, not too
long ago, the legislature
created a program called the
Transportation Project Fund and
the intent of the program was
essentially to set up a grant
that would allow local and
tribal governments to apply to
DOT for funding to fix local
projects and in some cases,
maybe even to fix a state road
within the local jurisdiction.
Um, I think Angel Fire is a good
example.
of that. And so it received then
its own tax distribution out of
the motor vehicle excise tax.
And so as I mentioned earlier,
the motor vehicle excise tax is
projected to generate a total of
about $289 million beginning
next year.
And of that 289 million, we
receive um
62.6 million to the state road
fund.
But
of that 280 million, 53 of it
goes to that transportation
project fund.
And then another 170 goes to the
general fund.
And so what we're proposing in
Senate Bill 289 is taking some
out of that general fund, adding
to the state road fund and
adding to the transportation
project fund and that then
creates an increased recurring
revenue for DOT and locals.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. So, and so then the
highway infrastructure fund.
Where, where does that come in?
I'm not sure, so, um, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator, you know,
the the highway infrastructure
fund, uh, covers debt some debt
service payments from the
department, um, there's uh
revenue in there from leased
vehicle gross receipts and some
other taxes that the um the
department receives and that's
used to pay debt service. OK.
Thank you. Thank you for
clearing that up and it truly is
a professor hat.
So if we go down a little bit
farther there.
And we've got the DWI
prevention, the driver
improvement program and the
motorcycle training.
So
Where did those kind of fall
into all of this. Sure,
absolutely, Mr. Chair, Senator,
so those various distributions,
some of them come directly to
the Department of Transportation
and they're allocated primarily
to our traffic safety bureau.
And so when those distributions
are created in statute, they're
given some guard rails, if you
will, on how they need to be
used. And so for example, the
driver safety fund is a fund set
up that also that collects these
revenues from those
fees. It also collects revenues
from registrations to like DWI
programs, and then that fund is
used mostly to match federal
dollars for driver safety or to
support local campaigns that
address driver safety.
OK. Thank you. And Mr. Chairman,
I just, I wanna do, um, Senator
Compos, he, he brought up some
good points.
Uh
Keeping you guys safe out there,
that's.
Uh, very important. I used to
teach driver's ed and that that
was one of the things I harped
on.
You know, and that was before.
They were required to wear the
orange vest and things like
that. I mean, that's just dating
me, but, but it's very important
that uh
That we take care of you. I
don't know if speed cameras are
gonna be the best way. I don't
know what to do. I think
changing your lights, colors to
red and, and blue helped a lot.
I think that, that I know it
made me slow down, to be honest
with you.
Um, but he brought up something
about
And and Senator Tobiasson did
too about the electric vehicles,
but now I'm
I didn't really have any
questions about it, but, but now
I kind of do. So if, if we do
have problems with the weight of
the vehicles, what's the damage
to the roads?
But we don't, we can't take out
of the gasoline and the, the
diesel tax.
For that
So, is it?
Is there a way maybe we can do
the registration fee? Can we
increase the registration fee
for electric vehicles to make up
some of that difference.
Because, you know, my point of
it is and, and, and Mr. Compos
brought it up in Campos brought
it up perfectly.
We've got
If, if we're gonna move that
direction.
And in your presentation,
If, if the more electric
vehicles we have on the road,
the less fuel tax we're going to
be receiving. So you're gonna be
getting cut.
So how, what's your projection
on how you're gonna
To take care of that deficit
that's coming in.
Mr. Current, it's, it's a great
question and, and before I hit
electric vehicles, I think it's
important to note that, that,
that's the case for all modes of
transportation that don't
involve driving a vehicle,
right? And so let's just say for
example, we see a 20% increase
in park and ride and rail runner
usage, right? And now we start
to see over time that that's
what's happening to the fuel
tax, right? So we have to be
mindful that we can then tell
people if you get on the rail
runner, we're gonna charge you
an extra $120.
a year because you're no longer
putting gas. And so we have to
think methodically, right, about
road user charges and so I can
tell you now mathematically that
if you drive 15,000 miles a year
in a vehicle that gives you 22
MPG that you're contributing
about 120 bucks a year.
In tax to the state road fund,
right? And so if I wanted to
just superficially say, I got to
recoup that from an EB owner. I
can say when you go register
vehicle, it's full electric. I'm
gonna add 120 bucks, right, to
what you pay for your
registration, and I can recoup
that.
But then again, the registration
takes into account the year and
the weight already, right? And
so it's capturing that. So when
you go register your gasoline
vehicle now, you take the year,
the weight of that vehicle,
that's how much you register,
you pay. If it's electric, then
I'm going to add what I estimate
is what you're gonna spend if
you drive 15,000 miles a year.
But if you drive less, then
you're overpaying. If you drive
more, then you're underpaid.
And so what we've got to figure
out is how do we use that matrix
of vehicle year in weight, like
we do with weight distance when
you come into the state with a
full load and a semi truck. How
do we then how do we then
understand how much are you
really driving right in a year
and how might we then assess
your road usage charges with
your driving behaviors. That's
the most sophisticated way and
so the straightway as I can tell
you right now, 15,000 miles a
year, 22.
a gallon, that's how much you're
contributing, 120 bucks, and
there has been legislation that
has said, OK, if you're gonna do
register a full electric, we're
gonna add that surcharge. If
it's a hybrid, we'll cut it in
half and charge you $60. And
that over time would give us a
straight, you know, estimate for
estimate, um, replacement.
All right. Thank you. And what
these just run.
real quick you know to follow up
with that, Mr. Chairman. So what
about the diesel tax? Is it
figured the same way by weight
and my.
Uh, Mr. Chair of the senator,
the, the registration fees for
vehicles are, are using the same
matrix with vehicle year and
weight, but the gasoline tax is
calculated the same way, right?
It, it assesses the attacks. We
receive about 90% of it here at
the Department of Transportation
through the state Road Fund. And
so again there we could
calculate based on the 21 cents
per gallon, what the average
driver is spending, and so there
again, if you have an individual
that's going from
A diesel truck to an electric
vehicle, we're actually losing
more.
Probably revenue from them than
we are somebody that's going
from a gasoline hybrid to an
electric and so those are some
of the nuances that we can
capture if we just go for
A surcharge in other states are
working on saying, what are you
driving and how many miles are
you driving in a year, and that
should be what we charge you.
All right, thank you. And Mr.
Chair, my last question because
I know San Juan County is
watching this on pins and
needles and
3 mayors specifically and and
San Juan County.
ATVs.
We've got a lot of outdoor
activity and and things in San
Juan County and most of our
mayors have
Passed, passed legislation so
that they can drive around in
town.
Legally still, but
But they can't cross the state
highway.
Where do you sit on that?
And bail me out here, would you?
Um, Mr. Senator, maybe we should
charge them a road user fee for
the state road fund, but have,
um, I, I, I hate to answer your
question with a question, but
there is a process for
requesting the use of of off
highway vehicles on state roads,
um, and so in Farmington that
request would go through
District 5 and District 5 would
assess the request, um, assess,
um, some of the safety risks and
liability that might present
with allowing those vehicles on
those roadways.
And then, you know, work on a,
on an official response to what
we can and cannot do. Um, we
have granted those permits to be
sure, um, it's, it's, um.
Desirable when we see the
connection between where they're
going to off-road trail access
like in areas like Angel Fire,
Red River down in Riodoso, but
we'd be happy to look at that
request from the city to see
what can be done.
OK, thank you. I may be visiting
with you.
About that.
All right, uh, that's all I
have, Mr. Chair. Thank you, sir.
All right, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
Uh, I missed the presentation
and I was presenting another
bill.
But uh just a little bit on uh,
just what I heard since I walked
in.
And I always look at a
This page which I'm trying to
find the number.
This one here.
5th chart I believe
distribution.
Um
You know, uh, just a little bit
of a memory lane.
You know, to 94.
We had a 6th sense gas repeal.
We never have recovered from
that.
You know, so then from 9495 on.
This basically has remained the
same.
And then when you look at the 17
cents of the.
Gas tax
The one that actually goes to
the department is like 13 cents.
Because you have all these
increments that go to different
distributions.
So we're
If you really want to say our
true picture.
So the department is 13 cents,
which is probably the lowest in
the nation.
You know, and our neighboring
states so.
Henceforth have had a several
times that they have a.
You know, initiated and pass gas
taxes.
Well we're still in the same.
And we have tried different
methods. We have tried from.
I sense 10 cents, 1 cent and.
Just a very hard.
hard to to work with but I think
we need to do it no matter what,
you know, and, and have the
component of um.
How do we address with electric
vehicles.
Uh, also on your ATVs, now
they're electric too.
You know, so, uh, you know,
that's another part that's
coming in.
Now, um.
I'm just uh, because I did miss
a presentation. I think we have
to be very cautious when uh when
we go into bonding.
And uh we were strapped for a
long, long time.
With a very high.
Payment
Into paying our bonds.
And any time that you have that
part.
That's less money.
Yeah
Construction, roads and
everything we have.
So if we do take that on.
That path we have to be very
aware of that we're saddling
again with a large, large debt
for many years.
And uh, you know, he said.
One or the other, what is worth
more, you know, it's going into
debt or just.
Being able to have the actual
cash available.
I, I feel that is something
that, you know, we have to
really give it a good thought.
The other part is uh.
On the construction part for
years I have been.
with this is how can we make it
safer for?
Our individuals that are out
there working.
And uh, you know, whatever it
takes, but we really do. And if
you see a work zone.
You can follow that speed.
And I will assure you that 99%
of the vehicles will pass you.
You know, with no problem at
all, even if there's a state.
Police on this side, but by the
time they passed him, you know,
they pick up again. Now, uh, the
last point that I just want to
bring out and uh.
And this was brought to us on a
different issue on a different
bill.
And I think somehow we need to
get that message back again.
I
Having a driver's license.
You know, is a privilege. It's
not an entitlement.
It doesn't belong to you, it
belongs to the state.
So if we do have rules and we do
have things that you have to
follow.
To be able to have that
privilege.
Then you have to abide by it,
and if you don't, you know, I
think we just have to see more.
Of this
Infractions, you know, be uh.
Be followed and, you know,
individuals that, oh my God,
there's so.
Individuals that will pass 2 or
3 cars in a 2 lane thing and.
And that's unacceptable because
they're jeopardizing.
Their life bless someone else's
life.
You know, or families and um.
So I really would like to see
that enforcement at whatever it
is to to work with that and
again, keeping our safe part,
the other part that uh.
I like to bring back his um.
On our um
Glittering beautification.
Or
Our signs are posted at $300.
But I, to my knowledge, there's
been very, very few citations on
that, very few.
Uh, you cross over to Arizona,
it's 500.
And boy, if you do, you know,
uh, they're strict about it.
You know, and you see that, so.
Going stronger in our
enforcement.
You know, definitely would help,
you know, to keep.
Our roads to.
To be safer.
Thank you as chairman.
Senator Woodson.
He was sure, I'd like to talk a
minute about the bonding also.
And uh
I think you said that we have,
we could bring that bonding
capacity up a billion dollars.
Something like that.
Mr. Chair, senator, so, uh,
House Bill 145 would allow for
the state transportation
commission to bond up to 1.5
billion.
Um, for transportation bonds.
There is a statutory limit and
you'll see in the bill that at
any single time, the department
cannot have aggregate debt in
excess of 1.1 billion.
And so you could consider the
1.5 billion as a line of credit
and then as the department gets
projects ready for construction,
they issue some debt, pay it
down, then issue more debt, pay
it down, and they would do that
until they exhausted the 1.5
billion in total credit.
And so what we would do is
prepare projects for
construction, get those projects
in front of the state
transportation commission.
They'd authorized the the
issuing of bonds and then we'd
continue on the debt service and
because we have existing debt
now that we're paying off going
back to the 2003 authority,
we're fundamentally paying that
debt now because the total cost
annually for our existing debt
is about 110 million.
Because we only have about 4 or
5 years left.
If we borrow up to that 1.1
billion.
The debt service annually on
that would be 108 million.
And so if we can get new revenue
from Senate Bill 189.
The existing money we're paying
on our debt would go back to
construction and would go back
to the state road fund, and we'd
be paying the aggregate debt
with new revenue.
We would utilize that money, the
40 million that would go back to
the state road fund to build
capacity within the agency to
get those projects ready for
construction.
You know, I, I think I need to
see all that on paper, um, I,
I feel quite.
Understand the moving parts
there, but if you show it to me
on paper, I'm sure I'd figure it
out. Oh no.
So
The other question I have, I
noticed in
In this, uh.
House Bill 3.
We have
Some here.
We have uh air service
assistance program.
I'd like for you to do me a
favor or have your staff do me a
favor and see what it would cost
to get a uh service between Las
Cruces and Phoenix.
And uh I don't know how they do
that for sure.
That somehow they figured that.
Yeah, they fly, yeah.
But I know that it's, it's kind
of a makeup for
To have certain percent of the
plane being capacity and then if
it's not, we have to make it up,
but I, I'd kinda like to see
those figures, uh, that Las
Cruces has contacted me wanting
to see if they could get that.
That uh particular thing.
Um
The other thing is, sorry, just
real quick, Mr. Chair, and
Senator Woods on that point. So
the air services assistance
program we're seeing here,
that's for grants to airports
for capital improvements it's a
little different than the rural
Air Service, but I do think the
secretary might be able to get
you some information that you
requested on that. So, uh,
absolutely, so Mr. Chair,
Senator, if you go back to the
LFC rec and executive rec,
you'll see 12 million for rural
air service enhancement that 12
million.
With that fund does.
Is it does provide a subsidy to
municipal airports who are
looking to add commercial air
service, much like what you're
suggesting from Las Cruces to
Phoenix.
And so we can get you the cost.
I, my understanding now is
Gallup, for example, runs their
service from their airport to
Phoenix.
And we could kind of use that as
a framework for telling you
what, what that might cost. OK.
OK, if you would do that for me.
see how much that would.
Costs in the budget.
Um
The, the other thing that I was
gonna ask about.
I saw here some of the.
Apologize.
Some of the trend here.
On, on the House Bill 3 section
6.
And it was talking about uh
transfers from personal services
category.
Up to 12
Million dollars.
Um, and may request budget
increases up to
$85 million.
Could, could you explain that a
little deal right there a little
bit to me.
Or what that's about.
Yeah, so Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods. So that is annual budget
adjustment language you
typically include in House Bill
2 for the Department of
Transportation. Couple of
things, so the $12 million for
personal services, that was uh
something that during our
discussions with the department,
they really highlighted as, as,
as a, as a sort of a safety net,
I guess, if to help them, uh,
Uh, be able to fill positions
and, and build capacity within
the department. So this, this
wouldn't appropriate that
amount, but would, it would
allow uh the agency to request a
budget increase from the
Department of Finance and
Administration from the state
road fund.
Um, uh, you know, if, if they
need to, to increase the
personal services category. The
$85 million from other state
fund and fund balances, um,
you'll notice it says to meet
federal matching requirements
for debt service and related
costs intergovernmental
agreements, lawsuits, and
construction and maintenance
related costs. So typically what
the department does is if they
get a discretionary federal
grant, they will then bar in
money from the state road fund
to match that federal grant. So
that's why you
give them that, that 85 million
authority.
Yeah, but the only piece of that
that's
Has me excited this year's where
it says lawsuits.
So
That's, that's my big deal this
year. Apologize about that.
But we got to get those under
control some way.
Um
And understand the the bar.
Parameters that you have there.
Um
But I don't understand maybe why
don't you, is it easier to do it
that way than just to put 12
million up here.
Personal services.
To start with,
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, that's
really where we started from
actually, and so you'll see that
in the category for personnel
budget, it did grow from last
year to this year. What we're
doing is we're trying to really
right size our budget for
personnel services and that's
happening in a few different
ways. The first is we really
need to do something to address
our entry level positions a few
years ago. And so we worked on
pay increases for all of our
entry level employees and now
for the most part, we don't hire
anybody in at the department.
less than $20. Once we
stabilized there at the
foundation, we started to see
high vacancy rates among our
engineers and technical staff.
So we worked on pay increases
there. And so what we're trying
to do now are two other measures
that we believe the bar
authority is critical for. One
is, is to properly align our
employees at the agency based on
experience, and 2 and more
importantly is address gender
inequity in our pay at the
agency.
And so it's really those two big
projects that we believe that
our authority gives us
flexibility to do as we roll out
across the board changes to make
sure that when we have 2
employees in the same job with
the same years of experience,
they're aligned, and if we have
a female or an underrepresented
minority also into similar
positions with same experience
that they're aligned as well,
and that gives us the
flexibility that we can't put a
number to right this second in
in.
Are you working with the state
personnel office on all those
categories,
Mr. Chair, Senator, absolutely,
because whenever we take those
broad stroke attempts then we
work with them. It simplifies
the actions, it justifies them
all kind of uniformly as opposed
to doing dozens and dozens of
them all single at the time.
OK.
I know that's been a problem for
years also.
OK, Mr. Chair, I'm through.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, a couple
of questions I had as you were
uh were answered by your
response to Project fund and
then the local governments also
appreciate it. Thank you, Rick,
for the presentation and Joey
and.
There you go. All right,
