Is.
Usually
when you with Chris.
With personal.
That's going to be.
Mr Chairman we will take that
under consideration.
Mr chairman I texted
Leader Martinez and his chief of
staff I haven't heard back yeah
and and so I just got a text but
that Senator Rodriguez can sit
up there with the.
Do you want.
Yeah I yes I can do that or I
can do it either way thank you
Mr chairman did you want me to
start off now right away thank
you for calling me an order okay
thank you
you have before you house bill
one Mr chairman members of the
committee has the mandate so
whatever you senior staff is not
exactly what this was because
some things were amended out
we're having a clean bill for
the claim for the feedback just
to run the session and pay the
staff and have the the late
leadership staff and approved
here as far as part of the
female anyway it says this
appropriates nine hundred
fourteen thousand one hundred
dollars from the Legislative
cash balances that are already
there for the legislative
expenses of the second special
session of the fifty fifty
legislature that amount includes
the following and by the way I
didn't even recognize publicly
role but for the public thank
you for being with us three
hundred twenty two thousand.
Three hundred dollars for the
house of representatives and
three hundred and five thousand
four hundred dollars for the
Senate and two hundred eighty
six thousand four hundred for
the Legislative Council Service
for it session expenses.
And additional with the bill
appropriates from the general
fund for expenditures in fiscal
year twenty two and twenty three
for leadership staff and its
operational expenses of the
leadership offices as follows
three hundred and fifty thousand
for the chief clerks office in
the house and for the house
chambers or this leadership and
three hundred fifty thousand for
the chief clerks office in the
Senate also leadership positions
and that's it this bill was
amended on the house floor
striking the appropriations to
the administrative office of the
courts and and the department of
finance and administration
that's what I meant when I said
that if you see this analysis it
would be accurate because it had
extra staff that was amended out
in the house and it has one
change also in that it has an
emergency clause because
The general appropriations acts
at risk automatically carry an
emergency clause this here would
not a medically carry it so we
put in an emergency clause to
take effect right away which is
required thank you.
Thank you introduce your expert
witness yes of course Raul
Burciaga the Director of the
Legislative Council so you're
with me thank you Rowe.
Senator good afternoon Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
In that.
The thing that to those
questions and commitments Center
for.
I'm.
Mr chair I just for the.
The knowledge of everybody since
we didn't have a copy of the
amendment here actually she
actually found the copied
amendment I read it.
Section three stricken yeah I
just want to be sure that thank
you visually to.
You Mr chairman I mean thank
you.
Mr chair out of I was born to
read the rest of the bill I'm
okay with.
Senator Gonzales.
We have motion for the past
Senator Gonzales second by
Senator share.
We call the roll.
Chair Senator Burt.
Senator yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria is not here in
Senator Diamond is not here
Senator Gonzalez.
Yes yes Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hemphill is yes Senator
share yes Senator shares yes
Senator Steinborn is not here
Senator Woods yes which is yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Rodriguez
is yes and Senator yes.
Yes three amps thank you have a
do pass thank you to thank you
Representative a did you when
you next time I'm in the feet
bill could you invest in cash we
all have to.
I mean the governor is giving
away the governor was given to a
vaccine shots with hundred
dollar bills I mean.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank
so let's just chat real quick
about house bill two we're
breaking down a bunch of the
language in there so.
We'll get you a copy and I'm
just going to use for example
there five million dollars to
buy land in more we're calling
the agency seen one it's for how
long they made the request what
their needs are there's another
hundred million for housing with
equal match money so we're
trying to figure out how much it
match money they're gonna have
and so we're probably gonna here
for some agencies so we can
actually comprehend what
everything's in the bill and and
where the agency requests come
from how long what's your time
frame and and then the and so
we'll do that over the next
couple of days I think on the
gonna start to schedule some of
those agencies.
I think the only one we're gonna
have to really get at big heads
up on the don impact is Jacob
make sure we we give him at
least for five hours notice so
we're gonna have a meeting.
Anything else you think you guys
might want to see in that break
down.
I I didn't have a listed to a
few minutes ago so I haven't
looked at it but gave it to me
just a few minutes ago before
that so we'll look at that I
have any questions thank you
look at that bill if you have
any any agency want to hear
we're gonna have a lot of times
we might we'll figure out if
we're going to spend this amount
of money what exactly they're
going to do with that what time
frame and I think we will have
some percent amendments about
teachers and getting teachers
into the pipeline system right
away there's a there's a chatter
about a few other things that
make it have in the Senate make
it taken away so we'll have that
conversation.
Keep up to date but don will
Donner how to get a list of of
breakdown and I.
Using words coming from what
they're gonna DO for where the
how long do a question there.
Right now wasn't four hundred
sixty.
Of the total on that Mr far.
I'm sorry.
Percent.
It was four thirty and went up
and when they want to introduce
two four seven for sixteen
hours.
Yeah and then bill has been in
the house amendment some stuff
in the house will just be on our
toes and start hearing some
agencies and.
The questions I think we're
joined.
Thank you.
For we're we're going back to
the floor for today.
And so.
