Is make a motion to remove the
previous amendments to the
Senate Finance Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 275
as a mandated we removed the
amendment. Okay, just the
amendment. We don't mean to me
just the amendment to it, so, Mr
Chairs said.
So we're, uh, the motion is to
remove the Senate Finance
Committee Amendment.
One. You know that Amendment
number was
0.228391. So we have a motion to
His three month 2.1. That's it,
That's it.
Yep. 392.92 0.1. That's the
version. We're gonna move so we
can have a motion to move that
amendment from Senate finance it
emotion was second by myself.
Yeah, Yeah, Mr. Chair. You're
moving the 0.2 version, which
was the one that you adopted to
remove the other version. 0.2 is
the new one that tended out five
is the one you all will be
adopting.
You're removing the 0.2, and
you're adopting the 0.5. I know
we're removing this 0.2.
392.2
Just we are removing that
amendment. Okay? Nobody talked
till we get that amendment
removed
any objection to removing the
amendment. We had emotion
violations self or second by
myself for some who seconded by
Senator Gonzalez made the
motion. I second it. We're
moving.
The amendment. Okay, Now we're
still on the substitute bill.
Senator. Wait one second on the
substitute bill. We just removed
the amendment that we put on.
Where Senator Rodriguez now
we're here on Senate Amendment.
392.5
29 2.5 so if you'll pass that
out?
We're on our way up.
Sorry. Just
Mr Chairman.
Little bit of grace.
No.
Senator Rodrigues explain the
differences in this amendment.
Thank you. Members of the
committee. What? Um, we had
adopted earlier was the fact was
an amendment. That would have,
um
505 127.8 million, um as STB
notes, which are sponge bonds
for roads, and then we in in the
same amendment. We had $30
million for tribal projects and
that was going to be, um out of
the general. Give me a set out
of the General fund.
What? This. That was a former
amendment. What this new
amendment does is adjust the
numbers somewhat instead of the
527.8. We're gonna be doing 320
million in rougher roads. And it
is all STB notes. Short sponge
bonds.
Like overnight cash, for
example, like it was and instead
of being for two years, which
was the other one was for fiscal
year, 25 and 26. This one will
all be for one year. So this is
the roads and this package has
to be done in fiscal year. 25
The other part of the amendment
is the 30 million for tribal
that we had will come out of STB
notes also sponge bonds as
opposed to the General Fund,
which we were
Going to get in the earlier
In the earlier Amendment, so
that's what it does. Um, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee can I have a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion purposes?
Emotion by center. Gonzalez
second by Senator Sheer
So we discussed the amendment.
Questions on the amendment.
Understanding. Thank you, Mr So
I'm curious, Senator. Um, so
we're going from 500, plus
million dollars to 300 plus
million or whatever. What is the
difference in the 200? What is
no longer being funded?
If I'm hearing that right, Mr
Chairman, Senator currently in
the bill, there's $470 million
of, um, roads. Basically, that
can be done. Uh And so this new
amendment basically says you can
do up to 320 million
Inroads, but it has to be done
within one year. And so, um,
that's all it does the list of
the prioritized roads is still
in the bill. That doesn't
change. We have anybody on
dream.
Mm hmm.
Okay?
Thank you, Senator Site. Just
wanna make sure I heard you
correctly. So, um
The actual project has to be
completed within a year.
Where it has to be encumbered
within a year.
Mr Chairman. It's my
understanding that they have
Uh, one year through fiscal year
2025 to complete the project and
could be just encumbered. I
better turn to Adrian because
this was just a few minutes ago
finalized. Thank you, Adrian.
Mr Chair Center for the Yeah. So
more than anything this gives d
O t the ability to present the
project before the Board of
Finance within fiscal year, 25
to sell the bonds. And then if
you look within the bill on Page
three
Uh um.
Subsection C or paragraph C. You
have two different conditions,
which basically means they need
to be able to prove that within
six months 5% of whatever they
get in cash, they're able to
actually spend. So it's
basically the selling of the
bonds need to occur during
fiscal year 25 so as projects
are off the shelf and ready to
go. They will then go to the
board of Finance and get the
money for
And then, uh, Senator, So, um
20.
And then so Senator. The
amendment doesn't change any of
what Adrian just described.
Mr Chairman? No, That's exactly
what it was, as he said it.
Thank you. I think it will want
this bridge built as soon as
possible. But I don't see it
built in a year, So I just want
to make sure that we're not
gonna thank you.
And then Mr Chair Center for the
I will also point you to page
three paragraph D one. They will
have until fiscal year 2027
before the money would revert.
Sorry, Mr Chair and Senator I'm
on page three. I c d. But I
didn't. Did you say the one d
one? Okay, so, sub paragraph
one.
It says the unexpended balance
from the proceeds of servants.
tax bonds appropriated for a
project shall revert to the
servants Text bonding fund
within six months of completion
of the project, but no later
than the end of fiscal year.
2027 thank you for clarifying
that I was actually looking for
that in the bill, So it's in the
amendment. Okay, Thank you.
That's all.
Any other questions.
So
Senator Stein born church So
sorry because we got in late.
The amendment that we removed
was that just the 500.
The the other. So let me explain
what happened. Redrafted this
amendment with the 522 like we
all thought it was another
conversation going on that we
did not know about.
And then all of a sudden we put
this amendment on and then he
said, no, we have a different
number. Well, I didn't know
somebody else before leader and
the speaker agreed to a number.
So that's why we're back then.
We had an issue with projects
coming on projects coming off.
And so that's why we're
straightening out this amendment
because they need to do this
bill tomorrow on the floor. Got
it. So, Mr just total clarity.
so we're not whatever we
removed. It's just the
transportation number that were
at before. There's nothing else
that we have removed in that
amendment.
And network recalibrating in a
smaller number, different terms.
Anyway, we did.
I mean, clarify something to
clarify Mr Chair. There was one
change. So originally we had 10
different line items of projects
that were eligible. This one
only has nine. So the one thing
that was removed was the earmark
for legislative projects that
were identified in House Bill
two.
So that was a $15 million. You
know, sponge bond that could
have been purchased to address
those projects. That was the one
item that was removed. Ouch!
That was well, So it was that,
like the Indonesian and all all
those projects, however, those
projects are still funded within
House Bill two, and there's
still $120 million worth of
maintenance that could go
towards some of those and then
also, since this is all being
done through sponge bonds
now gets to retain their ability
to issue transportation.
And bonds independently.
So they could leverage some of
that money going in that
direction as well. Okay, Thank
you, Mr. Thanks.
I mean it. We thought we had a
clear cut path and Senate Bill
300.
Now it came back. The house is
the one pushing back on the 577.
Which
Move some roads, but D O. T is
an al going to be in position
with this amount of sponge
bonding that they're paid for
that the Legislature doesn't
have to pay for him. That d O T
doesn't have to pay for them
that they should build 500
million in cash in the next year
by this savings, so they should
have plenty of money to
To earmark those roads are well
aware of the legislative
remarks.
I'm not happy with this, but I
didn't agree to it. It was done.
Between leadership, and so this
is where we're at today.
Okay?
Any other questions, Okay?
I just want to make clear, Ricky
since you're there now.
These are the roads that you can
start that are sitting on the
shelf.
You can have a leading for
Within What time frame. Mr.
Chairman. Remember this
committee? Thank you for the
question, so the waiting time
frames will vary. Um, when we
presented these roads during the
interim, we ensured members that
these roads can be complete
within three years.
And so the legislation, the
legislative language that allows
for bonding within
FY 25 we work and the funding
life for at least three years is
necessary to get them done.
Okay with this amount of money.
In sponge bonds that you don't
have to pay. The Legislature
doesn't have to pay. How much
cash balance will that create in
D O T.
Mr Chairman, Um, they won't
necessarily create cash balance.
So what the goal going back to
the presentation of Senate Bill
300 in this committee was to
expedite getting these projects
to to letting and to
construction.
And I think we've all agreed
that the cost of inflation is
increasing at a high rate.
If this if these projects don't
get funded, they won't move to
construction every year that we
push these projects back the
cost to get them done will
increase. And I think we've
centered on a minimum of 5% a
year as presented by the
chairman during during some
committees, So what we're doing
here is we're saving on getting
the project's done sooner every
year by at least 5%.
And D O T won a lottery to get
And then now this money is
coming.
And there's gonna be some
savings in projects. We just
took $377 million worth of
projects that wouldn't be done
for three or five years, and now
we paid $120 million.
In road maintenance money for
477, plus another
50 years. 60 years 70
On top of that.
So
I don't know how d O T is not
going to build cash with this
amount of cash that the
Legislature has given them.
Can you tell me why d O t is not
gonna build cash?
You're so so, Mr Chairman the
and we may be seeing the same
thing. So currently with 320
million
In and sponge bonds.
Our ability to move these
projects forward if you take
320 multiply it partly 0.5 by
5%.
What? What This saves us is $16
million. If we were to push
these projects back one year and
two, arguably if we were to have
to push them back two years, it
would say twice that $32
million. And so what Bot is
sharing, of course, is that
doesn't have the funding right
now to do these projects.
And for every year we have to
push 320 million of construction
out. It's going to cost us an
additional 16 million to get
them done eventually.
I don't think we're speaking the
same.
Pick one project on the road
that and what year? What BOT
complete that
5,000,075 million for right away
Acquisitions on the Mexico
Highway 1 2020 Mile marker 28.8
50.5.
So if D O T had the budget and
they don't currently have the
budget, and they don't have to
spend this budget
There's some money from D O T
That's going to be a savings
from the Legislature picking up
this project now not only for
interest cost increases, but for
D O. Tina having to spend that
money on that road project, So
where is that money going to go?
So Mr trying again to clarify
his
Do you thi doesn't have the 75
million right now.
To do that project and so by
receiving the 75 million now in
this bill, we don't have 75
million that we can shift
somewhere else. The fact of the
matter is that project wouldn't
get done on another $75 million
materialized elsewhere.
And so the projects are on the
list, not because we're going to
swap the funding for them that
we have now with legislative
funding. The projects are on the
list because they're not
currently there in the outer
years, which means that they can
be funded but to your point
about savings if we were to move
that $75 million project down
the road, even just
One year.
Then what we're saving based on
those annual inflation rates is,
you know we're saving nearly $4
million by doing it and
financing it and letting it in
FY 25 as opposed to moving it
out a year.
So you're telling me out of the
$1.2 billion budget in D O T.
That there is no
Savings any way shape or form
when you do this, because if BOT
had to spend this 75 million in
one year, two years out
The 75 million that were
appropriating and saving D O T
75 million from doing that.
Somewhere in the line.
You're getting caught up. You're
getting ahead. Somewhere in that
line. There's not another list
of big road projects that you
said that you couldn't get done
so they're still planning the
other road projects, so there's
cost savings somewhere in that
mix.
Mr Chairman, I I agree entirely.
These projects need to be done
and they need to be done
eventually, and they need to be
done soon. That's why their
priorities and there is no
question that moving forward
that the money for these
projects was going to need to
materialize and getting them
today is saving us
significantly. So, um,
immediately we can keep go ahead
now that we got that done.
The earmarks from the
legislature.
Should be D O T s next
priorities.
And so as that other 70
You work. Start working down
that list on the 70 million
D O. T is now going to have in
the one or two year savings from
not having to do the next road.
That amount of savings and I'm
just gonna say it's a $75
million road if that was the
next project in line and D O T
had to save money to do that
That's taken off your plate. So
that's 75 million that you're
going to have to spend here is
now a savings and we expect
those roads as a legislature
because the house didn't want
the earmark.
For the $50 million.
So we just want to make sure
that those legislative roads are
the next priority before they
moved to any other big projects.
Mr Chairman. Absolutely. The
roads that you're referring to
coming in house built to in
section 11. Our team has already
begun to look at the roads to
determine where they are in
terms of getting them ready for
construction, whether that be
designed planning preliminary
engineering, so that very early
on in the interim, we can
provide lfc tears. Whatever
committees, um, where are
interested in hearing how we're
going to
Use the 70 million to
essentially do as much
construction work on those road
projects as possible and in the
cost savings should should get
those roads done for legislators
that have earmarked roads and
House Bill two and not in this
deal, So that is a list we
expect BOT does complete within
three years because of the three
year cost savings and so
Any other questions on the
amendment.
You can have a motion to pass a
motion for do pass by Senator
Padilla second, my center, Bert,
You can have a motion to pass a
motion for do pass by Senator
Padilla second, my center Burt
called Liberal Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes. Yes,
Senator Campos Campos votes.
Yes, Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzales. Gonzales votes
Yes, Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Yes. Votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer? Yes, Senator. Share
votes? Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Sign Stein born votes.
Yes, Senator Woods, Senator
Woods votes? Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes. Germanos? Yes, Jeremy. No
sports. Yes, we have a do pass
on the amendment on the
amendment tend to zero. So we're
back on the bill can have a
motion for pass on it.
Senate Bill 2 70%. But the
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 275, as amended,
amended again minus and plus
Um, I'll make the motion
As I stated it. Second advice
center. Sure.
Colorado.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator. Compost? Yes.
votes. Yes, Senator Bradley.
Yes, Senator Bradley votes Yes,
Senator Gonzales. Gonzales
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill.
Senator by the
Senator Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator share
boats? Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods,
Senator Woods votes? Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Chair.
Rodriguez votes? Yes, Chairman.
OSCE. Yes. Votes? Yes. You have
a do pass.
On the committee substitute.
As amended, correct.
Next year when we do this,
Adrian, I want to check sheet,
everybody that when amendments
come in, we're gonna make sure
that they're signed off and that
people know and that we're not
caught in the confusions.
Okay. Thank you, John.
