started because we have our
agenda and we have another
meeting coming up at ten fifteen
so which we're trying to be fair
time by so we will go ahead and
then maybe as we get more
members will have introduction
of our members you know for zoom
cast so with that I'll turn it
over to you.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning I need to
Chavez I'm a capital outlay
analyst for the legislative
finance committee I'm joined
today by over keep some capital
outlay chair with Indian Affairs
Department mark Thompson tribal
infrastructure fund board member
James G. that are from the
Navajo Nation Emory Chavez
Senate finance committee vice
chair analyst we're here today
to review specific act tribal
projects with capital outlay
appropriations tied to them.
I'm going to be reviewing of
this memo from the.
For some brief high level notes
related to the projects.
So as of December two thousand
twenty two they're approximately
four hundred and fourteen act
tribal projects funded capital
outlay under way without
standing balances totaling one
hundred and thirty five point
nine million dollars or seventy
percent of appropriations
between two thousand nineteen
two thousand twenty two the
outstanding tribal projects
represent roughly twelve percent
of the forty one hundred
outstanding projects.
Recent appropriations to tribal
projects have been spent on more
slowly than appropriations to
local projects overall that
we've discussed over the last
few days in addition to capital
outlay tribal projects may seek
grant funding through the tribal
infrastructure fund which is a
four point five percent year
mark on senior severance tax
bonds distributed to test each
year.
This year's estimated
distribution is sixty seven
point six million dollars.
and that last bullet Indian
Affairs Committee this means in
affairs department currently has
eleven vacancies for its staff
of twenty three including at
secretary one additional staff
position with added last fiscal
year for capital outlay
management totaling to four
positions however the agency did
not request additional capital
staffing for fiscal year twenty
four currently the agency's
administration administrative
services division includes the
capital outlay manager and
administrator and I wanted to
make it clear in my language
here there is one vacancy for
direct capital outlay management
the fourth staffers supports
with finances.
And what they work on is they
provide support to all public on
sovereign nations to report the
progress on capital projects and
yes expenditures so I'm gonna
pass it over to all right and
will all be able to after
everyone is presented answer any
questions you have thank you.
Morning in the you can introduce
yourself for the record.
Good morning and welcome.
Yes good morning if you don't
have to put the microphone more
towards to.
Good morning
to chair cabinet.
Thank you so.
You can probably chair for the
Indian Affairs Department I just
wanted to recognize our staff
members are CPO
chief financial officer on
Monday coming just us.
Many are
media
group sherry
And then also Erin today and
Marcia.
also the other administrator
I've recently got to this
position as the cap program
manager said last starting
Monday prior to that I was a
Caporali and to ministry and I
started in August of last year
prior to that I was a plan for
the purpose of the gonna for
over eleven years so I work with
the tribes and have experience
in that.
And today I want to talk about
some of our process as far as
how we go about distributing
these projects currently we have
five hundred fifty one projects
totaling two hundred eighty
million thirteen thousand.
And twenty four dollars in
projects that we minister at
Indian Affairs that's myself and
more strong doing in
administration along with our
accounting partners
so when I got to the position
said there is a big task at hand
part of our process in
administering the projects if we
go through and we once the funds
have been funded through the
projects by the legislation and
Today we execute the agreements.
And after that the tribes or
have the ability to go through
and public Ecker findings to
their selected vendors and
create a contract third party
agreement contract with them.
Once they go through that
process they go through and do
the work they can do a request
for payment which is in
reimbursement for the work that
has been done.
And so after that we paid down
the the the funds.
For reimbursement I just wanna
make that clear that's how the
funds are allocated to the
tribe's after reimbursement.
currently right now in our
process in the sheets that were
administered
through Google forms what I went
through in kind of saw was that
the issues that are made mainly
related and some right our duty
comment pandemic one of the big
issues has been the closures in
sovereign nations.
And our staff incomplete
government shut down.
also within that outsiders
contractors vendors were able to
come on to the nation's.
currently now they're still
struggle with regards to beating
staff members back in building
capacity inside of the tribal
communities and tribal
governments questions impacted
the management of projects in
the development has is.
The only thing that has happened
to is that with the complexities
of projects development projects
on Indian nation with regards to
historic cultural sites in areas
in that manner those projects
got even more complex to the
pandemic and so right now to try
to do and what they can to move
forward and I'm very happy to
say that I after completion
indicating with many of the
leadership they're moving
forward in that manner there's
re authorizations requests are
going under state that have been
identified thus far in regards
to moving for their projects
forward and trying to get the
task done on for Indian country.
So with that I.
If you'd like to answer any
questions you like to speak to
the.
Good morning good morning good
morning chairman Tom members of
the committee my name is mark
Thompson a member of the tribal
infrastructure fund of local
representative and just take a
couple minutes and I've been on
watching these presentations
over the past couple years when
the committee was reviewing
presentations on large local
projects and also yesterday
transportation the trouble
projects are experiencing the
same issues.
And what we have going on here
now is most of these projects
that are past due or at risk
based on the terms and
conditions of the agreements are
all two thousand and nineteen
and two thousand and twenty
obligations and that's right at
the pandemic so we see that
quite often and as a result of
the pandemic UC supply chain
issues construction costs issues
but also a big theme that has
been going on in the
presentation is that you've
heard over the past couple of
days is capacity and you even
hear that from our analyst is
that even in the Affairs itself
was is tasked with some
oversight and coordination
responsibilities forties tribal
projects is half staffed
capacity is a real issue whether
it's at the bureaucratic level
or local level and so those
capacity capacity issues that
everybody is experiences it is
impacting ourselves to so what
can the committee do what the
committee is authorized to be
able to home look at re
authorization look at continued
funding and looking at what can
we do at the legislative level
to enable these projects to be a
success and we had trouble
infrastructure fund board will
be looking at those same aspects
to enable those projects to be a
success and so we're not here to
give you anything different than
what has been impacting us is
the same issues that have been
going across the state and we're
looking forward to your
continued support and will get
these done thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee and we're able to
answer any questions you have
about any of the projects you
have before you.
Okay well thank you.
The gentleman yield.
You know the let me ask
something about the tip is there
a time line on the tenth capital
projects yes there is indica
intergovernmental agreements
there are termination dates just
like any other agreement with
the state and those are all
impacted and when the tribes are
approaching the state than some
of those that are listed here on
the information you have will be
making re authorization request
or extensions and so the tip
board does have some Lee way up
to a year but even that might
not be enough when you're
changing school work or you're
trying to make adjustments to a
school board in order to get
these done some of these are
faced projects understanding
that I mean that's my background
I settle into board as a
developer as an engineer so I
understand being able to
accomplish the some may require
adjustments in the school board
that's what we do act but the
short answer gentleman is that
there are home home terms in the
IDA.
And I you know tribal
Put a section in the test that
lets them use plan money first
before they come to us before
they come in requests for
capital that way we know that
the project is is planned and
designed and they have a cost
estimate and then come back to
the tent for the legislature and
say now you have they can get
infrastructure money have a good
planning money instead of just
saying here's ten million go
planning design.
But you don't really know what's
going to you know the needs are
but you don't know what it's
gonna look like what are.
Not necessarily.
Not necessarily I don't think we
need to force that to happen I
think flexibility needs to be at
the crowd to be able to request
a school board that they all
need for their specific
situation now that process
itself has been evaluated and
I've been in deep on that right
now there are aspects of the tip
process that in able planning to
happen and well we score goals
projects when we review won't
you get scored higher if you're
planning is accomplished up
front so that process is forty I
mean that requirement is
inherent to the process for
right so I don't think anything
at the legislative level would
enable planning to happen more
home of quicker than any place
else it's already being
evaluated.
And then and I'll and I'll speak
for myself right.
For my this is only during the
tribe is pretty good right
thanks spend their money they
get it some of the projects are
listed here in red I know
actually went out to be an inner
under contracts of I'm
ministers to push when you meet
with constituents in a sale that
we're actually we're actually
here right.
And I think that is really
tribal fairgrounds building I
know went to bed like a month
ago and and so we know that
they're working on it in their
within the time frame.
When they get ran sometimes are
not moving but all using
different chapter I'll use a I
used to chill time highly right.
I I may have three capital
projects that for bathroom
additions right.
And we heard this in Gallup when
we had our capital reports we
Fund bathroom additions but then
they don't have the water and
they don't have the power to him
right.
And so I think what I'm gonna do
and re us is all together all
those projects in one and
require watering in electricity
to be hooked up.
With the bathroom addition
because otherwise they become
storage sheds.
and storage and and that's what
they're telling us power lines
the same way right we have three
different projects in the
combine those in and but at some
point we in the.
Water and power is going to
happen on the Navajo Nation in
in when my capital projects are
there that's pretty much what I
fund.
And I'm gonna combine them in a
minute requirement to do on that
a certain timeline because if
not.
In the tribal process.
It's so monotonous for those
chapters to go to window rock in
and push their project and
pusher project and got a goal
from DOJ to hear to their right
to the easements and all that
they're gonna have to create
some efficiency so we can get
power incentive can get water
certain places because they're
still hauling water right
there's a lot of people that I
live south of town in every
morning there comes a trucks
with the two hundred fifty
gallon totes into the tank on
the back on the water and then
going back to the reservation in
getting in water for a week
three days depends right minus
seven yesterday so that
everything's froze up and and
it's tough to survive and live
that way but the track is going
to have to help us Gallup has a
water well request and we're
doing the the the water wells
for the the pipeline right.
And we're filling those with
water wells city water well
requests were feeding that helps
reservation now tribes gonna
have to come in so given we're
going to add some additional
wells toward window rock on that
new reach that's going out there
so we can it's been fill in and
help you guys can fill that
water so we can get it out
insurance want to mention that
there are many tribal nations
and governments that implement
the planning process and develop
projects from conceptual master
plan type and going to
preliminary engineering report
to get into the design phase and
construction are successful
in this this you see a lot of
those projects that use that
philosophy in management of the
development however due to the
issues that we received through
the pandemic there's a lot of
things that are out of control
in that manner so I I think
that's something that to note
it's very important also to add
to you with regards to the two
of timeline on planning projects
there's a twenty four month
deadline two years after the
agreement is executed and also
for the design and construction
the state thirty six month three
year deadline as soon as the
grant agreement is executed the
difference between capital if is
that capital outlay specifically
is at the end of the fiscal year
is when the deadline is for the
state as opposed to the actual
when the agreement is executed
by the nation and the cabinet
secretaries.
And so that's a five year
timeline thanks for planning
it's two years and then design
construction you have three
years put it specifically to the
actual project in a specific
phase which is one of the
reasons why I think tip has been
very successful in that chair
point.
In some places been successful
but if you look at other places
in state of two children in
their master plan for their
water lines and they're drilling
the wells in their successful
and they're servicing their
community but if we're waiting
five years and I mean it is
simple if you have a kid born
today and in.
Male lake right and you don't
have water.
And they're gonna get water that
kids can be five years old by
the time to get water even start
there I think the we got to
shorten that timeline and we
gotta we gotta push a little
harder to get services to
people.
Even though I know there's
constraints but.
It's just not fair right to have
a kid being born today in five
years from now maybe get water.
In.
I I mean I'm just kind of a tire
I mean I live there right is
born razor and.
That they any and you know the
whole to shady language in and I
don't want to see that anymore
for people right.
And it as a legislator I don't
know how I push that forward in
state.
If you award the money right the
time line is gonna shorten to
get services to people.
And then my next point is going
to be and mark you were there
right when we talk about
projects are short and I talk
about Lagunas fire department
all time if you project a short
tell us now is the time for us
to fix that and the fire station
unit has four million dollars
the needs that they need three
million more to complete it's a
seven million dollar project and
let us help you fix that.
Because if somebody house
catches on fire and they need to
ambulance or first responder
right.
Do that I think there's an old.
But let us help you fix that
that's my whole goal in the
Steelers if you're short.
Tell us so we can fix that so
we're not adding more capital
more projects and we're not
fixing what we have and then we
talked about Senator no I talked
about having other fund where
they can use Peifer fact
matching federal grants right in
and have year round projects and
and we're working on that is
come forward that there's we got
to stop the roadblocks right.
And and because I go home and
people say I need help I need
help need help running.
And and several again a money in
the in you know it's it's the
big Navajo that the structure
but Navajo that causes the
issues and a lot of these big
projects right seventeen OO
Shiprock the code talkers museum
right.
Eight they are all handout is in
window rock in the money just
sitting there the dollar sitting
there when people need services
and.
And so we've got to figure that
out as is efficiencies we can't
tell you what to do but we got
to help.
Agencies and and this is why I'm
really driving this homes
because during the COVID.
And if you have been there is
one water station Gallup.
And you go to Gallup and you put
your quarters ending in Philip
you're tanking in New Mexico
home right and during the COVID
that the banks were closed in
the recording shortage right and
nobody can get water so I told
the city why don't you just
given free water.
Open up the thousand and then
get it for free right because
you can get quarters right
everybody's going to the car
wash to get quarters not the
bank and and so there is an
issue there and we just kind of
fix that for people I can't be
provided fifteen years and have
the have the same difference I
did fifteen years ago and say
when you get services to the
people I had I mean that's what
we're here for and sometimes
it's a hard look a hundred
lecture but.
Everybody wants to be better
everybody wants to see be
successful in and that's what
we're here for so if you guys
have projects are shortened and
we need to know so we can say.
Center and you know sure project
in.
In the.
In the I am a tow short of money
and they need an extra fifty
thousand so make sure that you
get an extra fifty thousand to
complete that.
Yeah.
Committee chair of the we are
currently now working with DFA
to develop a list of projects
for the governor I'm currently
no to see what projects are
lacking funding in that manner
and also projects that are
coming forward in the next
couple of years in the session
the request and so we're working
with the with DFA on that right
now.
Right to that information it's
very important that we complete
and it's not just tribal
projects that and that way right
Albuquerque's simply Santa fe's
the same it's it's all over the
state.
But at some point of view you
have so much money in the bank
in in there basically got all
this money dollars projects.
Nothing's going right.
Of it would turn on the
sprinkler and gets green that we
never getting grant.
So that's what we need to make
happen so thank you Mr chair
thank you chairman we have a
vice chairman of the this and
the Senator Diamond thank you Mr
chairman good morning to
everyone for being here today
and to our staff always let me
just.
Question is we're trying to get
a grasp on what truly are the
problems what it what is it that
or do you we are doing or you're
doing together how what is it
that we are delaying projects
and perhaps there are some
inhibitions in there that we
need to see clearly so we can
remove all these barriers and
get these projects going for the
intended purpose that being said
let me ask you in several of
these projects you have that for
example grant to the inter
governmental agreement sent to
the grand T. the questions that
came to my mind immediately is
do you see as the grant T. for
example could be the fiscal
agent because the funds can go
to a fiscal agent and then and
then to a grantees which is the
person the organization or
whoever the funds were intended
to go I want to follow the flow
in my head so tell me so
thank you for the question for
twenty is the usually the
governor the president of the
nation or chairman that's who
that grantees is as for this
most of the nation signed
through at being at their
sovereign nation.
I see so so the grand T. is not
the the project that receives
the funding through the Navajo
Nation it would be the nation
itself that center I'm happy it
works levels are completely
different than the Navajo Nation
I'd give cap outlay to a chapter
house who is the grantee then
they have to go to the Navajo
Nation right is a contract for
and then they have to approve
that money and then the chapter
has to if they have the total
amount then the Navajo Nation is
that contract or or warranty for
the project in the money comes
back to the chapter house thank
you no it is to the president
yes they have on that.
Through their process they
disseminate with regards to the
project managers for the check
process thank you and see that's
what I was alluding to is that
we thought I always was when the
same page thinking that it would
go to the chapters and the
chapters work with the Navajo
Nation itself to be able to
president and others involved
yes these funds
but it from what you're telling
me is different is that it goes
to the Navajo Nation regardless
of whether the allocation is set
to a chapter it's still goes
first to the Navajo Nation to
the president or another yes the
nomination currently has a
process called the one sixty
four that they go through our
reviewing I need a before it is
executed by them and then
they'll send it back to us where
we can the secretary will go
through and executed.
I see that that's interesting to
see that perhaps you know what
we need to to be able to see the
flow a little more streamlined
is is follow that to see what we
can do to expedite this process
because and I understand I've
seen it for many years how much
delay there can be with so many
chapters in the Navajo Nation
and it's true sent everyone
else's right it's very different
than it is for the pueblos but
you know the grantee to me has
always been where the money goes
and if it's to the chapter and I
realized Mr chairman the
signature and approval from the
nation that's just how your
system works.
But I I would think that the
allocation and distribution of
the funds would go.
To the chapter at primarily for
their review since it was
intended for them and then they
can work with the nation
president to get approve this
just for clarification on the
nation on the tribes have to
have the capital from.
once they complete the project
in the utilize the funding
whatever that comes from then
they go and get reimbursed for
that work that has been
completed so it's not out front
here's the money what do the
work it's you have to have the
capital from in potentially some
issues are with that with regard
to having that capital up front
to complete these projects so
that's the challenge to sure
yeah and I can see that you know
that's always been a difficult
situation Mr Chairman where you
know people or organizations or
or nation or Representative
looks get their funds after they
have been used by the tribes or
the Navajo Nation many times you
don't have the money to do it to
be able to get the funds after
you do you need to say something
if you Mr chairman there's also
the
Nations don't have heard don't
have gross receipts tax and
other venues
aspects of funding you too can
find that cap front and so
tribal nations are disadvantage
in that as opposed to a city
which has revenue streams from
taxation that where they can do
that part playground in that
manner whereas the nation
doesn't have a lot of a lot of
that some of the general fund or
other means that they have
locally obviously some committee
try except gaming and other
revenue streams amendment but it
does pose a challenge in that
manner.
Thank you thank you for that
information I guess something
was crossing my mind here to
make sure we're clear on this
and please understand that I I'm
sympathetic to the different
system that you have in but I
guess if the law says that these
funds go to twin lakes chapter
okay.
Then it the funds don't get to
between like chapter they go
around and go to the Navajo
Nation to get the I need
approval inter governmental
agreement approval stuff before
anything is reviewed or looked
at by the by the chapter in the
that that point to get approved
hopefully by the Navajo Nation
so the next go back a little if
the Navajo Nation decides not to
approve this for whatever reason
even though the chapter has
requested it then what happens
there this is the the funding
was intended for the chapter and
the language is clear yes ma'am
that's the current situation for
a lot of a lot of projects
however the the the president
one of the Navajo Nation is the
one that actually is the one
that has the authority to get
into the agreement and that's
what our process goes through
being able to do that once their
project project managers from
the Canadian government division
goes through and manages the
project for them those are
professional staff members that
have capacity to do that
and I think that's one reason
why they do that but that's
The process you know it doesn't
go directly to the trap house.
Thank you for that explanation
and in so may I have this
genocide mark thank you yes on
chairman members of the
committee all.
The pip board member also a
member of the football back in
the tribe and.
having been around the block a
few times it's important for us
to understand that there is that
sovereignty and understand what
the sovereignty is.
The award the the money is
actually going to the Navajo
Nation.
Then that local process and
Navajo Nation is big then goes
to the chapter.
For the pueblos it goes to the
Pueblo of the might be a bit
smaller but they still have
their own internal bureaucracy
so if it is written in a manner
that the chapters have been
given by the ordinance Authority
to request on their own but they
still got to work with that
Navajo Nation bureaucracy I mean
we all have bureaucracy I don't
need to use the word bureaucracy
in a bad way it is what it is
okay so just understanding that
the state to state relationship
is between the state of New
Mexico Navajo hole Act come all
the Munoz of all the nineteen
those the Apache tribes any of
those then that's where it goes
down so the authority to sign
that I need eight is with the
president or the chairman or the
governor of that try.
That's where it goes then it
goes to the chapter or it goes
to any other authority so for
example a Housing Authority for
a Pueblo can request some funds
and it goes through but it has
to have the governor's signature
then it goes to the Housing
Authority goals to be utility
authority or any of those so we
just gotta be cognizant of that
making any changes at the
legislative level that would
creep those tribes differently
we've got to maintain some
consistency there the issue is
at that local level.
Yes.
Yes thank you in in that thank
you for the information and and
as we said before we understand
there is a different system that
you have to deal with and and we
continue to be sensitive to that
I guess I just a quick question
Mr chairman I move on for others
to ask but as I'm trying to
understand this so the net that
much the funding goes to for
project goes to the Navajo
Nation for a specific chapter
correct me as I'm going but does
the Navajo Nation charge an
administrative fee as of yeah
you like a fiscal agent in
addition to the nation the
Navajo Nation you are a fiscal
agent for these projects so do
you charge an administrative fee
for that.
I work for the state of New
Mexico for the Navajo Nation I
don't know who would be here but
it's on the color of money some
of the ten if it's general
obligations are severance tax
bonds typically when we a review
them at at that level those
administrative costs or indirect
project costs we only paid
direct project costs so the
short answer is no.
And when we review those they'll
indicate those as cost match or
costs here for in you know
soft costs that match the
projects with the short answer
is typically no that we're
required by the bond sales not
to pay those indirect costs.
Admission fees on a local
residences for capital outlay
and thank you for helping us
understand all of this and to be
able to follow the trail would
we're trying to help familiar
right any inhibitions are
barriers that may exist so we
can remove them and get these
funds out and what if I may
chairman I think and it goes
back to my initial comments what
can we do at the legislative
level I think there needs to be
serious consideration it goes
back to where does the money
come from the general obligation
is a severance tax our goals
there are time constraints
within that and because the
pandemic was such a huge issue
do we go back and look at that
and make a short adjustment for
those projects that happened
during or impacted by coal it
gives them more time that's I
think low hanging fruit that
legislatively you have control
over give them more time then
let the late in able Indian
Affairs and those local
governments to come back to you
and request specifics on a
change of school board and
enable re authorization on that
team to school board and also
serious consideration through
two through Indian Affairs on
through DFA or to rest of one is
looking at home impacts of of of
cost increases due to the recent
times general called general
construction costs have
increased enabling that would
would help to those are things
that are low hanging fruit that
can be
allow because this was an
extenuating circumstance I'd
hate for us as a whole us all of
us here to make decisions that
would affect us once we come out
of this we started to come out
but what we're experiencing that
Google right now all of those
projects that happen right there
let's not have too much of a
knee jerk reaction and make
decisions that are going up the
affect something or prevent
something from happening later
on right.
Now these projects need more
time right now these projects
need a scope of work right now
these projects may need a little
bit more money those are all
this low hanging fruit thank you
thank you thank you for that
thank you Mr chairman I think
that's a purpose for having a re
authorization bill sometimes to
extend the deadline is that we
need and I fully agree I think
that comment on this pandemic is
not nearly over and it put a
damper to say the least on so
many projects and in also the
transportation the supply and
demand of but transporting the
goods that you need for
infrastructure developments on
of in the late so there's a lot
of that and we should take into
consideration all those things
and stand whatever time we need
to to allow you to do as long as
we continue to have updates
where things are so we know
they're moving I think it makes
sense thank you Mr chairman okay
thank you very well also when.
Thank you Mr chairman if I'm
just summarizing really the the
weight of of these shortfalls in
capital outlay right now looks
like we have a a hundred thirty
six million dollars in
outstanding balance four hundred
fourteen projects it looks like
you're in complete.
These are these are this year.
You still have sixty seven
million earmarked in twenty
twenty three an additional
projects so we have a hundred
thirty six million coming to you
yeah another sixty seven million
coming to you we have thirty
eight million is yes money that
also has it been spent right my
question I guess is can you
reassure us that you were
clearing as many of the projects
off your desk as you are
receiving because clearly the
legislator is still open to to
investing more capital outlay
dollars are you running it you
have to be over a hundred
percent annual to make sure that
you're clearing all projects off
your desk as fast as you'll be
receiving the new projects can
you assure us that that is being
done or we just compounding a
back up.
Senator.
Meter yes so.
What you're what you're asking
with regards to the project pass
and how it's going and how we're
moving forward in that manner
what we're doing
as our role is we administer the
process that is firmly by TFA in
administering these projects so
we how we help out with the
tribal communities in their
process because they have their
own procurement systems in their
own process with regards to
their their systems nations how
we help them out as we do
technical assistance and
training which going forward is
going to be a big part of what
I'm gonna do going forward as a
pro capital outlay managers
providing them with capital
improvement planning master
planning having them understand
being a little have a little bit
more understanding with the
strategic and how they go about
going into an agreement with the
project like a building multi
million dollar project you know
having them understand what it
really takes ago and how what
you need to be tested in the
area things that you may be
aware of prior to actually
getting to the table of because
everybody wants to turn on the
switch open the door right in
some of the new carpet in the
bank unfortunately the
challenges they may not have
running water in the area they
may not have electricity in the
area the soil in that area may
be challenging because maybe we
need to bring more different
soil in there so the building
isn't seen later on there's a
lot of engineering planning that
he's going to that prior to even
getting to the point where we
can talk about our facility and
so understanding that process in
development obviously like a lot
of nations are challenged with
regards to having capacity and
professionals to be able to do
that in house the to contract a
lot of that information but as
Indian Affairs one of the things
that we want to do is a system
in that manner and educate them
in that manner and help them
potentially for people that
potentially maybe cut put into
position because so also left me
someone who isn't here anymore
after the pandemic you know and
so office and is their job to
oversee this grant or manage
this grant and support.
Right in that those assistance
you know and that's one thing
that clearly I can control in
that manner as far as moving
forward as far as the speed is
concerned as far as when they
turn in their I. G. A.'s they go
and turn notice obligation how
they go about doing I can't we
can't control that and
unfortunately you know and we
can't cleared off so to speak
you know in that manner but we
can use the system and motivate
them to kind of move forward for
project to the best of our
abilities to answer your
question thank you Mr chairman
you did I appreciate you
acknowledging that there's
really working preparation that
needs to be done before they
even reach us for capital outlay
requests I also want to make
clear this is this is systemic
really they're all agencies
we've learned this is our rural
communities is the reality is
that they would work shovel
ready what we can and that's why
we're looking at these we ox I I
want to kind of go back to
something that Kelly presented
to us the other day and that's
just generally how capital
outlay is allocated it was new
really really and lighting to me
to see although it the majority
of projects are sent to DFA
there's a number of other
agencies like you're stuck
around the receive these capital
outlay projects oversee my
frustration but because the two
biggest backlogs or within the
environment department and
Indian Affairs my frustration
with the specific one was
admitted to the environment
department and while the fiscal
agent is ready to put the money
on the ground it was remaining
on someone's desk Environment
Department if I'm listening to
what you're saying here today is
is our challenge doesn't seem to
be within the agency so coming
in and saying we're gonna take
these capital and let's have D.
F. they come in and help them
isn't going to resolve your
issue your challenge if I
understand you correctly is
really with the fiscal agent and
trying to find that fiscal agent
capacity to execute the project
is that correct.
If I may chairman I'm Senator
you.
We need to be careful there it
there's no easy button
on uncertainty in my current
position I was waiting for an
IDA we had Rece I'm ready to go
so the point can be both sides
there and we waited for an IDA
for six months and it put my mic
federal funding costs met at
risk because we didn't have an
IDA we were ready to go so it
can be both sites and so it's
not entirely on the fiscal
agents responsibility and so
when you ask that question for
reassuring you that's a
difficult call wanted to answer
certainly that tempore member
and having worked with Indian
Affairs Department for over
twenty years right now what did
you say initially that the
capacity at in the affairs is
right now they have eleven
shortages over there live in
vacancies there are capacity
issues at the state level and
the local level that making that
reassurance to you might just be
a blind promise.
And that's hard so honestly
you're asking a manager here the
best thing we can do right now
is let's fill that vacancy is
secretary of Indian Affairs to
enable some leadership to go
there to begin to fill those
positions so the onus of the
responsibility and the
coordination level can be at the
state level and you can think in
able to local level and
communicate with them and then
find accountability at this
level that's difficult so asking
for reassurance from a staffer
is hard to do so I just want to
advocate for that maybe I
misunderstood your question but
that's what we're hearing right
now let's fill that let's get
those positions filled so you
can maximize your coordination
efforts Mr chairman and I
appreciate your remarks but
that's a lot easier said than
done yes to fill all of these
vacant state agencies right I I
wonder and I understand that
your request to fill those
positions in the long term same
as one advisement was before us
is the ultimate goal but I
wonder if the legislator right
now looking at the great that
blog within to introduce if we
can for temporary a short term
solution to get some of these
projects after death can bring
it in the resources of DFA to
assist maybe these two entities
at least catching up in the
short term because it's
frustrating for you it's
frustrating for us as
appropriators and it's also
frustrating first our our
citizens and constituents on the
ground we're waiting for good
projects for many years they
just want to get started but
clearly you have highlighted a
problem and we understand your
capacity issue I just hope that
maybe we can come together maybe
for short term took solution to
get these clear the desks and a
potential long term solution
would ultimately be investing in
and FTEs.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you just also
add that DFA is working with
Indian Affairs Department at
this time in Wesley Billingsley
is here he can give an update on
what they're doing and what they
plan to do right.
Mister chairman Senator not
going to have we were asked to
help any affairs department with
the rent is.
Opossums and flow for them to
get those out the door and so we
did that we the combined we we
can mail merge document for them
to get those that information
into the members we can actually
get those out faster to the
entities and so we have done
that and so there they can this
process and self they have the
access and.
I was the first have been doing
it and as we stated earlier in
the process of getting all of
the outstanding projects
although they have no
expenditures going through all
of those trying to see which
ones need more money which was a
very authorized so we're hoping
to prevent that us and tribal
framework I'm to the governor
and up to the legislature sent
you often make these decisions
and getting these these projects
of started fully funded and out
the door thank you Mr chairman
that is encouraging and
hopefully it and a step in the
right direction to execute these
these projects thank you that's
what I want to thank you Mr
thank you Senator of we have
Senator Sheryl okay Senator.
So Mr chair.
This problem is happened long
long walk in decades so it's not
a COVID problem obviously COVID
didn't help anything comment
made lot things maybe bad things
even worse and good things that.
but this is been a problem for a
long time we're trying to figure
out.
How to to fix it.
And I'm not sure that we got is
the the collective losses
whoever offices are that have
come up with a solution
I know that there are projects
out there the funded.
Of that really aren't ready to
be funded Mr chair and.
We needed.
We need somehow to know.
With that money is ready to be
spent.
That's the real problem if the
money's not ready to be spent
that we ought not send.
There's other things in the into
that that that can happen I
think we've proven that we're
we're not opposed I mean there's
millions of dollars here that
the that the state has put into
to tribal governments and tribal
projects it's not it's not that
we're opposed to any of that.
We just wanted to go to be spent
in a timely manner we wanted to
be spent one is doing things.
And I think that's the problem
this is not one cabinet
secretary it's not one pandemic
it's not what this is this is
been for ever.
Representative as far as I know.
And so that that I think that's
what we're looking for.
Help us understand not
understand help us fix the
problem because we bond against
this money and then we're we're
paying interest on money that's
just sitting there doing
nothing.
We don't want that mean that's
counterproductive to the whole
the whole process.
So.
Mr chair I think that's what
we're trying to get at not not
blaming each whether or not.
We do.
Talk about maybe we need to do a
lot of engineering and grant
well all of that should be done
before the money was was here.
I have one of the
I guess the question is when we
send money to the Navajo Nation
for any of these projects.
Is there still a Navajo tax on
the they take six percent of
this money.
I'm not aware of their the local
system as far as how they go
about if they could take money
out of the.
So we'll need to can you look
into that because it used to be
the case and and I don't know if
it is now or not but it used to
be that we would send a hundred
dollars to Navajo nations in the
nation would take six to that.
It in the project needed needed
a hundred and so the project
could never be done because they
were short six dollars Mister
chairman Senator share will make
sure to do the research.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you just to kind of wrap
this up.
James at occasions zoom in I
think he's Representative for
the Navajo Nation dislike
dislike the call just like
cities right they take a
percentage off the top
administrative cost off the top
but at some some projects may
need that right when they're
design build construction
projects but when they're
despite a greater or back all
right then that leaves a chapter
short patient thank the
administrative costs session
signing a purchase order and in
transferring checks but but they
do take a percentage off the
top.
Also just a note that hello the
projects also the cultural
affairs department take so
pardon public places funding one
percent the award of the
projects.
in certain specific projects
that school St enough funding
for this my question to you is.
In New this is a perfect example
of a Norman John who passed away
from twin lakes right his
chapter vice president is in the
back there I ran out there to
meet with the right but he
passed away so the shepherd that
was watching all the capital and
in the present those tracking
everything now somebody's going
to pick up the the pieces right
and so now they're a little bit
behind the ball and you can help
them catch up and see those
things happen right there's been
a couple chapter presents a
nightmare
said total couple of passed
away.
But I'm wondering if if we are
to move the Indian Affairs
capital outlay division under
DFA.
To help you get more staff
increase efficiency.
You think market here.
You think that helps create
efficiencies to get I think
you'll have an open door.
Yeah but we're we're talking
about creating efficiencies in
that
I don't think you create
efficiencies by moving it from
one bureaucracy to another.
I'm just being honest notice I I
get I you and I know we tell
this well and are obviously very
direct and honest and we have to
have these honest conversations
or we don't get some of them are
hard so I just give you an
honest opinion on that I don't
think that would work I think
you need to build the capacity
where it's at now.
And you're the only employee.
All right right.
So I am.
I also work with more action on
and then we have to account
auditors and Gina.
Victoria Archuleta and
The Lopez the assistance and
like I said before I am fifty
one projects that we have to.
We we minister to your face
policy procedures and and so
that is a task within itself
So yes capacity as we are moving
forward I I came on staff in
August I Leah and Gina have a
Virginia also came months after
about the same time period and
we're looking to hire new home
other another account of.
Caporali tiff administrator and
grants specialist
but more support more staffing
in that department would
definitely help out as far as
full time employees are
concerned as pointed out by Nina
it would definitely help out
with regards to the following
getting stuff out on time.
In.
The the amount of rules and
regulations with regards to how
we have to log inside the C. PMS
and other systems that we were
to get her in and having
signature authority one of the
challenges that we have because
we have signature authority due
to not having secretary so
setting up ideas though having
signature authority of which we
do have found in our State
CFO's currently now able to sign
off and I need until we get a
secretary but that was kind of
some of the issues that we had.
As you see there's got to be a
little either when you don't
have staff that give these guys
help step in in some way shape
or form to help the process
right now I mean because DFA has
a processing can set stuff up in
in in in in your new staffs
upright you probably don't you
then there may be six months
trying to get in that September
five months in and so it's tough
to get a handle on this right
Norman I know Norman John.
and on the job choose a lower
wage jobs.
March John has been in capital
before so he understands it
right in the center process but
if if you haven't been in it
it's a struggle to get up to
speed and in the contracts
systems and and then you don't
have a you don't have a
secretary you don't have other
staff to lead in this so then or
just.
Making it set you up for failure
taking longer because only one
person can call and I don't know
I I think there's what fifty six
chapters on eastern agency side.
maybe a little bit off and then
and there's twenty six pebbles.
Nineteen point loss but there's
twenty three tribes in the state
of New Mexico including the two
Apache and Navajo.
Some of you have if you have one
person calling every day for me
and you spend an hour with them
you can complete which get the
process moving so I I don't know
how we create those efficiency
many I'm not sure either if I
make chairman and and again no
disrespect there whacked I don't
have any conversation you just
get concern about moving a
bottleneck for mobile from one
agency to the next because I'd
be really all wouldn't want to
burden Wesley and his team
either because they're probably
or already over loaded and we're
asking them to do even more from
that standpoint and so that's
what I meant by building the
capacity worked intended to be
and that's not an easy solution
much like Senator Diamond had
mentioned there it's it's it's
not an easy fix it's it's a but
it's where we're at right now
and that's the reality of it and
so on.
The commitment is to try and
fill those positions and that's
really where I want to advocate
for the staff and in an affairs
and get some leadership there
fill those positions build that
capacity and then start moving
forward that's the commitment
that can be made right now omxs
relatively easy again to use
that term yes the lowing for
right now let's get those
positions filled and get to
work.
We'll have a conversation with
things that can to forget that.
I can make secretary appointed
there the above I mean.
I think this is a good honest
conversation and help us fix it
and it goes for the cities to
their the same same way to
write.
The the cities counties they're
the exact same way there's no
difference we just have this
three deal three million dollars
sitting there and and we're not
getting the moving so thank you
Mr chairman very well well we're
going to bring this to closure
We have another meeting coming
up.
I was just going to.
Ask you.
This is provided on the
information from the agency
Chavis.
It is so.
If you could give us an example
what is your smallest project
the to help.
And if we don't have the answer
now it's fine and what would be
the largest.
The what I was doing this.
if you divide four hundred and
seventy five to one ninety four
eight eight three nine one.
You come out with the the four
hundred and ten thousand dollars
per project.
That's quite a bit of money yeah
that's a lot of dollars.
You know so I and I know that he
was and fund it that way but
just to maybe get a better
understanding and then the other
part from Marcus you mentioned
up about the time part of I
think you're gonna have to
provide that to us because we
don't know which is the one that
needs more time and it's a very
a very fair question and very
fair.
Request you know because I think
we're all into the.
Madam
chairman from the information
compiled by Senate finance
committee on this report of
course is
Only showing projects from two
fifty thousand two above so we
can go back and do some research
on capital outlay projects below
that but on this report in front
of you some of these projects
have probation that are upwards
of three million dollars.
Very well.
Well if we want to thank all of
you for being here for trying to
work with this.
We did receive some very
valuable input.
The.
Our discussions here to.
Also understanding you know the
sovereignty part but also make
in the.
Process to how can we just
become more efficient.
So I want to thank everyone of
you for traveling for being here
today thank you.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee appreciate the
time and appreciate the dialogue
on continue the good work on
accountability can be tough at
times but you make some very
