The land, Water and conservation
fund that we've had for almost
50 years through the federal
government. We've spent 44
million on over 1000 projects in
a rural areas of the state.
This bill is to update that, Uh,
program that we have and to make
it easier for our rural and
tribal communities to tap into
this fund.
So, Senator Heinrich just put in
990 million. Um, that's
recurring back into this land
Water and conservation fund at
the federal government. We can
get a little over 3 million a
year. That's our share, but we
have to put in local match and
we have to
Ah, so our bill has attempted to
update our management of this
fund. Uh, previously, we
required the local communities
to have a local match. The idea
with this is that the state
would help
Make that match and that the
state would provide assistance
to them because people don't
know how to tap into the fun
now. 44 million since the mid 19
seventies for 1000 projects
there in every county, their
parks their trails. Um it's just
pretty amazing how many projects
that we've been able to do with
this fund in the past.
So we do have amendments that
came from the department to
assist them in administering
this fund. Um, really, if we had
2 million a year in the fund, we
could get 3 million, but even
without any funding, and our
amendment does take out the
appropriation, we can at least
try to work with tribes and the
rural areas.
Uh, to see if they can come up
with the local match. Provide
them assistance so we don't
continue to revert money. We've
been reverting 3 million a year
since the 2019. We have not been
able to use it because of the
strictures that we put on
ourselves. So this will allow
the state to help the areas and
will provide, um
Would have provided over 55
years. 2 million years. I know
we're still trying to look for
money for it, but will accept
the changes to make this easier
to administer and make it easier
for the state to administer. Um
even if there's no funding gonna
reel to Senator Neville, and
then we have an amendment at
all.
Um, thank you, Mr Chairman. My
interest in this came about
whenever I saw one of those
ranking things were the best and
the worst of whatever and it
came across his, uh
One of the worst places to raise
kids or something like that was
farming to New Mexico. Well,
farming to New Mexico is an M s
A metrical metropolitan
Statistical area.
Unfortunately, it isn't farming
tonight includes the whole San
Juan County, which includes a
lot of rural areas, small
communities that have very
little facilities. This fund
this program would allow for a
lot of those small communities.
Farmington itself has a great
parks. And so does that stick
Bloomfield for those parts, but
the communities are particularly
the tribal communities have very
little in this fund. This
program would allow for us to
Implement various programs and
projects out there to build
rodeo arenas, playgrounds, all
kinds of things, and that's what
it's all about. That's my
interest in it. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. We do have an
amendment to move them in
second.
Yes, you should have. It makes
sense to
On the amendment Center street
when explain amendment Yes, Mr
Chairman. So, um, you can see
from the very first one
clarifying fund usage is so we
have to work with the federal
government to get this money. So
our agency has to check the
boxes on what's required from
the federal government. That's
what most of these admit, Uh,
amendments do so we took out the
appropriation. That's number
three.
And number 10
and the rest of them, really,
Just try to help the our
government do it. You can see on
number seven where they define
technical assistance because
they have to follow
Environmental policy Act
processing permits, etcetera.
And then on page nine after the
cost, you have to say that the
fund may be available to provide
assistance with compliance with
the UH, National Environmental
Policy Act. So this is designed
so that we can help.
Tribes and rural communities
understand what they have to do
to get the money and to get
these projects.
Some movie.
Yeah, that's good down.
Any everybody
Anybody any time.
I didn't organize anything.
Listrik chairman so
to know
Good afternoon, Mr the chapter
representing Mexico. We're in
strong support of this bill and
would like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this forward since
this exception in 1965 more than
50 million in federal, land and
water conservation funding has
supported over 1200 outdoor
recreation projects in all 33
counties in New Mexico.
This bill is very important. The
10 million, uh, will improve
access for funding for tribal
and rural communities to help
them build new city parks. Ball
fields, trails and Mexicans We
all love, enjoying our lands and
recreate in them, supporting
projects like this means
continue to create better
opportunities for current future
generations that enjoy the
state. We love so much.
So for this and and all the
other reasons that I think the
sponsors did well in stating, we
ask that you will support SB
169. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Greg Peters,
representing conservation
Voters. New Mexico here to stand
in strong as the previous
speakers of articulated the Land
and Water Conservation fund has
been a wildly successful federal
program that was recently
codified to the Great American
Outdoors Act several years ago
to provide continuous sustained
funding to states across the
country.
For the protection of our lands.
Waters. Wild New Mexico has been
leaving millions of dollars of
money on the table by failing to
properly leverage these funds
that are going out to every
state every year. This bill is
an elegant solution to allow us
to more effectively leverage
these federal funds that are out
there ready for the taking to
invest in communities across the
state. So for these reasons, and
one's already articulated, we
stand strong support and urgent
do past vote and thank the
sponsors for bringing this up.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Two people on zoom, zoom the
name or anything.
The borrow.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. Can you hear
me?
Yes. Can you hear me? Yes, we
got you.
Thank you. Thank you, Chairman,
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Adrian and
Navarro and I'm here on behalf
of this project. Today I am here
to vocalize strong support for
Senate Bill 169 and want to
thank the sponsors for
introducing this piece of
legislation. This project is an
organization that seeks to
activate and inspired by pack
you find informing them about
the impact of climate change and
conservation through outdoor
recreational activities. I have
called New Mexico and Dona Ana
County. My home for my entire
life and associate are no
natural reason.
Sources and landmarks with life
and equitable opportunities.
For a frontline communities
aspiring psychology
practitioner. I see the
legislation is not only a means
to increase outdoor
accessibility and safeguard our
resources, but also as an
opportunity for youth and by pox
citizens to experience the
mental health benefits of nature
by allowing them to connect
their ancestral roots and by
fostering meaningful connections
with others in the environment
We would like to once again
thank the sponsors for
recognizing that an
environmental conservation is a
necessity. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak today and
have a great day.
Kay.
Okay?
I don't want to touch your last
name K.
Are you there? Yes, sure. I
everyone can you hear me?
Yep. Can you say your last name
that will know how to say it.
Sure, it's cable and good.
Go ahead, okay?
All right. Good morning. Um
Hello, Chairman Yasser remember
the Lieutenant Finance
Committee? My name is Keegan.
Kuhn and I'm here on behalf of
the Wilderness Society. I think
the sponsors for this bill
energy, everyone to vote Yes, in
support of it. The Wilderness
Society has been working on the
LW CF program for decades. More
recently, we invested resources
and supported outreach to local
municipalities and tribal
governments to raise awareness
about the program. One of the
most common barriers we heard
from rural communities in tribal
governments was their inability
to meet the Metro group.
Requirements of life for the
fun. This has resulted in far
too many last opportunities for
the people in places that we
must benefit from investments
and outdoor infrastructure
projects like playgrounds,
parks, trails, rodeo grounds and
ball fields.
When the LW CF supplemental fund
existed 41 tribal communities
and New Mexico received Grant
funding zero has since received
funding since the state match
was removed. In fact, the last
time a non state entity received
funding was nearly 20 years ago.
The LW CF Supplemental fund will
ensure funding is accessible for
communities who need him as only
Mexicans deserve equitable
access to nature and the many
benefits that outdoor recreation
can provide.
So I please urge you all to me?
Yes. In support of SB 116. Thank
you.
Thank you. Is there anybody in
opposition on Zoom?
Anybody in the audience and
opposition on House Bill two.
They're not painted pensions.
I'm saying they're paying
attention. I know what I'm
saying. Yeah, No. One opposition
questions from committee members
Center Woods.
Just a quick question. How much
money Mr Chair and senators are
in the fund right now. The state
Land Water contribution fund.
How much? What is the balance of
that fund right now?
Mr Chairman as Sara Woods. I
have that I didn't bring my
other folder. It's it's bigger,
little less than $200,000, Okay?
And the other question I have
heard several times in here.
Eddie eliminates the matching
requirement.
For local governments and then
some place else.
I see that it's a 1 to 1 match.
So which is it?
Chairman incident. Mr Chairman,
Senator Woods.
Ah, this bill takes off the
requirement for the local match,
but that was incumbent upon us
as a state.
You know, we need about 2
million a year to do the state
match. So without money in the
fund, there's still going to
have to come up with the local
match unless we can find it
somewhere else. I mean, 2
million will cover the entire
match that we would need. I want
to say I feel to say this also,
We also removed the requirement
that tribes pueblos land grant
soil and water conservation
districts and others have to
have a county sponsor.
Because before they they had to
go through the county. We've
taken that off.
And then we've also just made
the state work with him easier
through through the amendments
you just made so
Real quickly. I wanna hold you,
Um
So who will be the financial
agent for these funds?
The state. The state will be
I guess D f a. The state will be
The FAA would
So so this this is a fun through
energy, mineral and natural and
minerals, but the FAA will be
the financial agent.
I believe it will be energy and
mineral. Okay, so
One of the
People that came up and spoke
here said that
It would match it would be a
priority for the Indian nations
and Byblos.
That's the number one priority
in this deal.
Mr Chairman. It's rural
communities also
Its tribes and rural
communities, and there's a
population cap. We've raised
that to 65,000. So we really are
trying to focus on rural areas
of okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Don't see anybody else
on the list. Let me say
something
to him Raise his hand. Um, let
me ask you a question. Real
national anthem. Um, we have 75
million in match money Going to
D F a
We have another 12 million,
sending that Indian affairs
I think the executive kid
Quickly moved $3 million.
That's that's the hope without
the appropriation. That's the
hope that is the hope and really
2 million would do it.
Even better. Yeah, here.
Mr Chair. I'd move to do pass,
Except I think that the
President Pro TEM has got to
find a more competent coast box.
Told me I was her arm candy
before
I think I'm here for she's gotta
milk dead.
It doesn't matter.
Motion for a do pass as amended
Center share second by Senator
Padilla.
You call the roll?
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator Campos? Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Senator Gonzales? Yes,
for votes? Yes, Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Padilla. Yes. Votes?
Yes, Senator. Sure. Senator.
Share votes. Yes, Senator Stein,
born
Senator Woods.
Woods votes Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes? Yes, Chairman
Yas? Yes. Germany or sports?
Yes. You gotta get some hot
tamales.
Do past 8 to 0.
Senator RTZ Pinot. He has his
geothermal. We have your
amendment.
Oh, Senator, Senator Novell.
Could you just check? I'm sorry.
I didn't ask. We need to check
the 202 numbers on the amendment
to make and Senator
554 is when I have Senator
Stewart
We do have an amendment will
send yours out. Make sure it
tracks the one that we have.
55
Correct. We're good.
Thank you.
We
And the check while you're at
it. Um, Miss Mr Chairman. I'm a
little confused because we came.
I came the other day with the
Senate version of this bill.
And you said, Well, let's just
do deal with the House version.
So that's the house version
here, and I don't think we have
an amendment on the House
version. That's why you tried to
confuse me because the House
version already stripped the
Appropriation Act.
We're doing House Bill 91 as
amended.
No, it did the amendment in the
house. That's correct. Yes, the
amendment.
This is part of a tax packaging
longer. You talk the more
geothermal is gonna come out of
here. That's right work, So I'm
going to defer to get into his
basketball uniform. That's true.
So, Mr Chairman, I'm going to
defer to the House sponsor,
representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm just here
to introduce House Bill 91.
Which would amend the Geothermal
Resource Development Act to
establish two funds administered
by the energy, mineral
Resources Natural Resources
Department.
To provide study grants and
project grants of up to 250,000.
Um to political subdivisions of
the state, such as universities,
tribal governments to study the
costs and benefits of proposed
geothermal projects, which will
generate electricity or
otherwise support industrial,
commercial or residential uses.
It also provides revolving loans
to those entities, plus
nonprofit organizations.
And private entities for
financing for a dream,
geothermal.
Development project. And with
that, Mr Chair, I will see if
Senator the extent esteem
Senator has anything to add. If
not, I'm Stanford questions. Mr.
Chairman. You've seen this build
over the last two years. We sent
it up to the governor last year.
This is essentially the same
bill. There is 2.5 million for
each of the two funds in house
Bill two. I'm assured so
That will stand for any
questions. Uh, anybody in zoom
and support
One second. Anybody in the
audience support
Got one person come on up.
One and one.
You can read the
Thank you. There are one person
on zoom.
I don't have your name and you
don't have your name up so
Barbara
Good afternoon. Good afternoon,
Mr Chair Committee members
Barbara, Calif. Speaking for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico, the league supports
policies and incentives that
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by promoting greater energy
efficiency by developing clean
renewable energy sources and by
encouraging further resource up
on alternatives to the
combustion of fossil fuels for
energy. We ask that you please
pass.
Uh, have Senate Bill 91. Thank
you.
House Bill 91 Sorry. Senate Bill
House Bill
It's a bill.
Uh, questions from members.
Wait, Senator Woods. You have
questions quickly on on the fr
our under the significant
issues. It says that possibly
the SC, uh, request
clarification. Language. Did
that language go in?
Oh, Mr Chairman and senator was
that language did not get
included in the House version.
It was not amended.
What? What is the What is the
thoughts on that? Mr Chairman,
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods. I'll
have our expert witness, Tom
Solomon deal with that He's been
working on this bill for two
years.
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods.
We looked at that. And, um
So I think the substance of the
state engineers comment was
that, um you know, there are
geothermal resources between
100, °F and 250, some of which
may be in the purview of the
state engineer.
Um, they it is. Those resources
are already in the purview of
the state engineer. They would
include the, um the direct use
geothermal plant that is
operating in mass and of
Farms and radium springs. Uh,
and the geothermal hot springs
all throughout the state. So,
um, and the tilapia farm, so our
guests are feeling was that
those procedures and systems are
already in place.
Hmm. Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Verse here. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Where are around the state?
Where are the most likely
Geothermal fields. Um, thank
you, madam. Chair, Senator,
Sheriff.
Uh, New Mexico is, uh, somewhat
uniquely positioned for
geothermal resources, and it is
pretty much all along the Rio
Grande rift. So the Rio Grande
rift runs roughly from towers
all the way down to Deming. It's
the Rio Grande Valley That is an
area of the state where the
geology of the earth's crust has
been pulling apart for about 35
million years, and it is thinner
there.
Therefore, the very hot rocks in
the subsurface are closer to the
surface in that area, meaning it
is easier to access them less
drilling costs so all along the
Rio Grande rift. Are we going to
go for these?
Um, there was a test well of
18,000 ft. Drilled in adjacent
to lightning dock. I'm sorry, Mr
Chair, Senator. Share, um,
drilled in adjacent to lightning
dock in the boot heel in 2022,
and they got down to 18,000 ft
Reach temperatures in excess of
480 °F.
Which are very adequate to
achieve the kind of development
that we're talking about. Mr.
Chair, 18,000 ft Pretty far
down. Um
I know there used to be one.
Near Las Cruces, New Mexico
State had one
And
It stopped working because of
mineralization.
Is that gonna be a problem on
all these others? And if so, how
do we? How do we mitigate that
one? Because I think that was
the first one in it died because
it got loaded up.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. Share?
your, uh your correct? Yes.
there was a whole system of
geothermal development on the
New Mexico State campus started
in the 19 eighties. It was
pretty much, uh, mothballed
around 2015. And the reason was,
is that they were actually
Directly circulating the
geothermal fluid that was pumped
up from the subsurface. Um, we
now know not to do that, because
of exactly this is the problem
you describe if you use that
fluid directly, it contains a
lot of dissolved solids, which
over time build up.
And so the new the new procedure
is to instead of circulating
that fluid you run that fluid
through a heat exchanger.
And then you run the heated
fluid on the other side of that
heat exchanger, which doesn't
contain any of those dissolved
solids, and that's how you
transmit the heat throughout the
system, and that's that's what
we would do if we were to revive
that system on the animus U
campus, which is on the list of
projects we'd like to do.
Okay, So this issues Mr Chair of
fresh water.
As opposed to whatever is in the
ground already.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. Share?
Uh,
The heat transfer fluid to bring
the heat up from the subsurface
up to the surface, though, that
the heat can be transferred
could be fresh water. It could
be a number of other transfer
fluids.
Okay, So my question is
potentially, we're using fresh
water.
Um, Mr Mr Chair, Senator. Share?
Yes, but it is not very much. It
is just enough fresh water to,
uh, to, you know, charge the the
the wells down to the reservoir
and bring it back up and re
circulated in a closed loop. So
you charge it once and the
losses of the freshwater pretty
low over time.
Okay?
18,000 Ft of Water is a lot of
water.
How much power do we expect to
get from?
Each one of these
Uh, Mr Chair senator share as an
example. There is the first of a
kind of the advanced geothermal
electricity generation systems
that we're talking about under
construction right now.
In western Utah. I think it's
Beaver County, and their
projections are for it to be a
400 megawatt electric plant. Uh,
First phase coming online in
2026 full production in 2020 88.
Utah, okay?
And then Mr Chair, So we got the
state engineer.
Involved in this
Um, why not? O. C. D s and so
seedy, generally knows about
Wells.
In the state engineer knows
about what surface water.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. Share?
Uh, the, uh, New Mexico.
Geothermal statutes were
modified some years back to, um,
basically segregate geothermal
resources outside of OCD, and to
give that permitting and
oversight authority to E C m d,
The energy conservation
management division within M
nerd.
And that was, um that was
intentional. For
Reasons that you might want to
inquire of Senator Griggs.
Yeah.
Okay, okay.
So, Mr Chair.
I'm all in favor of always been
in favor of geothermal. Uh
I've always wondered why the one
in Las Cruces
Died because mineralization
because
We can clean water. We have
things that can do that. So why
didn't we do it on that one?
And
I'm just that's just a curiosity
on why that one didn't work, and
it never really got to
Energy production. It was
experimental. Most of the time,
wasn't it, Mr Chairman and
Senator? No, I think for about
eight years they heated the
entire campus with that heat,
including the pan Em Center, the
basketball arena, So it worked.
It's just that all the time it
was working. The the deposits
were building up, and eventually
it started getting to the point
where they were not able to.
To get all the way through all
the piping there. Re they're
considering reopening that
project but not using the actual
hot mineral water coming through
the pipes they would do as as Mr
Solomon indicated.
Run another fluid through the
pipes, but the heat would come
up. The exchange will take
place and then that hot fluid
would circulate, but they're
they're actually looking at it
right now, Uh,
What's your name? Dr Sullivan,
Patricia Sullivan was part of
our working group. And she
indicated there taking a look at
that. Okay. And then finally, Mr
Mr Chair just to comment, so all
the people that stood up and
supported this year we love all
this.
At the same time will stand up
for other new technology and say
it's an unproven technology. We
can't do it.
Just curious.
Why they love one and hate
another when they're basically
the same level of technology,
and I'm not gonna ask him for
that. I just wish that they
would allow other technologies
to happen instead of the gut
reflex to hate everything that
they didn't dream up themselves.
Thank you.
Maybe that's why we have U. N
employees State of New Mexico,
which which Maybe that is, the
employees might be a question
for the environment Secretary.
Senator Bert, You have a
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just a
quick question and looking at
the analysis and HB 91 provides
that e C. M d apply for federal
geothermal grants.
However, the federal government
usually only works with
universities and research
recognized research
organizations.
So
They're saying that you may not
even be eligible to get those
grants. How would you? How would
you find such things if you
can't get those grants?
Mr Chairman and Senator Bert. Mr
Solomon has a whole page in our
presentation we made to the
interim committees on that very
issue, so I'll refer to him,
Okay. You don't have to be a
long explanation. Just, you
know, quickie.
Uh, Senator Ponyo's um R
Uh, Senator Ponyo's, um, our
chairman, EOS and Senator Bert,
Um, since the passage of the
inflation Reduction Act, there
is a lot of federal money not
just for research, but for
actual development and, um, of
geothermal projects. The
geothermal programs office is
actively searching for
State level partners to partner
with to build some of these new
projects, and we've identified
um, upwards of $500 million of
potential. Um
Nationwide geothermal monies to
apply for some of those moneys
have you know they open a window
of application that closes but
they open new windows. So over
time? Yes, there are. There's a
lot of federal money. We've
looked at that, um, in
particular in conjunction with
Senator Martin Heinrich office
Great, Well and and Mr Chairman,
and and I appreciate the answer,
because
You know, you know these old
gyration get this thing done.
You're ready to pull the trigger
on something like this, and you
can't get the funding to get it
done, So I'm glad that
The federal government has lots
of money to spend on all this
because I think these are great
projects in Alamogordo. They
used to have geothermal that
that heated up a good portion of
the high school, including the
gymnasium. Uh and I don't care
whether you walked in when it
was like 68.
It was just it was great. So
thank you for bringing this
forward. Thank you, Mr Jim.
First time board.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator and
my good friend, Representative
Tom. Welcome to the committee.
Curious. Um, the funding for
some of these
Funds and whatnot. Where are
they?
I understand some of it in the
budget.
And funded in the budget already
you want to speak to that? Yes.
Um, Mr Chair and Senator Stein
born. You're correct. Okay, um,
budget includes $2.5 million
Ah, at this point in each of the
funds for each of the funds,
it's not as much as we had
requested. But 2.5 million.
We're good. Thank you. That's
great. So it is funded. Yeah, Mr
Chairman. I mean, I get I have
the distinction of representing
Radium Springs, New Mexico.
So that's actually in my
district and I represent him in
the house now in the Senate.
And it's a very cool special
place who also has these
incredible geothermal resources.
So, um
I think that's great, You know,
um, potential energy source for
the next and the Mexico. That's
Renewable. So, um, so I fully
supported and I know we
We were just pointing. We didn't
do it last session, but it's a
great opportunity. Good job, you
know, getting it funded and I
know the vice chair.
Appropriations is here and I
checked with her and I know it's
funded so
Totally proud of support your
bell. Thank you.
Thank you, mr Chair motion for a
new pass.
That means off made a motion for
do pass all second.
Seconded by Senator in pill.
We call our own.
Senator Bert? Yes, Bert votes?
Yes, Sandra Campos? Yes,
compote. Suppose yes, Senator
Brantley. Senator Brantley
votes? Yes, Senator Gonzales?
Yes. Gonzales votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill
votes? Yes. Send it via Yes
Votes. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator share of votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair Rodriguez.
Chairman Yeo's Yes. Germany?
Yes, we have 10 in the
affirmative. Zero in the
negative for a do path. You
Vice chair. Rodriguez votes Yes,
we have a do pass 11 to 0. Thank
you very much, Mr. Thank you
very much. Mr Chairman, Senator
Gonzales is you've got to go to
the committee.
I thought I seen represent.
Dixon. Are you back there? You
want to move up to the front so
we can
Right ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
on Senate Bill 185.
This appropriates 150 million
from the General fund to the
Water Project fund.
For FY 2025.
Any balance remaining at the end
of the F Y shall not revert to
the General fund.
Some background mystical finance
authority makes grants and loans
from the Water Project Fund for
the project recommended by the
Water Trust board.
To the Legislature. Funding for
the Water Project fund comes
from the annual 9% distribution
of the servants Tax bond.
Along with the annual 4 Million
distribution from the Water
Trust fund.
This year. 115.74 million will
be available from the two
sources for the projects
authorized by the Water Project
Fund.
House Bill 148.
Uh, New Mexico Finance Authority
administers the annual
application cycle on behalf of
the Water Trust board.
Demands the need continued to
rise for water board funding,
and this year and then received
65 applications totally
277 million Well, 65 projects
are included in House Bill 148
And without all Madam chair. I
also have my expert witness. Um,
thank you, Senator. Um, do we
Marquita? Did you want to say
anything before? Good to see
you, Madam Chair? No, thank you.
I think that the senator covered
it. Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
Um, anyone in the audience
supporting this bill?
Okay. Thank you. You want to
come up and briefly make your
comments and then we're going to
go to other another group that
made not support it, But I think
it's a great bill. I think it's
something we do annually and
it's for a good purpose. Thank
you. Alright, state your name
for the record and you can come
out of chairman members of the
committee. My name is dip.
Debbie Hughes and I'm, the
executive director with the New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts.
And we strongly support this
bill. The water trust fund the
soil water districts do a lot of
watershed projects that are
funded through this as well as
some flood prevention projects.
and we really have not had
adequate funding in that fund.
Really, since it's been passed,
so we really appreciate the
funding being added to it. Thank
you.
You. Thank you, Debbie. Alright,
next person. Yes. Good afternoon
again. Madam turn members of the
committee Luis Guerrero with the
circulatory organ. The chapter
representing our 35,000 members
and supporters. We stand in
support of SB 185. We believe
that Water Project fund provides
grants and loans for projects
that are critical to the water
security of our citizens and
communities.
Many of New Mexico small
community water systems are
extremely outdated and in dire
need of updating or replacement
drought, a warm warming, climate
fires and subsequent flooding
has made this aging
infrastructure even more
vulnerable. Funding for these
types of water projects is
particularly important right now
to help make our communities
more resilient to certification.
Changes in climate and
protecting our precious water
resources. So we urge that you
vote yesterday. Thank you. Thank
you. Next person, please. Madam
Chair members of the committee.
Jason s in as a registered
lobbyist with the New Mexico
Coalition and Conservation
districts stand strong support.
Uh, the legislation. The
appropriation that's really
gonna help Watershed projects
around the state. Thank you.
Thank you, Jason. Alright,
Anyone against before we move on
to zoom. I hear we have someone
in Zoom, But do we have anyone
against the bill? Go that route
first.
No one. Great. Thank you. And we
have someone isn't just one
person on zoom to people. All
right. So who is first on the We
have a name appeared. Tim. Okay.
Tim PF Peterson Peterson. Thank
you, Did you good afternoon.
Good afternoon, madam Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Tim Peterson. And I'm
speaking on behalf of the
Lutheran advocacy Ministry of
New Mexico. We also expressed
the position
Of the New Mexico Council of
Churches.
And the Presbyterian Santa Fe
And I'm here to state our
support for Senate Bill 185. We
believe this appropriation will
help bridge the funding gap and
enable many projects for smaller
communities.
We believe that ecologically SP
185 is the right thing for our
state and morally, it is the
right thing for future
generations of new Mexicans.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Next person, please on zoom.
Who is it? Good afternoon
committee chair and chairs.
And sponsor of SB 185. My name
is John Brown. I'm a Franciscan
sister and executive director of
New Mexico and interfaith power
and Light, and many of our faith
leaders and members are very,
very concerned about water and
the situation of sister water
are sacred water and communities
in our state. As we move ever
more deeply into a climate
change, But we are in a water
crisis in many ways, And so this
bill would
Really help.
The situation. We need to have
many tools in many aspects in
addressing water, So thank you
for considering this very
important water Project fund.
Thank you very much for that. Um
okay. Do we have anyone else on
zoom? All right, so we will go
to members. Any comments?
Questions from members that
Senator Sheriff
Thank you, Madam Chair. So in
here, it says you've got 65
applications.
And your fund 30 of them with
this money.
How did we pick the 30?
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator,
So we have funding for 100 and
$15 Million of the 275 million
requested. We believe if we, um
uh
Size the project's sufficiently
they will be able to fund the
entire list. With $150 million
addition to this to the Water
Project fund, So it's in
addition to the money that's
already in the fund for this
year.
This would complete the backfill
this so
Everything that's out there.
Been out there for a while, It
would all be done and then would
only be things in the future
that we would have to come back
for and say We need more money
Mr Chairman from this year's
request, and every year that if
you have a Multiphase project,
you come back each year and
apply for your next phase. But
for the projects listed the 65
projects we believe this would
complete the funding needed for
those 65 projects.
Okay? I just confused because
looking at this, it says 65 out.
65 applications.
English is starting to wane on
me, Um
And can only fund about 30. So
that's That's why I was asking
What 30 of the 65, but you're
saying all 65 can be done. Mr
Chairman with this
appropriation yes, that gets
that completes the amount of
money needed to fund all 65 We
have about 115 million without
this bill, and then Mr Chair of
We were looking at house Bill
148. And that's the list of all
of these things. Mr. Project, Mr
Chairman. That's correct, but
they don't have any price on
him. It's just
These are the projects, but it
doesn't say this project for
$1000 or whatever, Mr Chairman,
that's correct.
All right. Thank you, Mr
Any Senator Bradley
Thank you. Mr Chairman to
clarify you said your funding
all 65. But in that house bill,
you've only listed 55. So you're
adding an additional 10 projects
that's not listed on there. Um,
Mr Chairman, Senator, there are
56 I believe under 55 entities
for 65 projects. There's a
couple of entities that have
multiple projects, and that's
the difference. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, no, I I just
It's kind of an eye opener that
we're pushing for more money in
this
Fine when you have enough money
in there to do the projects that
you need.
And we could have sent her trust
fund.
And save 50 million for this
year, but there was a big push
on the other side to do 50
million more. And you're telling
us what this 150 that you have
enough, Mr Chairman. There's
115 currently appropriated
through the severance tax bonds
and the water Trust fund.
There's $277 million worth of
requests. So this 150 million
Helps complete the number of
projects on house Bill 148. So
without it, we will fund
approximately half of the
projects on on hospital 148 and
then can build them that fast.
How fast can they build a
project? Mr Chairman, we size
the projects to about 2 to 3
years. So if there is we look at
complete phases of projects and
we look to see what they can
complete in a 2 to 3 Year time
period. So if they've got
Multiphase is applied for that
may take them five years we will
cut back their requests.
Understand? Born real quick
because we're real quick, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Marquita
Senator, Um, the other bill,
forgive. I may be conflating.
These things are a little
confused. I just wanted 30.
There was another bill that was
going to expand the purposes of
the fund to cover wastewater and
also allow you flexibility to
fully fund things that have been
partially funded before so
Is that included? Does this
money cover that or that's
separate issue, Mr Chairman that
that's a hospital to 11 entirely
separate. This is for the
projects that appear on house
Bill 148 that applied starting
back in the fall last fall.
That's what this appropriation
would help cover. Does it look
like that Bill is moving that?
Senate Bill. Mr Chairman. It is
on the House floor, probably
tomorrow.
That's a really important, I
think.
Thank you, but probably also,
thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'll
move to pass. A motion by
Sanford is second base center.
Sure.
We call the roll.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator composed. Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Bradley, Senator Brantley Boats?
Yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill Hemphill Boats?
Yes, Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez? Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chairman. Oh's
sports? Yes. You have a do pass
11 to 0. Thank you, Senator and
Marquita. Thank you both.
Representative Dixon Center,
Gonzalez.
And the longer you Tak talked,
the more good afternoon, Mr
Chair. Um, would you like for us
to begin?
Okay, Wonderful. Um so
We're here this afternoon to
present House Bill 177 is
amended Establishes the New
Mexico match fund materials are
being passed out for your
convenience. Um, with me today
is Rebecca Reus, the governor's
infrastructure advisor, and we
also have Wesley Billingsley
from D F a here as well for a
very brief amount of time.
Um, in a nutshell. I think most
of you are aware that, um this
is an unprecedented opportunity
for states and communities to
leverage federal funds. However,
a lot of times our communities
do not have money set aside for
some of the opportunities that
come up quickly. And so the New
Mexico Match fund is designed to
provide our communities our
cities, municipalities.
A way to obtain match funds
contingent on receiving the
federal award. Uh there is
believe $75 million in the
budget for this and
I think with that we would stand
for questions. Thank you. I
noticed you have a couple of
Senate sponsors on here.
Go with the audience. Anybody in
support?
One or two. Come up. We have 200
zoom so
Is there. Anybody in opposition?
Members of the committee. My
name is Debbie Hughes with the
Association of Conservation
Districts currently here in
Santa Fe, Pewaukee Salt Water
Conservation District are
sponsors of several dams. One of
them is just above Chimayo. We
have $22 million in federal
money. If we can come up with
the state match, we have asked
for a million dollars through
Water Trust board.
We're still short $6 million
This damn protects that the area
of Chimayo so we're in great
support of this, and we hope
that we can help utilize this to
bring that $22 million to New
Mexico. Mr. Chair members of the
committee. My name is Michael
Leon Guerrero.
I'm with the center Pacific
policy. I first want to thank
our sponsors of this bill. I
also want to thank Rebecca Reus
for her work on this. This bill
was developed based on the
feedback.
From staff at the FAA from
councils of government from
municipalities, counties, many
tribal communities throughout
the state.
Um, and many of them are already
doing amazing work and getting
federal grants out into
communities, But they all
identified a number of problems
and obstacles and being able to
do that more effectively. The
match grant is one having
capacity Grant management and
grant writing, um, cost overruns
and also time constraints in
terms of getting
The federal grants and being
able to implement them. So HB
177 actually addresses all of
these problems and gives these
communities the tools that they
need and resources to be able to
more effectively get these
federal resources into our
communities. And of course, the
return on investment could be
very, very significant. So,
really urge your support and
thank you for your thank you.
We're gonna go to zoom, Wesley.
This is your creation causes
problem.
That's what he just said. Uh
Two ones and give me your name.
One minute.
Very cool.
Mr Chairman and members of the
committee. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. Um, HB 177 is all
about smart money. The creation
of $100 million matching fund
for use by state local Indian
agencies to secure federal
funding for much needed
projects. Think repair of
existing and construction of new
roads and highways, bridges,
water systems and other high
dollar and a high priority.
Infrastructure needs, ensuring
our villages, towns, Cities,
counties, water associations,
blows and more have their
required matching funds to
leverage. Federal dollars is
just smart Money. The Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges the committee to pass HB
177. Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee.
Man. That was a lot of talk from
an urban city that supports
rural New Mexico next.
When you got one minute.
When, once thank you, Mr Chair
and committee members. My name
is Glen Shift. Bauer. I'm the
executive director for the Santa
Fe Green Chamber of Commerce and
New Mexico. Sustainable
business. We have also been
fortunate to receive a sub award
from New Mexico State University
for the EPA's environmental
justice initiatives.
Um, the money that we are
getting through. That is going
to, uh, develop a thriving
communities Technical Assistance
Center, which as Mr Guerrero
mentioned is going to help all
these disadvantaged communities,
of which there are many in New
Mexico about 50% of the census
block.
Access These funds that are
coming from the I R A and the B
I l
$600 million from the EPA for
thriving communities and $2
billion in community change
grounds. That's a lot of money
and if we can match that
Even greater than the 50 million
up to 100 million. That's that
much more money that is left.
Um, that isn't left on the
table. So we support HB 177 and
hope that you will, um
Um, bonded to it. The fullest.
Thank you very much.
Any questions from committee
members, Senator Combos, Mr
Chair. The only thing I would
like to do is to go to make a
motion whenever it's time.
That's already it's time. Thank
you very much. Mr Chairman,
members of the Senate Finance
Committee and again to you have
ice chair Dixon. Thank you very
much for your vision to our
governor as she continues to
help us with the economy with
that being said I moved house
Bill 177 is one cemented.
Second emotion by center
composting.
They can't buy.
Media.
Senator Bert
Yes, Senator. Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost Compost votes.
Yes, Senator Bradley.
Yes, Senator Brantley votes.
Yes, Senator Gonzales? Yes,
Gonzales buds. Yes, Senator
Hemphill, Senator Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes. Votes? Yes, Senator
Scherer, Senator Sherrod Boats?
Yes, Senator Stein, born
born boats. Yes, Senator Woods,
Senator Woods Boats? Yes. Vice
Chair. Rodriguez? Yes. Rodriguez
Fosse votes. Yes, Chairman Yeo's
Yes, those
Votes. Yes. You have a thank
you, Mr Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you.
representative. Look forward to
counting those credits. We have
negotiations without you're not
Let your
Remind your chair about the
credits from last year Senator
neighbor
We're gonna have a hearing on
this bill and talk about it.
We're still waiting on one more
thing with House Bill two. We
think we may get it before we
end committee, But we're waiting
to see
Senator. November You have a
committee substitute.
Explain the bill and then
Yes, sir. And I know that
You all are wanting us to be
short. So I will be very brief.
Not gonna vote. We're just going
to discuss this bill and then
Yes, we have submitted a
committee some basically for the
last 65 years.
The state of New Mexico's
collected a small tax on
production for purposes of
reclamation and plugging.
Unfortunately, over the years of
state is used that money for
other purposes other than its
intended purpose, and what we're
trying to do is to allow the
reclamation fund to achieve a
sustainable balance.
Was sufficient monies to plug
and reclaim the oil and gas
sites that
Or abandoned by
Operators who
Cannot be found or are insolvent
and cannot attend to those.
We think that that's a very
small percentage of the
operators out there. Most
operators are good stewards and
plug their wells and reclaim the
property. But there are some
that do not and this fund is set
up to take care of that and
working with the oil
conservation division director,
Um we've we've
Are calling for a 60 or $80
million rollover that won't
revert to the state general
fund to keep sufficient monies
in this fun for ongoing
operations dedicates $5 million
a month to to do that, we pushed
back the effective date because
the
Director, uh, need some time to
to implement the procedures to
do this and when it's in force,
uh, we're hoping that it will
provide resources for about 200
wells per year to be plugged by
the state of New Mexico and the
sites reclaimed to my left is
Matt Thompson. Uh,
He's my expert, and I believe
the OECD directors here as well,
if you have any questions
Matt? Yeah, Chairman members. I
think Senator neighbor covered
it.
Acting secretary. You want to
tell us your position on this
bill? Uh Dylan Fuge, acting
Secretary of Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department, appreciate the
additional funding provided by
the questions for a community
from Committee, Man. Mr. Chair.
Can you address what were those
concerns?
And the that you stated
Mr Chair, Senator the original
draft of the bill, uh, had some
references to federal money We
don't put we don't put federal
plugging funds in the wreck
fund. We segregate state and
federal funding for for various
reasons. Um, and it had a
complete reversion at the end of
each fiscal year, which made
committing to longer term, more
expensive projects trickier. And
so that's why we worked. Uh,
On both the cap with the sponsor
and the removal of references to
the federal funds. Okay, Thank
you, mr Chair. So to be fair,
those changes have been made and
you're fully supportive of the
bill.
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh,
Senator. Yes, the changes and
concerns that we had were made
and we certainly appreciate
additional resources coming into
the wreck fund to support this
work. Perfect. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
No, We're just having a hearing
on the bill.
I think I wanted. So does this
fix our problem?
Plugging wells.
Fiscal responsibility. Bill do
that.
Um, uh, Mr Chair, uh, in energy
view. Um, As we testified in
Senate conservation, this would
be an important piece of the
puzzle, however, because we do
not and never have done full
cost bonding across oil and gas.
It's a
Uh, it's it's one important
tool, but not, uh, not, in our
view, the exclusive tool
What were the other tools and
Bob? The, um, the other
Um, Mr Chair. The other tools
would be, um
Uh, additional bonding held by
operators dealing with sort of
larger disruptions, as opposed
to dealing with ongoing work.
And has I know how are bonding
is that we bond a lot of
projects Have you ever
To call on the bond and got
paid.
Mr Share? Yes, we have.
And how much was it Bond form?
What is it?
Uh, Mr Chair. Unfortunately, the
most recent one we forfeit was
Uh, for the 600 wells in the K
no field, and the only bond they
were required to hold was
$160,000 Bond. I've reclaimed
$161,339, which was the total
value of that bond.
And how much is it cost?
Reclaim or plug each well.
Mr Chair. The
300 state and fee wells in the
K. No field will probably cost
Somewhere in the vicinity to
30 to $65 million. When we're
done, they have some large tank
batteries that were remediating.
I seen something elsewhere.
Well, how much does it cost to
plug? Not a well, experts.
Uh, regular oil well with no
other issues.
Uh, Mr Chair, it can cost as
little as $50,000.
But we've seen costs as high as
$350,000. And I'm emergency
deploying cruise to well outside
jail That sprang, um
Produced water like a fountain.
Um, and that site will be
significantly more expensive
than the 50.
And how much is the bond on
that? Well,
Uh, Mr Chair the bonding in that
on That operator, I believe is
about 75,000 total, so it won't
cover our response costs for
this for the well, we're dealing
with
In the foreseeable future. I
mean, I guess, tell me how they
Yeah. Uh, Mr Chair In its
simplest form, they're going to
cut the wellhead off. We're
bringing in a rig that's capable
of deploying what we call heavy
mud. It's mud made with very
briny water to suppress the
pressure coming in and get it
down. And then once we get the
well controlled, will put in
plugs at each interval, So
you've isolated, isolated it and
moved it forward. And once you
have it plugged in contained you
deal with surface cleanup.
So I guess how many wells? Do
you think, uh, Mr Chair? We have
17 we have about 1900 wells that
we know are orphaned. Um and
Just with our experience in the
oil and gas industry, some
percentage of the active wells
today about 70
1000 will be orphaned in the
future. Um, there's not a
precise formula to say how many,
but there will be a percentage
that are orphaned.
And are those percentages
weight? Heavenly, uncertain.
People like you have a
I heard this one time and
Senator Nado is here. Bad
actors, right? You have a
classification Say Well, we know
This company over
Uh um, Mr Chair.
Obviously.
We have facilities and
operations that we pay more
attention to the not but
circumstances that lead to
orphanage or more complex than
that. You can have a sudden drop
in commodity prices. Uh, you can
have, you know operators.
Run it varying scales of
capitalization and other and
other components. So again,
there's not a firm predictive
model of who's likely to do it.
And again, the Keino field that
I mentioned earlier they were
publicly traded. I believe on
the S and P before they went
belly up, and that was that was
related to price circumstance.
um, and not even necessarily
particularly poor operations.
There's time board. Thank you,
Mr Chair, Self director. So you
were or assistant secretary or
forgive. What's your acting?
Assisting the second? Alright.
Um, thank you for your work on
this and and, um
So
Thank you for talking about the
differential between the bond.
And what the true costs are one
thing we didn't talk about it.
Sometimes the remediation needed
on a site that's had
A lot of surface spills.
Contamination. How much can
those costs run if remediation
reclamation is needed on a site
aside from the capping, Mr
Chair, Senator, those those can
run into the millions for a
large tank battery, depending on
the conditions, spills
historical releases. The two I'm
working on now are in the
millions.
Very much appreciated the $80
million sort of holding the fun
because it allows us to commit
to those projects, right And and
the 80 Million or the millions
of dollars of reclamation. Is
there any extra fund that we
collect from operators that
covers that? Or is that also
supposed to be taken care of by
the $50,000 bond?
Or whatever.
Uh, Mr Chair? Um
Um, Senator, we can use money.
We forfeited a bond for plugging
cleanup and remediation and
under the existing wreck fund,
we can use money for cleanup and
remediation. Historically, the
Legislature had appropriated us
about 3.5 million a year. That's
changed in recent years. Larger
dollar amounts allow us to make
commitments to larger projects.
Thank you. And so since we are
so prolific right now, Mr Chair
obviously you have lots of new
wells coming along. Center. I
know you're
You're chomping to say
something. Let me just spend out
of question here real quick And
then you could
Can you answer? You know, I if
you compel this issue this
differential we have over all
the new wells coming online and
what will then ultimately you
orphan that we need to cap or
whatever.
What is the kind of unfunded
mandate to the state of New
Mexico to cap all these things
over? I know you looking like 50
year timelines.
You look in long timelines, but
like over the next 50 years over
the life of these wells, capping
and what is the differential
there over what we're going to
have to pay for what we're
collecting in Bonds? Uh, Mr
Chair, Senator. My hope is with
additional resources in the O.
C, D and deliberate upping of
our rate of plugging and
reclamation paired alongside
Plugging and reclamation work
that occurs by industry. Um,
industry averages anywhere
between 375 to 700 Wells a year
that we will be able to both,
um, address the known orphan
well issues and and and bring
down the risk of creation of
them in in the future. Um and
And have the necessary kind of
insurance policies in place to
deal with risks that we can't
foresee today.
Do you want us seven. Mr Chair
and Senator Steinberg, the
This past year, Uh, state of New
Mexico is collected about $115
million on this tax.
This bill would call for 60
million to go into this fund and
dedicated solely for this
purpose. So you know, I would
argue that that the amount of
money collected for this purpose
is going to the state that it
should be sufficient to take
care of this. And had we done
that. For the last 65 years, we
would have
A huge amount of money to take
care of all those liability, but
that's not what's happened. So
we're just trying to take
basically a portion of the
monies that's collected in this
tax and make sure it gets
dedicated for this purpose and
give those resources to the OECD
to take care of these.
Orphaned wells that are not
being plugged by a responsible
industry party.
Thank you, senator. And thank
you for for the bill, and uh and
working with the department. I
mean, clearly this
Yeah, It's great that we're
having all this economic
activity, but we should also be
aware that we're creating a huge
liability to fight financial
liability to state which I think
director When you testified our
interim committee, it's pretty
astounding when you work out the
numbers over 50 years. I mean,
it almost as a billion dollars.
Um
That's a pretty big unfunded.
And a, um to the taxpayers to
clean up that mess, so it's
really the bonding issue and
updating those things are really
crucial, um, really crucial and
really should be considered the
cost of doing business to clean
up. What is
Can be a pretty dirty
He doesn't so
In the sense of ecologically, so
I appreciate it and appreciate
the discussion in the bill.
Thank you, Mr Jim.
Page two line 20.
Can you explain to me?
Why we're gonna revert 80
million. We're going to hold the
funded 80 million, but we're
gonna revert the rest. What
could the fun go to that?
Well.
Mr Cherif. I made that the
The fund right now is all going
or the monies collected are all
going to the General fund. By
and large, So we're just trying
to take 5 million a month.
And of course, it has to be
appropriated by this body and
house Bill two.
But takes 5 million a month,
which is 60 million a year
dedicated out of that last year.
$115 million to let the agency
Perform this work.
We want an $80 million
carryover not revert. The
original bill called for all of
the money remaining. That was
unexpended to go back to the
General fund.
We're just trying to build this
fund up so that the director
will have sufficient funds
you're in and year out to take
care of maybe some of the more
expensive cleanups that he's
identified tank batteries, some
others surface facilities, not
just plugging of wells.
You tell me what it take
batteries, so I know I just
don't know what thank battery is
is a place where
Oil from one or more wells is
stored on location and maybe
piped to a pipeline may be
collected by trucks. Uh, it's
held there for a time before.
It's uh move via pipeline or
truck to another location. So
In, uh In many instances, you'll
have
Large tank batteries that serve
many, many wells in other
locations. You'll have one tank
battery for one well just to
store the the
Product on a temporary basis
until the truck can come by and
and take it from this storage
facility.
What is it cost? How much do you
think you need in that fun?
My last question.
Uh um.
Um, um, Mr Chair. I think we
felt like, um
The $80 million With money
coming in. It's sort of a steady
clip clock each month, assuming
HB two had sort of a parallel
appropriation to allow us to
spend up to those kind of income
levels would spread the resource
needs, Um, over time. Um ah, and
because it was a
Potentially at least in the near
term of recurring revenue
stream. We felt like this is a
level that was commensurate with
our ability to to to deploy it,
and the rig crews and
remediation crews. We've been
able to sign up.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you committee.
As quick as we can get this
done.
Questions anybody in the
audience and support
Anybody in opposition.
Seen none.
Any questions from committee
members.
See none. We have motion for do
pass by senator share seconded
by
Senator Woods.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator. Company? Yes.
votes. Yes, Senator Bradley,
Senator Bradley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzales. Gonzales
Votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill?
Yes. Votes? Yes. Senator. By the
yes votes. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator share votes? Yes,
Senator Stein. Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes? Yes. Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes. Yes, Chairman
News
Yes.
Germany or Sports? Yes, you have
a do pass 10, 0. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you. We're going
to try to get the house Bill two
tomorrow. We have to get it
done.
We do have a glitch in our
system.
And we're trying to figure out
where Excel talks to the
spreadsheets and sends it over.
They've been working in my
office all day by hand trying to
get that figured out, so we
cannot do House Bill two until
