Through the FAA, and they're
pretty much spotless and good to
go. So in total, the Senate will
be appropriating.
33.6 million through this growth
process, and, um
In essence, If you all would
like to make a motion, we can
send this over to drafting a K
Lfc to get added into House Bill
two.
Um
And then the second
Spreadsheet you have, which is
salmon tan colored up top.
Basically captures the
appropriations that will need to
go to the cogs in order to be
able to handle the volume of all
the grow appropriations from
both the Senate and the House.
Ah, um you will also in a few
days have to adopt the house
version of the appropriations
are currently in their final
stages of vetting through D F A.
But they're almost done and
ready. Given the volume. It's
important for us to get those to
lfc sooner rather than later.
Um, that way they have enough
time to
Get them into the bill. They'll
all be in the same section.
Which would be Section nine.
And then, um, sorry.
Ah, and then they will all end
up.
And in that section
So with that, madam chair, I'll
send for any questions.
Or if you all can make a motion,
we can wrap it up. Okay. Thank
you. Yes. Thank you, Senator.
And just one second. Adrian, do
you need a motion to okay this
list right now so you can
proceed to get better share.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So
on the
Um
On there, it says a line number
four Eastern Plains Council of
Government then over it.
Percentage admin fee. Does that
mean no money goes to the
projects or very little, anyway?
Madam chair members of the
committee, so the idea is that
the cogs will not receive or
pull any money from the projects
individually. This is a separate
appropriation to cover the admin
fee for, um
Being able to scale up and do
everything in relation to to
grow so that specific
appropriation to Eastern Plains
Council
Is substantial, but
Currently, their operations are
so small to be able to do any of
this. They would need to
actually bring in and then house
accountant even though it's a
small amount, But this will also
increase our capacity. So this
way during the next round of
potential grow if you all decide
to do it again, um they will
have the capacity to take on a
lot more and to be able to
support those communities.
Okay throughout the year.
Thank you, Madam. Senators time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Adrian,
Um
Okay, So this is going in the
house bill to correct and you're
trying to get it in over on the
house side.
Before they pass it.
Ah, Madam Chair. No, it'll be in
the Senate side. It will be a
Senate a minute. Alright. I just
want to make sure that we're
accurate. That's the main thing
And so I mean, we could always
approve it and send it on today.
But my preference is that
somehow a list is distributed.
Everyone gets to check their
projects and make sure that
we're correct.
So if we send it on now, ones
are opportunities. There's that
may exist. Of course, Madam
Chair Stein born So the idea is
we get it to them. They then
produced the draft and we'll
cross reference and have those
printouts for you. So before
we've got the bill out of this
committee, everyone will hold
seen that their appropriations
are in there. So now I'm chair
radio and there will be an
opportunity to fix mistakes.
Past this point.
Uh, only technical mistakes.
Madam Chair and Senator
Steinberg.
One you might remember last year
at a project that didn't even
make the list, which was a
little more than a technical
mistake, and we had to add it,
so I just, you know, mistakes
get made human nature so
So that's my only reluctance to
passing out and Adam chair is,
you know, we need to be able to
better work and
As long as that opportunity
exists. I'm happy passing it
So can we expand the definition
of technical mistakes to include
projects excellently left off
the list.
Madam Chair. Yes. If it's a
project that originally was
submitted and was approved
throughout this entire process
on the Senate side and during
the drafting at LFC, a project
is omitted for whatever
technical reason or human error
that is an acceptable fix.
Alright. What we would call a
technical fix. Okay? And then,
um, man cherry during. Did you
say that DNA has looked at these
projects.
Correct, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinberg.
Interesting. That's good. And so
they presumably signed off on
all of them. Madam Chair,
Senator sign born. So D F A only
came back with two small
technical changes, otherwise,
all the language and everything
else is perfectly good on their
front.
Okay, That's enough to work.
Sure. Thank you. Okay, I'm now
This is
For a moment. I thought I
understood. And then I went
blank. So help me Adrian on the
grow. Is this part of the junior
that we what we used to know as
junior before? Thank you. Now,
um
The okay then that would be fine
on that. But I'm wondering if it
is the under the one in the
cause of the 10 looking salmon
colored one
Where would I find the funding
for the homeless shelter that I
put in, for example from Junior?
of course. So madam chair that
specific appropriation would be
under one of the cost us. I
believe it would go to the north
Central Cog. Okay, but it's not
in here to find directly in
here. It would be in your purple
red sheet on Page three.
The Purple One. Sorry. Green
Green Green one. Thank you then.
Okay, we can see pretty good
colors. Adrian. Right. Okay,
let's see. It's it between lines
97 and 111 it be one of those
line 107. Madam Chair.
I found two of them.
So thank you. Yes, I'm sure it's
in here. You remember the three
we worked on? I gave you so
they're all trust. You know
they're in here. I just have two
of them back today. But thank
you. Does anyone else have any
questions or woods and anyone
else before we moved
Senator, you can proceed? Yes.
Thank you, madam. Chair
chairwoman and Adrian from way.
This came back to me.
I gave language.
And my language wasn't quite
right.
So
It came back to my office.
And the language. They said. We
suggest that you change the
language to do it.
You know the same concept. Same
everything, but maybe a
different
Word or two in there, and I'm
assuming that's what you did for
ever Senator
Ever Senator.
Submitted their request to you.
You double checked language.
And went back to them both on
They called or the whatever here
And then
You submitted language, and now
it's been checked out by the
D F A. And so
It's pretty close to
Ready to be submitted. I mean,
it's
As far as you know, it's ready
to be submitted.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods? Yes,
that is accurate. So every
senator and representatives
submitted their initial language
staff vetted that language along
with council service, and we
went back to the senators who
had issues or needed a little
bit of tweaking to make the
appropriation work.
Got their sign off.
Right and then
Fix the spreadsheet with that
those changes and that's red.
She was sent over to the FAA.
And the FAA only came back with
two small suggestions and the
spreadsheet you have in front of
you addresses those two issues,
If if
As the chairman did, if there is
a question on our personal
stuff.
If we don't see our personal
stuff in there now is the time
to bring it up.
Ah, Mr Chair. Everything should
be in there and what we will do
is we will have a print out here
and we'll get them all to the
floor. Um, from this spreadsheet
of everyone's personal stuff, so
you can see that it was in here.
Okay? And and I'm just trying to
address Senator Stein Burns.
Reluctance because I want to
make sure your stuff is in here.
As you wanted it to be directed
as as every other senator has
And and but I know also
It's ticktock.
Pick talk we we've got. We're
running against the calendar and
We have to move things along.
I'm just saying.
Uh,
However, you want to move
My stuff is in here.
I'm happy with it. Well, it's
worded.
Um, I'd be ready for emotion.
But if some other members not
ready for more great chair to
all right, Senator Woods, let me
but the allocation for the civil
legal services. Is that working
the FAA to the Civil Legal
Services fund, so that would be
in here. Yes. So, Madam Chair
lines nine through 12 are four
different appropriations that
all will be consolidated to one.
For civil legal services. Yes,
and it was right in the much and
I don't have any further
questions that time both
s O. What's seconded any apart
and harder and harder the way
you always do. Thank you. Thank
you. Appreciate you. Thank you.
Alrighty. So what else do we
have this morning? We've got
Senate Bill 153 early childhood
fund transfers feel him.
Senator. Thank you, and you can
proceed. And of course, Kelly.
Good morning. Thank you, madam.
So Madam Chair Senate Bill 153
is an LFC endorsed bill and it
increases the distribution from
155 million to 250 million to be
transferred from the early
Childhood Trust fund to the CD
in
F Y 25, and that will allow for
additional investment in early
childhood policies. The annual
district district Uh
dispersement is determined by a
three year average amount this
year is, um lower, so we want to
increase the distribution for
Um, investments and childcare
assistant tribal services.
Okay? Yeah. Childcare assistance
with everyone should have a
sheet with those
Um additional investments
childcare assistance rate and
eligibility. Um, Childcare
assistance, infant and toddler
contracts. Um, I t system and
program support home visiting
prekindergarten through the list
and pre k X without Madam chair.
We stand for questions.
Thank you very much. Senator.
Any questions on this Bill?
Senator Woods?
Just a quick question, Madam
chairman.
Um, so this this amount is
appropriated in the present.
House Bill two.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, That's and thank
you, Madam chair. Sure, Thank
you, Senator. And this is, um
merely to transfer funds from
the from the trust fund into the
program fund to to be able to
make up the what's needed this
year. Thank you, Senator anyone
else?
Second by Senator Stein born.
Okay, you gotta do pass. Thank
you, Kelly and Senator. Thank
you, madam. Present my bills.
This was too good fast. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. I think we
have to do a roll call on the
belt. I thought went to the next
item immediately. So
Go ahead, Elaine, You want to
proceed? Just vote on them
because it's a bill? Yes. So can
we just do Okay, Let's go. Let's
start. I'll go ahead and do it.
Let's go, Senator.
Yes, we're gonna do a roll call
and so on This last bill, we
just passed. So Senator Woods,
Can we start from that side
Senator? Vote? Yes, Senator
Bert.
Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Unanimous
Vote. Thank you for reading you.
That's a good idea. Thank you.
Okay, we're done, okay?
Alright, madam Chair members of
the committee, so we were asked
to come in my name is Eric
senior Lfc analyst for the hell
con El analysts for, um, were
asked to come in today and just
kind of go through, Uh, high
level.
Uh, between HFC and lfc and kind
of get areas that you may want
to add something in or just kind
of give you an idea of where we
landed in HFC and so
Um, you should see a hand out in
front of you that looks like
this. It's just it's just the
budget there.
Um, and you'll see that there's
a on the second to last column
There. There's a HFC column.
Um, and that's what was passed
out of HFC the other day.
And then
You'll see that it's also line
numbered all the way down in the
HFC column, you'll see uh what I
did. There was highlight for
you.
The changes between the LFC
recommendation patients so you
can kind of see where money was
added or taken away.
And then also in that last call
between the HFC recommendation
and the first column, which is
the H S D.
January projection, which
Um and so just jumping in here,
you'll see online three there,
uh, where it's line numbered.
Ah!
The January projection showed a
$40.1 million
Um, Red, uh, basically a
surplus and so we adjusted the
base down.
For FY 23.
And so that gave us a little bit
more. Um, and so we were able to
add back in, um some pieces and
then adjust the line six. There.
We went back to match the, um
for maternal and child health
and other physical health
services. We went back and met.
Um, you'll see that we went up
on adjusting face three
providers rates, so those are
the
Providers that you know we've
been doing rate adjustments for
folks in Medicaid, you know,
the um providers and Medicaid.
And this group had not gotten a
rate adjustment yet. And so this
is an adjustment up to 100% of,
um
We also increased the
maintaining great parody for
phase one and two providers, so
that's maintaining the rate with
Medicare. So we're, um
You know, staying at we adjusted
so
That's that, um, moving on. We
also had online's 18 through 20.
Some, uh, some increases for
Program, inflation, inflation,
um, medical care costs and lump
sum payments.
Um, online 22. You'll see. We
added in just $97,000, but this
was actually to increase pay
parity for
Non physician practitioners. So
this is like the physician's
assistants and clinical nurse
specialists and the anesthetist.
And so we added that in
Um, we just on the revenue side
of things, we increase some
other revenue. So, um, fund
balances from the tobacco
Revenue Fund or the tobacco
program fund.
Um
And then we also increased a
little bit for medical
assistance.
I think that the secretary of
that
And there's probably other
opportunities and there for
that. If you're
On the D D waiver program
growth, some jumping down to the
sea. We added about 4 million
and therefore program growth.
You'll also see online 51 that
we added another 8.6 million.
In there, And so that's enough
between that line.
48 and that line 51.
That's enough to add about 90.
So if you'll remember the last
couple of years we've been kind
of chipping, Uh,
Jumping down the line 58. We
added more info. That's that's
another chunk. They're moving on
to the next page. Uh, we added
And this is actually I forgot to
re number this line, but between
lines 101 and 102.
We had a 5 million and 10 if
revenue
Um
We added more infra program
support jumping along.
And then you'll see at the total
there in the back on the last
page.
Um, we added back
That last page,
So if you look online, 155
Mhm, Madam Chair and and
Senator.
You'll see that the lfc was, um
1.95 billion
In general fund.
And now we're at 1.963. So a
little over 1212. I'm bored.
Thank you, ma'am. Chair.
Morning. Y'all. Thanks for the
briefing. Question. The
The secretary made me aware of a
deficiency in their facilities.
Which is $7 million. Madam chair
was so just for a point of
clarification. Would you like to
stay on healthcare Authority? Or
would you like me now? Two
questions. How would you prefer
this to go? I can wait if I just
thought it was included in this
is it? Yeah, we have to. Eric is
going to talk about HC a
Medicaid all those programs and
then I have department. What is
that? All right, Senator with
you. Why don't we just go ahead
and stay on the on the
healthcare authorities, But I do
have a question on what you
already
Presented and if he if it has to
do specifically is strictly with
D O h, always also, But you
mentioned Eric, Um the 100%
100% of the Medicare rates is
what we're going to increase the
provider rate.
I thought it was 100. We did
120% 150% underpaid. So, Madam
chair, so we did, so we did.
We increased some of the rates
up to 120% so maternal and child
health, um up to 120%, but there
were other items in there.
That
Were left out of that rate
adjustment. And so we're
bringing those you know it was
kind of legislature decided to
raise certain rates right and so
are the ones that were left out
bringing them and I will be
right with you, Senator. But
when we're help me understand,
Eric that when we bring him up
to 100%, shouldn't they also be
at 100? So last year? Everybody
else's rates were increased for
120.
The Medicare, you know,
benchmark to Medicare and child
health, physical health.
This year what the agency
requested, um providers or was
provided We supported that lfc
supported. Like I said, I was
there a move at all to increase.
even the 120% side up to that
madam chair, and that's that's
correct. If you look here at the
maternal and child that extra
$21 million there
And that's to raise those
providers up to on the D D
waiver. You did.
How many people did you say we
would be taking off the waiting
list right now? Well, madam
chair said there was no waiting
list. We have chipped away at it
over the last few years, and,
um, there's not really waiting
list. There's still some folks
that are that were on the
waiting list that are working.
They're still kind of working,
and now we're adding, um, enough
for about 19, okay?
Thank you. Eric and I had
requested it's been already a
couple of years when the list
had requested to get a list of
the individuals on the that had
been
Lingering there. I think it took
12 years to get these
individuals, multiple impaired
individuals off the waiting list
12 years and there was a list of
approximately six. I was always
bringing that up as to what is
it that's holding him up? Well,
then suddenly asked. Why, at
that time
Why so many? And, um I was going
to get a reason explained to me
and where these people are who
followed up with them. I wanted
to make sure they weren't just
dropped off the list and and
No way to speak for themselves.
And because these people are
meant they have seven severe and
several can hear. Many don't
have parents or providers, and
they try to work it out as they
can themselves, But I didn't
know if there was any Eric and
if you don't have it now, maybe
off line can talk. I want to
know what happened to these
people to make sure they're just
not out just to reduce the list
and the numbers so that
There there. Don't Madam share
When we created the health care
authority. We moved just now
picking up this program. But
Kelly here has history on it. So
she wanted Kelly just briefly,
And then I'm gonna go H four.
Thank you Don't care if you
might remember last year we were
able to do a comprehensive
financial plan that we was a
real kind of opportunity that we
had never seen in this state
where Arpaio funds allowed us to
match federal funds and federal
funds, which is
Like, never happens.
And allowed us to get a big part
of federal funds to bring
everybody off the wait list and
to allow them to enter into
services. And then it was a
financial plan to then wean off
those one time federal funds and
increased General fund each year
to then cover it in a way that
the state could afford. So
that's where we are now a
significant portion of
individuals have
Started to receive services.
Some of them are just going
through the process of going
through the paperwork, some
individuals they department was
not able to get into contact
with, but there is an ability
for those individuals to come
back and sign up again and then
hopefully move into services
very quickly. And then if not,
um,
There is also opportunities for
them to, um throughout
administrative hearings process
can test that They lost their
spot. But we in this area
recommendation have money for
new individuals who may have not
ever been on the waiting list to
come on again and to start
receiving services to hopefully
never have a true waiting list
again, Other than the point of
like signing the paperwork to
receiving service sensitive
Thank you so much for your work
on that, Kelly that when those
severely impaired unable to
speak or hear and have other
developmental delays were off
the list so sudden that they
can't call back. I don't have
any services suddenly to do
that, and they don't have the
hearing to do that other ways.
physically, so I just didn't
know who would be following up
with them.
I In a nutshell. Again Just want
to make sure that in the DD
waiver division now that it's
moved that we don't lose track
of that, and whoever is the new
division director question that
I have and concerns online 58
You talked about health be
Um
Provide a rate increases.
So I know that we had a
Discussion in in some group and
I think it was the behavioral
health People said. Oh, no, We
didn't get that.
That rate increase. We only got
5% rate increase.
This. This is this.
That this fix it. This is a rate
adjustment on top of that. And I
know, um, I know that there has
been kind of a slow roll out of
some of the rate increases that
we did last year into this year.
Um
And you know, and so we are
following up.
How they are implemented.
Ensuring that these rates
For November to get some of
those were looking at kind of
working on more. Another group.
the home health providers.
Um
So there was the
Community benefit providers.
I believe I believe those are
the same providers, Um
That's you'll see those on. All
right. Thank you, madam. Thank
you, Senator. We have Senator
Korea. Hemphill. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for the
presentation. My question is
about an increasing
reimbursements for, um,
providers. I think there was an
increase for primary care
providers. Is that correct? What
was that increase that that's
included Madam Chair. Million?
Um and Madam chair. What would
it have cost to increase?
Um, reimbursements for rural
providers. My concern is in
rural communities. It's much
more costly to operate clinic.
We have some really high quality
clinics in southwestern New
Mexico, Um
For an example. Southwest bone
and joint that provides a lot of
high quality quality supports
and services for our community
and the reimbursement rates are
just not keeping up with the
cost that they're having to
expend. So is there a way that
we can get even burst mint for
rural providers recognizing
those additional costs they
incur?
And Madam chair and Senator just
to kind of point out so online
eight. You'll see, uh, f k Q HC.
So those are the federally
qualified health centers. And
so, madam chair and thank you
for your response. So that's for
all providing that's for this
rule providers. Yeah, federally
Dealy waiver clients, so I just
want to put on the radar that we
need to make sure we're
providing dot additional
outreach to make sure people are
being taken off the list without
providing those services that
there is adequate Munich ation
to make sure that there wasn't
an issue there.
And I'll just give my example
Um
So my son has been on the
waiting list. He was on the
waiting list for a year he was
provided DD waiver support. Um,
finally when he was 16
He's going to be 28.
And March and after
Many, many years being on the DD
waiver. We submitted all of our
paperwork. There are many, many
parts and pieces that have to be
so and I'm a senator. I have a
master's degree in school
psychology. Um, I've worked in
the public schools for 30 years.
I know how to meet deadlines. I
submitted all the paperwork on
time like I do every single
year.
And we were notified that his he
was dropped from the day. The
waiver.
So
Yes, that can happen to me. I
know that it's happening to
other families. I'm grateful for
the leadership of, um those in
the developmental disability
department who are able to
eventually get him re put back
in and the paperwork completed.
But
If I didn't have those phone
numbers, you know if I wasn't
here, which someday I'm not
going to be in my son's going to
have to figure out how to
navigate this, and if it brings
me to tears every single year
trying to navigate the red tape.
I don't have, um, the same
ability that I have. So I want
to make sure that those
Supports are there for every
single family because these are
the most vulnerable Children and
families and
Thank you, Senator for that, And
we've got Sanders Stein born.
Thank you. That's a really good
point. Senator Temple and I know
I've had constituency through
the years and we had the
backlog really struggled with
the system, and it's totally
understandable how some people
would fall through the cracks.
Give up whatever. I think it
makes complete sense justice.
feedback to the department. I
realized it's not your job.
But
Um as feedback we should give to
the department directly that
It's great that we've caught up.
I mean, that was a great
achievement for New Mexico
government, but it would be
worthwhile to do a look back.
Maybe just audit people that
were served to make sure there
aren't some that fell through
the cracks. That's all because
the need is probably still
there, and you have a lot of
struggling family members who
are just tired, you know, trying
to help out their loved ones.
So, um
I have a question, though not
related to anything, you said,
But more like a bigger policy
issue, and you can tell me if
we're doing anything about it.
You know when we passed the bill
couple years ago, center hit a
real health is it's
And on
On certain insured people.
Um
It would seem to me especially
with also with what's going on
with our kids and covid and
drill health providers that we
need to be doing more to recruit
behavioral health providers to
the state. I'm just wondering.
Is there anything in here for
provider
Expansion dealing with
behavioral health providers,
Madam Chair and Senator, I think
you know, it's been kind of a
big push over the last couple of
years to expand, Um, you know,
education for providers.
There's also a little bit in
here for, uh
Rural precept ear's. We've got a
million in there for basically
for teaching new docks as they
come out.
Um, there's also
And I have to go back in my
memory Banks, Behavioral health?
Actually, I think Mr Jorgensen
can kind of help out on this.
Um, Mr Chairman. There is $15
million for health, professional
loan repayment. Health
professionals are pretty broad
term and generally speaking,
would cover a lot of, um
A lot of occupations related to
great
That's great.
That answers that question. I
know. Uh, it's great that
apparently, we're adding funding
to create more analyst
positions, Health analyst
positions in LFC and some of
these things, So that's all I
have, Hampshire. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, madam Chair thing
here.
Apologize for walking a little
bit late. I was working on
another bill. Um
Can you point to me where it
would be for the
Home modification.
Would that be 47 or
Hmm. Uh, madam Chair, Senator,
I'd have to get back to you on
that, Um
Well, it's set out think we were
at was sorted by 1.5 million.
That's what they needed to
fulfill.
Thank you, Senator. Proceed.
Sure, I think you dropped from
him.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Madam
chair and Senator, I have to
think so back, maybe in a
different agency. I have to go
back. And maybe I recall this
program and I think they started
off. It went down to 5 million
And then um, and I'm pretty sure
it was with a member correctly.
So here we go. Let's
Senator Diamonds or diamond on
that point, Thank you, Madam
Chair and Senator Gonzalez. I,
too, had had some concerns about
that. It's just Centennial
members that qualify for long
term support and the DD waiver
program medically fragile or
supports waiver qualify.
Qualify for environmental
modifications. It's my
understanding that it did, Madam
chair go to H s. D if you could
verify that, but we've cut those
costs down from 12,000 to 6000
in benefits, and that's 6000/5
year.
Period. The most concerning
though, is that I understand it
has a 3 to 1 federal match, so
For for Yeah, big for most
purposes. Who cares what it does
that the government, you know,
Federal's government's willing
to come in and matches times?
Three. Let's take their money.
But could you could you verify
that that's coming over and and
House Bill two where that is and
where we need to look at it to
make sure we get that number up
there Asked this year is 1.5.
But could you find out what the
house is sending over Cherry? I
can thank you. Thank you very
much just to finish.
Well, you know, that's a very
strong prevent you
You know, stand the other side.
If someone gets hurt now, if we
could really work with that, I
think
That's right. Thank you like to
need home money and be
completely dependent about, um,
does not priority. Thank you
very much for getting back to
us. Thank you, madam Chair.
You guys may not know, but I'm
carrying Bill.
And partner known a bill for
rural hospitals. Uh
Those those numbers would they
be reflected? If if I'm
successful would they be
reflected in
These numbers here somewhere
Madam Chair and Senator. No,
they're not included in here. It
would be. That would be more of
a non recurring. So I think you
had the 50 bill That's not
included in here because that's
uh I believe what you're trying
to do with that bill is, uh,
More of a non recurring kind of,
um, stopgap measure until some
more augmented.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Yes, Senator Gonzalez
Carol on that point to, uh
Being a non recurring
And is it possible that we could
go higher with that number? 51
is in
Madam Madam Chair and Senator,
Um, just on that one thing I
wanted to bring up is you know
there's a bill going through
right now. Kind of on top of
Senators, Woods and Senate Bill
17, and I think the governor's
message on it.
Um, and that's assessment
hospital in hospitals basically
be returned to those hospitals
with, um, Medicaid match.
On it. So basically, um, and
that'll come basement. Um, and
that's that's going to put
Uh, we don't have. I don't. I
don't have the exact number for
you, but it's going to put
A lot more.
And then, uh, 11. Other thing I
wanted to add on that earlier
Question two was the there is
Yeah.
Yeah, And so there's also the 80
million that we have in right
now. Rural, primary rural
clinics and hospitals to expand
services. And so I just wanted
to
question on that point because
of Senate Bill 17 raising this
tax at the hospitals one because
it's
Going to multiply it and turn it
into a lot to them.
Do we still need the other bill
that appropriate since there's
another revenue stream? That
work? I think you said would
Didn't even bigger revenue
stream going back to them.
Potential.
Madam chair, and, um, Senator, I
do believe this is more Senator
Woods Bill. There's also a
similar bill from Chairman
Munoz.
Um, Senate Bill 161, and I think
those are kind of meant to be
more of a stopgap.
Measures between now and when
the later in FY
Later in 2025 got it done with
this part or kill you. Clint
Legislative Finance Committee,
so you'll also have a high level
for the Department of Health.
You should also have your FY 24
special supplementals, which is
In landscape form, and that's
just
So for the Department of Health,
HFC took the LFC recommendation.
They only made one major aged
two of your handout online 48.
They added a million more
dollars for operations at
facilities. There are several
important increases in this high
level, including replacing
tobacco funds for tobacco
sensation programs. They
increased a million dollars for
public health hotlines. But the
major conversation really with D
O A C when, if you remember was
that the facilities that D O h
have
Had some really significant
financial struggles, which
Senator sign born was bringing
up earlier. They have a
deficiency of over $7 million
year, and they're projecting
that they need a supplemental to
continue operating and not
created another deficiency in
the current fiscal year.
So a lot of the HFC
recommendations coming out were
to stabilize this at the
hospitals, so you'll notice that
in that program alone was an
8.6. On top of that. At the
healthcare authorities. Some of
those rate increases will also
affect the revenues.
And you know part of the
discussion we've been having
about the state hospitals since
Covid and before is been about
my operating costs and those,
um so in the L. C
recommendation, HFC
recommendation. We added more
general funds since I've only
been doing D O h for a couple
years now.
There is some opportunities for
the Senate to help so they had
asked for about 7 million at the
current fiscal year piece on
page three line 26 $3 million
there.
Ah!
Oh, here we go Online, 36 on
Page four.
So
How the agency had requested, as
they had basically asked for
supplementals for each facility
Instead of doing that, HFC did a
lump sum for all facilities and
put that 3.5 there so that as
the agency goes through the
current fiscal year, in kind of
figures out how those rate
increases will frost the
hospitals instead of directing
it to its flexibility?
So there's an opportunity there
online. 36 too, if you want if
this committee in this chamber
wanted to add another $3.5
million to that line item, so
those are kind of the big
conversations for D O H F
Do we have any questions? There
we go.
Um, Madam Chair. I'm gonna ask a
question here.
That probably is a little
Off outside the box deal, but
it's something
That we're talking finance here.
And
The
It's good big.
Real in the room.
Is is lawsuits that are
occurring.
And the punitive damages of the
lawsuits. We we are we are
trying to manage the liability.
True lowering caps two different
liability.
By playing off either the county
or or, you know, doing different
things.
But
When when we have
Huge
Settlements. I'm not saying that
they're paid but their their
Settlements. I'm not saying that
they're paid, but they're
they're they're requested, so to
speak.
How are we ever going to get her
hospitals out of debt?
If we we and I know this is not
your question. I know I'm
throwing it out to the General
group here.
Because it's such a, uh, problem
to our small hospitals.
As our medical malpractice and
different insurances go up or
liability injury goes up.
Um and and they're they're each
one of those policies as you
know, have a cap on them.
And there's a risk factor and
there's everything else.
But
I guess I need to talk to some
attorney about
How we could possibly
Give more protection and keep
her real healthcare.
In our rule.
Areas.
It's it's It's so.
Devastating.
When when these guys are digging
deeper holes and deeper old
And as you say, we're trying to
find a way to get extra million,
or 2 Million, or 5 million in a
At a budget somewhere to help
Spread that out, but we're not
addressing that part of the
problem.
And
Can y'all think of
And you don't have to come up. I
know there's not an answer
today.
But can you can you
Rainstorm and see
If there is any way
Um
Through legislation or any other
way that we might be able to
limit
Some of these
Huge jury settlements that were
saying into Mexico.
Because, you know, I had a I had
a doctor. Tell me just the other
day that
You know, I'm going to leave the
state because I don't want to
risk everything. I don't
My my liability insurance is
here.
But the courts are awarding up
here.
And that means personally, I
have to stand. What's what's
above that?
And
You know?
We've got such a doctor shortage
We've got
Nurses shortage. We got all of
this.
And I'm just trying to address
the very problem that's coming
to me as to why people are
leaving the state.
And
I don't know if there's a way to
address it, and that's not a yes
or no question so
I just wanted to bring it out,
Madam chair that I see that as a
huge problem that we have
And it
If there's something we can do
to curb some of that we might
have a shot at attracting
physicians back into the state
that we need desperately.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Well, said center
Thank you, Madam Chair question
for you All Health Council.
Honestly, not really Sure.
Totally. What they do, I guess
their facilitators part of the
process. Um
I think they need $6 million for
saying or they're going to
suffer a cut creations online.
21 gave him 3 million
Are you able to speak to that at
all?
Understand. Born so health
councils received large federal
grants from the CDC during and a
lot of that was local response
and data gathering. Now that,
um, though that is not a
priority necessarily have funds
are ending and the alliance of
the House put in $3 million
The Senate to discuss it, Talk
with them a little more or more
what they're doing, but
Pretty important, right? Thank
you. Thank you, Senator. And I
have to thank you because you
are a true champion in
protecting and helping real can
and services for people in rural
and you continue to work so
hard, Senator Bert, you are
next. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
don't have a question. I was
just it was a supplemental
comment to, uh, Senator Wood's
comments.
Hospital in my town.
I used to have liability
insurance for about $4 million a
year.
Last year in this coming year,
their bills $19 million, and
that jump came within a two year
period.
That's
What's happening in our our
small hospitals around the
state, and it's hard to find
someone who will.
Ensure
At that level, so the pool of
companies that are willing to
take that
That risk is shrinking
dramatically.
It's just
More of what we have been
talking about here, it's
becoming difficult.
To not only keep doctors in the
state because this, but they
keep hospitals open. There are
five or seven. I think that are
literally on the brink of
closing right now.
So that was my comment. Madam
chair. Thank you unless it hits
home, we truly realize how
serious medical care providers
anyone in the health industry.
Um
We really have to do much more
than what we're doing to
ameliorate the problem. Thank
you. Senators. Um, I don't have
anyone to add any final comments
staff. Okay, I think we've we
have completed our work for
today. So we are back at 130 am
Cherifi may have some visitors
from towels so we have
Mayor Pascual Ito. Maestas. We
have a
Mr Stewart, you let the
registered with government
affairs Steve.
And then we have Mr Barr Romero,
chairman of the commission, wife
to us very good where you stand
up to be recognized. Great.
Happy to have you welcome. Okay,
Okay. Thank you. Okay. We are
