Then we'll amend the substitute
into the bill, then we'll vote
on the bill.
That took longer and explains
Center woods, so let's just roll
through it, so.
OK, let's, let's, uh,
The stable. No, you don't have
table anything. Bill never left
here. Do you just want to we're
gonna move the subs back on
Senate Bill 115 and I move with
some stupid.
For discussion for discussion
purpose so we have a motion by
Senator Woods, 2nd by Senator
Tre Hill, for discussion
purposes, explain what happened
in this.
And is that a substitute too? Uh
no, that was just a main name in
the amendment amendment that
required us to get to substitute
real quick. That is correct.
There were a couple of areas
where projects were listed in
the wrong counties and that's
the only problem that we can
have a motion on the substitute,
a motion for.
Wait, wait, so we got a motion
for a do not pass on Senate Bill
115 and it do pass on Senate
bill substitute substitute as a.
Right, committee substitute.
Bill
1:15.
OK, so I have a motion. I have a
motion for a
Do not pass on Senate Bill 115
in a motion for a due pass on
Senate Senate Committee finance
substitute for Senate Bill 115.
And emotion.
June.
Emotion by Senator Hill, 2 by
Senator Shindo. Any objection to
that motion?
No OK, we're back on the bill.
Any questions on
Bill, see none can have emotion,
so moved and motioned by Senator
Padilla, second by Senator
Manos.
Uh, we called real real quick
just so we have a record.
Senator Brent.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Send it to Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes. I'm
sorry, Senator, but the, I
skipped right over you.
I vote yes.
Senator
Senator Tobiasson Senator
Byasinbos, yes, Senator Trujillo
Senator Trujillo votes yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Schendo.
Senator Sendo votes yes, and
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz
votes yes.
combos we're voting on 115. We
just that we caught some mis
Counties that weren't in there
correct and you substitute the
bill.
Yes.
And her accomos votes, yes.
Which means we have a due past 9
to 0.
Chair, I apologies and out of
total respect for um Marquita
Russell is uh my expert to my
right. She is the uh CEO
executive officer of the Mexico
Finance Authority. Thank you.
I don't think anybody doesn't
know her, maybe the people
behind you.
Mr. Avila, who's going to start
us off?
And explain to us what we're
doing.
So Mr. Chair, uh, Adrian Avila,
chief of staff for Senate
Finance. Uh, initially we were
gonna have house appropriations
come and present House Bill 2 to
you all, however, they haven't
heard it on the floor yet, so
it's still technically in flux
subject to amendment or
substitution on the floor. So,
uh, instead, today we're just
gonna give you kind of a tool
that your analyst prepared for
you to get you prepared for when
House Bill 2 actually comes
over.
Um, so just two quick highlights
on House Bill 2, as it's passed
in house appropriations.
Uh, they passed it at a 5.8%
recurring level, um, and then
their reserves ended up at
31.2%. And with that, I'm gonna
pass it over to the Senate
Finance team to go into details
and to walk you through this new
tool that they've developed for
you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good morning, um, in
front of you, you have, uh, the
Senate Finance Committee hearing
briefs.
Uh, your analysts, all of us,
um, created this for you so that
you have a better understanding,
uh, well.
Let me take that back. Uh, you
all have a very good
understanding of how House Bill
2 works and where to pull
information, but we wanted to
consolidate information for you
so that it's easier for you to
read and find uh data numbers
quickly on 1 to 2 pages, um,
instead of flipping through 3
volumes, um, based on the
agencies that you heard over the
last few weeks, and so, um, if
you open up the brief, um, that
we have in front of you. I'm
gonna very quickly let you know
what's uh in this brief and then
my
Uh, and then John will go ahead
and go into detail as to what
exactly you will be finding in
uh in this uh hearing brief
book. So if you open up to the
first page very quickly, you are
going to see a table that, um,
uh, breaks down funding
appropriations since FY 24
through 25, and then it, uh,
you'll see the agency request,
the LFC, um, recommendation, the
executive request, uh, the
general fund of um appropriation
that uh.
KFC has uh voted for and then
the total, which includes all
funding sources. From there
you'll see presentation key
takeaways, which are coming
directly from the presentations
that you all heard over the last
few weeks from the various
agencies, then you have the
supplemental information where
we pulled from the various
volumes, uh, the numbers that we
thought were relevant for you to
have, uh, to make your decisions
regarding funding gaps.
And so with that, I'll pass it
over to John, who will go a
little bit more into detail, um,
as to what you will see in here.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
just sort of flesh out this tool
just a little bit more, um, in
terms of what you can expect for
uh most of these briefs. Um, can
we go to page 2 of here which I
think will be a good example.
Um, of what you can expect. So
one more, yes, perfect. Um, so
let's just take this is the um
administrative office of the
courts just as an example, um,
what you're gonna see with most
of these, um, is they're always
gonna start with this table up
at the top for the agencies. Um,
this is just gonna be really
simple information at a glance
going from left to right, um, in
that first um cell there you're
gonna see their budget for FY
24.
Um, then you'll see in the next
cell over their budget for FY
25.
Um, then in that third one,
you're gonna see what they
requested with the agency
requested for FY 26. Um, this
was a change that we sort of
made at the end in terms of what
this is going to be labeled, um,
most of the briefs, I think we
label this as FY 26 agency
request. Some of them, it may
just appear as FY 26 request.
It's the same thing again you're
just looking at what the agency
actually requested.
Um, then one over there, that's
what the LFC recommendation was.
Um, one over from that is the
executive recommendation.
Um, then it'll be what out of
the general fund, um, was, um,
uh, what out of the general fund
was um appropriated and then
finally the total.
Um, if we then move down just
briefly into the um the
presentation key takeaways, um,
like you've heard again is going
to be fairly standard from, um,
on all of these, it's gonna be
the main takeaways what you saw,
um, uh, essentially in in these
presentations, in most of the
supplemental information, um,
that's where, um, you see here,
um, what ended up happening was
that um when these briefs were
finalized, um, most of us
analysts were here together and
so we
ended up sort of just
structuring them the same way.
Um, that won't be the case for
all of these. So if you scroll
through, you may see some of the
supplemental information will be
slightly different, but
generally what we try to do at
the very beginning of that
section is to give you a sense
of what, um, uh, you know, what
sort of a percentage um change
this makes as far as um from the
current budget from FY 25 to FY
26, um, putting that in context
by talking about maybe what the
executive recommended or what
the
LFC recommended and then again,
what the agency was requesting.
Um, and then we sort of get into
um a number of different just
pieces of data that we tried to
grab them all and, and put them
here. Um, that includes the
funded vacancy rate.
Um, the reversions, um, for the
data that we had available for
FY 24 and FY 23 bars.
Um, again, in FY 24 and 23, um,
and then we tried to do sort of
a quick dive into um what we're
seeing in HB 2,
from HAFC, um, in terms of
special appropriations, um, try
to identify those, um, any
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations. We'll try to
include those as well. Um, IT
appropriations and then lastly
any grow appropriations, um,
what we tried to do at the end
was if there was none, let's say
there were no
IT appropriations, um, we
started adding that.
I think you'll see that on most
of these, but again, not all,
but if, if there's nothing there
that um should be an indicator
that the analysts did not see
any, let's say IT appropriations
or special appropriations,
something like that.
Um, just one other, can we go to
page, um, let's start on page 4.
Um
Yes, sir.
a question on the chart on page
2.
Um,
the last we has 81.
Oh
You're saying the difference
between um.
So what makes up that difference
and we're, we're just like 22
million between 59 and 81. So
what makes up and where can we
find that?
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Chanel, so the difference you're
seeing there is likely coming
out from um other state funds or
federal funds. And so we wanted
to make sure that we made a
distinction between what was
coming from the general fund.
And then just all sources
together, um.
That, that would be the
difference there and some you'll
see won't have a difference,
others would and, and that would
be the reason.
you captured that somewhere on
here or it's just for
For our purposes,
just the amount capture other uh
state, uh, funds and all of the
um briefs, there are some where
you will see in the
supplemental, uh, section when
there is other state funds being
used, but we did not include
federal, um, so if I can, um, I
was trying to, I thought maybe
it was special, so I did a quick
math but didn't add up to 22
million, so I was just curious.
OK, all right.
Um, and I, I did want to focus a
little bit on the DA's, um,
because we ran into some issues
when we put this um together.
This starts on page 4. This is
sort of the largest section I
think of of the um.
Of of the hearing briefs, um,
all of the DA's will be in the
same section, um, and this is
sort of a very large table here.
It spans, I think 2 pages.
Um, much of that information is
again going to be the same as
you'd see from the previous
tables, the differences that um
it's not going to show the FY 24
budget, but it will show what
they, what their current budget
is for FO 25, um, the agency
request the LFC recommendation,
the executive recommendation,
um, and then again, what we're
seeing in in HB 2,
and then, um, the supplemental
information is going to be
broken down by each district
attorney individually. Um, each
office individual.
we tried to do that. Um, again,
it's gonna provide that same
sort of big picture overview as
far as what that means in terms
of their budget increase or
decrease, something like that,
um, all the same information,
funded vacancy rate, reversions,
bars and whatnot, but I did just
want to flag that for you
because you'll probably notice
that this is a little bit longer
than, than some of the other
ones just so that.
You understand that?
Um, and I believe that's
everything on my list in terms
of the items I wanted to raise,
but um I'll turn it back to my
colleagues.
I, I do want to add that, um,
again, for some of the ones that
we have that um are not
following that standard, uh,
format that we, that John just
discussed, if you have a
particular question regarding
those briefs, we can find that
information for you. So for
example, page 48, um, doesn't
break down vacancy rate, um, it
doesn't have reversions,
information like that, and if
you want us to quickly get that
information for you, we can do
so. And before we, um, turn it
over back to Adrian. I want to
see if Mikko has anything to do,
I think that pretty much covers
everything I will say, uh, an
emphasis on the differences in
terms of the uh
Types of analysis, that
information uh we all have
already, um, and then anything
else that relates to House Bill
2 that's not in here, we're also
able to get for you uh upon
request.
One thing I'd like to see you
add in the very first one
section we went over for Supreme
Court, uh, House Bill 205. We
don't know what that does.
Be good. Can you repeat the page
on page 2.
Under specials, there's
contingency language on House
Bill 5.
Under specials and
OK.
Some of those when we have a
bit, it's that's in house bill
too, so we don't know what that
does. And so we want to tie up
money.
As that moves along because we
could.
OK, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so what you're asking
is that we connect 550
substitute of care advisory
counsel continued on enactment
of House Bill 205 or similar
legislation.
I mean, the similar legislation
should be there, it should be
tied to that one or with similar
legislation is, is the agency
authority to say, well, that
passed, so we're gonna, that's
similar.
Mr. Avila, you're smiley.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so by the end of
the day, you'll get a one pager
with kind of a summary of all
the contingency bills that are
in um
You know, house built too. So
this way you all can know what's
on the table for that.
Uh, and I just wanna highlight
really quickly that this team
prepared this in 3 days for you
all.
So, um, really good job team.
Thank you for stepping up and
delivering, uh, and they stand
here for any questions you might
have in relation to that, but
hopefully this gives you kind of
like a head start. So this way
tomorrow or the next day
whenever house appropriation
comes and presents House Bill 2
to you all. Um, you can really
dive in to specifics.
first.
Thank you, Chair. An outstanding
job, all of you. I'm very
thankful for this. This is
excellent. Um, is, are there, is
there gonna be another version
of this or is this the only
version you intend to
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
we're thinking there will be
some there might be some,
yeah, thank you. I have a
suggestion. So when you do this,
obviously just put like a
version 2 on the cover and then
Literally on each page, maybe
after your names on the bottom,
just like a very tiny B2 like
version 2 and then the date and
time that you did it so that we
don't get confused on which
document in case there is more
than 2 or whatever. So that,
that's one thing that I would
like to see, um.
And then also, so I was here all
weekend, as many of us were and
did they act, they didn't act on
the budget yet over there, did
they?
OK, so do we anticipate
Where, where, what's going on?
Is it actually on the floor
right now or where is it? OK.
And do they, I don't, I've never
been a member of the house. Did
they make changes on the floor
like the way some of the people
I'm looking at over here do once
in a while try to make them on
the floor, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Padilla. So last year
they did pass an amendment on
the floor in relation to the 180
hour um school day. Um, that's
the only amendment that I can
think of in recent history, but
the, you know, LLCs here, they,
they might have a different
perspective. Is that the only
one?
It's very rare. It is very rare,
OK. So thank you chair and thank
you, Mr. Avila. So, uh, the, so
again, the version control is
gonna be very important to keep
us in the right, you know,
whatever, or just grab this out
of our hands and throw it away
or whatever, you know, and then
put the new one in. And then the
other thing is so like say page
48 uh Department of
Transportation 805 or whatever.
I really hate to ask you to do
this unless you're willing to do
it, but it would be kind of cool
if you could just put the page.
that were 805 starts in the
phone book over here.
I think that would be really
helpful so that we can easily
kind of jump back and forth on
what you're talking about and
stuff, that would be helpful and
then if there are any other key
places we should reference. So,
so just, just, just process
improvement. I think this is
outstanding. So thank you, um.
And then so that on page 48
Department of Transport. Can we
ask questions about, are you OK
if I ask a question about where
things are?
Yeah, I mean, they might not
have the answers. They're like,
here's what's coming over in
House Bill 2. Here's the
highlights, right?
Here's
Here's where they spend their
money, right? And here's what
the exact correct, so they may
not have the answers, just so
you know, but you can ask me
questions, and it's a simple I
mean they're your team, so let
me tell you, they're your guys'
team, right? You need them a job
assignment or you want them to
work on something. This is your
team to sign him to do things,
right? Like go dig down on House
Bill 105 and and see what the
votes were and see the House
Bill 105, Senator Tobiasson
looked it up and it's a
commission for CYFD to appoint a
CYFD secretary.
OK. My question would be like
550,000 just to do a commission
appoint is, uh, a secretary,
that's pretty expensive.
Thank you, chair, um, yeah, so
I, I mean, I typically, it's
gonna get very chaotic over
here, as we all know, we've been
here, you know, uh, here in a
little bit, um.
So I try to, I go directly to
you guys once in a while, Mr.
Chair, but I usually try to go
through this via so he can
direct the work of the I think
that's we should all just try to
respect that chain of commands.
I think that will just make
things a little easier.
Um, so previously there was a
section 9 that dealt with
transportation in in years past.
So my question is, I need to
know the specifics, but where is
like where would we find, what
sections would we find all the
transport? I've already sent you
some stuff as you know.
And
Oh, Mr. Chair center for the
section 9 is still in the bill.
It's just uh only has like 4 or
5 items instead of what you all
are used to, which is an
in-depth section 9. Where's the
in-depth now?
13 or
Um
more money would be in section 9
normally in prior years, but
right now, if I'm not mistaken,
enough of memory.
Uh, there's $100 million going
to the uh transportation fund,
which is the fund that locals
can tap into and it requires a a
small match on the local side
and obviously for uh communities
that don't have that match, they
can be fully funded by the
state.
There's uh $50 million for
wildlife corridors, there's 10
million for a heavy equipment
for DOT.
And then I believe there might
be one more item in in that
section, but that's inside of
your house too.
Um, or maybe is it, is it in the
briefs by chance?
Uh, version 2 will have the the.
I knew I would ask the question
there you go.
So, uh, so chair and then uh uh
Mr. Abula and team.
So if we want to have specific
language added, how are you, how
are we going to deal with
language because you know, the
last couple of years we get this
massive document that has
a ton of language and
How do you want to deal with
that?
I've already sent you 2. I've
sent you 2 already, so, so
language won't be included in
this.
His language is section, well,
not in here, but I mean we're
gonna need to do some to the
Charles did they add language in
House Bill 2 or what they do in
language.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, there are
provisions throughout House Bill
2.
That include language, uh,
detailing how, um, Senator, they
removed the statewide.
Uh, road appropriation from the
5 million.
rural.
That's part of the
transportation. OK, so can we
still have then, Mr. Chair, um,
specific roads as an example in
a specific county.
Added to so that they they they
have access to that, those
funds.
That 100 million that you spoke
of.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so that is a fund
transfer into an existing fund.
I'm not sure.
If there would be legal
implications of trying to like
Change the statute of that how
that fund works by earmarking it
within House Bill 2, I would
need to ask counsel service, um,
an alternative would be adding
money.
In House Bill 2, that would
allow specific roads to then be
identified.
Um, we, we, we're gonna dive
into that. So if you can let me
know, chair, I'd appreciate
that. And then on the other
piece of language I sent you
related to Burnleyo County
housing projects.
Would that be something that
would be added to HB2 in in in
in the language section or.
So Mr. Chair, all of the
specials, which is section 5,
right? Um, you can always add
language earmarking those
sections, that that is something
that can be done. And if there's
existing language, you can tweak
that language. So if you have
specific suggestions, which you
do, and I have it, um, we can
make those adjustments. So we
just throw that to you and you
just start making a list and I
start making a list, and then we
will bring it back for everyone
to consider and
Potentially approved.
So thank you, chair, and so to
our new members, I'll just say
to you, you're gonna have a hard
time walking through the halls
here for the next couple of days
just because people are gonna be
tackling you on this and that
and the other, so.
Thank you.
Just remember on the local road
match, I mean 100 million gets
him a billion.
I know 100 million.
They only have to put up 5% of
that. So they have a million
dollar road.
You only got to put up
50,000.
50,000 to get that match.
So, I mean, it depends. So that
I mean there's a lot of things
that can be done like.
Gallup has never applied for
whatever reason.
And grants is applied and
they've never got it.
And so it's
It's the, it's the DOT mob that
controls who gets money over
there.
I, I just, Mr. Chair, I just
want to make sure that we find a
resolution to having actual
streets listed there. So there's
no confusion, no horsing around
the back of the air but the
county can't go in there and
screw around with things because
they do in my county, really,
you know, I get really upset
with them sometimes and um but
if we can at least have them
listed there, then they know
exactly what my intentions were.
Senator Steinbor.
Good job, everybody. Good to see
you. Thank you for doing this.
We do have a lot of materials to
absorb, so it's really helpful
to have this kind of lymph notes
version for us. There's uh
Just uh one thing that would be
helpful if you do do another
version, if there's time, this
is kind of.
Um, built on my conversation
with you, Senator Tobiasson
about
The area in the uh reports on
the agencies where our
performance measurements.
Or we see where they're passing
and failing certain performance
measurements. It's kind of a
helpful management tool for us
to kind of
If we had that embedded. I mean,
it's not really the numbers part
of it and so I would understand
not including it, but at the
other on the same time.
Except we never really kind of
zoom in on, right? They don't
focus on it, we don't often ask
about it, but I think it's the
kind of the important need of
How they're performing, are they
meeting there?
Deliverable so that might be
helpful for us to look at it as
we look at the budget.
Side to side.
Like how they're doing, where
they're falling short, where
we're putting money.
It's kind of an important part
of the story, so.
I swear that there is a wish
list, but um,
Otherwise that data obviously
already exists in these other
reports, but
That's all I had. This is really
excellent. Thank you all so
much.
This time you put into it.
turned bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll
piggyback on that, Senator
Steinborn, because I see you've
got a good bit of information
here even with the bars, etc.
but if we could have a
spreadsheet that shows the, the
agencies that have the largest
percentage of vacancies, perhaps
the agencies that are, that have
bars, put some of those matrix,
some of those dials that we'd
want to see on one spreadsheet
so we can really identify in one
spot instead of flipping through
and highlighting.
I, that would be my wish. Is
that possible? Those are already
in volume 2.
So you have to refer to volume
to that, this, this might get a
little complicated. We'll be
recreating the volume if we get
into that level, but if you go
to volume 2 and you pick an
agency, you'll see the reds and
the greens and colors
is it in 2? Maybe not.
One.
Oh
Volume one will show you your
agencies and you can just look
and
I think if you look, I'm just
looking on 123.
And you'll see the reds, and
you'll see the greens.
And so
You can skim through here to get
the capital outlay and it'll all
be read, Mr. Chair, if I may.
Yeah, good, um, just very
briefly, a lot of the
information we were getting um
came from volume 3, as I recall,
um, in just that same, um.
That same set of documents just
in volume 3.
Um, and I think, um,
One of my colleagues actually
knows the page numbers, um, but
in any event, we're happy to
answer any questions about that.
OK.
Thank you Mr. Chair to, to add
to that, uh, Senator Tobiasson,
we can just screenshot it and
put it in the volume 2, so this
way it's all in this volume just
so you don't have to be jumping
between Mr.
Chair, that'd be excellent.
Thank you.
I don't want that thing getting.
Volume size it's just gonna be
the vacancy rates.
And
And the, yeah, the bars.
OK.
The question
OK,
no, I didn't see you raise your
hand. You just keep forgetting
to put me on. That's OK.
You just look at me and go like.
I don't do this.
No, I want, I want to commend
you guys and thank you. I, I
felt like you're making this
for.
Tobiasin and, and Trujillo and
myself.
Because we need this. I, I just,
I wanna walk, don't get it too
thick, just like the chairman
said.
You know, that, this is perfect.
I know we're gonna have a ton of
questions for you out of this,
but it gives, gives us a good
reference. Um, my only question
was
And it's through here several
times on page one where it says
other requests.
I just want to make sure I
understand what other requests.
It was on one.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, uh, Senator,
um, so that is a summary of um
what they had actually included
with this particular agency, the
Supreme Court, included in their
presentation, um, so they had
they had specified that they as
part of their budget request,
they were requesting certain
items and that was, those were
some of them. That's that won't
always be there in all of the
presentations. It really just
depends on what the main
takeaways were according to the
analyst who who looked at it,
but that was, I, I think I was
the one.
To this particular one and,
and those were specific items
that they had requested when
they came before you.
So, Mr. Chair, that one is in
the 9.5.
Million. That's already included
in there.
Or is this going to be on top of
that?
So that would be under the
total. Is it in the total or
not? I believe, uh, Mr. Chair
and Senator, I believe that um
they were asking for um an
increase in their budget to fund
these items, um, and, um, that
was wrapped up into the total
agency request, but ultimately
what you'll see here is that um
the um HAFC did not.
You know, adopt that um
particular request from the
agency.
OK, so those are still the
wants, not, not necessarily
included. OK, yes, I think
that's correct. Thank you, John.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I don't see any other questions,
but good job. Thanks for working
over the weekend. Appreciate it,
right?
Just remember.
We're gonna have more plane
specials than anywhere else.
That's where all the money is
gonna be at.
I'll, I'll give you the perfect
example, CYFD secretary came to
me and said, oh, they didn't
fulfill any of my stuff. And
then I go and look and talk to
Charles, and that was all done
and grow.
And so
Just be aware when people say,
oh, I need just need this, I
just need that. I mean, I'm not
interested in cloud seeding. I'm
interested in fixing problems.
I'm not interested in special
pet projects.
Creating a sawmill or we just
gave him $10 million over the
summer where they could do that
on their own, uh, for
reforestation, so just agencies
are going to say they didn't get
this, they didn't get that, and
then
Adri and I will be meeting with
the exec and DFA.
Uh, see what their real needs
are, cause a lot of them, I
think,
And Charles, correct me if I'm
wrong, I think a lot of the, a
lot of the agency needs were
taken care of.
In House Bill 2, correct? To
match the LLC or
go above the LFC wreck in in to
match some of the exact, some
may be lower, some may be
higher.
Mr. Chairman, they did address
many of them. They may have
addressed.
Uh, a portion of it leaving the
Senate to do the other half on
some, in some cases as well. In
other cases, they may.
OK.
Other questions.
Adrian, you have a question? I
said questions answers I have a
suggestion, right? So, uh, when
house appropriations come by,
that would actually be a really
good question to ask, um,
Past appropriations of which
ones did you have fun to it with
the expectation that you were
setting that the Senate would
try to consider cause we don't
necessarily always get that
list, but if you set the stage,
then we will know what those
gaps are.
And, and coming over from the
house, our capacity is 18
million in reoccurring, correct?
Mr. Chair, that, that is correct
100 and what in non-re?
That's a question to ask house
appropriations. um I'm sorry,
what was that first number 18
million and reoccurring 18
million on a recurring.
Oh, what, what's the size of the
budget right now.
Thank you. Just wanna make sure
everybody heard that.
do
But wait, I'm gonna tell you and
then what we need to focus on is
if, if we go
Above 6% or
Then we're gonna trigger down
spending in future years.
If you stay at 6%.
We can have this level of
funding for the next 5 years.
If you go, start going above. We
come in at 7.5.
Or even higher.
And you're gonna start
triggering down the numbers of
years that you can slowly grow
the budget.
I mean, there's, we're gonna
have to play some magic cause
education we know they're short
quite a bit. They funded the 6th
grade, they didn't fund 8 and
7th, 8th, and 9th.
And, and so we know that that's
been a priority for LESC.
Because they currently they
weren't funded in kids in 6th
grade start going to different
classes, they take their science
over here, math over there.
So that's one of the ones we're
gonna have to figure out. So,
If you stay at 6%, you can
On 6% every year for the next 5
years, currently in our
scenario, if we go to 10, you'd
probably cut.
3 years off of that. So 2 years,
and then you're gonna be, you're
gonna be at zero funding because
we've hit that plateau with oil
and gas.
We have a
Republican president, oil and
gas is gonna stay down low.
There's not, see this.
$100 a barrel oil.
And so now you got to start
tampering where we're gonna go.
Um, just remember also too.
By 2030.
Or or income revenues are going
to be higher than oil and gas.
By 2030 are capital outlay is
going to be funded with cash.
And that's just from
investments.
So I mean
The scenario is set up. We just
Got a hold that is, and there's
gonna be outliers we're gonna
have to deal with and have
heated debates on.
Um, but that's the scenario we
set up for the last 2 years in
LFC is so we're now oil and gas
tank and we can hold what we
have without having to make
major cuts.
Any other questions?
Mm
Thank you guys. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
