And I'm Linda Trujillo. I'm
representing Santa Fe District
24, replacing Senator Nancy
Rodriguez, um, to the best of my
ability, and um I actually
served with Phelps Anderson too,
so I know I look a lot older
now, but still the same person,
Phillips.
Thank you. Happy to be on this
committee.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Michael Padilla, I
represent Senate District 14,
which is essentially the entire
southern portion of Bernalo
County, uh, the historic South
Valley and a lot of our newest
growth in New Mexico, the
Southwest Mesa, also served as
the Senate Majority Whip, and
I'm gonna be whipping that group
right into shape as much as I
possibly can. And Mr. Chairman,
I want to thank the staff
members that have done such a
wonderful job for so many years
for all of us and when things
get really heated, Mr. Chairman,
as you know, because we, we were
a very shy group up here.
Um, they are just wonderful
about calming us and helping us
to understand things. So I just
want to look across the room.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman Vice
Chair.
Um, I'm Senator Roberto Bayjay
Gonzalez and I represent part of
Los Alamos rearribo.
Santa Fe and Taos and looking
forward to a very productive
year and.
Again, thank you, all of you the
task that we have in front of us
for this coming session.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Senator
Pat Woods. I represent Senate
District 7,
Currique Union, and Harding.
And, uh, uh, between, uh,
Senator Campos and myself, we
represent, uh, a full 1/4 of the
land mass of the state of New
Mexico.
And it's always a pleasure to
serve on this committee, Mister
Chair, and I to Emma Republican
whip and I plan to help, um,
Senator Padilla with the
Democrat caucus also.
Who has a bigger whip?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Senator Nicole Tobias and I
represent District 21. I am the
only Republican fully um
representing Bernalillo County.
I'm thrilled to be here in my
day job. I'm a business coach.
I'm an executive and small
business coach, so I'm really
thrilled to be serving on this
committee. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am Steve
Lanier from San Juan County, the
greatest county ever.
No applause.
I guess I'm the only one. And uh
District 2, and I'm very happy
to be here. I appreciate the
staff and, and hope that you can
hold my hand because I am a
freshman.
I will be asking a lot of
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Steinborn.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, colleagues, and good
morning, all of you. I am
Senator Jeff Steinborn from
Donana County. My district goes
from Central historic parts of
Las Cruces and Donana County all
the way to the Sierra County
line, literally to a road called
Two Counties Road.
On the left is Donana County. On
the right is Sierra.
And so it's really great to be
on the committee again. Thank
you.
Good morning chair members of
the committee, I state Senator
Benny Shindo, I represent Senate
District 22, which is portions
of McKinley, Savi, Berlios, San
Juan, and uh.
Real rebound.
Thank you. Good morning. I'm
State Senator George Mnos. I
representbolo McKinley and I am
the chair, um, we're gonna get
started here in just a minute,
turn that on. All right, we
gotta wait for our closed
captioning to come live.
I think they're working on it
right now, on it right now, so
we just have to kind of wait for
that.
Gonzalez.
Oh yeah.
Lane, you want to introduce
yourself.
Like
Thank you, chair. I'm Elaine
Medina. I'm the um Senate clerk
helping here with the committee.
Help with everything if anybody
has any needs, most of the
people, you know, most of the
people on the committee, feel
free to contact me at your
convenience.
Adrian, you wanna
Well, not, you're fired.
Well
Hey, officer, can you come up
here for a second?
Uh good morning members of the
committee. uh, Mr. Chair, my
name is Adrian Vila. I serve as
your chief of staff for Senate
Finance during this session.
Um, this will be my 3rd session
as chief of staff for this
committee, and happy to work and
help all of you navigate, you
know, this.
Thank you. Senator Brent.
I think Mr. Chairman, and sorry
I'm a few minutes late. I was
meeting with the state
engineer's office, but uh
Grantsson of District 40, really
excited to be on this committee.
I think it's gonna be great.
I'll try to learn really fast.
They're texting and so we have
someone that needs.
They accomplished one tell us
what's happening in the north.
There's a lot of good things
happening in Northeastern and
northern New Mexico.
So here we are right now,
dealing, if you will, with a uh
the frigid temperatures and as
we deal with it, we're helping
our neighbors, particularly the
elderly as uh we check on them
to make sure that as they move
forward that uh they do have
heat, uh, the rising cost, if
you will, of utilities,
continues to make some of that
very difficult to deal with, but
overall, uh, again, people are
helping each other uh through
these cold periods. So that's,
uh, that's basically what's
happening right now, and I'll
keep you up on the temperature
throughout the 60 days in terms
of uh what uh you begin to feel
when we start dealing with all
the requests, the appropriations
that are gonna be coming in and
then secondly, as we uh deal
with the many groups, so there's
going to be a lot of excitement,
not only here in Santa Fe, but
of course throughout the state,
as we continue to unveil, if you
will, what the resources are
going to be and what the what
the objectives are going to be,
Mr. Chairman.
Tin Woods.
I'm glad that that we are in the
North, New Mexico, northern New
Mexico, because this last week,
we had a snowstorm, kind of a
freak snowstorm.
And it was real funny. I live
right on top of the Cap rock
over there between two carry and
Clothes, and the roads is pretty
good until you hit that cap rock
and when you got on top of that
cap rock, the, the snow drifted
pretty good. It was more snow,
snow drifted, uh, volunteer fire
departments got up at, at 1:30,
uh, Friday morning.
And started pulling people out.
Those people were stranded. They
would have been very bad shape
if those firemen hadn't took out
their own personal tractors,
their own personal equipment to,
to move those people, get them
out of snowbanks, and Mr.
Chairman, there's
We can't emphasize the need for
volunteers any more than you can
on an emergency situations like
that, uh, those people got out
of bed and did the work that
needed to be done because they
care for their neighbors. And
it's uh
We just need to appreciate all
the volunteers in the state for
all the work they did.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So you really want to tell us.
Might as well get used to
talking.
About something that's happening
in Santa Fe.
We know what's happening in
Santa Fe, the legislature.
There's Steinbor you what.
He just all feeling good and the
honeymoon phase of this session
and.
It was great to be back in Santa
Fe and thought the governor laid
out a lot of good stuff
yesterday from her perspective,
so we got a, a big session. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, uh, will say that um,
The uh Senate District 14 is
could quite possibly be the
economic center of the state
right now. We have so much
incredible economic development
effort and activity going on
there right now. I encourage all
of you to take a look at it
because as it does well, and,
and, and we continue to bring uh
areas really both sides of my
district, but primarily up near
the Albuquerque International
Airport in Mesa del Sol, as I
mentioned, uh, during my
introduction yesterday, Maxion
solar, Ebon solar, um,
The quantum uh information that
you heard from the governor
during her speech. Uh, we have a
number of other things going on.
There's going to be secondary
and, and tertiary uh businesses
that are going to have to come
up to support those larger
businesses as well. So uh please
let those in your districts know
that um if they have some sort
of a service or a business or
something that they do to
support larger businesses,
they're gonna want to get their,
their foot in that door right
away, because there's a lot of
great opportunities there. So
I'm very excited about what's
happening over in Senate
District 14.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
This time of the year is when
it's very crucial in my part,
you know, with all the ski
areas.
And uh we are hoping for more
snow, but.
The majority of it as we have
had a few snowfalls and um.
The other one is a man-made
part.
And so it is working and you do
have that volume of them.
Uh, tourism, skiers in the area,
so which is good. The other
part, um, Mr. Chairman, um.
As a community we're working
very hard to see how we can just
get really going on affordable
housing.
Thank you.
Senator to bison. Well, in, in
my area, I have the northeast
quadrant of Albuquerque and we
have
I think the best schools in APS
um La Cueva High Schools in my
district, um, I know that
they're looking for some
improvements to their
facilities, and we have a lot of
medical professionals in my
district and small business
owners and I'm very passionate
about that actually, the small
business owners of our state in
particular is what drove me to
seek um this position, and I'm
looking forward to learning a
lot here on Senate Finance in
relation to how do we support um
economic growth.
in particular with small
business and how do we help um
medical professionals in our
state and then our citizens gain
access to um medicine in a more
time. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Lundy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I was
a, a former county commissioner
there in San Juan County and so
we made a lot of changes trying
to improve our economic
development with the closing of
our power plant and our coal
plants or coal mining, we had to
diversify and do some different
things, so I got, I was
fortunate enough to be involved
in in some of the outdoor stuff
and some of those things, um, we
are really trying hard. We don't
have any.
ation in San Juan County. We're
trying very hard to get a rail
spur from
Um, gallop down to Farmington,
and we think that would open up,
uh, a huge economic development
for us.
Thank you.
There is also a fire in San Juan
County currently.
I,
well, it's in, in my district,
but I don't know if it's on the
Arizona side of the line or the
New Mexico side of the line. I
don't think they've.
It sounds like it's That's what
I'm getting too.
Thank Mr. Chairman and um you
know, Senate District 40, uh.
Represents most of the town
after the redistricting, I don't
leave Rio Rancho at all.
Um, but, uh, you know, Intel is
is doing pretty well, um, they
have 3100 employees right now
and they're ramping up to about
3500. They've got about 600
contractors over there doing
some finish up work, but uh
Uh, they, they believe that
their positioned right now with
the packaging plant that they
put in.
To uh be there permanently. So
there was
Um, other than that, uh, I, I
personally, uh, have the great
privilege of going to Israel
last month.
Um, and spent a week there with
uh viewing very many different
things and came back and I'm now
working with the governor's
office, the engineer's office on
some water projects
that hoping to partner with uh
technology that Israel has on
water now because.
You know they're kind of the
pros at it, they've been doing
it for over 60 years, so.
Or um
A lot of good things going on.
Hopefully we can bring those
back to the state.
It was a phenomenal trip if
you've never been able to go to,
it was very neat.
Understand them.
They represent the Senate
District 22, which is uh
And the inner quadrant of the
northwest part of the
The State
I have 7 pueblos, all of Vi
Apache as well as Chama.
History going on all the way up
towards the south of San Juan
River.
Some point south of I-40 back
into Birming County with To
Hodgeley and uh.
66 casino, so, uh.
Huge district, um.
A lot of the, the families out
in the rural parts of Navajo are
still.
Struggling with, you know.
Basic needs.
Water, electricity.
Uh, and of course, broadband is
a huge issue out there as well.
Those are things and roads.
We have a lot of uh uh dirt
roads, roads are paved just the
main roads are paved, but.
Families, when you have
inclement weather.
see a lot of uh
The further you go out, you see
a lot of cars parked right off
the the main highway.
And people are walking to their
homes because.
About those roll with the
inclement weather sometimes are
not uh uh able to to get to
their homes and so forth, so uh.
I get a lot of requests, you
know, for capital equipment,
whether it's graders or those,
make sure their their roads are
fixed.
Or you, or the gravel them
something so so.
When you think about, you know,
the needs, you know, it's really
important that our rural parts.
You know, we don't have the tax
base, so, you know, it's.
Always interesting when I see
that dynamic of
You know beautifying our parks
here in the cities.
And, yeah
My capital is going to basically
support the basic needs.
That we don't think about, you
know, in the cities and so
forth, so.
Just want to remind you that,
you know, it's a huge state and
uh represent our constituents
and what we can do to help our
communic instrument.
It's good. We're just about
there just finishing up. I think
it's coming up. We're good.
It may be slow and behind, but
that's all right as long as it's
working more good.
All right, just so I, I
represent in District 4 and the
same thing that Senator Sindo
talks about it, the uranium
capital of the world, used to
have coal mines, power plants,
and refineries and those kind of
shut down, we have one coal mine
in my district, um.
It's an interesting name.
I represent the Pueblo in 15
chapters.
Uh, two cities and a village
stretch.
Uh, Representative Karpinski, I
think we're ready.
The longer you talk, the longer
we're gonna be here.
Understood, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, good afternoon, members. Um,
I am presenting today House Bill
One. House Bill 1.
Includes appropriations for the
2025 legislative session and
appropriations for the permanent
legislative committees and the
Legislative department.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to
walk through the sections of the
bill, if you would like, um, and
I also have
Legislative council Service
Director Shawna Kapier.
Here today.
Mr. Chairman, would you like me
to walk through the sections of
the bill.
For, um, if anything you want to
highlight, just highlight what
you need to highlight.
Mr. Chairman, um, I would just
add that um the appropriations
in this bill for the session
covers Senate, House,
Legislative council Service, um,
and the, uh, year-round
appropriations, the annual
appropriations for the permanent
legislative committees also
cover council service interim
expenses, preparations for next
session, legislative IT.
Uh, district offices and staff
upgrades to the Capitol building
complex, LFC.
LESD, the House and Senate chief
clerk's offices and the Senate
leadership staff offices as, uh,
and finally the partnership with
the compilation commission.
And I would stand for questions.
you want anything?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Shana
case, director of the council
Service. I don't currently have
anything to add, but happy to
stand for questions. You don't
have the standard waiver. You're
not hearing support her.
I am not here in sport or
opposition to the matter before
you, but I'm happy to provide
technical assistance should be
requested. Thank you. Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
Inner woods.
So Mr. Chair.
And representative.
Tell me
If legislating aids are covered
in this.
In District aids.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Woods,
the uh legislative aides are,
um, in the bill.
And they are um
In
Sections.
3 and 4, there is an amount of
Um, 14 million for legislative
district offices and staff, page
6, lines 22 through 25.
And
Excuse me, talk just a minute of
how you determine travel pay
because at one time,
It was taught that we would have
uh a statewide transportation
system, the, the, um,
What would you say the, the
state motor pool.
Could furnish transportation as
far as uh check out a vehicle,
uh, the other part of it is, you
know, there's some districts
that they can literally take a
bus.
My particular district and
compos District,
you know, Moose district uh
these districts are so big.
How are we compensating for the
travel.
For big districts compared to
small districts. Is there a, is
there a set limit on those, how,
how, explain that to me on
travel.
Director Kase beard to answer
that, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, uh,
the Legislative council, uh,
adopted policies uh regarding
the district legislative aides,
and one of the most recent
additions to that policy was
that travel budgets would be
determined uh for each of the
districts, however, travel would
not be authorized until after
July 1st, uh, when a new budget
was in place for the new fiscal
year. So the parameters of that
policy have not been formalized
at this time, um, but the
working group has been directed
to come up with an equitable
way, um, to address the concerns
that you've raised, uh,
regarding uh smaller districts,
larger districts, uh, some, some
places where, uh, district
legislative aides may need to
travel more miles than their
counterparts in a more urban
settings. So that is a topic of
consideration that the district
staff working group uh appointed
by a legislative council will be
addressing after session and
bring back to legislative
counsel for their approval.
I thank you for that and, and
I hope that I'm might be
included on that particular
discussion when that happens
because the travel deal is a big
deal in my district, and it's
going to be some big deals in
rural New Mexico. Um, the other
thing is we're, we're providing
some computers and different
things for these, for these
people and uh we're talking
office space and I know some
districts office space is
relatively available, other
districts.
Or not, so it's still a very
complicated issue going on.
And I understand that.
But I wanted to make note in
this particular bill, that's
where it's funded.
So that's, that's a little more
of the cost this year that we
didn't have in the past.
So this chair that was
What, what I wanted to bring
out. Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Leader and, and
Shanna.
Thank you, Shawna and your whole
team for everything you guys are
doing for all of us.
pulling your hair out right now.
Um, Mr. Chairman, so just real
quickly on the legislative
information services IT area, is
that address uh dollars and, and
funding available for
cybersecurity for the
legislature.
Mr. Charis and her Padilla, yes,
absolutely, uh, cybersecurity is
a um constant issue of concern
and money has been built into
that budget to ensure that the
legislature has the proper.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that. Obviously,
we're doing a lot of work in
that area, um, and then, uh,
full stop on to another topic on
contractual services, I see
there's about 900,000 close to a
million there, I think between
the house and the Senate.
Can you give me an example of
what those contractual services
might be.
Just some examples.
Mr. Chair, for clarification,
Senator Padilla, uh, this is
specific to the House and the
Senate. Yeah, so that's about a
million dollars between the two
chambers, it looks like I think
it was 500 and change and 400
and change for the other, the
other chambers. So Mr. Chairener
Padilla, contract services could
be for a whole host of things.
um, often, I'll say for the, the
council service, uh, for
instance, we have, uh,
contractors who help with
webcasting during the interim.
So they're uh various
individuals who have an
expertise that the senator of
the House
you need, uh, not on a full-time
employment basis, uh, but on a
more short-term, uh, basis. And
so that's what those contracts
are used for, um, for the
council service, uh, for
instance, they're certainly used
for uh contract drafters during
session, uh, but it's
essentially work that is not
covered by the, uh, full-time
permanent employment of the
agency and therefore the agency
needs to go out and get that
assistance through contract. Uh
thank you, Mr. Chairman. So that
was like, I think you, you hit
the nail right on the head where
I was going, so these can be
contract
drafters, is it, are they
contract drafters and
individuals that do that kind of
work just for the session, or do
they also work for you year
round?
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, for the
council service in specific,
those drafters only work for
session or the lead up to
session, but they are not
year-round, uh, positions.
OK. And uh have you been able to
build the rejected number of
temporary or contractual
drafters, you know, with a third
of the Senate being new and I
believe it's a 25% of the house
being new somewhere in that
neighborhood, you're gonna have
a lot of, I remember my first
year here, 13 years ago, I, I
think I irritated everybody in
council, had a lot of bills and
stuff, but I, so are they
available, you can have enough
people is where I'm going
because.
This is a lot of work load for
you guys.
Mr. Chair, Senator, absolutely,
uh, we have 7 contract drafters
who have come on this year,
which is the most I've ever seen
in my tenure, and that is to uh
help assist with the permanent
staffing or uh drafter staffings
workload, um, and also to help
with um drafting of certificates
and memorials, which are um a
large undertaking for the
office. Uh, so we are up to 21
drafters total for this session.
OK, that's great. Um, that's
what I was hoping to hear. Thank
you, chair.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and of course, uh Majority
Leader Sapansy, uh, the
questions that I'm gonna be
asking are pretty much to go
ahead and help us all better
understand what uh resources are
gonna be here in our, uh, feed
bill, but in terms of some of
these issues, let's say for
example, the uh legislative
internship program, and I'm
gonna go through this real quick
and then if you can just in
brevity uh respond to some of
these, so that, and then also in
the Senator Woods indicated
something that was very
important, and we already knew
that in
In terms of this, that'll be
July 1st when we start talking
about other per diem for the
legislative aides, and then also
with the Senate Rules Committee
in terms of uh where the
resources are going because I
know there's gonna be a lot of
background check work that has
to happen, and then in terms
overall of the um.
Uh, the, uh, district office
staff, uh, the numbers and how
that process is moving forward
in terms of how many people do
we have on board now? I know we
pretty much uh put that in
suspense until after the session
for others, just to give the
members of the Senate Finance
Committee and the public, an
idea of where their tax dollars
are going when it comes to the
operations, not only for the
60-day session, uh, but some of
the things that we're evolving
into in terms of making this,
uh, a more open.
and receptive uh legislature. So
if I may, Mr. Chairman, just to
get him brevity and uh again to
the director of the legislative
council, however you wish to go
and handle the responses, but if
you could please in brevity uh
address some of those issues.
Mr. Terrison or Compos, uh, try
to remember all the issues and
please remind me if I've
forgotten one. so with the
district's legislative aides to
date, uh, there are
approximately 60 district
legislative aides that have been
hired. Uh, the caucuses are also
uh allowed to hire a district
office liaison. Uh, there are
two people in those positions to
date. Um, leases are being
entered as they uh are are
approved by the district office
liaison and uh the director of
the council service.
Um, I don't have an exact number
as to how many leases or MOUs
have been entered into. I want
to say it's maybe around 10. Um,
a number of those office spaces
are being shared amongst
legislators, uh, a number of
them are in public buildings,
say with educational
institutions or with the county
or with the city, uh, a handful
are private leases. Um, so
that's kind of the status of the
district uh office uh program at
this moment. So, so in terms as
we go forward of the legislative
internship program, uh.
If you could maybe respond
quickly on that one as well,
please.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, members
of the committee, uh, yes, the
legislative internship program
is open to, or I should say this
funding that's being requested
in House Bill 1 is for that
program for legislative Finance
Committee, Legislative Education
Study Committee and the
Legislative council Service,
and, um, ordinarily those uh
standing committees or those uh
statutory committees, I should
say, uh, they do bring on a
college intern, uh, for those
summer months, and then often
for the council service, that
individual also um
Often, uh, helps with session as
well, uh, in terms of the bills
online, um, program that the
council service.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, in terms
of the uh Senate Rules
Committee, uh, a lot of times
people don't see the uh work
that goes on in order to go
ahead and ensure that when
people come up for confirmation
as an example, uh, have been
fully vetted and you may want
to.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh, yes,
the Senate Rules Committee is
the only standing committee that
is allowed to meet in the
interim, and so some uh funding
is always requested so that that
committee does have time to uh
get a head start on vetting
individuals who are up for
appointment, uh, and also to the
backroom background checks, as
you noted. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman, and this is just,
if you will, the uh tip of all
the issues that we deal with,
particularly with HB one, and
then of course when we get into
HB 2 and uh
Other uh financial bills at all
as we move forward, but again,
thank you very much for the
responses. We really appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, uh Brent.
was chairman, and I just have
one question on the uh interim
committee expenses were
increasing at 30.
3%, um, but we only spent
2 million were increasing it to
4. What's the reason for the
increase?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Brandt, um,
There were a number of requests
from interim committee chairs
and members, um, uh, regarding
bringing in uh experts,
contractors to provide specific
analysis, um, so this, uh,
concept is that there would be
this additional funding
permitted for all of the 18
interim committees, um, that
each of them would have the
opportunity to apply, um, or put
together a proposal for any
additional contractual services,
and that way it's sort of fair
and open because some of the
individual
Uh, interim committee requests
were quite large, um, and so
this is a uh a pilot project,
legislative council would then
have the opportunity to vet.
These requests and make
decisions about whether they
should be granted. Thank you Mr.
Chairman, so um we already
didn't spend a million last
year. Was that not enough to
cover that? We want to
We're gonna double the expenses
of interim committees.
Was the language not available
for last year, maybe that was
this year.
Um, Mr. Chairman, so, uh, in
FY 24, 4 million was
appropriated this last fiscal
year, 3 year was 3 million was
appropriated. Um, we do not have
FY 24 actuals.
Um, and so the idea was just
returning to the FY 24. Um, with
this.
This additional funding set
aside for this specific purpose,
um, but it is a pilot program.
Like.
Senator Steinbor. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Madam Leader, good to
see you. Congratulations on your
new title, bye, good to see you
and, and Shawna, great to see
you and you're doing an
exceptional job, of course. Um,
and all of our staff in finance
committee who had.
And to everyone earlier. Um,
question.
I was also gonna ask about the
district staff. I kind of
represented in between district
because my district goes from
Las Cruces to Sierra County, and
so I have Hatch and Radium
Springs and a lot of communities
that I would like to serve. It's
kind of unfair to make someone
drive, right, if you're not
compensating them. So,
Look forward to that. I wanted
to just ask about the
webcasting.
Um, well, I want to ask about
another thing too, but on the
webcasting, Shawna, how would
you, uh, sorry, Madam Leader,
Sean, how would you assess kind
of where we're at and are we?
I mean, I think sometimes it
seems like it gets a little
wonky sometimes, maybe, uh, when
we have a lot going on. How
would you assess, are we making
any improvements, or do you
think things are good?
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you
for that question. Um,
The webcast is, is very
important. Uh, not only do the
rules require uh meetings to be
webcast and broadcast to the
public and archived for a
minimum of 5 years. Uh, we have
many members of the public who
are unable to travel to the
meetings, whether they're in the
Capitol or interim committee
meetings throughout the state.
And so ensuring that they're
accurate, uh, closed captioning,
uh, on those webcasts for
individuals who need that
functionality. Uh, this is, this
is crucial infrastructure. Uh,
there is uh
A request within this budget,
not specifically for webcasting,
um, but in terms of, um,
upgrades, I think are definitely
uh need to be looked at. I think
we also just need to look at the
technology, technology for
closed captioning, frankly,
since the pandemic started or
happened, um, has, has really
increased and become much more
um
Accurate, uh, in that closed
captioning. So, um, I would
like, uh, or I, I believe that
the, the legislature should take
a look at um what is the new
tech out there and how do we
make this as accessible as
possible and is streamlined and
as many uh limits on uh
technical failure points as
possible. So that's easier for
staff to maintain,
uh, um,
and also for the public to gain
access.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Ms.
Chair and leader. I, I, good to
hear all that. I agree. Yeah, I
think it's probably worth
reassessing everything involved
cause uh, it feels like the
interface is the interface we
started with, we have this
calendar, and it's kind of hard
to navigate, you know,
truthfully, it's not the most
user friendly thing, but it's
great, don't get me wrong. I'm
really glad we have it, but I
think looking at it and just
seeing, are we getting the best
user friendly interface for our
money, or some of the mics were.
Hot, you know, and then someone
worked really well, and just
making sure it works, right,
for, for the public out there
when we get really busy and we
have enough bandwidth and
throughput. So, um, thank you
for looking at that, you know.
The last thing I just want to
ask is, is cause I never heard
it until today, was it money for
the interim committee to bring
in experts and as someone who's
kind of involved in one of those
committees, um, is it, is that
available for all interim
committees, Madam Leader.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Steinborn, uh, yes, that's,
that's the idea of this starting
in the in the new fiscal year.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Senator Tru Hill.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, Madam
Leader and director. It's really
nice to see you here today, and
it's really exciting to be up
here, uh, having the opportunity
and honor to ask these
questions. I just have two
questions in relation to page 7
paragraphs J and K, um, and this
may be um relative to the
questions that were just asked
about processes um for the
website, but I noticed that
there's $500,000 put aside for
uh the ongoing planning.
output development and design of
design of the legislative
processing system. Could you
explain what that is?
Mr. Chair, Senator, a number of
years ago, the legislature
appropriated to the council
service, uh, funding to
essentially revamp from the bill
intake uh process all the way
through enrolling and
engrossing. Uh, so this is a,
um, wholesome system uh that
also has committee modules and
floor modules and uh is to
assist uh every person who is
involved with the legislative
process, uh, in having kind of
a, a centralized database or
centralized process.
um, to accomplish the work.
In the course of this
development, we have realized
that there are some items that
the vendor that we're working
with, um, have designated out of
scope, uh, so they were not
included in the original
proposal or their original
conception, but we're realizing
they are necessary elements, um,
of this whole system. And so,
uh, this request here is to
address some of these um extra
items that were actually
realizing are really critical to
the functionality and to ensure
that we'll be able to um
implement.
The system for the next session.
Great. Thank you, um, Mr.
Chairman, Director, so this is
really kind of just like clean
up cause it does seem like a
small amount of money, knowing
how much it costs to develop and
implement technology in that
way.
OK. And then the last question,
um, Mr. Chair, um,
Madam Leader and director is
paragraph K. Who are the
legislative clerks clerks and
secretaries that are going to be
paid for the national
conference. I'm excited to hear
they're coming here to Santa Fe.
I'm assuming next summer or is
it next spring? Um, uh, who are
those people that are gonna get
paid for that?
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Trujillo, um, this is a
section of the National
Conference of State Legislators,
and it is a, uh, it is a section
that is open to all of the chief
clerks or in some states they
are called Chief secretaries or
secretaries of the Senate or the
House, um, so the New Mexico
clerks, uh, clerk Luhan and and
clerk Ortiz McCutcheon have the
honor of hosting this conference
in Santa Fe. So this expenditure
to meet sort of the their
obligation in terms of hosting
that conference, so we will be
hosting all of the, you know,
sort of heads of each agency uh
from around the country here.
Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation
on this, so, um, so how much of
uh
The total of the appropriation
of the 68.75 is coming from cash
balance.
Mr. Chair, Senator, could you
please clarify which
appropriation request you're
looking at I'm just going by on
the summary.
And on the first paragraph that
um
Um
synopsis of the bill and it says
um 68.7 million from the general
fund and the cash balances.
Um, Mr, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez, um,
There is a total of
$5 million coming from cash
balances.
And um that ended that entire
figure, um, of the 68 million or
so is both.
Session expense and interim
expense so that we were just
tallying up the spreadsheet.
Very well, thank you. And then
uh the other part on uh
On the non-recurring.
And you see from um.
2020 to 2025, and you see the
fluctuation.
Oh, that is due to the 30 day
and 60 day sessions, right?
They sort of like go off by like
almost like.
Between 5 and 6 million.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez, are you looking for
FIR? Yes, right here.
non-recurring.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, that is the
variation between the 60 day and
the 30 day sessions. OK. So, uh,
Mr. Turman now because of my new
process and component of the.
AIDS.
We're probably gonna see some uh
very uh
Large numbers if we have a.
I would call it vacancy, but I
guess if it's unused.
Uh, funding for those positions.
So we're probably gonna see a
lot higher than what we have had
before.
uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez, the, the funding
allocated in this legislation
for the district offices and
AIDS does revert to the general
fund if it is unused, so it will
not revert to cash balances.
Very well. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shindo.
I think Mr. Chairman and thank
you for the presentation. Just a
quick question, I think, uh,
Senator Woods, uh, was able to
get most of the information, uh,
when I was trying to hire my
district aide. I was
specifically told that no travel
for that individual until after
July 1st. So when I'm looking at
the language under page 6,
section H.
The last phrase, other necessary
support.
Are we to assume that that will
be part of the
transportation, uh,
reimbursement or have cover our
district 8 is so it's in, you
know,
part of the $14 million request,
I assume.
Mr. Terrison Orono, that is
correct. Uh, the Legislative
council policy um prohibits
travel until or reimbursable
travel at least until July 1st
of 2025, uh, and this
appropriation is intended, uh,
for expenditure in the next
fiscal year, which would align
with that travel restriction.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Just some quick
questions to wrap up. Did we get
enough pay in there so we don't
have to have contracted lawyers.
We, we got to pay men in there
for.
version
Counsel for staff to write bills
and did we get the pay at the
right band so they can hire them
and not.
Mr. Chair, uh,
I believe there will be some
discussions after session with
legislative council as to some
of those pay bands. OK. And then
the legislative staff, I mean, I
kind of read that policy and so
explained this to me yesterday
let me a lot of legislative
staff.
And I thought they couldn't come
during this session. That was my
understanding.
And then it's my understanding
that there's legislative staff
here and we're making room for
office, we don't have enough
room for ourselves, let alone
your staff who's doing the
accounting in the committee room
over here.
Uh, I mean,
Where is that policy? I mean, we
have staff that shouldn't be
here, and that's what the policy
was set, and now they're here
doing know what's happening with
that.
Um, Mr. Chairman, um, the, the
legislative council did adopt a
policy that the district
legislative aides would not have
office space in the Capitol. Um,
I, I would defer to director
Cape on um what is happening
with the session and these
employees being here, um, I know
that I have seen district
legislative aides in the
building, but they are not,
they are helping their member
with something specific, but
they're not officed here.
Mr. Chair, the uh policy that
was adopted by council did
specify that district
legislative aides were not to
work as session staff. And it's,
uh, the intention of the
district legislative aid policy
that those aids are in the
district serving constituents,
uh, some legislators have been
able to set up uh those district
offices, other district
legislative aides are working at
home, and that is what the
policy uh contemplated.
I mean,
It's, it's until the policy is
really clear for me, I'm not
gonna hire an employee when I
don't know what the clear cut
policy is.
Cause if I have to send an
employee.
I call them places cause there
are employees, right?
Uh, almost a shipwreck to
tenosity.
Right and and I don't know what
the policy is on.
The pay costs, their travel
costs, right, how that's gonna
do that. So, let me ask you this
in the policy, if, if I hired a
staff employee, do they bring,
they give you the receipts to
verify or who verifies the
receipts is that the legislator
that verifies the seats for
reimbursement, for travel, fuel
if they're using their own car.
How is that handled?
Mr. Chair, uh, the Legislative
council Service is the
administrator of uh the
appropriations for the district
legislative aides and district
offices, uh, the human resources
department for council service
accounting, uh, for council
service also will be processing,
um, any, any payments that are
submitted for reimbursement. Um,
at this time, the council policy
does limit, uh, travel and
reimbursement until after July
1st, 2025. Um, so I would offer
that before that time, well
before that time, um, a proposed
uh policy will need to be
brought back to council to
clarify what the parameters are
of that travel and
reimbursement, uh, but at this
moment, uh, reimbursement is not
available.
OK, I, I just, I gotta have a
clear cut policy so I know when
if I hire some, what exactly
they get reimbursed for with
that exactly have to do, where
they have to be every day, how
that's gonna be handled and that
policy is created, I mean, we're
just winging it and leaves us
some liability out there that we
really need to clarify, um, if
legislators that don't manage
employees don't have employees
or never had employees. It, it's
gonna be a tough scenario for
you and could cause a lot of
heart, heartache among
legislative staff.
Because why did they get to do
this? Why did I not get to do,
you know how that story goes in
HR, um, with that, one thing I
do wanna remind you, uh, I wanna
have you back in our committee
and talk about drafting style
for council so our members
understand when bills are
written what an A means or an
MLG means, how that drafting
style is, if it's by like the
constitution and those issues.
So, uh, maybe next week,
Adrian's paying attention, we'll
have you in and talk about
drafting stuff or just a few
minutes and we comprehend his
bills coming in the center.
find it. We know what you have
drafted in what you have just
typed and printed or cut and
paste and, and so as we go
through that. So thank you. You
are no other questions, can I
have a motion.
Thank, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I move for approval of
House Bill 1 with the emergency
clause.2 by Senator Brent.
Yeah,
cholera.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brant
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez. Yes. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes
yes. Senator Padilla, yes,
Senator Padillasia, Senator
Steinborn.
Yes. Senator Steinborn votes
yes. Senator Tobiasson.
Sinner Tobias and botsia center
Truil. Yes, Senator Trujillo
votes yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Vice
Chairendo? Vice Chair Sendo
votes yes and Chair Munoz.
Munosports, yes, you have a due
pass. Thank you have a pass.
We're gonna head back to the
floor 11 to 0. We, we missed
that amendment to, to lower the
houses
for DM.
And raise the Senate, we have to
put it. It was last in E and Mr.
We need a foreman.
Thank you. We're, uh, Jon, we're
going back to the floor.
Right about on time. So let's go
right back to the floor to be
back there at 12:30.
