First start off with thanking
all our LFC staff I mean this is
a year long process is not a
thirty or sixty day process that
they go through in scoring
inventing agencies spent a lot
of time.
For you it's what's best for New
Mexico and how we how we use our
reoccurring money
there's forty six staff LCD okay
good yes during the session yes
Mr chairman madam chair yes
about forty six staff there were
over there working with the NFI
ours their working capital the
work here long and highly
qualified people that really
need to say thank you to
in the really the hard work
because we as legislators come
one week of the month and and
work through LFC and bill the
budget but those are the people
that are here every day working
through the process and and
making us look good at the end
of the day so I first of all
let's thank all the LFC and all
LFC analysts and staff and
everybody over there we
appreciate them and and what
they do and going through the
summer wrapping up House Bill to
it and our sixty day session so
I want to thank them first and
we thank you profusely trillion
everything understatement but we
do appreciate you thanks so much
thank you madam chair we're
gonna do a kind of a rack of an
overview of house bill two as we
moved it to the Senate so this
you were almost budget process
we're driven by a large surplus
and in our state's history the
largest surplus we've ever seen
in many people contribute good
ideas and now it's time for more
you for more ideas it's over
it's over House Bill to came
across with a twelve point three
percent increase pretty high
from the house to spend twelve
point three percent in
reoccurring.
In the Senate we only added
about one four one point four
percent in reoccurring.
And that put us about for a
total of thirteen point seven
percent in total recurring costs
in the Senate it was stopped
there pause as we've written the
oil and gas roller coaster New
Mexico this is gonna put us
right around thirty thirty two
percent spending over the last
couple years increases and we
know what happens in oil and gas
and so as we move along we're
gonna we're gonna talk a little
bit about how the how we're in
the state office of that but
they're in the reoccurring
increases on the Senate focus on
four major items including the
supplemental compensation for
all state employees for K. in
both K. twelve and higher ed for
inflation that's the one percent
we're doing and Senator Stuart
nice bill US inflationary costs
and health care items
we've increased the making
opportunity scholarships
reoccurring the exact was
pushing for reoccurring for
opportunity for him to do
something that we set up as
reoccurring and not use one time
the food quality in the school
center Padilla that was part of
the increase was about ninety
million for higher ed thirty
million for food quality
universal meals in schools we
increase Medicaid and in
Medicaid for properly funded for
better pay for physicians that
was an additional thirty six
million.
Thirty six.
The chairman after interject on
that to make sure let's make I
can hear you well on the
Medicaid you said what was two
to four positions what was
probably think paying physicians
that's all physicians so after
sept Association thank you.
Here is thirty six million.
The other can we ask questions
as we go yeah we're gonna go
through this in the morning
we're gonna go through the sheet
on the record recurring side we
added a few things and about two
hundred eighty million so that
was refilling opportunity back
filling the law enforcement
recruitment intention rural
health care bill which was
senator us to phonics
investing in economic
diversification including our
airports roads water projects
The family leave is a cost to us
in insurance me investing in
broadband the house did not
leave this much capacity to work
with it and we had overspent
from our first meeting in our
targeted thirty percent levels
and that's mainly because of the
exact and what the house then
back fill on their side of for
the exec in so as a has House
Bill to came over the house when
we funded a portion of things
didn't fully fund things and so
that left big holes that we had
to fill in the Senate
we know we could cut our way
back to twelve percent or cut
our way back to the budget but
that would require a lot of
shifting around from the house
and we know how.
If we work together we we make
New Mexico better if we fight
with each other we don't make
New Mexico better up.
So let's give us a brief
overview of the process and I'll
turn it over to to LOC.
I don't think.
Anything to add I think perhaps
Mr chairman madam chair would be
useful to have Mr solely just
kind of highlight some of the
items on the on the pages the
the recurring and non recurring
with that be useful Mr chairman
I want to go for just a few more
points I mean our Senate finance
committee members collected and
advocated for requests from
their constituents right the LFC
in the executive branch of
vetted recommendations and how
we move forward with language
windows language tomorrow we
negotiated very hard with the
executive came in with eight
hundred million dollars in Assen
reoccurring in eight hundred and
sixty three million dollars in
assets nonrecurring as we went
through the process and cut them
down pretty narrowly
The language changes we
collectively took a blank
language action yesterday and
that is not affect the funding
of tomorrow we're going to go
through some more language
appropriations and give a
drafting instructions in their
final version in close up
we're going on general
probation act more let Charles.
Then to the sheets.
Mr Chairman you all should have
a packet that looks like this.
This touch on a couple of.
For page.
And then see if there's any
questions before moving on to
the next one okay so the first
one I wanted to bring your
attention to
was online thirteen.
This would add twenty five
million from the early childhood
trust fund which the trust fund
could handle to fund some of the
the secretaries ask around
childcare assistance and also
they had concerns about using
that trust fund for school based
health centers into that three
million dollars we move from
ECECD down to line twenty
department of health.
Excuse me Charles Mr chairman
Charles explained that to me
again what was the situation
there again because it was
coming out of the out of the was
it a settlement here that was
certain there was a and and ask
for increased probation for
child care assistance which this
amendment would accomplish and
then also back feels the amount
of the trust fund in the house
version that was being sent to
the school based health center
so this keeps school based
health centers whole and funds
in the general fund rather than
with the trust fund yeah okay
which I think
is it will require bringing the
amount that was an LS.
Our greater transfer from the
early childhood Trust Fund in
the house the version was at one
twenty five this will require
taking it to one hundred fifty
million but that's a good number
because that's a projected
revenue for FY twenty five get
north end of the funding level
the sustainable thank you thank
you for that explanation I do
remember some of that discussion
thanks Charles go to the next
item
Chair is line eighteen.
The executive had requested
additional funding to pay for
the premium taxes and for the
managed care administrative
portion of the provider rate
increases that you.
Party approved and the house
version of of the budget that's
partially paid for on line
fourteen by restoring some of
some of the house cuts to the
using health care affordability
fund for the Medicaid expansion
population.
you madam chair there are some
other savings and the
corrections department because a
lower population in prison
and then line twenty for a way
to use other state funds for the
general fund.
And on the next page two.
Madam chairman to increase the
athletics budgets for the higher
education institutions.
And then line twenty nine in
light and relate line twenty
nine would reduce the K. twelve
plus appropriation
to fifty million and reallocate
some of that for an additional
one percent across the board
race for all educators and then
also take some of the savings
and give Public other public
employees a one percent raise to
account for inflation and health
care costs.
Overall you can see that these
kinds of changes for Senate
finance paid for themselves and
wish we could go down to
starting on line forty three
you'll see many of the executive
a request it adds starting with
the twenty two million for the
food initiatives.
Additional two million for
marketing and tourism.
Five million for New Mexico Air.
In additional one and a half for
school based health centers on
top of the three that's already
in this scenario in the big
ticket item was a hundred one
million for the opportunity
scholarship on a recurring basis
your call last fall the reason
why LESC and the House version
didn't put that much in
recurring was because we had
unclear cost estimates for that
program and then when you came
into the session you're notified
of a fifty percent error rate in
a cost estimate for this project
particular program this proposal
for you would settle of fully
funding what the department
thinks the program will cost in
FY twenty four thank you Mr
chairman I think Charles on that
one I think that house at the
forty million on there didn't
think and terrible stuff happen
in answer questions okay got it
thank you the bank is on make
sure we don't let them not
answers thank you that's a total
of a hundred and thirty six
million at the executive
requested in advance and the
grand total for this section
would be a hundred thirty five
million and change Madam.
Where the house was and that's
what I did hear above where the
house and she went to see okay
our and this is recurring all of
this is because correct okay.
At what point are we going to I
just had a quick question will
answer any questions on on pages
one or two okay I think we had
that what was mine I had
Hernandez on the opportunities
co chair so I to make sure I
have the correct numbers I think
the house committee with forty
and we at now this is adding to
clarify.
This only funds opportunity the
house only had about fifty.
Forty six hundred brings it to
the full request separately when
you get to nonrecurring there's
a shortfall that is covered in
the nonrecurring section from
the current year of the forty
million shortfall come.
Our idea okay well I guess we'll
look and see what what happens
some of this has to be discussed
thank you senator but the on the
Senator Steinborn thank you
madam chair and thank you Mr
chair so when you're talking on
the page two Charles R. where
wants to respond to this when I
guess line forty three has the
twenty two point five million
for the this food food
initiatives universal meals
after the bill and and M. D. A.
F. T. E.'s.
What what how does that connect
with the page six line sixty
nine.
Is that.
I don't understand the notes on
on line sixty nine there.
That adds another three point
six million on top of the
nonrecurring special that's
already in house bill two.
So total for to a total of
eleven.
The total for these purposes for
that's all of the food
initiatives not just the the
universal music so what is the
amount for universal meals the.
Is that the twenty two point
five or would we have the thirty
three point six in the twenty
two point I mean it Mr madam
chair
Senator the exact didn't spell
out how much for each of those
the documentation that I had.
So.
I'm still trying to follow where
the eleven point one comes
together the three point six is
in addition to what's already in
the house bill do bringing it up
to eleven point one so for total
free food initiatives madam
chair is thirty that is at
thirty three thirty three
million seven correct Mr
chairman.
Thank you and
You.
So.
Madam chair and and the.
Mr Chairman.
Yes we have another.
The gender going on here so I'm
just trying to ask a question
I'm sorry.
Thank you so when we had the
items that we submitted for the
amendments there was a couple of
that we I mean I submitted like
eight or nine of them were just
just for the Brigus the record
like what's going to happen all
those who are with those types
of for those monies come from.
See if any of them were to be
accepted I guess we're gonna let
amendments a little bit more but
we know that we got to wrap this
up yeah constitutionally we're
supposed to the house bill two
two more because of the delay in
the tax package on the house and
we didn't know capacity we have
to we have to move the budget
alone and so now that we have
some co operation of what's in
the tax package we need to get
House Bill to drafted which
takes about seventy two hours
and so as we move forward and
tomorrow and language their
specials and supplementals I
think everybody trying to
accomplish that in this rack up
some of those are from agencies
we are looking at language only
through the executive right now
and I mean so we're trying to
wrap that up some of those are
double costs and we don't know
and so we're gonna do language
tomorrow and it can go through
some of that I don't think
there's going to be a whole lot
of spending capacity left as we
look.
just because of the dollar
amounts in the for the house
only sending over eleven point
nine and I'm just trying to
resolve the opportunity
scholarships and the food and
that's a hundred and thirty four
million in itself so I mean
roughly there's not a whole lot
of that as above what K. over if
you take one thirty five and and
one thirty two there's a little
bit different from what they
sent over but in the exact rex
to handle those two pretty much
sucked up a lot of reoccurring
capacity with member answer.
The jets thank you madam chair
so Mr chair so there's still a
sliver of hope that we can get
maybe something beyond the by
now and and then the the rebates
coming over at three hundred
million I'm sorry three three
hundred dollars it seems like
that would have created and I
know you I we're we're gonna
take up soak up all that
capacity but so at three hundred
dollars that seems like it would
have created a tremendous
opportunity for other things
yeah unless we decided to put it
all into reserves three hundred
and three hundred dollars
remakes are four hundred
fourteen million and so I mean
that's a grand total of that
legislation.
This we need to come down
because.
And that the and if you look on
paying seventy look at the total
of center appropriation scenario
if we expanding and come down
because of the debate cost of
four hundred forty four million
in the base plus an additional
twenty million that that the
house then added me occurring
which rebates of four hundred
sixty in the score the tax
package at and total between
rebates in taxes it's about one
most one point one billion that
they're spending in those two
categories and so that
restricted spending but then the
main thing we should restrict
click for restrictions ending
this because thirteen percent
reoccurring spending in the
state and history is taught as
well that we ride a roller
coaster in that if we don't try
to get off the roller coaster
within the minimally downturn
again in the cut of roughly
about two point eight billion
the thirty percent.
Roughly two point vers training
happens and we have to come
back.
level of of.
Our cut spending by thirty
percent in the state because of
the downturn in the oil and gas
because we're dependent on that
one thing and we know that
schools are drastic cuts in I
don't know how we're gonna
handle.
Thank you madam chair and I know
others have questions in ask
real quick maybe I can find
myself here but is there
projected of reserve scenario
already.
That we can look at we're
looking at this scenario right
now with what we spent our
reserve scenario as it sits
right now currently right around
twenty six point seven percent
reserves.
Well that was quite interject
for second on that point Senator
promise to get back to us as we
were at thirty percent this is
twenty six just about three
three point three percent more
than what we had anticipated and
in general in them reserves but
okay just wanna make you less
chair I'm sorry you mean less
yeah well more spending is what
I meant but less than the
reserve but yes vehicle thank
you senator I I'll stop asking
questions now but I'm just
curious to know how we.
We would like we're thirty one
to thirty two percent reserves
and we got when we received.
The.
H. P. two.
Thirty right at thirty percent
reserves and then with the one
third divisional spending right
one thirty five an additional
spending we've dropped our
service.
The inmate in non may and we
have currently.
Dropped about twenty six percent
what what madam chair with the
on this will be my last question
what is the reserve or the with
the rebates in HD to when they
came over and how much for that.
you madam chair and senator
there was a billion dollars set
aside for the tax package and
included rebates.
And so that's how we scored the
total cost of rebate and the tax
package so that there is a
billion they spent about that
thinking about a billion one in
between rebates in taxes right
now.
I think that's all I have for
the moment.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
thank you madam chair so.
I'm sitting here a little bit
flabbergasted because.
We're being given a final budget
scenario and we're here and
we're waiting for the really
hasn't been a week
we were supposed to go through.
budget items that we were going
to talk about we were going to
go through language which we
haven't talked about and.
You know with all due respect Mr
chairman I mean there's there's
projects that are really
important how we do see it one
time.
Items on here so there's
something that city we really
didn't get a collectively decide
those.
Thanks for short circuiting this
process and
That's really disturbing to me
for nine billion dollar budget
percent finance committee.
And yet now we're almost out of
time didn't have to be that way
still and have to be that way
so.
But you know.
Outside of taking two million
dollars away from species
threatened species just.
You know some of the priorities
to my district in that are on my
list you know.
I just don't see any of that
reflected in here I mean I see
some items of course all this is
important I'm sure.
But I'm just wondering why we
were supposed to go through
we're supposed to go through
some funding items a long time
we're supposed to go through
language.
Now I think I'm hearing you say
there's no opportunity for us to
talk about any funding.
Maybe we'll talk about some
language items that personally
you feel are worthy for us talk
about tomorrow why do we short
circuit that process that we you
told us we're gonna have a we
get to talk about funding of we
get to talk about language.
Madam chair center with the
house only sings over eleven
point nine million we meet with
the exact and we get their
priorities and we move on in one
million
for opportunity and removed
roughly thirty three million for
food does not give the ability
for Senate finance a lot of room
to add a whole bunch of money.
Four I mean if we look at what
we spent over here to satisfy
the exact is a hundred and sixty
million roughly.
Not between not nonrecurring and
reoccurring in so what capacity
is left.
Up Mr chairman I mean there's
some capacity left in I don't
care if it's if it's five cents
or five million dollars I mean
that's why we have a committee
we have a democracy so and we're
getting lots of feedback from
the public about how what are
important to them.
And it's just it anyway I'm
just.
Senator we know the public
hasn't have probably have not to
to look at this one thing I we
got to get a budget out tomorrow
it's just.
I'm just and I I was a member of
the house Appropriations
Committee.
this my fifteen through the
legislature not V. at this and
I'm just saying.
It we've had very little input
in on this and I don't think
that's right would pass budget
so I'm just gonna say that and.
And I don't even know what
opportunities program tomorrow.
Senator I can tell you this an
opportunity with with
capital at four million dollars
which is a record number you
have an opportunity with junior
money which is nine hundred
million dollars per person to
reflect stuff that you wanted to
do and so at some point when we
get to these numbers and
nonrecurring in reoccurring
money ran expenses we have to
put a stop and we satisfy the
exact and you can go take this
up with exactly why she you want
to take her money for
opportunity and you can take it
was sent to delay one take is
money for food then we'll have
it then we'll have a discussion
when you get them to change.
Thank you senator Byrd.
Thank you madam chair
the.
You have a a line item here for
a tourism to two million dollars
and I think the request that we
talked about last week was ten
million point three is that
right
at a chair Senator that's in
their recurring operating budget
and then there's another for
that you'll see in a couple
minutes and nonrecurring okay
so.
The two and the four in the what
was the other I amount those are
the two about six million total
okay so we can get to ten we got
to six.
Madam chair okay and just a side
bar
project echo I know after six
million I think there's is there
a hundred thousand I don't see
it on the list here project that
goes on line twenty twenty seven
it came over six hundred million
as far as I know they ask for an
additional five hundred thousand
to get him to one point two okay
Mr chair asked but let me remind
project echo their words last
year as we gave them that big
giant bomb blast here.
And he told me I will not be
back next year for more money it
at the last minute project echo
comes in whether you like it or
not but I'm just repeating what
his words to me last year I
think we gave them a three
million dollar bump in the prior
year it was a large number and
she said that was Phillis
request for two years and then
we have them back.
And and that and that's for
observation
I just
on on tourism and eco are just
two examples of programs that
are working we see the results
we talk about a fact base or or
performance based budgeting and
here to programs that have
exceeded expectations quite
frankly one of them behavioral
health which we talk about with
gun violence and everything else
to to help out in that arena and
and tourism even through COVID
is just continue to grow and and
perform well
and yet they're requests for a
little bit short changed so I I
just I know it's a big budget we
have.
Billions of dollars in
requesting less up on trying to
make a point if we're going to
get serious about doing this the
right way transparency and doing
performance based and or or fact
based budgeting there's two
examples where we fell short and
we really need to look at that
as we go forth on this thank you
madam chair Madam chair Senators
point if you look below the line
on the executive adds the
executive king back in I mean
that was there at.
I'm sorry course and look on the
grand total of that is so yeah
forces you to act adds those
were there the executives
request.
Senator you still I'm I'm
finished thank you very much I
didn't have anyone else my list
but I do have just a couple of
questions on the echo program
that we talked about I think
eight hundred came in from the
house not six hundred Senator so
I want to make that correction
and then also let's see on the
the superintendent of insurance
I wanted to ask just to make
sure I know they were short and
I want us on the high risk pool
and I wanted to see if we ever
want to meet him at least partly
hold on because they for during
the COVID they have been chairs
of fifty three.
Okay and see where thank you all
right thank you very much of my
to see where it was okay and
there any other questions I
don't have time to look at
everything right now and I don't
think anyone does but we
appreciate the work that you've
done and we can continue self.
Move on a nonrecurring and.
Files okay
Madam chair line.
Three the administrative office
of the courts this would add an
additional three
for the County courthouse with a
matching requirements and that
that's in the capitol building
so that's an additional three.
The courts request an additional
ten for speech to text hardware
to upgrade through judicial
bring proceedings that would
bring them to a total of six
million and they said they could
do with out two million of the
appropriation for security
equipment and technology I would
point your attention to line six
where there was a request to.
Have language added to the pre
trial services providing the
courts from spending money on
pre trial assessment that's not
been validated by AOC in the
Supreme Court for for for that
to that as the Arnold pool.
five million additional for
matching for federal
infrastructure grants to bring
it to a total of ten on line
nine.
Line ten for infrastructure
upgrades for the murder response
to make bright fire.
Removing these next two items
from the bill.
Ten million for San Juan County
energy transition.
Three point six I need to double
check to make sure that's not
double counting the executive a
total for DFA.
Forty nine million more for
matching broadband funds that
would come from the money that
stranded in the New Mexico
connect fund right now and not
being put to use this to put it
to use.
there's language in your packet
for adjusting the earmarked for
the fifty million for economic
development projects.
The medical insurance pool
shortfalls madam chair is on
line twenty.
for response restoration to the
black fire range or black range
fire.
Hello that.
On page four.
Five million online thirty seven
for the rural infrastructure
revolving loan fund.
And ten million for emergency
drinking water fund five million
a that would be contingent on
house bill four fifty three that
water subcommittee worked on
that Charles yes we got pages
phone I mixed up so maybe
but I don't know kind of the
order of the agency code.
For.
That order sorry about that so
what we're gonna do page I.
We'll go back following the
water so I.
I agency code all right thank
you on page five ten million for
critical dam maintenance
improvement projects.
two million for the.
And more on that one that
includes two and a half million
for the project patch that I
discussed with Google Senators.
And then line twenty sixth
through twenty eight are they
are language changes what they
are your marks for how the money
would be spent came over
undefined from the house would
be twelve and a half million for
matching funds to leverage
federal infrastructure grants
for
tribes ten million in
coordination with HSD for start
up cost to expand tribal serving
health care behavioral health
services.
three million for creating
transitional caught for funding
tranches.
Tribal serving a community
hospitals and then two and a
half million for native American
studies faculty teaching and its
statewide.
six million online twenty nine
this is appropriating money
that's in the case of a major
fund to authorize its use as
institutional eight million
that's already in house bill
two.
Thirty two is forty million for
the rural health care providers.
Twenty.
As we
go back to page.
The.
Later on to your.
Nine forty six the deficiency
for the school bus replacement
from other state funds.
Higher education this is
authorizing money that's already
been appropriated and the other
state funds.
The five million for the
bioscience Authority online
fifty two that would be
contingent on legislation.
Then land fifty four that's for
online course developed.
At NMSU.
In online on page six.
Seventy four million online
sixty for major transportation
infrastructure projects
contention on enactment of the
tax bill making this fund
available in the road fund.
fifty million for upgrades to
airport statewide and then some
changes and fund transfers for
the conservation fund to make
some of that money available
In the near term rather than in
the long term in the permanent
fund big changes in the
executive that list are sixty
million for law enforcement
recruitment twenty million for
housing initiatives.
Eight point two million for the
law enforcement protection fund.
That four million for marketing
online seventy four.
Sixteen point two million for
the patients compensation fund
there's already money in the the
budget for that.
In the hospital.
Money this is duplicate of what
you saw before.
Department of Health for million
from Google homelessness
response.
In on page seven.
The PED initiatives for
attendance success and special
education and then the
opportunity scholars.
The documents behind this are
just supporting documentation
for example on page ten.
Director Miss.
Environment Department requests
to reorganize some of its
special appropriations and that
yellow column shows the
reorganization it's revenue
neutral.
Eleven just shows how the tech
enhancement funding would be
appropriated by institution with
that Representative answer any
other questions.
Thank you Charles any questions
Senator Padilla thank you madam
chair and and Mr chairman so
On page ten Charles who spoke of
the reorganization of those
funds and how it net net net was
zero change or whatever do we
feel confident that we or or how
much of the changes from ECECD
where they want to have all the
money's moved around or whatever
do we feel like we met those
objectives are Senator Senator
chair Senators these are just
economic our Environment
Department changes that came
over from the house that the
secretary requested that he gave
me a range the house is in
agreement with the re
arrangements with the secretary
and the only affects the
environment so I I get that part
but I I just was transitioning
us over to the C. center early
childhood
the recommendation was to add
that money for child care
assistance which was their
priority.
and then not use it for school
based health centers and then
you had a language change that
you looked at last weekend to
not use the early childhood
trust fund for children's
behavioral health and instead
use it for infant medical
services keep that zero five age
range that was a priority for
the secretary so I I ask these
questions Mr chair only because
you know I know a lot happening
in everyone's doing working
really hard and I just want to
insure that we at least sit here
to most if not all of those
those desired changes I mean
those are the professionals are
the ones around the departments
and stuff and I know that we
don't have to agree with
everything they have to say that
I I would the only want to keep
asking because there were some
huge ships going on there so and
then Mr chairman madam chair
Senator for pre K. you know
there's allocations that are
assumed on the spreadsheets the
high levels that you see there's
not language attached to that so
the department has full
flexibility that they think the
rate increases need to be a
little bit higher and the number
of slots that they're buying a
little bit lower they have that
flexibility thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
There's a two for two things
number one to tomorrow Mr are we
gonna go through all the
language requests that we made
for you we're gonna review that
we're still waiting for some
language from the exact she's so
we're gonna see where we end up
to see you in the and then I'll
make a decision to go to a
language.
And number three you know on the
budget I mean I I definitely see
budget decisions I mean you you
said while you're taking away
from food but there's lots of
other budget decisions in here
recurring money for rodeo
Representative let X. you know
decisions which I'm sure those
are totally worthy but when
we're fighting for pennies here
for lots of other priorities
that we're not getting the
opportunity I mean I guess I'm
asking because maybe we just
tomorrow need to have a good old
fashioned amendment process in
the committee.
Where we just consider
amendments to this thing I mean
we can do that
so I mean I guess there's not an
opportunity otherwise talk about
parties other than the chairs
and I guess school for the deaf
the.
What what is your expectation
that we're going to vote on.
We're going to we're doing this
tonight we're still working with
the executive on some issues and
so when we resolve those issues
with the executive hopefully
tonight that we're gonna start
wrapping up the final version
house bill two tomorrow review
some language was spending and
then we're going to the house on
house bill two to be a print it.
And then it's going to come back
to us seventy two hours which
would be about Thursday or
Friday and then we're going to.
Saturday and then vote on house
bill two.
So when when when is it your
plan that we would vote on.
On it is this committee.
Saturday.
Senator.
But.
Tomorrow we're gonna go through
language more the only
Wednesday.
So if we were to have amendments
to this when we need for that we
had to have the budget to it on
tomorrow because of the tax
package we had no we don't know
what capacity was looking like
we didn't know what the tax
package what rebates would look
like statutorily we kept waiting
on that for the house to unveil
House package was stated Monday
which then.
Set the ball rolling down the
hill rather quickly in order to
get us there.
Thank you so maybe tomorrow
we're doing language you know we
could look at some amendments
for a the following days or even
up till Saturday.
And that's traditionally what
the committee is the right Mr
chairman you were here back in
the day one cent house Senate
Bill center and it's used to do
amendments and actually in the
back in the day they did I'm
over in in a different room or
doing them in the open in public
and so there's a big difference
in house and then the to handle
and then economic about the vote
in order.
That's why we heard language
street language the other day
and that's why we had a deadline
on Thursday and I about language
and so we're trying to do this
more openly it's a learning
process for everybody but when
you have the guests from the
executive and you have language
coming from an agency that the
executive does not know about
and it's executive agency than
where how the hell is a language
so that's the that's the reason
we have to scrub language pretty
hard we have to put a limit on
spending at some point all Mr
chair and I agree with all that
except it's a collective
enterprise right we should all
be we should include this
talking about language talking
about the money making hard
decisions.
And.
That's the way this is supposed
to work when a bill the budget
in LOC it comes over the certain
amount we met the executive in
the LFC rack almost dead even
David between the exact in the
LFC wreck the small difference
the house increase that in non
reoccurring spending the
capacity from from the one
million in non recurring
spending to send to the
permanent fund they pulled a
hundred fifty million out they
sent us over with eleven point
nine and capacity and we try to
work I try to work with
executives no matter who they
are that we come to a ballots in
we get priorities for both sides
I think when the legislature and
when the governor raised capital
from six hundred ninety nine
million when we had capital
coming and LFC one point one
billion four hundred more
million in spending then we have
issues with where the money go
and I think that's a question
you're asking me and that's
exactly question I think you
need to ask executive and why
the increased capital spending
by four hundred million dollars
Mr chairman and with all due
respect we're co equal branch of
government where the
appropriating branch of
government so I respect the
executive they can make requests
and then we we get to
collaborate and we get a send up
a budget so so the by saying
well they made him that doesn't
mean anything of that system
request we get a process that I
see lots of.
Deductions here fifteen million
which is good for Corman called
rose seventy five million seven
the seventy fifth sorry seven
million five hundred thousand
per animal shelter statewide
that we're removing two point
five million.
Four or two million for lead up
it's really sad when I.
Not my sport two million dollars
for Representative species in
the state so we're we're
factional as money in decisions
are being made in the yeah there
is so there is capacity
justifications and I know it's
tough for for future I agree
with that.
but I think we have to put in
the work and and go the extra
mile to make a collaborative
process so and I'm just saying
there's other priorities that
are reflected I think with a
little more work we can probably
get there we should look at
language there's really
important entities from
commission on the line that were
promised and promised some
language there's graduate
students service my university I
can go on these I don't think
these are revenue impacting
things but there needs to be a
process so we can go through.
The the extra work here
expecting that's going to happen
tomorrow or at least will just
back in the center there is a
process it's called introducing
a bill interesting the bill for
funding whether it's for the
black fires whether it's for the
hermits peach fires that is the
process for introducing language
to the budget it's not a back
door of adding money to their
language on house bill two
everybody here has the
opportunity to introduce a bill
for what they think is a
priority and that is a process
the legislative process to get
money in the budget and how we
move forward although there is a
process of not the case and you
know lots of language like a
commission for the blind and
he's just a little tweak and
some things is not a bill it's
it's language and and then we
see bills becoming language so
that's okay I'll just stop there
and hopefully we'll just keep
working through this and.
The democratic collaborative
with thank.
Thank you senator I think on
that point agent did you want
explains that was at on the
school for the blind briefly
thank you miss madam chair
Senator I'm more in regards that
language you actually do have in
the LFC rack up of language that
you received a few days ago so
that was already included.
in that.
So.
It was the original paper you've
got the LFC one.
Was it you'll get to see it
again tomorrow you'll get a new
copy was that language what
Senators timer was concerned
about in there okay thank you
all right Senator we can look at
that language tomorrow if the
language is going to come in
again thank you Senator Padilla
and then we have Senator of us
on this thank you madam chair
Mister chair and it just a real
quick comment so maybe tomorrow
when with you did say we have a
conversation on these amendments
and all this language we also
made so maybe tomorrow we could
just have that document print
produced again so we have a for
the meeting and then what if any
capacity would be available for
any of those items the we could
just know what that is so that
we know what we're working with
so those would be two things I'd
like to have for that meeting if
that's if the chair approves.
By Senator Padilla could you
repeat the sure sure and we're
all friends here so all those
things maybe tomorrow we could
have two things for the
discussion you said we would
have on amendments have just I
think would be very helpful for
other members here to would just
all of this the amendment so we
submitted and then just you know
ace a swap that are like a of a
projection of what if any
capacity is available for any of
those and that we have those two
items there and we can have that
as part of the discussion
tomorrow.
With your permission.
What we're gonna look at that
right.
and and look at capacity.
So we're we're still negotiating
with the exact over rebates and
a few more items
that they're talking about so I
mean.
Yes these pretty much at its
limit I mean if there what will
look into that and then I'll get
you a straight answer tomorrow's
it's hard because and all they
had was in on the floor and you
know that and that was we were
running around the streets
trying to figure out who's where
which chicken is running without
its head off.
Well as we go ahead with that.
All right down Senator from for
okay thank you Senator share and
then Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you
Madam chair so I.
We know we're talking about this
tax plan in dealing with this
tax plan but it still seems like
it's.
Well certainly no one's voted on
it at all.
Other than the governor sure
she's voted on it but is anybody
else voted on it.
so how can we come up with
anything until we know.
What this is and we agree
conflict this is cordless the
majority of us agree.
Center I believe they introduce
the house tax package yesterday
yes they do they're gonna vote
on that tonight or tomorrow is
my understanding
excuse me and we can have all of
our and I think then I think
we'll have an understanding
where the tax package is that
that's why we're at this point
right now we've told them what
their capacity is.
And we haven't told them what
taxes they could do but we told
month capacity is and so as we
move forward seventy two hours
to get house bill two ready is
is where we have to head and
that's why we're doing this
tonight and so we told what
capacity is they have a million
dollars with tax package in
rebates complete one set.
And so that's where working for.
I know that's not the answer you
want but that's answer I know.
Full of along the same lines we
still don't have a clear.
Governor's package of what she
wants to do we.
I do not have any of the.
Talking to the exec.
Is the I have worked on the tax
package but they don't have an
executive tax packages that they
say is there's I mean the the
the the total of what the
governor.
Spent between whatever funds she
was doing.
capital outlay funds and things
like that we have any clue what
that is.
Capital outlay we know exactly
what that is that's one point
one billion on capital outlay
that we spent we when was six
ninety nine they added
additional capital outlay.
And everybody got additional
capital outlay including the
exact so capital outlay was one
point one billion.
But we know what that is we know
that I guess that's the point we
know the projects.
We do not know because we don't
have the capital bill it's in
the house in the chairman of the
capitol
we don't have that I don't know
where that is and drafting or
anything I can it looks like an
address response that Mr
chairman if I may Senator last
time I spoke to Legislative
Council they said that by the
end of this week they're working
to finalize that plus the re
authorization bill also because
they were working hand in hand
with both I asked to the
governor's allocations for
capital outlay had been received
already and they said yes and so
they were just putting all
together and indicated that by
this weekend by the the mission
Thursday that possibly Friday
they were hoping that all would
be together so we haven't seen
what those allocations from the
governor was from the phone
allocations we have from the
statewide.
Projects you thank you so.
Madam chair Mr chair these are
two really big chunks of money
up really really like two
billion dollars in round
numbers.
I find it difficult.
For me to reconcile what this is
without those two big chunks out
there somewhere because a lot of
what the governor is going to
spend money on could be
reoccurring things in here that
are least related to reoccurring
things maybe not directly causes
our capital projects but they
may have something to do with
the.
And with the tax package at
least a portion of that I have
seen.
That's that is not tax reform.
That's that's tax not reform I
do it just as polite as I can be
a reform.
And I thought that that's what
we wanted to do with our billion
dollars.
And we didn't come close to that
so.
I'm concerned that both of those
big projects here.
May call of this practically
relevant until we know more
about it and I know we've got an
obligation to do this I know it
takes three days printed.
But by golly somebody ought to
listen on this thing.
So it's not just Senator
Steinborn wants to know how we
came up with this but I want to
know where we're going with the
other two billion dollars.
So.
I think those are just critical
to this and I and I'm concerned
about that the it I know people
working very hard on this and
I'm please don't take anything
that's disparaging here.
I just think that we can't do
our job without knowing what the
other two were doing the other
two pieces are doing there in
any can that accounting scenario
in your business and my business
we have to have a balance on the
books here and because we don't
have that a clear view of the
tax package there's no way to
accomplish that balance we know
that me set a guideline of or.
Wireimage of one billion and so
within that guideline I mean it
is the tax package and I've seen
clear tax reform now it's it's a
tax on on the wealthy in in in
business and individuals and
that's not tax reform dropping
the G. R. T. maybe a partial per
percentage of tax reform the son
total tax reform but in any
business we have to have a
balance book and so free set the
requirements that they can only
spend this and and move forward
that's the best I can do at this
point and I understand madam
chair it's just that it's
possible.
That the tax the tax package
instead of being a billion
dollars could be nine hundred
ninety million which gives us
ten million two.
Do other things for example.
I would hope that it would be
like you know forty million
dollars difference but.
Senator they spend less in the
tax tax package then that will
just and more charters.
Right I am concerned we need a
better picture before we get too
far down the road to to
committed to anything down the
road thank you madam thank you.
Thank you senator all right
we're gonna go on to Senator
those on this thank you madam
chair no.
Charles on the
The H. two on line forty three.
So.
After the bell in in M. D. A. F.
T. A. what is what does that
mean.
Madam chair
Mills after the bill.
Currently allowed structure the
time they may have an initiative
to help fund that.
As part of your overall food is.
The the also
With with the universal meals.
so what we're going to be
working this.
Is fill in whatever the we don't
have the federal tax right now
we have the free and reduce.
And then this would be whatever
the differences right for for Mr
chairman and senator is as
you're well aware of being a
former superintendent of federal
government will allow schools
with a certain threshold of kids
that are free reduced lunch to
cover everybody regardless of if
they qualify for that service
but the higher income schools
don't qualify for all those
meals to be paid at the free
right so this would subsidize
the schools
The.
And madam chair
So we'll still keep our free and
reduce and keep our federal
allocation.
Okay I guess the only concern
that I see us all.
On the universal all.
It's really hard at the high
school.
Because you know it's really
hard for.
To get those forms back you
almost have to look on a one to
one.
And I'm afraid that they won't
do it.
Does any way we can get it free
now and we would be losing out
of federal dollars
Madam chair Senator the public
education department actually
does a lot of data matching with
other public assistance programs
now to alleviate that problem of
getting a paper forms Act
they're automatically just I
called express lane eligibility
where they're automatically
enrolling low income students
into the program by using other
data that the state is already
collected at the state level to
demonstrate that they would
qualify for.
Madam chair of the last part is
so I really don't know the
answer why it was so I don't
know if it was still an option
or up to the but some charter
schools didn't have a lunch
program.
The this would enable.
All students including charter
schools.
Madam chair Senator it's my
understanding that there are a
number of charter schools who
choose not to participate in the
program and there's some school.
Conversations with executive
officials they don't anticipate
because of this program that
they would then opted.
Sure there probably will be no
change for the schools that are
not participating for choosing
other information to not
participate.
I guess the last thought of
madam chair is so.
To me a student is a student of
the month or they go to school.
You know and if there's an
opportunity that they could have
a.
A lunch program.
In our eyes I think somehow we
would need to work with that.
You know they should be without
a full lunch just because of
the.
There are a by a reporter
whether to system to do it.
You know and
You know I hope that something
that we can work on and then fix
the statewide.
Thank you thank you Senator all
right I didn't have anyone else
but I do have want to just ask a
couple of questions on the ETA
money that was already allocated
but has not been it was not
appropriated for the Indian
Affairs Department and the
workforce solutions I think I
think that was like fifty
million in there that was just
not approach not graduated yet
are appropriated do you know
where that is I saw something
here on the IAD fifteen men and
some but I I didn't see anything
on the workforce solutions and
they just haven't appropriated
it was just sitting tell me
about.
Page I.
Okay and what numbers that.
It's five thirty four thirty
four okay I see the money for
Indian Affairs is on line
twenty.
Twenty.
Can.
One second itself.
Okay try we're still on it okay
got it okay and that is not two
thousand come online twenty
twenty five I'm sorry
we have two point five million
okay I thought there was more
that we had allocated for them
and have been budget that's the
Indian Affairs L..
Okay.
workforce solution is the
largest of fourteen million
times okay all right thank the
governor put
thirteen million or fifteen
million in the junior battle
for.
Of work relief in that area okay
you just want to make sure it
was used not sitting there
because the okay and then one
question here is we're looking
at all of these things that we
have a hundred and thirty five
million in non recurring added
to house bill two and we have
three hundred and some mid and I
think close to three hundred
thirty million added in
nonrecurring to the three
hundred twenty eight eight
hundred eighty five million at
it of non recurring money to
house bill two and I guess the
question that I have is where is
the house are we working
together with the house do they
know about this that we have to
meet with them or is that our
proposal how does that work
where is it going from here to
make sure that we're not in the
it's not an exercise in futility
here because we need to get a
consensus just wanted to know
madam chair we rent with met
with the chair House
Appropriations roughly about
three times a week so let him
know where pieces were moving in
big pieces removing and so we
have a meeting tomorrow AT and
with him Monday Wednesdays and
Fridays and so he pretty much
does on the serial for Monday
today we moved a lot of things
around with the exact and so
what we'll update him first
thing tomorrow morning on on
where we're at the house is one
of this to hold at thirty
percent reserves we're gonna try
to figure that out as as we go
for tomorrow so we don't end up
in a conference committee and so
we'll discuss that with them in
the morning I say so basically
at this point this may not be
reality because if they're still
looking at thirty point some
percent reserves and we're at
twenty six because of these ads
than this is not going to be it
may not like to be reality the
rabies quite a bit of change if
if the house usually we're used
to seeing discussion with the
house and communication the
consensus before before we see
it so that we know that what
we're seeing is in fact what is
going to stick at least to a
great extent but I just wanted
to make sure we we feel
comfortable.
With with the communications
that have been taking place and
so on and I guess maybe a model
number I I feel pretty
comfortable we've let him know
all along remember that the
house spent some some money and
specials and supplementals that
the Senate did not get to spend.
A big chunk to some some some
priorities for the house seventy
million in in one of New fifty
million in other and so we're
going to have those
conversations with the house
So we've had those conversations
that leadership meeting
yesterday with the house and
where they want to do it and
what school are and one more and
talking about that Senator Mr
chair the rebates may change
everything to its factory based
on stick at three hundred and
they could go up because I know
the governor was asking for five
hundred thousand dollars at a
minimum and so that may change
too and if that changes that
this has to change corrector we
have to support the in we have
to remember one thing on our
side of the aisle is is that.
That the hundred and one million
in net and reoccurring money
from opportunity what's the
exact was the biggest push on
got resolved on our side in
indigo result on their side and
not in reoccurring money you got
a look at that and you know look
at the food initiatives that we
had to result in you have to
look at the swaps for the early
childhood stuff that we had to
resolve that came in the house
on result in that we had to fix
look at really what we spent in
in entirety if we eliminate
those numbers the price spent
not even three tenths of a
percent in the Senate because
the house didn't didn't
recognize a good the execs a
request.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I
guess we'll find out some more
by tomorrow see where we are on
some more consensus than thank
you very much for that and
that's all I have are there
alternative would have some
questions Senator one question
on hold school transportation.
And I know that we change that
endorsement a little bit in that
are that density factor have we
put the money in under the
category in case which grew up
there Senator we did the density
factor increased by three
percent and we put in an
additional ten million on top
the density factor so there
should be no issues with it and
see factor we check that with
the new PED secretary this
morning from the double checked
a couple of things in PED and so
the density factor has more than
enough money to resolve the
issue correct yes but the the
question I had was.
Given would not put any more and
an emergency fund somewhere that
we lacked.
grown into a case worst case
scenario.
Increase Senator if we looking
in public schools support on
page twelve on my glasses for my
phone forty four you'll see the
increase in the density factor
there to twelve million dollars.
That's the increase that
includes.
The increase includes of setting
that into the fact.
And what time is that Senator
nine forty four forty five.
I am sorry.
Okay.
Senator don't know whether no
other questions thank you all
right what when this before I
just want.
Question on the phone page
eleven.
Where we start talking about
technical enhancement funding.
And and under the.
It.
The the and that's the.
The lower community college
there.
it is that pretty well four
million for whatever they need
to use it for half it is
specific projects or.
Madam chair Senator they have
flexibility within sort of
they've already spent.
And they already spent the some
of.
This last year's appropriation
which was allocated this is last
year appropriation okay leaving
a balance which is appropriated
in house bill to the issue after
the end of school.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and final question just
before tomorrow if we can follow
up I noticed that for the office
of the in a superintendent
insurance that we talked about
one twenty on that seven hundred
and fifty it's actually not
appropriating new money it's
taking from the health care
affordability fund and putting
that in into the office of the
insurance pool so I don't know
how that's going to fit.
What what are much does one
hundred million dollars.
Okay that we appropriate anymore
on that I remember what the
total was that we looked at.
Annual revenue in that fund is
that you don't have to look
right now I just want it wasn't
your day because I know you're
tired but I wasn't sure if we
already had if it had enough
funds in there and it was
intended
and after all these
appropriations okay.
Thank you.
Okay thank you very much and.
No words thank you that's all I
have an thank you committee and
Mr chairman and staff again
profusely I will see you
tomorrow what time do we follow
up tomorrow Mr chair in the room
for the culture but I think it
depends how late we were trying
to solve all the should say nine
thirty tomorrow morning.
Okay thank you very much.
C. Altamonte.
