of the department. So overall in
a $204 million budget, there's a
difference of about 400,000 in
the LFC and the executive
recommendation, so a very small
difference, and I'll just really
quickly talk about the
facilities management program,
which is the only program.
In the department that is uh
entirely at the current moment
at the entirely funded by the
general fund, uh, so the LFC
recommendation uh is a little
bit higher in the personnel
category that's, uh, the agency
is prioritized filling vacancies
and, and some targeted pay
increases in that uh area, so
we're a little bit higher in the
personnel category versus other
costs for maintenance and other
expenses of the department. I'll
just notice, note the LFC
recommendation also.
includes 169.2,000 uh in other
state funds for the department
to begin a pilot project uh
utilizing current statutory
authority to charge building use
fees to agencies. So the idea
would be there's uh an agency
that's getting ready to move in,
uh, to a new building based on
uh an appropriation you all
passed a couple of years ago,
um, to, to get, uh, the public
regulation commission in
state-owned space, uh, the LFC
recommendation for both
agencies.
include some, some of their some
of their rental dollars that are
already in the base could be
used for a building use fee to
try uh to uh.
Pilot that program in uh
In light of uh LFC program
evaluation recommendation that
suggested increasing uh the use
of that program.
And with that I'll handle it
over to Diego Jimenez with the
uh.
Uh, Department of Finance and
Administration for any comments
he has real quick.
Thank you, Jerry. I'm Diego
Jimenez. I'm the DFA analyst for
um.
The General Services department
at this time, um, Joey did a
great job of highlighting most
or all of the differences there,
I guess I would just like to
stress that the uh executive
recommendation include included
some additional funding in the
facilities management.
Program, um
So that the department can, can
Appropriately staffed new
state-owned buildings.
And um with that I'll hand it
over to the acting secretary,
Joey is at $400,000 difference
right there, isn't so he's man
I'm looking, but.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, you're, uh,
it's 451,000 difference overall,
you'll you'll notice the
personal services category is a
million dollars higher in the
LFC, uh, and $1.6 million lower
in the other costs category.
So we just need to do some
shifting.
Um,
You know, Mr. Chair at the
pleasure of the committee.
And
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Anna
Silva and I'm the acting cabinet
secretary for the General
Services department. Um, I'd
like to start by introducing,
um, our wonderful team. I have
uh Jennifer Kahn, who's our
deputy cabinet secretary. We
have uh Andrew Miner, who's the
general counsel for risk
management division. We have
Jeanette Chavez, who is the risk
management division director. We
have Joe B Hill who is our
public information officer
behind him, we have Dorothy
Mendonnka who's our state
purchasing agent.
And um behind her we have
Lakesha, um who is our ASD
director and uh the deputy
director, Brad Matthews is
sitting next to her, and then we
have James Chavis, who is our uh
deputy director for the
transportation department.
So, a little bit about uh the
general services department.
Our agency is dedicated to
supporting state governments and
all other agencies offering a
comprehensive range of services.
Um, we have everything from
custodial services to
landscaping maintenance, project
managers, attorneys of
engineers, architects, you name
it, it's all under our house.
I'm starting on page 2. 88% of
the general services
department's budget is
enterprise funds. The only
division that is 100% general
fund is the facilities
management division. Our
requested increase for our
agency is to cover actual costs
of settlements and the risk
management division and the
remainder of the increase is to
cover personnel costs,
specifically in facilities
management division, we have 26
positions that are term
positions. Those are two-year
positions that will be expired
ring June 30th. The reason that
those positions are so important
is because they support all of
our capital projects. So we have
large projects that are
currently in construction, the
forensics building in Las Vegas,
the metro facility for DPS in
Albuquerque and veterans, um,
cemeteries just to name a few.
Turning to page 3.
This slide shows our specials
and our supplementals. From this
slide you can see that DFA
supports a $55 million request
and the LFC supports 27 million.
Turning to page 4, our funds and
our budget requests.
If you look at the risk
management division fees loan.
This is to cover operational
costs. Under that line is the
risk management fund, which is
made up of 3 funds. The workers'
comp fund, which is the premium
all local public bodies, schools
and state agencies pay so that
we cover them in the event of a
work comp claim.
The public property fund, which
is the fee we pay for our
property insurance and the
public liability fund, which is
fund is named for, which are
premiums we charge to ensure
entities belonging to our pool.
Turning to the next page, page
5.
This is a little bit about our
public liability fund.
The public liability fund has
been able to meet the costs of
annual claims from annual fees
collected from agencies and
entities covered by the fund. Up
until FY 23, this method has
worked. The agency was able to
collect enough fees annually to
cover claim costs.
However, with changing times and
shock losses, which we um
discussed in a previous session,
which are settlements over
$500,000.
Our claims have increased as a
result of higher awards, costs
and fees which have now created
a pay as you go system that no
longer works and costs have now
exceeded fees that have been
collected.
Looking at the table on the
bottom right. These represent
unforeseen settlements that
represent 38% of total claims
paid in FY 25.
Or roughly $12 million of the
$32 million paid.
Traditional insurance plans
utilize a reserving method to
project the potential costs of
their unrealized liabilities.
We like to think of it as um a,
an example is of your mortgage
on your house, the mortgage for
your house, you know what that
payment is monthly, but in the
event of a loss or a roof or
damages, we need to save for
those rainy days.
And then turning to the last
page.
On page 6. This is just a
depiction of some of the
highlights that we have done in
GSD.
If you look at the middle page,
this is the new D1 facility, the
District one facility for DPS.
Um, below that is the new state
plane that we just purchased
last year.
To the left of that is the new
crime lab that we just
constructed last year.
To the middle right, this is our
new pine tree facility that we
completed. We, this was a, a
bill to suit of 5 buildings
where we were able to move to
agencies into from lease space
to state space saving the state
$2 million a year.
And then above that is a a
picture of our CPO program with
our mobile CPOs, where the
environment department had a
lapse in their CPO, so we were
able to step in and uh help
support that agency, do their
procurements and uh RFPs and ITB
so they didn't have any breaks
in service.
And with that, I will stand for
questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Hill, you don't have to
ask a question, but.
I know. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, um,
secretary, it's nice to see you
again. I noticed on the, um the
quick facts. This is GST.
Um, the, the, um,
I understand why the risk
management funds went from
yellow to red.
Uh, the group health is always
red, facilities management, we
got that up to yellow, good job.
Um, and then the transportation,
but there's a note here that
says that the facilities
management division continues to
struggle with on-time
completion.
Of maintenance projects and
transportation services. Um,
what's the struggle?
Just to chair, uh, Senator
Trujillo. So we have um been
tasked with uh building new
facilities. I like to think of
our team is like the Mission
Impossible team, so we get an
assignment and we don't have the
option to not accept it.
So, um, we have 7 new buildings,
but we don't receive the staff
to actually support the
facilities. So we are now in a
situation to where we don't have
enough custodians, some of our
custodians are doing 2 floors at
a time.
we don't have enough
maintenance, we don't have
enough landscapers. So our work
order system where instead of
being able to respond to work
orders within a matter of an
hour or 2 hours, sometimes it
might be the entire day or the
next day before we can get to a
work order.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary. So is it
that there's not money to hire
them or there's not people to
hire.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Trujillo, it's that we don't
have enough money to hire them.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Lanier.
Thank you, sir. All right. Um.
So, so kind of staying on the
employee part of it.
How, how short were you last
year, and you may have said it,
I'm sorry. There's so much going
on up here.
How many employees short were
you last year?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Lanier.
So we are currently asking for
26 full-time positions that are
right now term positions. We're
asking for them to be changed
from term position to permanent
positions. And because those
positions will be expiring June
30th.
However, that still is not
enough. We still are going to
need additional um security,
additional maintenance, but just
to make sure that the 26
positions that we don't lose
those, we want to make sure that
we turn them to permanent
positions and then next year we
will come back with another
request for additional um FTEs.
OK, and what was the total cost
on that, Mr. Chair.
I believe we have $4 million is
the request for.
I
I think that's what I'm seeing,
but I'm not sure.
We show we what pe code are
those in?
So Mr. Chair, uh, P code for um
facility managers P 608. So it
looks like if you, if you
reference your PS calc on page
16 of the LFC packet. You, yeah,
you can see, um,
We're projecting current FY20 uh
6 cost of $14 million that was
for 146.5 FTE uh according to
the most recent headcount report
there at 141, so pretty close to
to to that limit, um, so the
agency requested.
Uh,
an increase to go up to 15.7
million. The LFC recommendation
is 14 million, a little more
than 14 million.
Thank you. And
The new administration building
here in Santa Fe, where we kind
of out on that.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Linnier.
Administration building, um, the
executive office building. Oh
sorry,
no problem. So, um, tonight
there's actually a a public
meeting before the historic
review board so we can present
our uh design, so, um, we're
gonna start working with the
historic review board so that
way they can start giving their
input to the design. Once that
process is complete, then we can
go back for the request for
demoing, uh, demolishing the
casitas. OK.
And my last question.
Mr. Chair
How you have aviation 700.
I don't remember. 750, no, it's
900,000 something for aviation.
So how many planes?
Do we have?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
we have 2 planes.
To and
You're wanting to replace one or
add to that.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Linnier,
we're asking to add an
additional plane for a fly and
that does not.
Account for the governor's plan.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, um,
all three, both of them are
available for the governor. The
3rd 1 would also be available to
the governor.
OK. So is that the, yeah, is
that the 15 million?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
yes, that is the $150 million
request. So that would be for
jet.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lenier, yes.
Thank you. I, I just have to get
it straight. I have to be
senator over there cause I know
he's gonna ask you, so that's
all I have. Thank you very much.
Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Chairman.
Somebody else
So let me ask you, did you have
a deficiency this year in that
P68 code.
Um, Mr. Chair did you request a
different because it shows you
ran a negative 1.6. Uh, that is
correct. We have a deficiency.
Joey and then to the public
liability fund.
Did we not fix some of that
house build too this year.
So, um, Mr. Chairman, there are
increased in in throughout the
agencies there are increased
rates in addition in the LFC
rec. There's a $17 million
recurring uh section 8
appropriation for the public
liability fund. Uh, based on
some work we did with uh um DFA
last fall. We think that's
enough to get the, the public
liability fund.
To stay positive through the end
of FY 26.
That's a, a moving target based
on settlements.
Madam Secretary, said.
Feel comfortable with that
number.
Well we would prefer the 50
million.
Yeah, but we, we funded up the
aggencies to cover the costs,
and then increased cost, and
then we added 17.
He knows that calculation covers
the cost, or will it, will it be
close?
Mr. Chair, I believe we need um
in order to cover the cost 30
million, correct?
It was 31 this year, right? 17
and then you said that agencies
almost covered their costs. I
don't see the shortfall in your.
So I can get you the exact
number of the short that your
sheet, Joey.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, we don't
um apologize for that. We don't
actually have the specials, um,
for this agency, um.
But we can, um, but
Uh, Anna does on her in her
presentation. No, no, no, sorry.
Um
page. So on page 3 of her
presentation.
The, um, the executive
recommendation includes $50
million for RMD. That's the
first line.
Um
The LFC recommendation that's 17
million I mentioned it's not a
special it's, it's a recurring
section 8, but then there's an
additional 5 million, so that
would be a total of 22 in the
LFC rack for um the public
liability fund.
I'm just trying to calculate.
There were 31 last year, right?
And we have a total of 22.
And then plus the agency
increase, does that get us?
In total, what does that give us
to you?
Mr. Chair, um, looking at the um
slide on page 5.
So if we look at the
Uh payouts for settlements of
the 31,957,000.
That's for the claims that we
pay just half of this year, 6
months.
So we still have open claims
right above that of 2,639 open
claims.
So what we are saying is based
on the 1st 6 months, an
additional 6 months that we
still have left in the year,
although it's hard because as
Joey mentioned, it's a moving
target. So our request was the
50 million, um, however, uh,
we're basing it on the 31
million that we currently have
increase did we increase
agencies and what would that
total number?
Like to go into that fund.
So, um,
So, Mr. Chairman, if you look at
on page 12.
Uh, in your, uh, packet.
The different sheet, you'll see,
you can see the public liability
fund.
Uh sorry, that's, that's
actually just the LFC. So my
recollection, Mr. Chairman, is
the public liability fund was
about $60 million in the current
year and it's up to 91.7.
In this year, partially from Van
Valance.
OK.
Might get close.
Right, at 91 million from
agencies.
31 million shortfall.
And we're adding 22.
Yeah.
The numbers you give us joy.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm sorry, can
you repeat your
repeat your question we're
adding.
22, right? 22 million on top of
the 91 that they currently pay.
No
Um,
so yeah, so there's Mr. Chair,
uh, there's $25 million cash
balance in the fund right now.
Um, the LFC recommendation
includes uh
A $22 million direct
appropriation plus uh revenue
totaling, um,
91, about a little less, uh, no,
no, no, so that, that 91
includes the um
Includes 15 of the 17, so let me
Do some math real quick.
76 76 million in agency, so 76 +
25 plus 22.
123 million, yeah.
I'm like nothing.
Well considering that we have
reserves 333 million. We're
getting there.
OK, I guess we'll have to dig
into that a little bit more.
Anything else? No, I just want
to say thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and committee members.
Make sure you tell them upstairs
thanks for the cookie. I.
Thank you.
Uh, you want to grab Adrian
since, there he is.
Adrian's like a ghost in the
building.
Mhm
This is the rack up from this
Morning Center Pad and Senator
Steinborn made those comments
and so you have the sheet
sitting next to you.
Uh, you'll see that on section.
4 and 5.
And
Vitamin D.
But they drink anything else I
need to explain.
And so, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, this uh rack
up kind of just gives you
potential language or still
wordsmithing it up with council
service, but it would add a new
section to Senate Bill 3,
creating the behavioral Health
Executive Committee, which would
be composed of a total of 6
members, uh, it'll be the
secretary of the Healthcare
Authority or the designee, the
behavioral health services
director at the Healthcare
Authority or their designee, the
Medicaid director of the
healthcareity or their designee,
the director of AOC.
their designee and then the AOC
will get to a point to be
behavioral health experts on top
of that, and that will serve as
the overarching committee, um,
that would serve as the entity,
you know, the buck stops here,
you want somebody that where the
buck stops, this will be that
buck.
Um, and then it also includes
what powers this committee will
have. So we're gonna shift over
the designation of behavioral
health regions to this committee
instead of it just being the
administrative Office of the
courts. Now it's a collaboration
between the two.
this entity will be the one that
reviews and approves the
regional plans.
They will also establish the
funding strategies and structure
based on the approved plans. So
whether it's gonna be directly
funding based on the plans,
money needs to flow directly to
providers or should it go
through the counties, all that
stuff, this is the body that
will make that decision. Uh,
they will also monitor and track
deliverables and expenditures
related to the plan, and then
they will also establish the
project management strategy that
you requested, uh, Senator
Padilla, um, and then they will
at the very minimum can be
quarterly, that's the
language that's in here, they're
planning on meeting more than
that, obviously at the onset,
but uh since this is for the
long term, uh, at least once per
quarter. And then um
This, uh, executive committee
will report to the LFC on the
implementation status of the
regional plans. So when it comes
to reporting on how things are
being implemented, this is the
body that's going to be
responsible for that piece. Um,
in terms of the regional
planning, that's still the AOC,
but this, I believe, captures.
And finds that middle ground
between uh the concerns uh from
both uh Senator Padilla and
Senator Steinborg.
So with that, I'll stand for
questions. Any questions, chair,
and, and, um.
Adrian, I like it. I do like it.
Um, I, I think it it captures a
so it might to understand that a
I, um, this is sort of the
oversight of the work of the
entire project.
OK, and then be, Mr. Chair, um,
What exactly is, I, I see the
project management there under
B5. But what is 1 through 4
again?
OK, so you're tracking the
deliverables
it's just the powers of what
this new committee has in
relation to the whole act. And
then um in terms of the project
management strategy since the
money's in Senate Bill 2 or the
healthcare authority to be able
to hire out regional, you know,
just to be able to step up to do
all this work. We don't know
definitively if an official
office should be in order in
this bill right now or it should
wait in 3 years or, but at least
we make sure
that they developed that project
management strategy to provide
that support to the locals.
Well, I think in order to make
this work, um, on 5, I would
rather the language they
establish an office of project
management for the
implementation of
The whole thing
I know you can't say it like
that.
Well, I think you add another
layer of bureaucracy via
established an office, right?
And
But Mr. Chair, just for project
management.
it.
He likes bureaucracy.
I do.
He does it. Republicans like
bureaucracy. Well, back on
point, Mr. Chairman.
I, I, I, I think it, I don't
think it's another level or
anything like that. It's simply
an office of for this particular
purpose and then it would be
disbanded once there's an
ongoing management of this
strategy.
But to keep the project on
track, Mr. Cha.
I, I mean, I don't know why we
need an office, you already have
the agencies, right? How many do
you have on there? 5?
I can support that then. I just,
you know.
There's gotta be somebody that's
eating, sleeping and drinking
and has the whole shooting
match.
You know, in my
Hm, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, so
the, the money that's in there
for the healthcare authorities
to be able to address that. So
we can expand the language.
Um, in Senate Bill 2 to ensure
that the project management
component is captured in there,
but over 3 years they will
determine the right framework,
cause we don't know how these
regional plans are going to
shape out, right? So at least
here they're going to have the
strategy in place.
And then over 3 years, we'll see
how they deploy that strategy.
And then if it manifests where
it needs an office officially
through title and ape code, they
can do that, but they can do
this in our discussions with the
healthcare authority and they
will see they can do this
already just with the staffing.
Just by having the staff within
their divisions.
Do
you done that's.
See what
Sure, um, yeah, this looks
pretty good to me. Um.
Maybe with the exception that I
think it does have kind of a
Because of all these different
people. Thank you for trying to
capture what we talked about.
Um.
I think it it um
I still think it's, it's what
we've done here is we've kind of
created a big committee and
saying they should meet
quarterly, and that's not bad,
but I think what Senator D and I
were really after someone, like
you just said, day to day who
were workshopping this and
granted you've got all the
departments, so.
Um
Maybe there's something about,
you know, each department should
have a point person who should
work.
Regularly in communication.
This
With each other. Yeah, I think
that's kind of what we're
looking for.
Maybe a little out of peace. The
other thing I would recommend,
um, this cherry on the number 4
B4.
Where we say monitor and track
deliverables and expenditures
and then we have to uh by whom,
and I would add and address
deficiencies.
In the implementation.
Of the act or in the
implementation of the
development of regional plans.
Cause that's one area where I
think I anticipate that people
are going to lag behind some of
them, and that's the crux of
your system. So I just think
that would be additive to what
you have there rather than just
track deliverables and
expenditures, but address the
deficiencies, that's kind of a
key part.
So those two things, I think
it'd be perfect for my
standpoint.
Good work.
No,
go ahead, send her and then I'll
go to center, thank you. So I
think maybe
What I'd like to see then is uh
B5 say something like establish
a project management strategy
with a project manager.
With a designated project
manager and then my, so if we
can get that baked in there,
then that makes me feel a lot
more comfortable with somebody
is
Managing the thing, OK? It's a
very high level project manager
like a senior level project
manager then second, who's that
person gonna report to? Who are
they answering to at the end of
the day?
With what you've outlined here.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
uh, the project manager, since
they would be housed out of the
money coming out of the
healthcare authority, they'd be
housed under the healthcare
authority. So they'd answer to
the secretary. I think that's
fine. I can support that just so
there needs to be somebody in
charge that makes me feel a lot
more comfortable and then they
need to have someone that's
overseeing their work and, you
know, guiding them and it's a,
it's a large project. Thank you.
Just to stay on that point and
regionally, then we're gonna
have to have one in each region
to make sure the regions are
moving forward, one will not be,
what is their 13 or 16 judicial
courts.
Districts. There's 1313 and so
one person to manage 13 regions.
It's gonna be a little
difficult.
So Mr. Chair, within Senate Bill
2, the appropriations of the
Healthcare Authority enable them
to hire administrative staff for
each region.
To help with all this, but we
can make it more explicit. I did
see that in the I'm sorry.
I saw that in the bill.
I, I just, you know, it's gonna
be who's in charge, that's gonna
be the issue. The commission
gonna
Right.
Mhm
But the, the board now has to
make the decision of who to fund
and who not to fund, right? And
the project manager and the
administrators for each region
are now going to have to
determine what the project meant
what they send to the project
manager and the project manager
is gonna present to the
Overlying board.
Correct.
I'm calling the board of
commission or whatever we're
calling it.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
It, it, with the inclusion of
project managers and the
regional staff, they'll have a
heartbeat on how everything's
going. But this commission, the
executive committee.
They'll look at the final plan.
Right? So as things are being
developed at the local level,
that's where the regional staff
will, you know, play a role. And
then once this committee, you
know,
Approves the plan.
Then they can designate, you
know, the specific project
manager that will add to B5.
To be like, all right.
Make sure this executes and
coordinate with these other
regional staff
centered.
Thank you for looking over to
the our side of the table, Mr.
Chair. I'm trying to navigate
the, the right side of my is and
the left side is.
Like when governments I'm
worried about what you're gonna
say.
Well,
I'm actually not a fan of
bureaucracy, but what I'm
hearing is a very complicated
decentralized project.
With a lot of moving parts. So
imagine the analogy of yoking a
massive team of horses and no
driver.
So that concerns me and from a,
a business coaching perspective,
what I do every day. If I coach
a team of executives with an
organization and the CEO or the
ownership of that organization
is not directly involved in
understanding exactly what's
going on. They fail in whatever
their ultimate goals are. They,
they won't meet them, they'll
fall short, and this is so
complicated, right? So
decentralized beyond what I
think we even are comprehend.
ready this moment. Do we have a
behavioral health czar. Is
there, is there that one person
that
is to your point, Senator
Padilla.
Eating, sleeping, breathing, all
of this 24/7 and understanding
exactly what all these moving
parts are doing, where they're
accomplishing their goals, where
they're falling short, where
they need help with gaps. I, I
think it's a, a huge
consideration.
For us to put into this
document. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And then, uh Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, they technically
within state government there is
such a person already.
That's the behavioral Services
director, they're breathing,
living, you know, dealing with
all this. However, um,
What this is proposing is
expanding beyond that, right? So
going one step further and
really getting local input
beyond just what's the Santa Fe
perspective on things.
But I definitely hear you in
regards to
Making sure things flow.
to understand more.
Thank you, Mr. I was just gonna
say the point is that we don't
necessarily have to hire a new
person for this if somebody
existing on the staff could fill
this role like the behavioral
Health Services division. Sorry,
Nick, um, but if that's the
right person, if it's not, by
all means we need to get the
right person for this job, but
it doesn't necessarily have to
be new by definition.
It could be Nick Bogus who heads
the Bay Health Services division
because he is a behavioral
health guy, but it could be
someone else. More important to
have.
the right person who has the
authority to, to wield these
horses because it is going to be
a lot and they're gonna have to
really demand results and
And while it's locally driven,
they're gonna have to get in the
weeds, I'm sure on more than one
occasion to help prod them
along, work, maybe even make
suggestions and bring expertise
if they don't have it, and
they're not coming up with their
own plan, we shouldn't view that
as failure in a region. We have
to come in and
Provide that expertise just so
we're bringing some services to
bear, so.
Big job.
Thank you.
Senator, uh
Brent first.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and, and
I guess my concern on this whole
thing is I'll stick with the
horses and wondering if we're
getting the cart before the
horse.
you know, it's there's a lot of,
a lot of planning that needs to
go in. There's a lot of things
that need to be put in place.
Yes, we have needs now.
Um, but
My concern is we're gonna put a
lot of money where it's not
where it's either not needed or
where it's misused, trying to
move too quickly.
You know, is there a way for us
to balance that and, and spend
the next in a room, really
looking at putting what what
should the infrastructure for
this look like? What should the
planning be to make sure that
that the, you know, the billion
dollar trust fund that we're
putting together isn't misspent.
Um, you know, we've seen in the
past, uh, misspending of a lot
of money in behavioral health.
Um
And
You know, sometimes, uh,
behavioral health is successful,
sometimes it's not.
I'm just, I'm concerned about.
You know, have we moved into
this?
Too fast
I wasn't on LFC for the last
year, so I don't know how much
prework was done, but it really
sounded like this has been put
together in the last month.
Not put together in the last
year.
And I'm, I'm just concerned
about has there been enough
thought gone into how to make
sure that we're not wasting
money in this, you know, maybe
some of these bills we ought to
pass and put a date a year out
for them to go into effect
instead of going into effect
right away.
So that that planning and that
work can be done ahead of time.
things that we need right away
to deal with the issues we're
dealing with today.
We can
Put into effect right away.
But the other things maybe we
need to take a little bit of
time and make sure it's done
right so we don't waste the
taxpayers' dollars. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Pa
chair, uh thank you for all the
work you're doing again, Adrian.
And so, um, along the lines of
this, the questions that Senator
Tobias and said I thought were
right on bar, right? I can't
remember if you were in the
morning session or not, but you
should, so the big concern and
the, you know, the, the, the
flare I put in the air was
there's, there's no management
here. There's no project
management here. And I think
that, that the work that, you
know, between the morning
session and now.
If, if you take a look at this,
there's a little more governance
guidance, whatever, and I think
there's also some flexibility
with the way it was worded. So I
think that's, that's good too.
And yes, it's gonna be 13, you
know, regions and it's gonna be
this or that. It will, we will
have to have a, a high, highly
trained, experienced individual
to run in office they're not,
we're not gonna call it, we've
agreed not to call it an office
of project management, but like
I said earlier, nothing gets
done in my business unless I put
a team of people that are going
to be charged with a task that
has 17 goals or 7 goals.
And then they, they're, again,
every single day, that's all
they're thinking about. They
would essentially be picked up
out of their regions or whatever
to be this project team, but
there still needs to be a
singular leader of that team in
order to make sure that the work
of the of the project is moving.
There is a lot going on here
with this legislation.
And if we don't have someone,
you know, like.
You know, the Marshall Plan or
whatever, running this thing,
we're going to end up tripling
the cost of this thing and we're
going to be looking at ourselves
in a year or two from now.
What, what, what did we get done
here? So I think that some
governance has been brought in
place with Section 3 here, and I
can support that now. I, I feel
much better about that.
Thank you.
temperature
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
I totally, um
Mr. Ger, I, I, I get the idea of
a project manager.
My fear about this behavioral
health executive committee is
that it does at a level of
bureaucracy.
And, and you, you got to figure
out there's gotta be language
about, is it administratively
attached to the healthcare
authority. Is it in the
healthcare authority.
Um, you've got the opportunity
here for the healthcare
Authority secretary or their
designee. So there's 4 places
where there's or the designee
and my experience with
Committees where it's or the
designee is that it's never the
secretary.
And they're the ones that are
the decision makers and the
designee changes.
And even when the designee shows
up.
And I don't mean to be
disrespectful, but when they
show up, they don't necessarily
feel empowered to make really
strong strategic decisions
because they're still going back
to answer to their secretary,
who's the one who really has the
authority. And so my experience
has been that
When it's overdesignated that
it's, it's
It's a roulette as to whether or
not you're going to get somebody
that can actually make the
decision. Um, the secretaries
need to be responsible for this,
so that's what we're gonna have.
And I see down under B5, it says
that they convene at least
quarterly.
Like this is a big project,
asking someone to convene
quarterly and, and still be the
secretary of an agency doesn't
seem like a whole lot, right? It
just doesn't seem like it's a
big imposition. They have been
making these important
decisions. And then the last
thing I you can tell I'm not a
fan of committees. I'm not a fan
of administratively attached.
I'm not a fan of any of that
stuff, um, but the last thing
I'll just point out is that
under a 5,
We got to figure out who gets
pretty.
These are behavioral health
people and there's got to be
some mention of uh the other
people don't get per diem
because they're already being
paid. These guys do get per diem
so.
Thank you for working on it.
And I guess I probably should
have told you in advance like I
hate committees.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You
hate the finance committee.
No
OK.
No, I, I, it sounds to me like
we're rebuilding the behavioral
collaborative.
And they all got to collaborate
to make a decision.
Is it really gonna work? I mean,
remove designees for me. I'm not
gonna.
The designees, I mean, they're
the executives, they need to
make the decision.
And hopefully the executive will
push them to get.
The stuff done sooner.
I mean
You went over this with the
executive yesterday, what were
her would she make any comments?
Well, this language didn't exist
yesterday.
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes, this new
section was based on the
discussion today.
Sorry about that. Um, her
concerns were more focused on
some of the changes that we
include in Senate Bill 3, which
you all reviewed this morning,
so including like fail safes and
certain other like.
Uh, ability for the healthcare
authority to access data.
And accountability and, you
know, um, you really like the
audit approach that we
incorporated thanks to Senator
Gonzalez's feedback.
So those were her.
Questions
Um
And we, we addressed all of her
concerns and
The version of this that you saw
this morning.
This new section 3 is basically
addressing the concerns um from
Center and Senator Steinmore.
So
Say this passes in this way,
shape or form. How do we make
sure it functions.
I mean, if, if a cabinet
secretary or I mean they're
they're state employees, so they
don't need per diem.
They're already paid, right?
They can hold the meetings in
Santa Fe or wherever they go,
but they're already paid under
the state per diem.
These are all state employees.
Uh
Or AOC employees.
And and so,
So will that make it fail or
will that make it function
better? I'm looking to you as
the expert because
So, Mr. Chair, I think based on
this framework and this
governance structure.
Um, that's presented to you
right now. And just to be clear,
A 5, the two behavioral health
experts, and we can clarify this
language.
We meant to be from within AOCs
like staffing, so the per diem
issue should should be addressed
on that front.
Um, but having some entity where
you have all the expertise and
the decision making authority
like the Medicaid director, who
knows better than anyone if
we're going to put something in
jeopardy in relation to
Medicaid. The behavioral
services director, the person
that understands the gaps in the
regions and like all the data
and lives and breathes it every
day.
The
Secretary and, you know, the AOC
who's leading all these efforts
on the planning.
And then, you know, just having
those extra 2 sets of eyes just
to see if anyone misses
anything.
It it's
It it's obviously, it's not in
Odd number or a reason, because
here,
You're not gonna have one
entity, be it the executive or
the courts steamroll the other.
It's very much you need
consensus.
Or at least the majority.
Um, so that's why it was kept
this way, where no entity had.
A a veto over the other.
So it, it's a different type of
governing structure, but I think
it it strengthens the bill.
And then you have an even
number.
Which needs to be an odd number.
So that
They can't tie and not do
anything.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would disagree
with you on that, um,
specifically because when it
comes to this, the only thing
they would tie on.
Is potentially if there's um
There's no consensus at the
local level.
So realistically this is a
contingency in case things don't
work at the local level to make
final decisions.
And
Based on the people that are in
that this subcommittee that they
need to find some consensus that
works on both the judicial side
and the executive side.
But if the local level doesn't
come to consensus, why would
they even do it?
The local level is not gonna
agree, why don't they just move
on and say, well, you guys don't
want to do it, let's move to the
next ones.
I do want to do it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, there's nothing
stopping them from doing that,
yeah.
Any other questions?
Tree Hill.
Sorry, Mr. Chairman, um, I, are
they subject to the Open
Meetings Act?
I imagine they would. Well, I
don't know.
Imagine it would be I think they
would be and there's
confidential information
potentially that's going to be
discussed.
Well, I don't think there'd be
confidential information because
they're not dealing with the
patient, right? Just the plans.
They're just dealing with the
structure.
We should note that.
I don't know how you do that in
the bill, I mean.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair, um, that's
definitely something that can be
worked out based on whatever.
The open meetings access,
there's
I don't think I need to
explicitly say this is subject
to the Open Mes Act. It's like
if you Meeting act.
Applies to what they're doing,
then it applies. Imagine implies
that they're operating in a
governmental capacity.
Was a
Or that's appointed to have a
quorum, right?
They have to post meetings and
everything else then.
Well, they'll definitely report
to you all on what they decide.
Steinberg. Well, Mr. Chair, and
I, I would add, I think it's
probably a benefit or there are
benefits to having it be in the
open because
It's a transparent kind of a
deal and you know, groups who
maybe are involved.
In a decision that might be
made. I mean they might be
participating or want to know
and look at what other regions
are doing, so I think there's a
value in having more people
participate, generally speaking.
Although there may be some
things.
You know, whatever that might be
more convenient to not, but I
think.
Even erring on the side of that,
I think is been.
I, I think once you go to the
regionalization, they're gonna
be they're gonna be in meetings
on me.
Uh, to see if it applies and
then is everybody OK? Cause I'm
trying to save us time tomorrow.
12, and 3 with this committee
trying to figure out where we're
at, so.
Everybody knows exactly we went
over.
2 days in a row now.
Tomorrow when we come in we'll
we'll be good.
So do you want to rack this up?
Or what do we finally decide?
You take notes or or taking
notes back there. The beautiful
thing about recordings, right,
is I can go back and just get it
word for word.
Um, but yes, we, we're, we're
taking notes as well. OK.
Anything else?
We move on.
OK, rack it up. See you tomorrow
morning. Maybe go over this,
let's do a, this is 3, right, or
2?
Mm
We're gonna start tomorrow with
321.
OK.
Maybe right before we'll go over
the changes that you made in
here.
Went over the other changes
today, and then we'll just roll
right into 3.
OK.
All right.
Tourism.
Is there two Andrew minors?
She would said Andrew Minor and
she looked back and I didn't see
you sitting there and I'm like.
We're waiting on you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair of the
committee. Uh, my name is Julisa
Rodriguez and I'm the LFC
analyst for the tour department,
um, yesterday, a house
appropriations Finance Committee
voted on the LSC recommendation
for the tourism department.
A very high level, the main
differences in the two
recommendations are in
personnel, uh, the executive
recommended a 3.9% increase for
the agency while the LFC
recommended a 1.3% increase.
Like I said, that means the main
difference in the two
recommendations is in personnel
costs with the with the
executive recommending more than
the LFC.
Um, those are my remarks remarks
on the reoccurring budget. I'm
gonna pass it over to Doctor
Miner for any additional
comments.
Thank you, Julissa. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Uh, I have no
further comments at this time,
so I'll turn over to uh.
So you're gonna accept the LFC's
wreck and
Uh, we'll see what happens, Mr.
Chair, when the when the HFC
bill comes out next week.
Quick as you can.
Mr. Durban, uh, members of the
committee, Lansing Adams, acting
cabinet secretary with the New
Mexico Tourism Department. Uh,
good afternoon. I wanted to
introduce some of my staff, uh,
in the audience. Uh, we have
Jennifer Sabara is my deputy
secretary, Novella Salazar
serves as as our general
counsel, uh, really Sibe is our
chief procurement officer, Eric
Heringer is our economist.
Uh, Taylor Lawrence is our co op
manager. Sonia Rivera is is my
executive assistant. Aaron Ladd
is our marketing director, Cody
Johnson, our comms director,
Holly Marquez runs our travel
trade program or missing anyone,
I apologize.
Here we got Jay Bernal, our, our
travel liaison and Francine
Hopper who manages our marketing
center of excellence program.
Additionally, a lot of folks uh
did uh make the trip out here to
support us. So thank you for
that.
So I'll try to um be quick here.
Um, you should have a, a
presentation in front of you,
looks like this.
Um, so to start out, uh agent at
a glance. It's this one, Mr.
Chairman, I know which one it
is, but
You want the Bible or you want
the sy version.
Well, you want funding or you
want explanations? I want
funding. Do you want
explanation, Mr. Mr. Chair.
I think we ought to talk about
funding and and and you can
explain what the difference is
and where you're short, yeah,
Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, senators
will do so to talk about agency
at a glance, just a couple
primary pieces here. So the
divisions within the department,
uh, primary divisions, uh, New
Mexico magazine, uh, program
support, um, tourism development
and our tourism marketing. Uh,
we have 59 authorized FTE right
now our vacancy rate is, is it a
little over 10%.
Um, but as of the 17th of this
month, so coming up quickly, we
will have two positions filled
and we'll be a little um
Under 7%, about 6.78% uh vacancy
rate. Additionally, uh, with
respect to reversions, um, we
reverted less than 1% of our
budget last year.
So to give a snapshot about
where we're at in terms of our
economic impact. We get numbers
each and every year that measure
visitation and measure um uh
visit visitor spending 2023 was
another record-breaking year for
us, the New Mexico True brand
continues to be a very, very
strong, uh, magnetic brand that
resonates 8.6 billion uh in
total direct visitor spending,
um, so that returns, uh,
Over 810 million back to the tax
base and supports over 93,000
jobs around the state.
are very proud of that.
Uh, the next slide provides a
little bit of an infographic as
to how sort of our agency
strategy works. So essentially,
um our tourism marketing makes a
promise through our advertising
about adventure steeped in
culture that's uh executed
through very, very high quality
branding, um, advertising, um,
and those activations, um,
additionally, we do have our
tourism development division,
which as we are making that
promise, we have to make sure
we're
delivering on that promise by
uh making sure we're investing
in quality amenities,
attractions and access to those
amenities and attractions always
looking uh to research, um, to
inform our decisions.
So to speak more specifically
about some of the marketing
programs, national marketing,
very briefly, we continue to
work in our retention markets,
the strong drive markets, high
deserve volume, perhaps not as
high spend, but we're talking
about the Texas markets,
Arizona, Colorado, but
additionally, we have expanded
um into the California market,
uh, particularly in the Southern
California and the Bay Area,
we're seeing um high, you know,
very strong, um, presence there.
Uh we are in the LA.
San Francisco airports and
there's a lot of commercials
there. Additionally,
Uh, because of the Route 66
Centennial, which we're really
excited about, and I want to
thank this committee, uh, I want
to thank the LSC both
recommendations, um, including
the one that was adopted, the
LFC recommendation does, um, or
the HAFC recommendation does
include 2.5 million to continue
to support Route 66, we will be
doing some international
marketing. Um, this is new for
us, but it makes sense given um
given the market for Route 66
road trip. So we will be working
with Brand USA on marketing um
in.
Germany and the UK, uh starting
um in the next coming months. I
so excited about that
cooperative marketing says we're
telling everyone about New
Mexico. We're also continuing to
invest in our cooperative
marketing programs which local
governments and tourism
nonprofits buy into so that as
we're selling to Mexico, we can
also sell Gallup or Tier C or
any of the destinations so that
we're going from awareness to
consideration to conversion.
Earned media, we got a strong
shop that is always looking to
tell the stories and get those
in, in magazines like Nat Geo,
which we had success in this
year.
New Mexico Tru certified, we
certify products made here, uh,
grown in New Mexico, um, we have
over uh.
470 partners right now that are
within that program, and we're
trying to find additional ways
to support those businesses. And
travel trade. So as we're
Particularly to the Route 66
play as we're doing this
advertising, it's also really
important that we make sure we
have a presence when it comes to
um international travel buyers
and making sure we are at these
appointments at these trade
shows, selling the New Mexico
destination, New Mexico
experiences so that when they're
creating their itineraries for
this roadshow, New Mexico can
either be a primary destination
or a significant destination
stop overnight stay as part of
these uh either large group
tours or smaller.
tours.
So moving from marketing then to
development.
We have a few programs I want to
highlight our events program, we
see events as being strong
drivers of tourism, uh, and we
invest, uh, we're investing in
37 events this year at a little
over $500,000 those anything
from micro grants to support um
their websites and online book
ability to general sponsorships.
destination forward again as we
are looking to um deliver on our
promises through qualities,
amenities, attractions,
infrastructure is important to
us. We do have uh dollars
through our destination Forward
program to support some
tourism-related infrastructure,
renovations to historic
theaters, historic, um, cultural
centers, visitor centers, etc.
And then lastly, New Mexico,
clean and beautiful.
The program continues to grow 67
communities out there, um, these
are grants that support litter
cleanups, beautification, and
communities.
wanted to highlight the um the
uh marketing center of
excellence budget, specifically,
uh, we've had, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senators, conversations in the
House on this, uh, you know,
this was the results of, of a
bill in the 2023 legislature,
House Bill 377 established the
marketing Center of Excellence.
Um, we are currently and
actively working um in that uh
through that program and uh
Francine Hopper, as I mentioned,
is in the audience who's been uh
working on that.
For the past 7 months, engaging
with state agencies, the purpose
is, how do we break down silos?
How do we maximize the impact
of, of campaigns that touch
multiple state agencies. So
that's what we are working on,
however, um, at this point, uh,
that was not funded in the HFC
uh recommendation which we are
continuing to discuss and work
with them.
So just to close, uh, with, with
the budget. I don't want to.
The analyst spoke to, um, you
know, to what we're asking for.
The primary differences, I guess
what I'll, what I'll speak to
right now from where we're at is
And if we want to just with the
slides skip to maybe the last uh
FY 26 budget comparison.
So the difference right now as,
as we, as we're sitting here is
there's about a $658,000
difference on recurring.
That's the result of two
positions and uh an effort to um
increase basically are funded
vacancy rates, so decrease the
unfunded vacancy rate because
right now, uh we have positions
that we've hired that if we do
not receive more funding for,
we're not going to be able to,
you know, to support those
positions on a, on a recurring
basis. So we're we're really
looking to shore up those 200s
as I mentioned before, in the
next week or so, our vacancy
rate will be a little under 7%.
We're
this is a big priority for us.
So that's a request on the
recurring side. Additionally, I
mentioned marketing Center of
Excellence, that's a gap that we
currently have that we have had
some discussions with the house
on. Um, there's also in the
recommendation, I do definitely
appreciate the 16 million um for
the uh national, international
marketing that allows us to go
for a season that allows us to
be in California, allows us to
do what we're doing
internationally, um, just a
little point of um detail there,
there is a million dollars of
that that was put towards the
clean up beautification, um, the
executive had 2 million as a
standalone item. Um, I would
entertain some discussion with
the committee on how we could
potentially restore some of
those funds, um, but with that,
I, I, I appreciate this
committee. I think we've
appreciate both recommendations
and, and the work we've done and
um I'm here to answer any
questions. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman. The DOT when they made
their transfer out of
maintenance and repair to 10
million to beautification. Did
they send any of that to you?
Mr. Chairman, uh, senators,
there was $500,000 of, of funds
that were sent to us to support
the beautification campaign.
Out of the 10 million tracks.
Hi, Mr. Chairman, uh, senators,
I would have to discuss with DOT
if it was from that funding
source, but it was from DOT.
It was from DOT and it was from,
it was under maintenance and
repair.
And they moved 10 million to
beautification. I want to know
where that money went and if you
got any of that, so to bison.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Hm
Could you tell me with a with a
10% vacancy rate, what's been
your biggest challenge to hire?
Mur and Senator to bison, um,
you know, I think the the market
is, it's competitive out there,
um, and, and we have, I think,
high expectations with respect
to, to what we, you know, what
we require within the department
and that skill set, um, but I,
I'd have to say, you know, with
between our administrative
services team and our HR um and
our relationships with SO, um,
you know, I think we're making
progress, you know, if we can
get down, I think 6% within an
agency of 59.
Folks, there's gonna be um
Turnover that happens, um, but
you know, it's, it's putting us
in a position where we are able
to meet the demands, but yeah, I
mean, it's a competitive market
out there, uh, we, you know,
there's a lot of folks obviously
within the department that that
work within uh marketing and and
creative and those types of
fields and there's private
sector competition there, but we
have an incredible staff that's
very, very talented.
And I'm proud to be part of it.
And Mr. Chair, what, what is
your average salary?
Give, give us an idea.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Tobias and
I could, I'd have to defer to
our ASD director for specific
site. I know many of our um
employees right now are at just
a little bit above 100% compas,
so we're right basically at that
sort of midline with respect to
pay, uh, we're not sort of way
outside the bounds or way
underneath, um, and so I don't
know if there's uh.
We can get you some more
information if you want to know
the exact number, but I do know
it's not out of whack with
respect to uh.
Papa,
that's, that's fine. At least
you gave me um an idea and Mr.
Chair, one more question.
I like the fact that you're
advertising internationally or
have a plan to. I, I'm kind of
surprised to hear that it hasn't
happened in the past. Um, I
lived in Europe 30+ years ago
without dating myself too badly,
um, and I constant I turn on the
TV in Germany or England or
wherever I was, and I would see
commercials for Florida where I
grew up and other, you know,
places around the country, so I
think it's a really valuable,
um, to do that. Do you have a
way of tracking
and
I think I see there's spend of
16 million in your plan, um,
what is the respected return for
New Mexico on that 16 million.
Yeah
Um
So Mr. Chairman, Senator Tobias
and, um, you know, we, as, as I
mentioned at the very beginning,
you saw sort of the the numbers
with total visitation volume and
then total spending. So that's
the way we look at things
typically to make sure that when
we compare that year over year,
but we also uh compare that to
the national, uh national
average. Now, um, with respect
to return on investment, um, we
have done uh return on
investment studies in the past.
LA market, for example, um,
I believe and I don't want to
misspeak, but uh we did have,
let me get you the number on the
LA ROI, but it was, it was
greater than 3 to 1, um, on the,
I believe it was 5 to 1, um,
tax, tax to uh to, to spend. So
we do look at ROI specifically
within certain markets, but I
think what we really try to base
it on our, are those visitation
numbers moving? Are the spending
numbers moving? Are they
outpacing the national numbers,
um, and are they outpacing
the regional numbers and that's
Sort of the way we've looked at
it now with international, we
did do some market research um
to determine which international
markets to, to engage with for
the Route 66 centennial. One
thing I will speak to is the
German market, the younger
demographic did have more of an
interest in the Route 66 road
trip than some of the younger
demographics and the other
European and Asian markets, and
that was something we thought
was really interesting, um, and
so, so I think these are the
things that we consider when
we're deciding where we're.
gonna go and then we always come
back around it and, you know,
determine whether it was a it
was a good move and then
obviously, um, you know, if it's
not, we, we pivot our approach.
So those domestic markets we're
in are all the result of, of
research of the going into
California was a result of
research and then uh the markets
that we chose internationally
with the results of research.
And Mr. Chair, what's the rate
of ROI for California, what
you've put into advertising
there. So, uh, Mr. Mr. Chairman,
uh, Senator Tobiasson, as I
mentioned, I believe it's about
a 5 to 1 tax to spend ROI, um, I
will get you the actual numbers
for that LA study. OK. Thank you
for clarifying. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Let me ask some quick
questions here. This special uh
16 million for international
travel and marketing, the exec
cannot use that for travel,
correct?
If you go somewhere you, uh,
that is correct. That is for
advertising.
Do we need to add language
Julisa may want that in special
language, to write that down
then, then that can be used for
the execs travel.
Yes.
OK.
Give me the numbers on the
Beautification why DOT made the
transfer, you got none of it.
500,000 of it. I want to know
where that rest of that 9.5
million went.
I think that's it.
Oops, Senator Steinborn in Hill.
Mr. Chair, thank you, Secretary,
welcome and your staff. Welcome.
Um
have just a couple of question
or two, the marketing bureau of
Excellence, so we gave you an
initial preparation of $2
million.
You've done all this work with
different agency. How many
people does that employ, the
secretary?
Mr. Chairman, uh, uh, right now
we have uh one permanent staff
who has friends he is in the
audience who, who's essentially
taking the lead on that. Now,
now there is, it is an effort we
do have a contract that she does
manage that a lot of the
production and and creative work
and uh the buys do go through,
so we do have that sort of
augmented support through
through contract support, um,
but as, as is demonstrated in in
the presentation, I mean, we've
engaged with 25 uh different,
different.
agencies, there's a lot of
interest. I mean, we're seeing
that there's, you know, people,
a lot of agencies have been
looking for this kind of, kind
of help. Um, so we're 7 months
in, um, we're, we're, uh, we've
been in conversation and, and
Julisa and I were were speaking
to this on the House side, but
you know, about how do we define
metrics, um, KPIs, you know,
things like that if we want to
move this from potentially
special to recurring, so, you
know, interested in, in all
that, but
You know, I think state
government, it it is good
government to, to have a
marketing center of excellence
which can unify messaging and
maximize campaigns across
multiple state agencies that
touched them, which we see.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, um,
I
whoever that is, I agree with
you totally. You know, every
department needs communications.
They need modern communication
skills, graphic design, you
know, content, good social media
content, etc. So it kind of
makes sense that you would
create a centralized marketing
bureau that entities could go
to, but I was just curious for
the 2 million that we're asking
for that was not recommended by
the LFC, what are we getting?
You know, it sounds like we have
one staff person, we're
contracting out a lot.
Um, sounds like some of the
money is going into buys. So I'm
just kind of curious to me how
much of it is personnel, how
much of it is advertising, maybe
it's kind of a flexible dollar
amount. I asked the question
because
I think a lot of agencies may
not need advertising as much as
they need.
Lateral they need assets, right?
So, I mean, what's your thought
on that? I mean, the flexibility
of using it more for the asset
generation and the marketing
Senator Steinborn, I think.
Um, that's really important to
sustaining what marketing center
of excellence is. It, it is not
to be cliche about it, but it is
sort of a teach how to fish type
of approach in the sense that we
do want to build tool kits. We
do want to build asset
libraries. We do want to build
um these portals that
That agencies can turn key into
and if they're higher ed, they
could say, here's photos from
all of our higher education
institutions from, you know, uh,
here's, here's copy that makes
sense to use. Here's fonts that
makes sense. Here's a color
scheme that makes sense. That's
something that we're, you know,
I think that was what success
would look like is is to deploy
something like that. So that is,
I think ultimately where we're
going.
Right on. Well, I agree, I
agree. So, you know, I hope we
support that.
Um
Yeah, very much support the
other things you're doing as
well, and I know we have the
Special Olympics here who I was
privileged to join them in Las
Cruces and that's just amazing
seeing the 1,000+ athletes there
from around the state and the
amazing job the staff does and
it goes a long way and so that's
super important for us and
All the good work you guys are
doing. Um, I appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Chairman, I apologize. I think
the analyst wants to say
something.
Go ahead
that the LFC recommendation
didn't, but
As a follow up. Thank you. So
the LFC is recommending a
million, is that what you're
saying? It looked like it was 0.
Right, but Mr. Chair, ma'am, um,
So, but how much are we
recommending for the center to
come up with the collateral.
Is there any recommendation from
the LFC on that?
the thinking, our thinking was
that to create that collateral
for those specific campaigns.
Mr. Chair, what I'm asking about
though is to create collateral
you need staff that, that
there's a cost there, not just
the advertising costs that maybe
you're saying the agencies have,
so
Any rate, maybe we're saying the
same thing, I don't know.
But, um, but if we want to use
the marketing bureau, then they
need to be funded, right, to
have designers and
You know, content creators and
maybe you're, are you thinking
that the agencies themselves
would come up with that
collateral.
Mhm.
I know.
Yeah, I, I'll just do it, OK,
very good. Thank you.
Thank you, Michelle.
cemetery.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
just want to build off of what
Senator Steinborn said about
Special Olympics. It's a really
important aspect and activity
here in Santa Fe and I know
across the state. I am
wondering, um, I see that the
executive recommendation was
300,000 and we LFC's
recommendation is 300,000.
Has there been any increase in
that? I mean, how, how long has
it been 300,000?
Uh
Mr. Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Gio, thanks for the question.
So, uh, the information on the
specials is actually a little
incomplete. So the 300,000 that
we do uh spend for special
efforts for the special is also
augmented by 350,000 that we
spend in our recurring base. So
that that number is actually 650
on an annual basis. Um, I, it's
an incredible organization to
work with, um, you know, we, we
look forward to, to new
opportunities, but that, you
know, that's, that's the level,
so.
Thank you for the question.
That's kind of what all in.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and so
I'll just close with um I know
here in my community, um.
There's been a challenge to find
space for practicing, and I
don't know what the solution is.
I, you know, tried to work with
the school district. They have
conflicts, they have, you know,
scheduling problems, but I wish
we could come up with some sort
of
Places that we wouldn't have to
worry about where do they go and
do their practicing because that
seems to be the biggest
challenge that the local
community struggles with.
Is where are they going to
practice that. So, thank you.
Appreciate it.
And thanks for the work that you
guys do. Totally appreciate you.
Thank you, sir.
But
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm gonna
give you a softball question.
What, what is the, the most
visited
Tourism we have right now.
I'm assuming the bloom fiesta
bet.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Ladier, you know, I think when
you look at just total visitor
volume, it's, it's central,
north central, so it's, you
know, Albuquerque, Santa Fe,
Taos. When you look at destinate
when you look at events, you
would be correct, you know,
balloon fiesta is definitely the
the largest event we have.
Um, I'm excited and somewhat
terrified about the prospect of
Roswell this year getting they
actually do have uh the uh world
championship air races, which is
gonna be an incredible thing,
uh, so that, you know, that's
been as high as 100,000, I
think, uh, in talking with folks
from Roswell and folks from uh
the air race they're looking at
about 50,000 that they're trying
to get for September, so that's
gonna be huge, um, so, you know,
I, those are the regions, those
are obviously the big events.
I mentioned our events program.
That's important too because
We support Balloon Fiesta
through that, but we also
support events like Gathering of
nations like festival flamenco,
like events in rural New Mexico
like the Demi duck races or
festival flamenco or the
Bernalillo Indian Arts Festival.
So
You know, we are helping small,
large, um,
You know, whether it's events or
uh you know, travel, I'd say,
you know, in terms of areas we
could, we could definitely um
you know that there's, there's
lower tourism areas where it may
be a lower visitor to tourist
ratio like the Northeast.
So the Northeast would be the
low that was my, yeah, yeah,
yeah,
yeah, and I think that there's,
you know, we'd have to be really
careful and deliberate on how we
would ratchet those numbers up.
Uh, because we have to make sure
the communities can support um
increased visitation in a way
that's not gonna cause any
challenges.
And Mr. Chair, my last question.
So,
When we're putting money into
that when you're doing your
advertisement.
Do you put more advertisement
into the
Successful areas already or
you're trying to funnel more
money in those outlying areas.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, so our
approach on the national
advertising is more thematic. So
we're focusing, uh, winter,
we're focusing on winter
activities, uh, summer.
Cultural more like adventure
focused activities. I think when
you're talking about individual
communities and those types of
advertising that happens
primarily through our co op
program, and that co op program
is a 2 to 1 match and we are uh
our spend right now is about 3.8
million, which is, which is a
high water mark for us, and
those are the advertisements
that we work with communities
and say, OK, Clovis, you want to
have your marketing um in West
Texas in Lubbock or here or
there, and we will work with
them specifically on their
targets to fill.
Some of those gaps.
Because all of a lot of the
different communities do have
different, somewhat sometimes
unique um travelers.
Mr. Chair, and that, that's my,
that's my comment. Don't forget
San Juan County, we have a lot
of water, a lot of water sports.
Don't, don't forget about us,
all right,
Thank you very much. Thank you,
chair. Only if it snows center
or rent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
just, you know,
Do, do most people that are
coming here for tourism, drive
or fly?
This senator, right now we are
heavier on drive. If you look at
total, yeah.
Um
What are we doing about our?
Rest areas because they're
atrocious.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
so just to provide some context
and and I agree we need to do
better. I, and I think that, um,
you know, we have incredible
visitor center staff um that
work in some of these visitor
centers and, and, and we do
deserve to make sure the
visitors and, and they have
really high quality facilities.
DOT, we have 4 visitor centers
that we operate. I think you
said rest areas.
Rest area visitor area. Yeah, we
don't have any, I mean, rest
areas for the nuance that we
don't control any of the rest
areas, so it's just kind of
bathrooms and vending machines,
but the visitor centers we have
for, we have the Santa Fe one
right next to our office, we
have one in Glen Rio right on
the Texas border, uh Manualelito
right on the Arizona border and
then Lordsburg, um, off by 10.
Those are all so the Santa Fe
one is owned by GST. The other
three are owned by DOT. We
operate them.
Um, we have had some challenges
this past year with maintenance,
especially at Lordsburg, um, and
Glen Rio.
Um, and they were down for a
while, um, good news now is they
are all open again. Um, I have
talked to Secretary Cer about
this, if there are dollars that
are available, having some
discussions about
How do we, how do we do better?
German because we don't, we
don't own them, um, but we do
have to operate them and we
equip them inside. So our main
roads though are
Obviously, I'm 25 and I 40.
That's where our main traffic
is.
You go into any other state. I,
I do a lot of driving across the
United States, usually pulling a
35 ft RV.
OK, you're going to any other
state.
And the first
Rest area is always a welcome
center.
And they're like a million times
better than ours.
They actually are welcoming.
You know they've usually got hot
coffee, they've usually got, you
know, nice restrooms, they've
usually got plenty of parking
for your RVs and your trucks.
Yeah, when you come into New
Mexico.
You're not sure you want to stop
at all.
Because of how bad they are.
And if we're really trying to
push tourism.
Um, that's something we need to
solve, because I, I will tell
you if I didn't live here, I
wouldn't stop here.
Because
Our state is not showing that
it's very safe and very
welcoming.
And then you, and then we can go
on and talk about our our state
parks if we want to.
All of them are in horrible
shape.
Actually, Blue Waters not
because they finally fixed it.
So pretty much everyone except
Blue Waters is in horrible shit.
And, you know, we're not, we
can't expect people
Come inor stay and enjoy the
outdoor activities that San Juan
has to offer and other areas
have to offer.
If what they have is is
substandard to every other state
in the union.
And right now, they're all
substandard, and I've not heard
anything.
Um
The tourism department or from
DOT or any of them about
addressing those issues, and yet
we want to
Broaden our base, you know.
Expand our economy.
We're not doing it the way we're
doing things.
Mr. She, uh, Senator, I'd love
to continue the conversation
with you. I think it's
multifaceted, um.
The rest centers, visitor
centers is one issue that's a
significant one.
Talk with DOT about how to
approach that. I do want to just
go back to one thing I had
mentioned in my presentation.
As part of our strategy, it's
just as important to make sure
we deliver on our experiences
that we make a promise of an
experience. And so it takes
time, it takes investment to get
there. Our destination forward
program is designed to do that.
We're trying to provide that
infrastructure that, you know,
so you do have nice signage and
you do have nice lighting and
you do have uh buildings that
have been renovated and have uh
proper facilities and those are
things that we're going to
continue, uh,
To, you know, to be a passionate
about and invest in uh.
We can do better, but we are,
it's part, it's
primary part of the strategy to
address exactly what you're
saying.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and secretary, the only thing I
heard is advertising.
And if we're advertising, we're
bringing people here and the
experience is not safe and the
experience is not good. They're
not coming back and that is
going back to them.
Again, you know, maybe we got
the cart before the horse.
And we need to make those
investments.
We should have been doing that
why we had the billions in
extra.
Um, because that's not gonna
last much longer.
Thank you, Mr.
I think he
For your information, Ener uh
covers parts. We haven't heard
them yet.
But we did fund them with.
Money the last two years we did
at LFC tour went to pretty much
the state parks.
And one
Las Vegas and one other one, I
can't remember.
There are funded and the visitor
centers are not the visitor
centers, but the
Rest areas are funded by DOT. We
gave them R by in 2020, and I
think they're just starting with
that, so.
And I think they did request
more this year.
you're gonna wrap us up.
OK, real quickly, um, Mr.
Lanson, tell me something.
Uh, Mr. Chairman mentioned what?
Is the average salary.
In tourism. Have you done any
metrics that you can tell me the
mean salary or
Anything like that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
we can look into that for you.
You see the similar question
earlier, um, my understanding is
we are just over 100% compA, um,
I don't want to give you a
number and and misrepresent it.
I don't know if uh Doctor Minor
has that. We're not out of
bounds with that. Many of our uh
staff or program coordinators or
program coordinator 2s, um, uh,
so, you know, I, I, but we can.
Miss Cha really wasn't talking
about your salary range. I was
talking about the industry.
That salary rate.
Miss Sherman Center apologized
for that. Um, I don't have the
average, I don't know if uh if
you give me one second, we do
have our economists that might
be able to provide that, if not,
I'll get you that information.
Mr. Chair, Senator, you're gonna
have to come up to the mic
otherwise.
I get 500 texts you couldn't
hear what he said, Mr. Chair,
Senator, I do not have that
number with me at the time, but
I will work on providing that to
you. That'd be, that'd be very
interesting. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Lindsay.
Center.
Goodbye.
Thank you Mr.
It was a pleasure.
Yeah.
Cultural affairs, your next.
Julia, are you doing them too?
I
Short sweet and to the point as
quick as we can move through
this.
And everybody's wore out for the
day.
and members of the moving on to
the cultural affairs department.
You guys want to leave that room
quietly so we can finish up.
Thank you.
Um, so for the cultural affairs
department, HFC that closer I
don't think I can hear you. Is
this better? I have a small
voice.
Yes, talk in your big kid's
voice.
Um
So moving on to the cultural
affairs department yesterday HFC
voted to vote on the voted to
recommend voted on the LFC
recommendation.
Uh, for the department.
Um, as far as the differences,
the main difference between the
two recommendations is again in
personnel cost, um, the
executive recommended an
increase of 1.5 million, or
sorry, an increase of 2.5
million for personnel, while the
LSC recommended 1 million, um,
Again, the just the differences
between those two reps, but they
uh executive recommended a 6.8%
increase overall general fund,
while the LFC recommended a 2.9%
increase.
I'll pass it over to Doctor
Martin for any remarks. Thank
you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman. Commend committee
again just the the big uh
difference in recurring
recommendations is that 1 point.
$5 million
for personnel in the museums and
historic sites program which
Secretary will discuss in terms
of a special corporations, a
couple of differences don't do
that really quick.
Uh, the Native American grades
protection and repatriation Act
compliance executive recommended
$5 million.
2.5 million.
Libraries and that would find
the executive.
$10 million infusion, uh.
No, uh, LSD recommendation and
then
For a semi-constantial
activities.
Uh,
that recommended
500,000 LFC 20.
So with that I'll turn it over
to the secretary.
members of the committee. Thank
you for your.
Uh, I want to think, uh, both,
uh, Julisa and Andrew for their
work, they're great partners,
and we appreciate having them. I
have with me some of my key
staff. I'm not gonna introduce
them, but we also do have some
of our supporters, actually
quite a few supporters who have
traveled from around the state
to be here today. So thank you
for that. Uh, with that, I'm
gonna skip uh per the chair's
request that uh we get to the
substance. I'm gonna skip the
first two pages of my
presentation. I think most of
you are familiar with my agency,
um, and then the third page, I
do just want to
acknowledge that I, uh,
understand you have many, many
demands and many requests and
many priorities and we
appreciate the increases that
are made in the LFC budget, and
I do want to stop and
acknowledge and thank you for
that before moving on to page 4
which are just uh some priority
ads for us. Um, I would, uh, our
number one ask would be to
please move the LFC HAFC
recommendation closer to the
executive in a personnel
services and benefits in P536.
That is
So that we can continue our
level of existing services state
while while while maintaining a
vacancy rate under approximately
20%.
Um, I would also ask that some
consideration be given to fully
funding the Native American
graves repatriation work. Um, it
is a two-year project that is
how we put it in the uh your
recommendation does or the HAFC
recommendation does fund it for
the first year, um, but it
really is critical that we have
the 2 years' worth of funding
because in the 2nd year is when
we will be doing a lot of work
with the tribal communities
engaging around actually
executing those repatriations,
and that money in the 2nd year
is critical.
important because the feds did
change the compliance deadline a
year ago and tribes are
inundated with requests from
cultural institutions around the
country and they do lack the
capacity, uh, the staffing
capacity to do that. So this
money will allow them to do that
work at least with the state.
And then last but not least, to
fully fund the special
appropriation for the
semiquincentennial or the 250th
anniversary celebration for the
United
Um, so moving on to my last
slide, I'd like to spend just a
little bit more time talking
about the requested general fund
increase in the 200s for P536
P536 is our
past 2 years, and I am proud to
say that by the time the 1st
quarter has closed, we have had
every position created,
advertised, and filled. Um,
additionally, last year we did
138 hires, um, and 17% of that
was an internal promotion rate.
We have no transfers out or bars
out of our 200s, and we had no
general fun reversions in our
200s last fiscal year.
However, the 200s do represent
70% of our agency, I'm sorry,
72% of our agency budget, and
that's because we are definitely
a people-driven organization
with staff who have very
specific education and expertise
and just anticipating a
potential question, um, our
median hourly rate is $26.70 and
40% of our staff is a 55 or
under. So, uh, there's a lot of
frontline workers that make our
agency.
run.
Um, we've been proactive in
managing our budget situation. I
have no supplementals or
deficiency requests. Uh, we have
done that by um
Really prioritizing and slowing
down our hiring. We are also
actively increasing to seek our
revenue and that's where I want
to thank you for the million
dollar recommendation for
marketing and advertising. Let's
increase our ticket revenue.
Let's get more people in the
door.
Um, but really our efforts to
prioritize our our hiring and
reaching critical levels, um,
LFC Volume 3 shows that we have
a vacancy rate of 15.5%, but
that same spreadsheet shows that
in terms of our funded vacancy
rate, we are negative 2%, which
means we are, we are, um, hired
beyond our funding.
Um, if the LFC recommendation in
the HAFC recommendation, um,
stands, we will continue um to
treat staff to maintain an even
higher.
vacancy rate, and I have no
doubt that when I sit before you
next year, that vacancy rate
will be somewhere between 20 and
25% and at some point we will
have to um cut programs and
services to handle that
reduction in staffing.
And with that, sir, I hope I've
been quick and I stand for
questions.
Serra Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, um, can you, uh, please
repeat that part of the rural
libraries.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
members of the committee, uh,
the agency, uh, request in the
executive recommendation is for
$10 million to the rural library
Endowment Fund. Currently the
LSC recommendation adopted by
AAFC has no flooding for the
rural library endowment.
So, Mr. Chairman.
So
Yes we can just look at it again
and see what we can do.
Very well. Thank you.
Thank you. How much do we put
into that over? I'm looking in
the.
Lisa, you know what page they're
on in volume 3.
you're talking about rural
libraries andowment Fund. Uh,
that and cultural affairs.
So last year the you all
appropriate 2.5 million. I think
the fund sits currently at 30
million. Maybe it's valued at
like 32 million. Right, is that,
is that what you're asking the
past 3 years, didn't we pump 20
something million or 30 million
in 2020.
2 or 2023, maybe it started off
like you all have appropriated
15, then 10, and last year was
2.5 million. I may be getting
some of my years wrong, but the
fun sits at 30 million. You know
what page cultural affairs are
in volume.
Um
to, to,
yes 202. Thank you.
You should know that Julia thank
you secretary.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn.
Mr. Chairman and Secretary,
welcome to the committee and all
your staff. I just wanna start
off by saying I
Thank you, first of all, before
I forget, you, uh, every time
I've called you, you've been
very engaging, very responsive,
very concerned because I want my
colleagues to know when the
floods happen in Roswell, I'd
heard from the, you know, oh
Roswell has quite the amazing
art community and a lot of very,
you know, special pieces of art
and they were flooded, the
Roswell Museum was flooded 4 ft
high. I called the secretary.
She sent a team down there the
next day to help.
try to deal with the calamity of
that art collection and being a
part of that. So thank you,
ma'am secretary, and thank you
to your team.
Uh, that's first of all, number
2, Mr. um, chair, secretary, you
know, I've visited several
monuments and
Museums in the last year and
they were incredible, and I was
blown away.
Um, Natural History Museum,
Science Museum in Albuquerque is
amazing and you know,
truthfully, I represent Fort
Selden, um, and it was the
happiest public employees I've
ever met in my life. Truly, I
was like they're all smiling. I
was like, good Lord. Whatever
management style is at work here
is working because I've never
met a more motivated team of
people.
Doing their job and telling the
story about that amazing piece
of history that's actually I
think was the first state
monument.
And I think uh former
Representative J. Paul Taylor
was involved in that.
It happens to be in my district.
Um, which is amazing by Radium
Springs, so kudos to you. Now,
Madam Secretary, a year or two
ago, we were hearing that
Literally, you were very
strapped and
I don't remember exactly the
story, but like the greeters
were having also sweep the place
at the end of the night and we
needed to increase funding for
some of those supports that. So
my first question is, did we
resolve that?
Have we improve that?
Mr. Cha, Senator Steinborn
members of the committee. Yes,
um, this committee actually um
increased the number of
janitorial staff to 16 FTEs. We
were able to get those filled
and part of the reason actually
a huge part of the reason for
that great morale is that people
are working in clean facilities
and they're not having to clean
them themselves, uh, before you
mention natural history, uh, I
will say that, uh, we did have a
visitor who sent a, I, I used to
get almost weekly calls about
the cleanliness of the
restrooms.
or lack of cleanliness of those
restrooms since we hired the
janitor that had those janitors
that has stopped and in fact we
got a very nice constituent
remark from a gentleman from out
of state who said that he goes
to museums all around the world
and ours with the cleanest
restrooms he has ever seen, so
yes, thank you very much for
that and, and it's made a huge
difference and the visitor
experience and staff morale and,
and the overall quality of our
facilities.
Cool. Well, that's great to hear
and, and, and so good job to
everybody. We appreciate what
you're doing and you know, we
were talking about the visitor
experience. This is truly one of
our main products. Uh, when
people come to town.
You know, I was talking with a
former tourism secretary years
ago, and she was saying kind of
the um mix of products people
want when they come to New
Mexico and part of his outdoors,
part of it is the cuisine, but
then part of it is going and
visiting a museum and enjoying
our culture and our history and
so it's really part of that.
Try out and um.
So it's super important we get
it right and support first class
facilities and
It is part of our economy and
really important part. So thank
you for what you do and
hopefully we support your
request here, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you. I'm just looking
through here. Maybe we can get
those guys to start cleaning the
uh rest areas.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I will admit
there were some text messages
and, and we would love to help
out, but please don't give me
rest areas.
Uh, let me ask you 11 question
I'm glancing through here and
since 2023 we've increased your
budget, Julia, correct me if I'm
wrong, I roughly $10 million
over a two year period, correct?
Yes, that's correct, Mr.
It it seems like we're getting
to the right sizing funding
agencies and trying to maintain
this leveling off, I mean,
Um
Other than a few specials that
you need.
And get caught up. I mean, what
are you, your real needs.
After a two-year $10 million
increase, that's quite a bit in
the small agency.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you, and
yes, um, you have been very
generous and we're very grateful
for that, uh, and it does follow
after some, some rough years
when tough budget cuts were
having to be made, um, and so I
do think that the agency is in a
much better position right now.
Uh, I do think that the fact
that we are over our funded
vacancy rate as a with, with no
bars out of the 200s and no
reversions out of the 200s. Um,
I always straight shoot straight
with committees about what I
need and I'm telling you right
now what I
need is money to keep these
existing stuff I have an
increase in my funded vacancy
rate, um, to keep, keep the
staff that I have, not new FTEs.
So I appreciate that question
and that's the need Julia,
what's that number?
The FC recommendation for
staffing increases it by a
billion dollars, um.
That's aiming to reduce their
funded their vacancy rates, um.
I think that's, I think that
these are funded, these are
funded.
Tired employees and they're
short.
I can't, I wanna say Richard,
but I know that's not the right
name.
Mr. Chairman, a great guy, sir,
our CFO is here
uh LSC.
Deployed back in the day.
Um
What we're seeing is uh.
Employees are more expensive.
The average cost of the FTU has
really gone up.
all these years of pay raises.
And particularly the IT.
Uh, feel the finance field,
we're seeing a lot of turnover.
So, um,
We had a big growth of personal
cost of benefit changes. I mean
we did add the janitors, right?
That was about 12 FTE.
You all funded about 5 FTE or
Taylor, which we need, right?
Um, but really, it's just.
Drive that vacancy rate down.
Getting closer to 13%, which is
where we are.
And it's just more expensive.
That's what we're seeing.
So the basis of the request
really is trying to get us to
about 11 to 12% vacancy rate.
That's what we're asking. That's
what we requested and DFA would
probably put us at about 15%.
Everything's more expensive.
Some
Help me out, Andrew, a little
bit here.
If we have a funded vacancy
rate.
In an unfunded vacancy rate, and
they're taking the funded
vacancy rate.
And moving paint that class code
to keep those people, right?
Do we not backfill to you to be
not backfill the unfunded.
London vacancy rate again and
then bring up the number that
they increased in pay.
The end of the day. I'm trying
to.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I know they,
they have been using some, uh,
you know, they've had this
negative vacancy or funded
vacancy rate, they've been using
some like uh special
appropriations to make sure that
they're basically keep them
afloat for the past year or so,
right?
OK. So they're just seeking to
get what they're trying to do
yet. I just got to figure out
how to do it correctly, not
increase.
FTEs and then have a greater fun
vacancy rate.
Mr. Sherman, I don't think that,
yeah, I don't think we need to
increase the number of
authorized FTE or anything.
They're just seeking the funding
to make sure that they've got
the support for like Greg was
saying at 10 to 15% vacancy
rate, maintain that you're
taking the notes for Senate
Finance so that we review this,
we move forward.
The
I'm still trying to find real
libraries. Anybody have an idea
of what volume and
Mr. Chair, I don't believe the
rural library's endowment fund,
there's not a chart or anything
in any of our volumes at the,
um, if you're looking for like
grants and how large the fund is
a fund is in over the years, how
much is funded in the last 3 to
5 years. Yes, I, I actually,
they, I have some information on
that. So the current fund is
sitting at 30.5 million, um, if
I'm looking back at the past.
3 fiscal years, the funding has
increased by
Um, 27.5 million. OK.
Oh
It's went up quite a bit in
3-year period, so average
library I think is 33,000
they're receiving another fun
correct yes and then I believe
the maxim PR right now is 25,000
for those 58 rural libraries.
OK.
Any other questions to him.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
too, uh, support like trying to
get them up so that they can
hire the personnel that they
need. I know that they're right
on the edge and, and honestly in
all of our communities, our, our
museums, are the, the, the
services that they provide or
the things that we take our
families to when they come to
visit our friends.
Um, secretary, I had asked a
question. There's a $7.2 million
ask, um, and there was a little
confusion about what that
property is, where it is and
what it might be used for. If,
if you could just address that
for me.
would be really helpful.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Ta, Senator
Trujillo, members of the
committee, um, yes, there is, it
is um LSC number 2958. It is uh
7.2 million. It is for a
property called um 705 Communal
Lejo, uh, that property is on
Museum Hill adjacent to existing
state property. It was a private
home, um, um, that has come onto
the market and uh the planned
use would be to create
educational opportunities.
For the Museum of International
Folk Art. Each year they see
about 22,000 youth and adult
learners in their building. They
do not have a dedicated
educational space that is
appropriate. So they currently
use the auditorium and a couple
of um 15 by 17 classrooms. So
the idea would be to move all of
the educational programs and
existing educational staff along
with the library and archives
into this property. Uh, it's a
very large property. The
property is uh 90,600.
square feet. Uh, it comes with
3.8 acres. There are two
buildings. There is a main
residence that is um about 7500
square feet, which is where we
put the education classrooms and
then there is a guest house
that's 2000 square feet, which
we would leave residential. Um,
so the property, uh, again, I, I
wanna stress we use existing
staff to stop this. Um, we
estimate the operating cost
based on uh other properties we
maintain at the hill, about
$30,000 a year.
Uh, the list price for this
property was 5.35 million, uh,
the most recent appraisal was
5.265 million and we currently
have a uh purchase contract that
is contingent upon appropriation
and a variety of other things
for 5.025, so underappraised
value, um, the additional amount
is for some um capital
improvements to continue to
convert that into a public use.
The need of this um
There's been numerous studies
done over the years regarding
the Museum of International Folk
Art and the need for more space.
The last one was done about 10
years ago to address this issue
and uh the estimate at that time
was $30 million so I think for
the price for existing um
property, it is worth asking you
to consider funding that because
um the price per square foot, we
could not build for that, um,
amount. Um, there's been a lot
of misinformation, I think,
floating around about the
property, the property.
is currently held by a revocable
trust, uh, the property owner
put the property into trust and
then when he passed, the trustee
has now placed the market, the
property on the market. Um, the
proceeds from that sale will go
to the Santa Fe Opera, but that
is not who we are buying the
building from.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Secretary, I appreciate that. It
just seems like a chance of a
lifetime for us to expand and
really support the international
folk art.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Trujil will be adding
capital to that project.
So
Yeah
So this, this property is a
property that uh
You say is owned by a
Nonprofit. I thought it was
owned by the opera.
I thought it was it's owned by a
trust that the beneficiary of
the trust is the.
Oh, OK.
So it is the opera, the
beneficiary of that trust. So
essentially it's an opera that
owns.
No.
OK. The trust owns the house,
whoever the
whoever owned the trust before
he passed, left it to the trust,
trust is put on the market.
So
If the trust turns the house
into cash, then the beneficiary
is the opera.
Correct.
OK.
And this is in some kind of long
range.
Plan that you've had.
Uh, Mr. Tay, uh, Senator Woods,
members of the committee. It has
been an identified need for
quite some time for the Museum
of International Folk Art that
they need additional space. Um,
it's been studied several times.
It is not on the five-year ICIP
because the last time it was
looked at prior to my coming
into this role. It was a $30
million ask that they were
looking at. So when this
property came up on the market,
it was proposed to purchase it
for this purpose, and I think
it's worth taking a shot at, uh,
but I, it is not on the current.
CIP but it has been an issue
that's been looked at numerous
times over the past several
decades.
Into
What are you willing to
substitute off your ICIP to do
this, Mr. Chair.
Governor's jet.
Do you, I think we're done.
We found them on
the night.
I mean how that works out for
you, still hired tomorrow.
Any other questions?
I just have one
You want to spend the rest of
the money on the jet, yeah,
yeah,
I've already had that.
Aviation questions today. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I just, I just
have a couple of really quick
questions. So how many projects
do you have going right now?
Uh, Mr. Senator, what types of
projects? Well, your museum
projects upgrading project, any,
any projects that you, you have
money is going out to, in terms
of capital outlay projects, we
probably have well over 100, 150
projects at any given time. I'd
be happy to share our current
project plan with you so you can
see exactly what we're working
on with uh facilities around the
state. Yeah, I would, I would
really appreciate that. And do
you have any that hasn't even
got started.
We've allocated the money and
and they haven't even got
started yet, Mr. Tay, Senator,
members of the committee, um,
Fortunately for me, I have a
very good facilities team that I
think we are, uh, what
percentage deputy cabinet
secretary, are we committed at
this point?
All right, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and that's, that's exceptional.
Thank you. That's one of the
best ones we've heard so far.
And then my last question is
just um
With the museums, do you work
with the museum association,
what, what, what do you do with
them?
Do you give them money out of
yours or do, how, how did they
come into this part. Now
remember, I'm a new
I'm a brand new senator, so.
Appreciate that, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Lanier members of the
committee, um, we do work
closely with um the New Mexico
Museum Association, the mountain
Plains Museum Association, not
as closely with the American
Alliance of Museums.
Years we have sponsored various
uh
Sorry, we've uh sponsored
various uh conferences and other
things, generally, most of our
uh grant making is done through
New Mexico art, and I don't
believe any of New Mexico arts
division. I don't think any of
those associations have come to
New Mexico who are seeking
funding for um their particular
needs, but we do, we actually
have several board, we have
several employees that are on
the boards of those
institutions, so we do
coordinate with them closely.
And then as um Senator Steinborn
raised, we do try to make
ourselves available to help
other museums when they need
assistance, whether it's
conservation, oftentimes it's
conservation. Uh, sometimes it's
technical assistance, uh, we do
have individuals who are
experienced AAM accreditation
experts, so we've helped others
sort of talk through that
process of getting accredited
and in some cases actually done
internal and external reviews in
anticipation of
re-accreditation, so I would say
it's really more on the
professional and, and technical
services, some sponsorships.
But I'm not aware of too many
grants to those organizations.
Right. Well, thank you very
much. Thanks for coming in
today. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Senator Hill, we've
nominated you to tell the
governor we removed her jet and
are buying a house going to
leave the room again. Mr.
Chairman, I thought I was gonna
tell her that we were not gonna
pay for the expo and we're gonna
buy this house instead
we're gonna take away the jet.
We don't want that extravagant
travel of paying $75,000 for a
seat to go to Australia.
Madam Secretary, thank you.
Appreciate your time.
We'll be hearing from you again
probably after we come House
Bill 2.
Uh, tomorrow we're gonna do 321.
321.
Virgin.
