One thirty one.
Good start sinister.
You have a moment to yes thank
you Mr chairman.
I'm very proud of this bill this
bill has been put together by
LFC Ellie as C. at the
governor's office my leaving out
and PSE and Scotus Public School
cop out like oversight task
force its doors by both Ellie is
seeing that you know we've spent
twenty years spent almost three
billion dollars on constructing
new schools that's just the
funding from the state so we
have really made huge
improvements in our equity among
public school capital this bill
does some of the strict
guidelines that we have put in
place over the years to ensure
that equitable funding so it and
because we have of construction
funding right now for the
schools we want to allow
districts all over the state to
be able to get help from the
state so it makes technical
changes but what it does is it
reduces every district's local
match by one third for three
years we think that will give us
enough time to look at whether
or not the formula is correct
the districts with fewer than
two hundred students will get a
fifty percent reduction in their
local match all kindergarten
projects will be reduced by half
of.
Local maps reductions will
include the future faces of for
the approval that we did of for
the current FY twenty three and
will play the new projects for
the next three years.
In twenty seven will revert to
the face to formula but probably
before then we will look at that
to make sure it still works this
is the outstanding legislative
offsets which are all over the
state some small rural districts
have three or four million on
offsets that means they can't
even come to PS CSC so it under
those those legislative offsets
if for the past present and
future in addition it on does
what we did with health house
bill six when we stop taking
credit for impact date in that
bill a we were to start next
year to look at having the use
of impact aid for capital be
part of the local match it on
does that completely so we are
no longer going to be looking at
that the impact aid funding.
Six.
In addition this bill puts a
hundred million dollars from the
public school capital out they
funds into the public school
facility authority for two
purposes at twenty five million
for security projects and
seventy five million for career
technical prekindergarten
facilities maintenance and
operations you'll remember last
year we put seventy five million
into the SCG up for those
purposes it was a well regarded
and will spend this year we've
moved that two hundred and that
is in the budget in the SCG.
so Mr Chairman we think of this
bill group maintains the equity
in uniformity among the public
schools of required in that Sony
lawsuit we're really at the
point where we can we now have
put enough procedures in place
to ensure that equity can I
speak about the amendment.
let's go to the audience and
then are you expert witness
morning Mr chair an intimate I'm
an analyst with Ellie S. C..
let's go to the audience is
there anybody on the.
Reporter.
The audience anybody in support.
We have three people in support
is when you want to talk real
quickly you have to come up to
my can see your name and in.
Support.
Mr chairman and I just want to
be to accord  public schools
this is a priority legislative
agenda item for board with thank
you Senator for bringing four
thank you thank you anybody in
opposition in the center you
want to go to the man a yes so
Mr Chairman in the Education
Committee we wanted to ensure
that that charter schools were
part of the distribution for
that hundred million we did an
amendment that
doesn't work because it to it
might fly in the face of the
anti donation clause because of
the privately owned buildings so
this is just on does that
amendment we didn't Senate
education of the PSC see which
are director of L. E. S. C.
serves on the director of the
LFC serves on are aware of this
and they intend to establish a
methodology to ensure that
charters also get funding from
this and in addition it just so
it takes off the appropriation
again ahead of myself I need a
motion on the amendment.
Fact Sam a motion and a second
by Senator Gonzales second by
Senator Rodriguez on the
amendment any questions on the
amendment.
More seen any objection to the
amendment.
No objection and then the bill
center or back on the bill of
anything else you want to add
before we go to where I know Mr
Chairman we're ready to
questions from committee
members.
Some of this and then the Sen.
Senator Wirth Senator Gonzales
I'm sorry I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Of Senator Stewart so that part
about the three years.
So at the end of three years
well.
If we still see we need to it's
opening up the.
Expand that.
At sunset Mr chairman we think
that getting this in place for
three years we'll see how it
works we'll see how it's taken
up and will also have a chance
each of these years to look at
that formula so we the the
formula we devised a few years
ago was designed to to shrink
the ability of districts with
better bonding capacity from
their ability to come to the
state
now we've kind of ruined the
ability for for districts to
even apply with the formula that
we have so we're doing that in
the in the manner I said thirty
percent off of every district
fifty percent off of
prekindergarten fifty percent
off for those a very tiny
districts we'll see how that
works I mean I'm hoping in three
years will have a good answer
whether or not we need to change
the formula.
Very well thank you Mr chairman
of.
Just going back a little bit of
you know no we used to have a.
The critical capital outlay.
The bonded up to seventy five
percent I believe you know
that's where we really started
that inequity in New Mexico
really really hard.
Let's see in this but you know
that's one of the things so it's
really hard at that time is that
you can change things that's
what it was you know and that's
what it is so having that
flexibility and being able to
work more closely and you know
all.
Maybe that's what I want to go
to the courts to to develop that
but just being able to address
all the different needs
statewide so you know I think
this is definitely you know in
the right direction.
Mr chairman I think this
represents the twenty years of
successful work that we've done
after SUNY that we're at this
point where we can sort of let
the reigns loose a little bit
and let everyone start building
and repairing.
Very well thank you Mr chairman
Senator Stuart Gulliver the
remains were make sure control
all the time.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Stewart to meetings with
two rural school districts very
poor school districts animus in
truth or consequences during
this legislative session with
LESC about their capital needs
in their inability to come up
with matches and this specific
bill has come up I know that I
had districts back home watching
this one thank you for bringing
it forward and explained that
some of those poor rural school
districts are counting on this
reduction to actually get
critical infrastructure needs
done capital needs done so thank
you thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and staff here for
bringing this before us I'll
just be quick you know the bill
does a lot of the things that we
need to do after we've
instituted some big change at
the state we did quite a few
changes before we always give
them time to work out we have to
come back many times to tweak on
as we get more data and find out
where things need to be changed
one of the things that I find it
even more important than
anything is that we removed the
barriers to the the taking of
the impact aid which is long
overdue but then we restricted
it as to how it should be used
that is not what we should do if
we're going to remove something
that's been truly strangle in
schools and poverty schools and
places we should account for a
long time ago and we need to
make it less restrictive and by
removing this requirement now
for the local match is going to
help quite to so amongst other
things which I think it's a good
fail in I don't have any other
questions.
We do have some Senator Stewart
Senator uses the.
Thank you
let me ask you something that in
and I think it's a ghost and and
this is my life experience to my
kids both went to charter
schools there are new names
campus that took welding and
construction so.
Is there anyway when those
charter schools or the school
district twenty use.
UNM Gallup or any issue requests
for their CTV's for career
technical is there any allowance
for universities to be able to
apply in that C. T. arena.
To work with the school
districts to.
The grant to so small you don't
need one in the school district
and then one at the college and
then one twenty five miles away
at Laguna or is there any room I
don't know this is just me
thinking.
But I'd like to have one giant
C. T..
Whether it's at university New
Mexico that the college and the
dual credit students can choose
someone so this is a.
Is chairman I'm gonna let him
answer but but before let me
just say that this is not the
only funding for CTP so we
really are trying to go I think
it's a real need I think it's
flexible enough to let me asked
to go to answer also certainly
thank you Mr chairman and it's
it's a great question I think it
highlights some of the best
practices that we've seen Adelia
C. about CTE you that you might
be familiar with Hobbs S. C.
tech where the the big facility
that they built out and Hobbs
that facility was very much a
partnership between local
business the school district
higher education partners
everybody was involved in making
sure that that cut off the
ground and so what what you're
talking about partnerships
between local school districts
and higher education
institutions it happens and it's
certainly something that we've
seen as a best practice for CTE.
And they have the ability to do
that.
In small communities right
methadone valium District in
tier C. I don't think we need to
CTE career places right we just
have one consolidated and then
maybe give a certificate.
In the well that they will be.
Allowed to
I'm trying to think of the I've
got two things to come in this
morning
the free college right.
To take that bill credit class
or that CTE classes welding in
high school.
And and use that as a
certificate in the in the
college credit.
Mr Chairman the the graduation
bill that we have more
thoroughly flushes that out and
allows all kinds of these they
got a to high quality
certificates that they get from
these well designed CTE programs
we are allowing them to use that
for graduation so that is
another important piece with
this is that those new
graduation requirements bill we
do it a little bit now but this
will will fully flesh out and
allow these kids to use those
for graduation requirements and
yes they can still do the dual
credit and the there is nothing
stopping at the districts from
collaborating with the
university out there to do C. D.
E. I just wanna make sure that
they do because every school
districts against territorial
like this is my welding let no
one else can use it even though
we have kids that came to their
system that are maybe an
animation requests saying well
you have this welding technology
and and can we use that there I
I just don't want to reinvent
the other question is about
school security.
I understand the language in the
charter school because of the
anti donation is there any
requirement to have like one
uniform schools thirty system
like the state police can
monitor and respond to the state
of every districts saying this
vendor came to me from X. Y. Z.
and and over here I have ABC and
over here is CD and a half and
consolidate one unified vendor
so when the please B. and T. for
their response and he's I mean
maybe that everybody is on the
same vendor and consolidation.
In monitoring that.
That same vendor I don't know if
that's possible it in some
places the scale to say guys
probably not possible.
But in in the in communities
Gallup grants Albuquerque where
they can get the vendor I'm
gonna choir any that same vendor
response to create inflation C.
so.
So Mister chairman of we
probably are not doing that only
because of local control but
what we have done is indeed the
confusing requirements that we
put in place originally fiscal
security so the majority of
these school districts are all
under the same insurance through
an MCO pumps and they are the
ones that training for security
so in a way they have that same
center so thank you Mr the only
thing that I would add is that
PS a fait is still sort of doing
oversight for all of the
securities it the appropriation
in this bill but appropriations
that happen in the past for
security go through the public
school facilities authority in
their standards that that the
technology or that the building
systems must meet in order to be
approved.
I'm just thinking it from risk
response when something does
happen.
The state police gets one
response from one company will
know exactly how to track the.
Got a monitor ten different
companies and is in response
saying I will who'd who has
Albuquerque has requests I just.
Something I'd like to see.
Something does happen.
that that there's response times
and that's meant for retail
skate you an answer Mr.
Senator.
Thank you Mr just maybe a couple
of quick questions
I know some charter schools
there are.
To maybe more in in the same
facility for example this is
this compensate for that I mean
with each one the schools get
the money or would be combined
into one facility how are you
are you addressing that so
Mister chairman Senator Burt
that would be addressed through
the public school facility
authority and their overseer the
public school capital outlay
council but they're going to
create that because our
amendment didn't work to ensure
that each charter school got a
certain amount they're going to
focus on a methodology to ensure
that so I can't answer that
specific question but it will be
answered to the methodology that
they come up with okay and Mr
chairman so insured the.
There is there's significant
balances left in the capital
outlay.
The public schools capital
outlay I think five hundred
million give or take is is there
a way to apply that money to
this so we're trying to be
efficient using taxpayer dollars
is that makes sense or
or what your thoughts on
something like that so Mister
chairman Senator for that that's
part of.
That's what we're loosening up
the street structures we put in
place so that public schools can
apply for that that that funding
is all for public schools see
their buildings or systems like
a roofer in H. back so that's
why we're loosening these
requirements so that the schools
will come and apply for that
funding because it is a large
amount now because of oil and
gas thank you to them again
right in in Mr chairman and that
I guess that's why I'm asking if
we are to have five hundred
million this not being used we
just take that and use it five
hundred million you're asking
for as opposed to adding on an
additional hundred million to
that so Mr chairman that's
that's essentially what we're
doing the hundred million is
going through the SCG so they
don't have to come to the SCLC
so they don't have to apply so
that they thought funding for
security but the what the money
you're talking about is what we
use for everything else building
systems and yes we are going to
even do the thirty percent
reduction in the and the
programs that are in the
pipeline right now that are on
that design.
The bills so when they move
forward they will get more state
funding.
All right thank you Mr chairman
that's all I have.
Thank you Mr chairman.
For allowing me for the second
time of Senator Stewart with the
same whatever comes from this
legislation with that also apply
for teacher reach if districts
of what.
Mr Chairman we are now using
these fundings for also for
teacher teaches so it depends on
the district depends on their
planning but absolutely that is
now part of the public school
facility of forty and the public
school capital outlay council
Methodology decisions it will be
allowed for teachers to this Mr
chairman and members that's
going to really help because so
the districts that I made that's
always the problem is that
match.
Takes away from the other part
of the.
The line but thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you no other
questions have a motion.
a motion for exact as I.
She went quick I'll remember
most of our do passed by Senator
Hemphill second by Senator
Padilla.
Any objection to the D. passed
motion.
Thank you center street
statement that Senator Hemphill
made a motion for the past
Senator Padilla second from the
motion no objection to the past
motion.
Mr Chairman can I offered to the
committee especially the rural
legislators to co sign on to
this bill I mean you can do that
before third reading this is so
good for all of our districts so
he can do that through the
clerk's office.
Senator Stewart.
Senate Bill yes I am Mr chairman
there's no amendments for this
bill snow.
It.
So Mister chairman this is a
three oh seven we have this
fantastic preparation
affordability scholarship that
we started several years ago we
now have
Thousand eighty teachers in this
program it's grown by sixty
percent so what this bill does
is it it
it will include teachers that
are working on their graduate
degree
because teachers working on a
graduate degree are often
working and going part time
we're undoing the requirement
that it has to be at least half
time often takes more than a
year or two but they're working
full time so the scholarship
will continue as long as a
student maintain satisfactory
academic progress is up for five
years
Everybody's excited about this
even if the audiences impact let
me turn it over to our secretary
of higher at the secretary
Stephanie Rodriguez to talk a
little bit more about this thank
you senator steer and chair
madam chair and members of the
committee I just whacked two
brief points over the past year
the higher education department
work diligently with our
partners at the public education
department and the teacher
workforce task force to identify
solutions to grow the teacher
workforce and support licensed
teachers were actually working
in our classroom in this
research we identified that our
teacher prep of portability
scholarship which is before you
today only supported students
entering into teacher prep
programs at the undergrad level
or individuals who are not
licensed going into the college
of education at the graduate
level meaning that teachers with
ten fifteen years experience
veteran teachers do not have
those same opportunities to go
back to grad school the last
point I will mention is in order
to go from level two to level
three you must have a graduate
degree so supporting teachers
and that is absolutely critical
for all of our agencies and our
work force and then of course
there is already funding in the
bill for five million dollars to
support this program so we are
not asking for an increase to
the appropriation or anything of
that nature thank you Mr chair.
Thank you we're gonna go to the
audience for seven years and
operator with anybody in
support.
Us just get one person up.
Future.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name you can budget
with the University of New
Mexico I know that some of our
other higher education partners
are here right now we spoke in a
previous.
Uniformed north supported this
we think the good sponsor bring
this forward we think are higher
education madam secretary for
supporting these efforts this is
a big deal higher education in
certain to our preparation of
the work force of thank you very
much thank you anybody in
opposition.
We all have to go to our zoom
zoom guy is seen to this.
In his room questions from
committee members.
Senator.
Senator Gonzales Mr chair just
this quickly and I don't have an
amendment or anything on this
but but I know we talked about
forgivable loans as opposed to
so if you if you finish.
Then it's forgiven if you don't
finish will not forgive.
but I don't have an amendment
that some I just wanted to throw
out here because we we we talked
about it for some other things
the opportunity scholarship.
So I just wanted to throw that
out there if that was a good
idea that worked or didn't work
whatever so also Mr chairman we
have that program to we have a
teacher loan repayment program.
This is a scholarship program.
so we have both in their both
being taken up significantly
this we're just all we're doing
with the scholarship program is
widening it to include a
graduate level work in
education.
Begin Mr chair.
Madam protium.
Why not make this a loan as
well.
This and again I'm just looking
at the return on investment so
you give somebody money and they
don't finish then then there was
no return if you give them money
and they do finish and it was a
return for both for both the
state and the.
Student if that's the right term
for somebody going after.
Ph.D but again I'm not going to
pose it just wanted to throw
that out there is.
I think a better ways to use our
resources thank you Secretary
responds.
Thank you I'm are you guys back
real quick.
Or we can get some velcro for
your chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I I only
have one and maybe two or
secretary of higher it so remove
requirements for eligible
students we at least have time
so what would that be the six
hours for.
Mr chair so have time would be
six hours for a student who's in
the undergraduate program for
the graduate program in actually
the four point five and that's
nearly impossible to enroll in
so we are changing that to part
time so that a student can take
three credits were six credits
at the graduate level.
So Mr chairman and secretary so
three hours would still leave
them.
Fully eligible.
Mr chair that is correct.
Mr chairman with the state of
graduate level teachers are
teaching
some yeah you know that I'm not
a higher I'm just try to
understand them and Mr chair
Senator Gonzales part time
though for the undergrad would
be six credit hours still for
the graduate would be that
anymore a three.
I guess so the last part of Mr
chairman so all our universities
are in state.
The same understanding.
Mr chair yes that is and it will
also be established in rural so
we'll be very clear once it is
administered out the door okay
very well thank you thank you
for that number thank you Mr
chairman
just curious maybe pointing
lies's
sent share.
We're we're doing first of this
is I think in concept good
because what we're trying to
educate our state teachers and
move them up get more teachers
in the pipeline were six hundred
short if I remember correctly
something like that
Is there any commitment along
with this money since we were
basically giving it to them is
there any commitment for these
folks to stay in the state and
and
Teacher in the state four one
three five years before
You know so that again maybe
it's a little return to pay back
on our investment in their
education Mr chair so the that
is the we are expanding
eligibility to veteran teachers
who already established and
working in our schools here in
New Mexico so we believe that
they will stay in New Mexico for
many years since they've already
been in the classroom for five
ten fifteen years as far as once
they complete their are other
incentives that our office
provides so that people want to
stay in the teaching part
professions such as teacher loan
repayment once again
incentivizing veteran teachers
to advance and we are very
confident that they'll stay
here.
And Mr I appreciate that of
course no guarantees you know
and so
just hoping maybe there was a
you know small commitment from
the just to make sure that they
stay there I think most of them
well but again there's no
guarantee because like anyone
else are going to go with this
is unfortunately and although we
made some great strides and
continue to pay more
there are other states to
probably will pay more
especially as they further their
education and go higher up the
chain so maybe some thought
might go into something like
that thank you Mr.
Thank you in similar questions
have a motion Mr a motion by
Senator Steinborn for the
passing by Senator.
any objection to the past
motion.
Direction.
Thank you senator thank you very
much thank you.
All you FFA kids right.
To come up and introduce
yourself for just one second.
Elsewhere today.
Where you're from.
The sensor you turn on that
speaker right there you can sit
the chairs were everything.
yes I'm dressed in Penson I'm
the president of our TFSA let my
officers introduce themselves
I'm complete right I'm the
reporter of artesian thank my
name is addy for more and I'm
the Czech personal I'm very but
the subject is secretary I'm
resting and the chapter vice
president.
You're all for more to you yes
yes Sir then we should put you
in the front room not the back
row.
Thank you guys for being here.
Taught some interesting and how
bills are working their.
I think it's really interesting
to see the legislative process
I'm really interested in and I
think it's a great opportunity
for our students from around the
state to get a better view into
how our state operates and I
think it's very education.
Have fun today yes thank you
thank you.
But the money latch.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Chairman came from
a Carlsbad students they were
here earlier and I told him to
come by this committee if they
for in the end walking will
allow them time till we have an
important bill for their
communities so Mr chairman
members of the community we have
a committee substitute for
Senate Bill two ninety two it's
a tax
Committee substitute for this
bill and I think most of you on
this committee have heard the
issue either the LESC or revenue
stabilization committee over the
last couple of years.
It is related to Carlsbad and
destination based sourcing and
what that particular bill did to
the communities of Carlsbad and
Hobbs related to the G. R. T.
taxes and basically as we've
moved to destination based
sourcing many of the mining
industry services were
transferred out to the county
which of course is a much lower
tax rate and that money goes to
to the county so the
municipalities were hit very
hard over the last couple of
years and have basically lost
millions of dollars because of
this change in tax policy and so
this bill that we're bringing
you today is a one time
appropriation nonrecurring
basically to compensate Carl
spent for the loss of revenue
related to destination thank
sourcing and so that's what
we're here for us so we can
answer any questions related to
the issue of destination thank
sourcing and how it's impacted
our communities we know for a
fact that it is a mining
industry over the last couple
years financial directors both
in Hopson Carl spent have
tracked it very closely through
the impropriety says we don't
know the names of the businesses
but we do know that it's mining
in particular that has created a
major problem for these two
communities which is very unique
to our area that really
potentially Farmington but we
don't know that for sure
but anyway that's what we're
here for and would be happy to
answer any questions I have TJ
Trujillo everyone knows TJ and
he's here if you want to say a
few words or we can answer
questions whatever you wanted
Kernan are those your FFA
students that walked in are you
students are just walking are
you from Carlsbad.
All of them with you they'll be
here in.
Anybody zoom in opposition or
support
This is heather noted for that
system budget hearing chair.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
Anybody in opposition questions
from committee members.
Senator Here was first and I did
see this time Center for sure
that's why.
So Mr chair of destination
source sources.
That was a great idea
absolutely helped most people
most places most of the time.
We can't yes we have these
unintended consequences and I
think this is a huge one that we
need to fix and I appreciate
that what she's doing here it's
certainly more than Carlsbad
that was affected by this and.
We need to support this one
today we also need to try to
figure out how to undo the
unintended consequences of that
but.
I support thank you.
Number I don't know I I you know
we're putting a bandaid on this.
But we got to figure out how to
fix this prominently does is
just continue to go.
Community after community is
going to come to us and and
we're not fixing anything just
again as we so often to throw
money at something try and fix
the process we need to go to the
core problem and find out what
it is and see if we can get this
corrected so I I don't know.
Who's gonna take on that
challenge how we get that done
of the but the problem itself
not the funniest got to be fixed
Mr.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
would just say I did everything
I think senator Byrd hit rate
was going to go which is we we
you know let's do this by I'm in
favor what the Senators
proposing here Mister chair but
we just kind of come up with a
plan hear me we we've been
talking about this for five
years I think that I've you know
I've been here eleven years but
I think I'm sure it's a lot
longer Senator Kernan but but I
want to help it in in that
process and and Representative I
think you're doing the right
thing for your community and I
fully support you but we need to
fix this overall because we're
just going to be right back here
trying to forget how much this
is going to cost some of the
community in that area so I
fully support.
Senator Steinborn.
Mr chair and senator
Representative okay so I'm
looking at the F. I. R. and
obviously it raises it raises a
variety of issues and.
So.
So I'm I'm kind of concerned
about it question number one
this teachers didn't we
appropriate money last year for
this Mr chair I.
Don't think we did any money and
FY are Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn is for the original
bill of the committee said
students my interesting there is
not enough our our at this point
we changed from a recurring to a
nonrecurring one time
appropriation that's all this
does and not when you when you
look at this it just allows the
community to moralist not have
to spend the money.
Quickly just over over time as
safe as I needed they're
experiencing compacts right now
because of agency reporting and
so that's an additional cost to
the community as well but they
are really does not go with them
the substitute.
Mr chair I see one thing that's
the same with the twenty five
million dollars appropriation
and then the FAA are the
original what are.
I guess taxed Rav estimates that
the actual monthly decrease in
incomes about one point five
seven million which comes out to
eighteen point eight million
over the year but the bill is
for twenty five million.
So what's the disagreement on so
off to Carlsbad on that film Mr
chair and senator you can you
can I don't think you can
quantify for sure monthly what
that cost is because it
fluctuates with what G. R. T. is
being paid and what's being lost
and for instance as I mentioned
you know one month you may have
a call back of I think we
recently had one of two two
million dollars two million
dollars in one month just for
compacts so it's it you really
can't say month by month and I
think that's one of the reasons
we may have to adjust to
straight appropriation that can
be spent over time just that
money is needed to to cover
those losses until we can have a
permanent fix which by the way I
think Representative Catherine
brown dropped a bill we don't
know that it's been be
successful but we want to keep
the conversation going and I
know that we have another
representative in the house is
working on more of a long term
fix and but it's not something
that's going to occur this year
in that we need to be vetted
during the interim to see if
there's support and it actually
supports all municipalities not
just Carlsbad and Hobbs so
things are in the works but
they're not ready for this year
this is a temporary one time
appropriation to compensate a
community that was harmed by
legislation that we as a
legislature passed and actually
voted for that bill and now so
we're just trying to to get
through until we can find a
permanent solution and you know
as you know we talk.
Oil and gas in the future
following gas we know that
that's going to begin to shrink
it we as a community are going
to be even more impacted thank
you in the state as oil and gas
and false possible your fuels
decrease we have to do
everything we can to prepare and
I guess it's just one area that
we.
The head of the gang temporarily
until we can get a permanent fix
it maybe I'll turn to
Representative Brown to see
appreciate your being here and
if you have anything you would
like to add thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee hi I apologize for
coming a little late I had
another committee but just to
expound on what Senator Kernan
mention Mr chair I did put into
the council for thirty nine that
proposes to try to do more of a
permanent fix for this problem
and we will we will see how that
goes I think this is something
that will need to be studied
more in the interim we just we
just have to find a way to to to
help communities that been hard
that have been harmed and
I I would also additional Mr
chair that the effective date of
this doesn't perhaps capture
what has been lost in since the
bill became the affected in July
we're already behind in
conference in trying to find
some kind of way to to fill the
hole was created through this
destination sourcing
with doing things now so we will
continue I know I will at the
with the senator also to to do
everything we can to find a spot
good solution that we can all
agree on but this is a measure
right now that would do a lot of
good.
The city Sir the need for city
services is increasing and the
money isn't there so to do.
That area so thank you Mr chair.
This time when you at Mr chair
and senator of how much money to
Carlsbad lose last year do you
know.
Mr chair TJ do you have those
types of the numbers and I think
it was close to twenty million
for well I think we're going to
the LFC it was a two hundred
million
Overall the the percentage of
that G. R. T. of over two
hundred million you take that
percentage in that.
Into the LFC and and certainly
and if we we have had that
presentation where our finance
director has percent about to
revenue stabilization and LESC
with those numbers and we were
trying to kind of consolidate
this we know you've heard this
issue for a long time and we we
were.
Trying not to overwhelm
additional testimony because I
know you on the for the bills
that are the reason is the
Mr Chairman center part of the
reason that so there's some
uncertainty is exactly what you
said you're still experiencing.
Because of the warning is
businesses are coming online
trying to figure out
how does this apply to me on
this mission sourcing so that's
where some of the uncertainty of
lies on the call back the
municipalities are struggling
just to figure out the
information and of itself on
call backs and improves its
related to because I could talk
forever about it it's a very
complicated process to get
behind the curtain and looking
sees the what specific taxpayers
are impacting the bottom line is
for for these communities.
Okay well finally Mr out to say
that you know a taxed Rav LFC
kind of concern that the bill
creates a precedence of giving
one off treatment preferential
treatment other cities are going
to come ask and is a variety of
factors of course that I'm not
saying this doesn't but impact
gross receipts cannabis gross
receipts obviously coming into
the community it says here's a
Carlsbad gross receipts has also
grown during this period of time
so you know that's my only
concern about how we make tax
policy around here and that this
is once again kind of a hold
harmless thing for one issue
without quantify numbers at that
so we just have concerns but I
appreciate where you're coming
from thanks Mr.
We're going Senator PM anybody
next but.
There's a group that large for
probably a year and a half to
figure out how to fix this
problem right and in there it
really is a tough fix but it's
it's hard to do and so in order
to get them through what
happened
because their budgets are
decimated right.
Eight we need to do something I
mean it was and an unattended
consequence we realize that the
fix is so technical and so hard
to do that we were going to get
it done this session.
Senator Representative brown's
bill.
Does work in and we'll see what
happens but that there was no
other way to try to fix that in
the short time.
So then we Senator Kernan came
up with this idea and they said
that that will do this but only
one time not recurring so
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and it's
my second time because I'm very
supportive of what you're trying
to do for the for your
communities
Yeah I guess a couple of things
I'm glad to hear we do so much
up here and this is my eleventh
year here I didn't realize that
this is been worked on for a
year and a half to try to solve
this and and when I heard
earlier this sponsor say what
we're gonna work on this and you
know and and that's great
everything with what we need
this done now I mean we still
have thank you just well we have
thirty days left when the three
thirty stated so let's get this
all out for you I mean that's
help you with the problem that
you have now Mr chairman and.
Bring something forward to get
this thing resolved for you
community because otherwise
you're going to be over here you
know trying to get us all of fix
two or three years again and and
we're gonna be having the same
conversations item number one I
remember to I want to mention is
an respectfully gonna Senator
Steinborn we talk about you know
we don't wanna make tax policy
for one community what we may
tax policy here that
unintentionally harmed one
community so we we do need to do
this we do need to solve this
and and you know I think I think
you agree I you know I don't
want to speak for your bank but
when we talk about we can do
things for one community or one
County whatever we just did
something to one county in in in
one particular area we've got to
solve this I mean we're we're
just but but why are we saying
we're not gonna have anything
thank you correctly so you're
not gonna have anything this.
So and Mr chairman and Senator
Padilla
Representative Brown has dropped
to build it on I I don't know
that we have a lot of confidence
it is the the long term answer
I do think that I know that
Representative Scott is also
working on more technical bill
that would really need to be
vetted through the interim with
the tax policy Committee revenue
service session so he we think
we have some good ideas but just
takes time to make sure that in
in the good news is if if I
don't know if you all have heard
the presentation I think
disability where they have the
technology now working with New
Mexico tent that they can run
these things prior to changing
tax problems here in this is
when we had it and artex
Committee and it would have been
amazing to have been able to do
that prior to house bill six and
we both caught this we would
have known so nobody really knew
at that point but that's going
forward I think it's going to be
really helpful and maybe that
something that we can utilize as
we planned the permanent fix to
make sure we aren't impacting
other communities pop whatever
we decide to fix some thank you
Mr chairman lesson also as well
I'm glad to hear that you have
to bills already filed and you
have or one so you have even
though we're going to get past
that were you can't file
additional whatever you say you
have a vessel now that you could
actually.
Sub some creative language into
and do some quick I I highly
recommend you try to get this
done this year in addition to
what you're before us with right
now so.
You know it's been a struggle in
the and so.
For this week Senator Steinborn
we're going to.
Will this once we can get out
here because it's already almost
ten point Senator Rodriguez
thank you very thank you I thank
you my I'll be quick high
Senator and Representative and
T. J. predicted to see you I'm
just going to be quick to say
that I've heard this for a long
time to and I've heard your
concerns Senator and your
concern should be ours is by
Senator Padilla said you know we
impacted.
Whether it was inadvertently or
whatever form one area and when
we do that we need to step up to
the plate affects and I think
that you know in this case
I couldn't by the fact that it
can't be fixed I think print
perpetuity we should we fixed
everything else apparently
nothing we haven't heard the
other areas come in the state we
did the same to them so I'm
assuming this is the the one
area that has a big impact in so
because it's that out wire there
I think we can make it whole and
and I truly believe that with
good hard work and an intent to
get it done not not to get it
done we can get it finalized so
I support this Mr chairman thank
you senator Representative into
teachers who do.
Thank the motion for do you
pass.
The Mason and I am in any
objection to the past motion.
Thank you very much Mr chair.
Senator Steinborn you have your
data that is coming down right
now we'll have.
We have we have one and then and
then there's a little late so
it's coming down right down the
street.
To a to see Pino.
Good morning.
Yes ma'am yes.
Members of the committee.
Senate bill two fourteen is in
the.
Bill would the move may seem
very familiar to some of you it
it's yet another attempt at
completing what we had hoped
would be a.
Fifty million dollar fund.
of endowment fund the revenue of
which each year would be
available to.
Fifty rural libraries in the
state.
Many of them are located in.
Thank for paraded Communities
and so they have a hard time
finding any they don't have
taxing authority obviously so
they have a difficult time
finding any revenue they support
themselves as a variety of
requests fund raising activities
locally.
And but the services they
provide go far beyond lending
books up.
These are it in those
unincorporated communities
effectively the local civic
enterprise this is where the
computer telephone Services
copying Services.
This is where people can get
online and and and fill out
forms for employment
possibilities many businesses
are conducted through the local
libraries the variety of
services is enormous.
Both cultural.
And educational as well as
economic development and just
civic support for people living
in the community after school
programming weekend programming
evening programs.
So all of this is done by.
Largely.
The volunteer organizations.
What we thought when we began
this effort the four years ago
now.
Was that we would have that fund
it it's it's a funded in case
the the state begins having
financial difficulties could be
tapped as part of the reserves
but until then it's been
invested by the state investment
council here and and the FIR
talks about.
The conservative and and safety
oriented investments that have
been made that even through this
past year enable the fund to
grow so much.
what we're hoping for was to get
fifty million dollars for fifty
libraries it turns out there now
more as as as a portion of these
funds are used by the state
librarian.
To help communities develop
libraries that don't already
have them I think we're up to
fifty to look at libraries in
our part of this program but
that in the future there growth
could be anticipated to exceed
even that so what we're hoping
is that it not be capped at
fifty million but did it
continue to increase the revenue
each year would be distributed
among those if we have fifty
when we came up with this so we
have fifty libraries
participating.
The thought was each one would
have a million dollar endowment
it would be consolidate into
this.
That would generate about.
Boenning on the on the run on
how the fund is doing in terms
of its investment income forty
five to fifty thousand dollars a
year for each of those libraries
with that they could hire
somebody fix the roof.
Add more computers provide
additional services whatever
that local group chose to do.
And with me I have Mister she'll
nine mark who brought this idea
to me four years ago.
and then I'd like him to say
something about this fund thank
you Mr Mr chairman Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for letting me speak so.
Let Mexico are generally funded
by municipalities fourteen of
these libraries are in an
incorporated area so they don't
have any fund
funding from municipality said
all unfortunately many of the
municipalities may delay in
larkspur Columbus quest to the
tests don't have of large
commercial sector to fund these
libraries in Colorado for
example libraries are funded by
library districts and they have
taxing authority so they're able
to reliably sing Colorado are
well staffed their librarians
are well paid because we don't
hear consequently librarians
throughout the state in my pre
directors are often making
twelve to fifteen dollars an
hour that it would include
directors in Tularosa in
lords perky dial gold quest he
let Magdalena Clayton in some
libraries I can mentally Kiko
they have volunteers there there
but you just may be six to ten
thousand dollars a year these
communities need good jobs in
well paid librarian said this
and it would really address some
of those issues.
Thank you we're going to go to
the audience anybody in support.
Twenty one to come up and say
something.
The
a button on that one and tucked
away.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for allowing me to speak I
endorse feels I am a member of
the board of directors for
plastics Committee library
libraries throughout the state
particularly the rural libraries
are varied and what they're able
to offer based on what kind of
income they can have
Placido says in in an
unincorporated area therefore we
have no municipal funds we are
able to provide we have what we
we have a generous community we
are very fortunate with the
generous community still we
spend a lot of our time and.
Volunteers are happy to do what
we do but we spend a lot of our
time I have a book sales bake
sales pip sales we sometimes by
Talavera pottery at wholesale
and sell it then we have over
the years had collected odds and
ends from people's garage sales
and had and hi had them into a
of a flea market so but we are
able to provide a wide range of
educational programs education
the libraries libraries serve as
a gateway to education.
People being able to grow
themselves and become actually
more productive citizens or more
productive members of their
community there's no question
about that so our library
provides educational programs
for children for adults a wide
range we have one paid full time
position and that is split
between two part time staff
members all of the programs and
we have programs that range from
geology of Placita us the
history of land grants on to the
skies the state this is
fortunate that we have dark
skies and we have the
astronomers who Madam bring
their telescopes and show us
what's going on in the sky I
could tell you a lot more than I
don't want to take a whole lot
more of your time but we have
doing all of this two part time
staff we have approximately one
hundred volunteers who give
their time their talent and
their treasure and I support
strongly support Senate bill two
fourteen and would ask if you
would please support and pass it
as well thank you very much
thank you.
I just know is anybody in
opposition.
Zoom.
Of questions from okay I think
there's something.
I mean opposition.
We're in support of quickly.
I can tell us the same things.
The state standing.
It's on the other good morning
Arnold chair committee members
my name is tree Center on hall
and I'm the librarian at Santa
Clara public community library
representing a tribal rural
library requesting the full
funding for the rural libraries
endowment fund thank you to the
bill Sanchez for the essential
work that's been done to assist
our rural community members this
is the most opportune time to
help our small libraries and low
income.
Entities and working at my
tribal rural library for over
thirty years I am among many
rural libraries who seek grant
funds yearly to address a great
need for basic library services.
It just.
From aside from managing the
library these grant funds in a
consistent and dependable way
could pave library staff needed
to address challenges of
students and families for after
school summer and evening our
programming with reliable
internet computer equipment and
one on one assistance to the
valuable online resources for
unemployed self employed parents
who would otherwise not know how
to use these resources many of
our.
Rural schools do not have a
library as in our community
where we serve head start K.
through six community school
classes weekly after school and
with important summer reading
and steam programming our
students learn what a library is
and how to use it to prepare for
high school and college
academics and leading learning
standards we are easily
accessible for people without
transportation for libraries who
are just beginning who are not
quite a public libraries yet
they will be able to access the
funding in the future
as a valuable funding streams
thank you thank you engine
right.
Good for
the action is not going.
Thank you.
Senator question from committee
members Senator Diamond thank
you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this forward you had a
lot of support that reached out
to us on the email running
please.
Their email access to the
library that they're currently
sitting at setting this I think
that's great I had a quick
question surprised and gas for
any junior money because it
looks like we can make some of
these monies to department of
cultural affairs who's the
fiscal agent for a lot of these
areas in these unincorporated
areas who's managing the money.
And then it Mr chairman and and
Senator Diamond they are.
Either local government it in in
this Magdalena for example of
the cause incorporated community
so it's the Magdalena city
government it's our library
branch but in those that are
tribal or non profit like I one
C. threes.
They have to go through the
county to have a governmental
entity guessing that the council
thank you tried that the the
nonprofit's the tribes can go
through their own tribal
government nothing non profits
that's what I was thinking just
confused about nonprofits thank
you guys bring this forward this
is very valuable for rural
communities thank you.
Seven dollars thank you Mr
chairman and I'll try to be very
brief but I don't have any
questions but I just really want
to applaud the you know for
bringing this for but I just
want to members to turn to us.
Third page.
The right has so.
Culture and history if you look
at the third sentence.
Well in other libraries holding
quilting art and craft classes.
And I published a local cool
cool.
Just enough reference yesterday
we had a long debate on the free
chili.
I thought about
getting a cookbook or getting
recipes of and the reason that I
mention this for you see the
Google this of the late senator
Cisneros and myself really
helped him with this so to bring
this up and they still sell it
today and it's already like I
seven years old maybe even more
than the the a new lease of as a
fundraiser but Mr chairman
members so I have witnessed the
type of community center and of
course the from the ground up
all the way.
And the boy put this is done for
that community it's there's no
words that the community center
in thought I just used every
single.
Our of the day that's available
but the most important part is
so.
When the COVID hit.
That is the one thing that
really help that community
because people could still
access going to the outside to
the house on the internet you
know and then by special
arrangement still going to the
library in order to use the
library but all this is
something that are really really
works in the last part that I
just want to end up with the Mr
Chairman is some there was
another donor that tough.
Crafted in hand crafted some
real beautiful table twelve I'm
talking these massive wood
tables outside and the thing I I
told my wife is that I hope that
graffiti of my hope that they
don't vandalize some.
Those that those tables are
probably not going like seventy
years.
And no one has done any harm to
a or anything but that's what
happens when you have impala
road from the bottom you know
the price from the community
that he belongs to the you know
and it's just really amazing to
see that.
The the with the one with the
help of I'm just gonna say
probably more than fifty percent
is done by volunteers.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Any other questions from
committee members.
so move that Mr so this is a
point in the session mmhm where
budget bills that are in the
budget currently right our
tabled and and as a the money's
there right the fifteen million
in house bill two maybe a little
bit more once crosses over the
And so any help would be
appreciated.
And so this is a time here where
we know stuff's in the budget as
it's coming over the structure
is already there so there's no
need to pass the bill along and
so the bills held here and the
money will be in house bill two
as.
And we'll talk about amendments
to house bill two is as one when
it comes over so.
Thank the I just think I can
find something Senator.
Mr chairman I would just say
we're also planning planting the
seeds for next interim and
hopefully we can if we don't get
the full thirty seven we need
this year hopefully you that
whatever we get this year plus
next year will completed and and
and and will be able to really
assure these libraries of some
of the sustainable growth.
Mr chairman thank you senator
for bringing this just quickly
since that fifteen minutes and
house bill two the thing to look
for there is that the language
is specific to this and I said
I'd have seen it but I want to
make sure that I didn't look at
it word by word but I know that
the concept is there so just
want to make sure and will yeah
what do what we can thank you
senator and and I know the RFP
made reference to a a switch
with our plans and I hope that
was taken care of independent of
the appropriation of hope that
doesn't reflect ten million from
the general fund replacing are
both plus a new I because we
really do need the full fifteen
all all of it
but I met comes over and.
That.
and I did and that that I've
been to the thought of you know
that the tribal libraries have
their own set aside to.
Right and I know what one
library losing out to another
because tribal already has their
own set aside funding on their
own.
and ten I think they have ten
million or something or maybe
even more that was done last
year the year before and so I
want to make sure that
everybody's treated equal right
if they need help they need help
or have other libraries are not
getting help and they're getting
out from tribal libraries on top
of state travel libraries.
It's gonna be for everybody.
Something that has to happen
specially in rural is in poor
communities and I think in this
so far in this fun there are how
many tribal libraries well seen
this that they're those guys
took thank the that tribal every
fund is for a lot more because
it includes all the chapter has
is.
Table Mr so we have to table a
motion right.
I guess the second.
Senator Gonzales.
Any objection to the motion.
Thank you senator thank you very
much members of the committee
remember to keep us as we try
to.
I'll make a tracking this to
think they're listening to us on
the back screen track house bill
two in in languages that comes
over thank you.
Senator Steinborn you have your
amendment.
Then I need to talk to you right
after.
Well this.
We we rolled this bill over.
In order to make sure that they
got the the right fix.
some Senator Steinborn I guess
on Senate bill ninety four.
This is the first amendment
Senate night bill ninety four
correct that's the point to Mr
chair yes it is the first
amendment Mr Chairman move that
we.
Oops.
Whatever this is and then
finance committee member number
one
to Senate bill ninety four for
discussion purposes.
We have a motion Senator second
by Senator Rodriguez any
objection to the motion Senator
Steinborn tell us about them and
Mr chair college what this does
is you heard yesterday about the
state trails Act and making sure
that the Rio Grande trail was in
conflict with the trails Act
that they work together this is
the general counsel EMNRD who
has authority over the trails
Act what this bill with the
amendment simply does to say
that for purposes of planning
and designation.
Only that the Rio Grande trail
is does not
What's the word to it does not
fall under the roof of the
trials at from other aspects it
does it does but not for
planning and and designation
which is clearly defined in the
real Rancho statute that's the
language on page three right
right.
Of the amendment.
That's the only one which.
And.
You should
also.
Then
Shendo Senator Rodriguez any
objection to the the.
And amended bill back on the
bill.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you yes Representative.
We have a motion for do passed
by Senator share second by
Senator Padilla any objection to
to pass motion.
I see none thank you.
That we fix that for you Senator
Steinborn.
That.
And.
That they have I are in the
bureau of research do not match
up to the amount of dollars that
the fund will need in in the
first year basing it off other
state and so we may have we have
a panel will probably have other
panels.
as we move forward because this
is a bill that if the structure
is not right it will fail and
and then we'll be running a
deficit in that in that bill so
it's we're going to spend more
time in the afternoon and
catching up on on a few
Hearing this and then we'll
we'll go that panel.
I plan on not having anything to
moral morning.
And
Maybe in the afternoon a short
meeting.
But coming in on Monday we're
gonna have the house bill should
not go to should cross over the
weekend and so we're gonna spend
Monday Tuesday and Wednesday
kind of staying late and racking
up the house bill two and its
structure and what's in there
and what's and duplicate.
I heard today that says bill too
comes over we're going to have
even less capacity it's now down
to about eleven million and in
recurring capacity so let's see
what happens is so I don't think
that's going to work so we're
gonna have a lot of movement in
the house bill two to open up
reoccurring on the Senate side
and and do some of those fixes
so we'll see this afternoon and
we're going to try to get out
here every day by five o'clock.
and we've got to play catch up
cleanup I really don't want to
do any I will not do Sundays
unless it's absolutely necessary
and they'll be in the afternoon
but Saturday's if we're gonna
have four sessions we may come
in and get caught up in I need
to visit with you up around this
week maybe a one eight I'll come
round on the floor this after
the.
We can talk so plan on Monday
evening being allowed you mean
