Adrian Charles, who's going to
lead us
Go over these. We're gonna go
over the head. You're gonna tell
us how we're gonna go over
these, So we know
Yeah, alright.
Uh, Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Adrian
Neville. I have Charles away
here with me. Um, before we go
into the packet and just want to
highlight some high levels for
everybody
So the House version of House
Bill two came over at 10.18
billion and recurring spending
or what would be a 6.4%
increase and with 32% reserves.
We with all if you all decide to
adopt this, uh, drafting
instructions, we would be
sending the budget back.
With recurrent spending
totalling 10.49 billion, which
is an increase of roughly 30
million in recurring
So that would be 6.7% increase.
And we would still maintain 30%
reserves would be pulling the
tobacco settlement fund out of
the reserve calculation.
Um, some elements to highlight
within recurring funding. We are
increasing the snap food
supplemental for seniors and
disabled folks.
From $25 to $100.
We are also taking care of
future liabilities like
universal school meals, raising
the money within the SCG to
match the L. E S C
recommendation and adding money
for Medicaid for rural
providers.
We also address staff gaps
throughout state government,
including the Healthcare
Authority, C y F D in the state
engineer.
And we are ensuring the state
police are the highest paid law
enforcement in the state.
And non recurring. We are
ensuring line Force Mint
firefighters in the M s are
funded.
And we are fully funding the
governor's literacy initiative.
And lastly, we also have
prepared a $747.9 million
Transportation and
infrastructure package, of which
$220 million will be found in
House Bill two and the remaining
will be in Senate Bill 300,
which we will hear right after
this, Um with that.
We can jump into your packets.
So what you have here on page
one is all of the recurring
appropriations.
Um some highlights. We are
ensuring the courts since you
all passed judicial pay
compensation. We're ensuring
they get money for that.
Um, we are insurance staffing
throughout various agencies.
Where Pete was
And that's basically what's on
page one page 23.
And four are all the non
recurring adjustments.
Which include all the healthcare
stuff, along with taking care of
cybersecurity education.
Um and basically the entire
state government were also
accounting for the grow
appropriations in that portion
that would be online 69 on Page
three.
Page five.
Highlights all the language that
would appear within the
transportation portion. So those
would be all the roads that BOT
can start to prioritize and move
forward. These were all roads
that members from both the
Senate and the House brought
forth to us.
Uh Hmm.
Page six and seven. You have
some language and technical, uh,
adjustments.
Which includes
Some Riaz from D F a moving so
that we can address some
shortfalls within tribal capital
as well.
Hmm.
Oh, yes.
And then we're what line is it?
Charles seven, Online seven.
We are also adding language to
ensure that the DD waiver
support program at the
healthcare Authority, Um is
getting $20.4 million. So we're
making that explicit.
So those are all the language
pieces.
Uh um.
On page 11.
You basically have the language
that would go in Section nine,
which would be the gross
section.
That would apply the
accountability measures to the
appropriations that would be
coming or going to local
communities.
And then you have some language
on accountability specifically
for C Y F. D.
C Y F D is really well funded,
But you also want to make sure
that you can track every dollar
and, you know, ensure the safety
of the Children.
On page 13.
You have the executives grow
requests, which totaled 33
million.
Her requests include money for
statewide homelessness. Um
Litter, Pick up and
beautification the Children's
Trust fund and turn around pilot
projects within a P s.
Ah, um the following page. You
have language, basically
ensuring that all the grow money
the appropriations that the
members allocated that after the
session. Um right. This is the
Yeah.
After the session, All of the
members grow allocations will
become public so everyone will
get to see where all the members
allocated there. Um, money.
And then the last sheet, which
is the single sheet just as
contingency language to to
appropriations that were flagged
as um, needing a bill.
In order for them to pass.
That is the packet you have in
front of you today.
Rodriguez had one question on
page Good.
Their woods. We talked a minute
ago about Mr Chair. We talked a
minute ago about the governor's
initiative on water.
Uh oh. What exactly did that
include?
Do you remember off the top of
your head? The How much was
about the cost in
That would not appear in this
Bill. Senator Woods.
But off the top of my head.
Their initial request was 250
million, using sponge bonding.
And they were proposing to do
something in relation to that
through the capital bill, But
this is House Bill two, and it
doesn't relate to that. So that
is not actually in this
disappear. It is not
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you, Mr Chairman of
Adriano. Maybe if you could go
over again, that transportation
one, of course.
So the transportation one will
appear on page.
Or
Right within house Bill two.
There's 220 Million in general
fund, cash and 120 million of
that will be going towards
maintenance statewide, so that
means each district within BOT
will get 20 million. And then
you have on page five, the
various roads that members have
flagged.
Uh, um, for d O t. To prioritize
and get work done on
And then Senate Bill 300, which
we will hear right after this,
Adds 527.8 million on top of
this
And we will go over that bill
shortly.
Mr Chairman, I'll wait.
Thank you. Hmm. Thank you, Mr
Chair. And thank you all. I'm
curious. Is there anything for
game and fish in this?
Buried in this document. Mr
Chair. There is not okay.
Um what
Were there any things and I
apologize again. You might have
already said this. Is there
anything that was in?
House Bill two that we have
zeroed out.
Hmm. Mr Chair. No.
Okay?
I saw we reduced some
appropriations. I just saw that
That's all. We increased one.
Thank you very much.
But, um
Okay, we'll keep looking kind of
wanted to ask you about the game
of fish and the other question.
Thank you, Mr
Is it center. Stein born wants
to start over and move some more
stuff from the house or
That we can move some worse
stuff on the house.
Yeah.
I think
Senator share
So, um, Mr Chair. I know that,
uh, there was some language
Issues that we had to get in
here and at least in this part
of it. I'm not seeing
The language that we don't have
any language at all.
Mhm.
What
So, Mr Chair. What?
What page?
Just as I go through here, Yes.
I'm not seeing
In some places. We talked about
minor language changes.
Hmm.
Trying to think of one at the
moment Health to menstrual.
Okay, that is in there. But then
there was some others that said,
Okay, we need we need language
and law somewhere like Connie
Mack.
Okay, so so are those. I don't
see those, and now it could be
because
Again. You wrote it microscopic.
Or it could be that I just
didn't have enough coffee.
But if you can find those things
that we talked about, that's
what course give me one second.
He's looking at Charles or were
they just not? Added Chairman Mr
Chairman on Page nine line 35.
You'll see the earmark for
purchasing advertisements,
commercials and publicity is for
the Connie Mack World Series.
Contingent upon a bill passing
Does it say contingent does not
say contingent, okay and see.
And I think that was I mean in
this particular doesn't need
contingency. Let your other
bills need contingency. Correct.
This one does not say
contingency on the on the other
ones is that is that yet? Added
in here. I guess there is
additional contingency language
on certain appropriations and
connection to bills. Yes.
Are we going to have another
chance to read this before we
vote on it, Mr Chair?
We're gonna do the drafting
instructions, so we'll point
that catch up.
I want to read through that
language, Charles. Did we remove
the notwithstanding language?
Yes, sir. That was not necessary
because statute allows the
appropriation to be carried out
as was written in the bill that
came over.
Okay. And then Ah, Mr Chair
Senator share in regards to the
ensuring that the Corrections
Department provides menstrual
products right? That's online,
27 on Page eight.
That language change.
Ah!
Okay. I see that one.
I just I would like before I
vote on this.
Particular thing I would like to
We're gonna send drafting
instructions today because they
have to start printing today.
Putting grow in the back of the
house got the houses yesterday
or day before
Monday there still typing three
days later.
We got it. Check and double
check so
Where they're dating. Click, Get
these caught up, starting to
typing and draft email. We'll do
some drafting errors, and if we
catch them, they'll have a
technical cleanup.
And then they'll draft house
Bill two, and we'll come back
and vote on it.
Okay. All right. Thank you, Mr
Senator Padilla first Thank you.
Chair and thank you very much
for the chair. Also in Adrian
for the pre game If you will,
where you sat down with us
yesterday, I thought that was
very smart and very good stuff.
Thank you Just had one
everything else that I was
working on with You is there,
but I can't find the one on the
medical residents for the
University of Phoenix.
I looked everywhere and I just
haven't had breakfast or coffee
or anything. And on Page six,
Senator Padilla line eight.
Right there where it says 3.4
where it actually says what? I
okay? Yes.
Somebody's actually reading the
bill.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Adrian and Charles for the
information. I was just looking
through the highway projects is
highway. The phase two for the
highway. When 80 expansion
project in there somewhere, and
I'm just not seeing it.
Hmm. Mr Chair, Senator Hemphill
that is within the Senate Bill
303 100. Okay, we will go over
that so specifically with, um
That one. You? You said us. 180
correct us 180 from Mile post 1
28.2721 42.5 70,000,070 million.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Adrian
and then was there's some
language change to make sure
that the all rural healthcare
providers are included in the
rate increases to to specify
that Mr Chairman, Senator
There's about 64 million worth
of rate increases.
That our in house bill two that
apply to all providers,
including rural, Okay, the
I think the questions that you
were getting from a at least one
constituent.
Where
We pay for
Services through rural health
clinics and fq hcs differently
than through the normal rate
process. And so that was a
separate earmark for those
particular providers. But all of
the other providers included in
the other 64 Million, including
Thank You. Thank you so much, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you. Mr Church. A couple
of questions on last single
page. The 6 Million
appropriation for legislative
staff contingent on legislation.
that's the district around the
state.
Funding for officers is am I
correct in that?
Mr Chair, Senator Bert? Yes, Mr
Chairman Adrian, Um what Bill?
Is that says contingent upon the
legislation. I can't remember
what number that do you happen
to know that offhand, do not,
but I know there was a bill
introduced in the House.
Okay. Um, However, any bill that
addresses that issue would would
cover it. Yes. Okay, we'll look
it up.
Check Several. Thanks.
Um, so there are some changes
from House Bill two.
Um
Number one. We are
Removing the funding for
legislative staffing.
Intentional legislation.
And without a language here,
which essentially kills that
because we do there isn't a
bill. This was an appropriation.
And so what? Folks to be aware
of that that was a force
studied. That was not out of the
blue.
Um And that reminds you point is
something seriously going to
enhance the capabilities of the
legislative branch?
So I'm really concerned about
that. Number two. We're removing
a $7 million appropriation for
the water Quality management
fund to do surface water.
Permits for the Environment
Department. SUBS, uh says
contention on legislation which
China's gender is no legislation
for that.
Also understand Mr Chair that we
are taking money out of the
health Care Affordability Fund
and the consumer a consumer fund
and again I'm not even looking
at that language. Just heard
that
You know, this is one of the
challenges Mr Chair with being
shown the fine print, you know,
and then being asked about five
minutes later, Um
You know, I really object to
some of those language changes.
Um
Appreciate the inclusion of
MSU's project that I've been
asking about. That's a good
thing.
But these really concerned me
and so welcome answers on any of
those questions. I just raised,
Mr Chairman. The health care
affordability is a fun swapped
to use that which is intended to
Help expand healthcare services
across the state.
Um
And
The other items are not zeroed
out in the budget. They just
have language that requires a
bill to pass for those
appropriations to go into
effect.
Well, all due respect, Mr
Chairman.
The other appropriations in here
that you can make the same
argument for for things that
happen to support, But you know,
it's
Selective.
And
For things also support
So
High in the future with it would
be great if we had some delay
between looking at these things,
and then agitating, mulling them
over and making sure we get it
right before we go off to do We
have any delay, Mr. Chair? We
can talk about this a little bit
or
Kind of like you gotta send it
off to the printers now.
Otherwise, I'd prefer if we
could cuddle on some of these
things. Senator Stein born. We
were still working on language
from the exact
Last night at 738 o'clock when
he left here, Mhm. We're trying
to wrap up language that they
wanted.
It's pretty hard for us to
Get there and then we have to
have a cut off and so language
has to get done Some of the
recommendations and from the
exact they want to see and so,
um, let's chat emotion you want.
We're You know, we're going to
get him to drafting today
because
Mr Chair. Maybe. Maybe if
there's any time flexibility,
I'm sure you know these are some
big priorities for the house,
Which is why I asked that
question.
Um, and their priorities I
share, so I'm not here. Just
doing the bidding of the house.
But, um
That's fine. We can disagree. We
can end up in a conference
committee. I just want to make
sure that we talked this
through. Um before.
We make our decisions that could
result in that scenario so
anyway.
That would be my request that
but I'll vote vote. Thank you.
If the House is willing to go
into conference committee in an
election year or more than the
plague
And I have a motion to adopt the
draft.
Senator Means also made the most
terrible. Did you have a
question?
So Senator Gonzalez made the
motion second by center Woods
You call the roll?
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes, Senator
Campos? Yes. Compost votes. Yes,
Senator Bradley.
Senator Bradley.
Senator Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzalez
Gonzalez votes Yes, Senator
Hemphill, Senator Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes votes? Yes, Senator Scherer.
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein board. Senator
Stein born votes No Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes Yes,
Vice Chair Rodriguez.
Yes. Rodriguez Boats. Yes,
Chairman. Ah'S Yes. Chairman.
Yes. Votes? Yes.
Thank you.
Hey, you know, the drafting
instructions are gonna come back
our ketchup or not our ketchup
cleanup, but our technical
cleanup.
We're gonna put Senator Compost.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Woods.
Okay?
I mean, why don't you do the
chili?
I did bring my memorabilia.
Those for those who don't know I
am still the
In your chili in New Mexico.
Oh, my goodness. We need to do a
little more marketing on that,
Uh, that's what we're here for.
Today. We will do Yeah.
Well, I'm not scared.
Travis. Look what you've
created. Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Yes, you may proceed.
Chili King were before you today
with Senate Bill 93, as you
know, the New Mexico Chilies
Verse Association has had a long
mou with New Mexico State
University since 2007 7. Many of
their, um research funds,
including assessing crop
rotations, herbicide methods and
improving weed control.
Mexico, Chile Growers are coming
before us today in conjunction
within MSU, requesting some
further funds for research. This
is an appropriation of $400,000
for research to include even
simple things like developments
of risk management tools for our
chili producers. Also included
in the bill is $100,000 for
marketing funds.
I'm going to let Travis talk a
while. We want to be quick, but
just to have some quick, you
know, fun facts about some of
the lawsuits that have happened
with Miss Labeling. New Mexico
Chili, also including in that
marketing funds would be the
search for new Chili King as
well. Travis. If you'd like to
speak to those center, Bradley
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee.
I'm trying to, say Magnet
director for
you did give me the title
Something idea? Yeah.
And then you will always be able
to hold the titles. The first
Chili King in New Mexico
chairman that does not go away.
Um, but again, we're asking for
a half million dollar
appropriation for the next two
years to go towards research and
marketing. We've seen a lot of
success in our partnership with
New Mexico State University, and
typically, we get around
$400,000 of appropriations from
the state every year.
And over the last couple of
years we've seen about $750,000
of requests come in from
researchers that animus you and
all of really good projects, all
projects that will make a big
stride for our industry, and we
want to be able to fund those
certain projects over the next
couple of years. And naturally
where that $400,000 number came
from.
As far as the marketing in New
York we've seen to consumer
fraud lawsuit.
Um, come in because of the
mislabeling of Chile as New
Mexico products and when they
were sourced back, they were not
from New Mexico, and we continue
to see that those are just
things that were brought up at
the forefront in 2023, but we
continually see products with
the new Mexico name on it, and
they're not sourced back to New
Mexico. And so we want to
provide some marketing campaigns
and partnerships with an MSU.
And again working through that
MoU that we currently have
existing. And so that's why the
structure where the funds would
go, Um was decided because we
already have that structure.
There's the MOU in place where
we have that partnership
developed since 2007. So we want
to ensure that we're protecting
New Mexico chili through
research and marketing.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Anybody in the audience and
support
Anybody in opposition to and
support we know who they are so
their chili consumers
So questions from committees are
questions from committee
members.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Senator, I was did
receive several text messages,
Mr Chairman, that there was
going to be a casting call to
recast.
Chili King.
And some candidates that had
applied or we're going to come
in and interview were Brad Pitt.
Um
And if you Italian act
But you have Hispanic after
Hey, I do but like they re cast
and you know movies of the week
about, you know, um, real life
stories. They usually recast the
main character and let you know
Thank you.
Understand born. Thank you, Mr
Chair, Senator. Thank you for
bringing this bill forward and
Travis. Good to see you. Um,
it's so important that we
protect this.
Um, prized New Mexico brand and
our trademark.
And anything we can do and the
market it's such a globally
famous product. Senator Hemphill
and I are permanent. Um, Senator
Brantley and I are honored to
report represent
Part of, uh, part of hatch and,
um
You know, it's such an
incredible community. And so
anyway, thank you for doing the
bill, and I hope anything that
we can do to strengthen our
brand and strengthen legal legal
fights were fighting in federal
court over people using the
name. I mean, we really
Have to be as aggressive we can
and use every tool we can. So if
there's anything we're not
doing, I hope you'll let us know
because I think we'll be there
to support that, Herbert. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'm sorry. I'm getting the big
poblano on my phone Self.
I just think Chili kings, So I'm
just sharing with you. So you're
prepared referred
should look in the mirror
before. Yeah. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Um, just a quick note. Um
$100,000 for marketing. How is
that money going to be used?
Mr Chairman, Senator Bert. We're
going to be working with an MSU
and pulling in the Chili Pepper
Institute and also an M. D. A.
in developing that marketing
plan. You know. Last year there
was an ask for a million
dollars. And one thing that we
realize is that was just a
little too significant to be
able to spend in a year so we
wanted to scale that down to
100,000. But we were going to
develop that plan in partnership
with all the chili folks moving
forward and ensure that what
we're developing is can be used
year after year by different
organizations.
So okay, So you're gonna sit up?
An image if you will or
foundation to build on from here
on out, Mr Wurman Center, But
that's correct. Okay, um and Mr
Chairman, um, you are using an N
M s. You're using any marketing
people to help you with this, or
is it the the agency or who are
you using to help Build that
plan? Your Majesty and Senator
Bert, There is an existing
marketing department within New
Mexico Department of AG.
That the chili growers work
closely with and they also has
marketing expertise in New
Mexico State University. I'll
tell you that $100,000 towards a
promotional campaign, you know
what's it going to go too far in
the details of that planner are
still pretty narrow Focus
chairman this mostly for
playing, that's I guess what I
was getting at because $100,000
is not going to go very far.
And you're much closer to it at
least a million.
That you had in mind from last
year if you really launched the
sink correctly, you gonna need
at least that much quite
frankly, to make this to have
the impact. I think that you're
looking for so and I'm more than
happy to
Dr. That boat. We get a chance
anyway. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you.
Enter Woods just quickly, sir. I
know that we're illness. I'm
lying here. I just want to
emphasize the huge change in our
labor force. That's come about
In the last several years.
Agriculture has this became more
mechanical and more mechanical
all the time because they're
just a shortage of labor in our
country, and we just can't get
people to do some of these jobs
and
The research that is done behind
the Mexico state by other
research, organize universities.
Yes, so important.
Uh, to keep
Our food chain in line to keep
it processing and
It's amazing some of the new
technology that comes out but to
get that technology to
production is a huge link. Here
are huge.
Disconnected times, you know, or
or nationals Labs have many.
Very smart people, but to to get
that information to our
producers is hard, another job
that new Mexico State does. So,
Mr Chair. I'm I'm
Totally in favor of this. I
would make a motion if I could,
but I can. This is a time we'll
need emotion.
Mm. Emotional, Senator Bert Yes.
Senator Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost? No.
Senator. Compost votes? No,
Senator Brown.
We're just stripping the
appropriation. Correct? Yes,
yes. Appropriation is in house
built to say so, Mr Chair as we
move forward, uh, In my opinion
as we start talking about Chile,
we want to make sure that all
the votes are going to be
positive. And so in that it
would be nice to go ahead and
take this bill to the full
Senate.
So as we consider that we
continue with the promotion that
you're intending.
Madam Senator.
Mm hmm.
We'll have to get an amendment.
So, Mr Chair anyway, So that's
that's my vote, and that's my
explanation. And I'm I apologize
for explaining the the vote out
of turn, But again, it's I
consider this to be very
positive. And if we had this
discussion in the Senate
chamber, this, of course, would
go ahead and bring a lot more.
Publicity if you will, and
promotion to the fact that New
Mexico is the chili capital of
the world, But anyway, that's uh
that's the way I feel, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Mr Chair. I think that he's
continuing against you for chili
King.
Travis just said you need to
Mhm got more hair. He may win
on that note. We would welcome
that.
I don't think we can get this to
the floor and that's we amend
it.
So
I guess we're gonna have to
withdraw that motion, right?
Yeah.
We'll have to strike Is there
not? Is there not a risk that it
doesn't make it through the
system.
Because the house is talking for
three hours on every column.
So it's a real risk. It doesn't
make it through the house. So Mr
Chair totally understood its.
We're on. We're on the vote.
That was my vote.
I was hoping to go and explain
it after but explained it during
the vote, and I apologize for
that. But anyway, so that's my
vote so you can continue with
taking the bones emotions.
You're calling the road.
Senator Brantley.
Yes, Senator Brantley votes.
Yes, Senator Gonzales. Gonzales
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla? Yes.
Senator Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator Scherer
votes Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes No.
Vice chair Rodriguez.
Yes, Thank you. Rodriguez votes
yes.
Chairman Yas.
Chairman Yeo's votes. Yes, you
have a do past nine in the
affirmative to in the negative
Rodrique chair. Thank you. Thank
you.
That is something
Thank you, sir.
Okay?
Yeah.
Okay?
Morning, Madam Chair, according
to the 2023 trip. Report, the
health of New Mexico's future.
And the growth of New Mexico's
economy is writing on its
transportation system.
Increased passenger and freight
movement or place further
burdens on the state's already
dear period and congested roads
across the state and bridges.
With that, madam chair. We have
Senate Bill 300.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 300.
It takes an appropriate 220
million out of House Bill two
allows bonding through highway
transportation bonds for a total
of 527.8 million for a total
package of 747.8 million.
And highway projects.
Minor too.
Okay?
That will stand for questions,
ma'am. Alright. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Any questions before we go.
Sorry. Yes, I was just gonna say
before we go on for any
questions. I was going to go to
the audience Anyone. Let's go
for the anyone who supported
this bill.
Okay, There's 1234567. Can we do
Maybe three and let's be brief,
please. Thank you. I'm sorry.
You can come up front. I'm
sorry, Senator. I didn't hear
you as it so
You can come up front, please,
as we proceed.
Make your brief comments. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Um Jim
Garcia, Executive Director of
Associated Contractors of New
Mexico. We build highways and we
love this bill. We think this is
a great bill and, uh, checks off
a lot of boxes. Thank you for
bringing it.
Thank you, madam. Chair members
of the committee. Ricky started
secretary. He makes pretty
Department of transportation and
is it they want to thank Senator
Munoz for bringing this forward.
We understand that, you know,
despite having a significant
amount of cash reserves are
significant need across the
state, and, uh, we're hopeful
that this bill will materialize
is an opportunity for us to
address a number of projects and
priorities, all of which are
listed in that bill.
With a commitment that we can
get those projects done over the
next three federal fiscal state
fiscal years. We have one, you
know, principal concern, and
that is just some more
information on the repayment of
the bonds and whether that would
come by way of legislative
support, which would be
absolutely great, Um, with that
being included in, um this bond
package were absolutely
supportive of getting this
revenue along with that which is
in House Bill two and getting to
work on some much needed road
improvements. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Ricky. There's one
more person back there who
Raise your hand.
But you just come up, please.
Thank you.
One more if you can come up.
Thank you.
We're gonna go.
Come on up.
You were for the for the bill.
Okay?
Thank you, Madam. Chair
Senators. Um, thank you for your
service. But we support this
bill. I work for a CNN represent
them to get more funding for our
state roads. I think this bill
here the way it's written really
helps the cities and the
counties that are involved. I
think, like Bernalillo County,
Albuquerque,
I think that they should be
encouraged to also participate
and projects that that helps him
But as you all know, every road
and that you fund is in
somebody's city and somebody's
county, So this is a very good
bill and thank the senator for
carrying this bill.
Thank you. Alright. Anyone in
opposition of this bill?
Okay, There is no one and there
is no one on zoom pro or
against. So, um, Now we just
need to go to questions to the
committee. And we have senator
would Senator Sheriff Senator
Stein born Senator Gonzalez?
Okay, madam Chair and Senator.
This is more of a
Uh um.
Understanding the complexity of
this, we're gonna sell one bond.
Average tax bond.
And then that also on Page one
online 24.
Then on
Online.
When we get to Page four,
Section two
We're gonna sell state
transportation bonds.
Now in my
Understanding the bill
correctly, so we're having to
bond sales.
Madam Chair and Senator, Madam
Chair, Senator Woods, so the way
the bill is structured projects
one through five right are going
to be done to the board of
Finance. It is an STB bond.
However, It's not a full long
term debt bond. It's it's a
sponge Bond, a note a one day
bond the same as cash because we
currently have the cash there.
Okay, so this takes up the
capacity that's available for
this fiscal year.
Okay. All right.
And then the projects in Section
two.
Those would be financed to state
transportation bonds, basically
pledging future revenues that
would be coming in for her
roads.
Um, the federal be it anything
else, it would be pledging that
money.
Um, However, with that the
understanding is that as long as
revenues for the state maintain
at their current levels without
us having a a nice a nosedive,
Um the state can pay them off
through General Fund in future
in the next 2 to 3 years, so we
won't really be committing them,
but that's just the vehicle to
get things done.
So both the state transportation
Uh um, Commission and then the
Board of Finance would authorize
the bond sales at the moment
they're ready to pull the
trigger and all of these
projects we have been told by
the Secretary of Transportation
are basically ready to go. The
ones projects in the first
section. Those are ready to go.
The second This bill gets
signed.
And then the second half are
will be ready within a few
months. They just need a final
bit of design to get the ball
rolling.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. We've got
Senator Scherer next.
Thank you.
Madam chair, So as I look at
this, I see 10 Road project Yet
Yesterday we asked for 42 Road
projects. Well, we at least told
42 people
With the other 32.
Senator. Those our in House Bill
two. So those are separate from
these stuff correct separate
from this bill.
Because those
If we look at the history of the
O T in the last couple of years,
inflation has outpaced the
dollar amount that we have.
But this rate if we were just
pumped 305 million, I think in,
we would barely be building what
they had capacity for.
These are all sitting on a shelf
that are ready to go right?
And so as we
On these roads and move money
Gonna get more flexibility and
more money to complete that list
of road.
As it moves forward. We're
taking a $500 million burden off
their shoulders and we're saying
Okay, we're going to play catch
up.
We're going to beat inflation.
We're gonna
Hey, little interest, but the
inflation cost is higher than
the interest costs. So we're
beating inflation, and I think
that's a key number.
If I look at just District
District one, it's really
Cost of unfunded projects right
now is a dollar 42 in 27 in 20.
27. It's about $1.60. That's
roughly about 18 cents over
three year period for every
dollar spent $100 million times.
18.
Stands on one project in 200
million
And a million times 20 cents, he
might be easier.
I got 200 million
Just look at a blue sheet
Pardon? I just had to look at a
different piece of paper.
Okay, Senator, are you done?
Thank you. All right, we're
gonna have Sander Stein born
next. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, um, he asked one of my
questions, which was what about
the other road projects?
Um, question about this bill,
though two questions.
How are these projects selected?
Mr Chairman. These projects were
selected by D. O T.
They're in there.
Line up or stepper projects.
They had them in their D O T
presentation when they're in
front of us, and they said,
these are the projects that are
on the shelf. Ready to go. We
didn't know member of the
Legislature selected those They
were all done by the agency.
They made the choices.
There's one there's two projects
in some districts. There's one
project in some districts, but
every every district has at
least one project. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Mr Chair. So you're
telling me that, D O t said here
are top 10 projects and that's
what we did.
That's what we did.
That's what we did. Okay. Good.
Another question. Mr Chair is,
um I know because we have so
much cash. We've been moving
away from bonds and very proud
of that. Why are we bonding in
this bill? What are we doing
that as a policy
Well, because the way we've had
capital in the way we spent
money if
If we would have all the money
from the higher Ed Trust fund
that we created. That's 986
Million or 96 $million billion.
We could have pulled that money
from there. But then we went to
have the ability to pay for
higher end education. We had
roughly about $3 million in non
reoccurring money.
That's 1 billion
Uh, grow Gate program.
Which the legislators
participated in was another
billion dollars, and we spent
about 500 that
Projects.
In agencies throughout the
state. The other billion
It's scattered about in various
water projects, and, uh, New
Mexico. Uh
What's the New Mexico program
The Legacy fund. 250 million
went in there. Large numbers,
100 million in the water
projects, um, so that it's
scattered everywhere from there,
Mr. Chairman. What's Matt? Man
Chair? Mr. What's the value of
this piece of legislation cost?
Uh, in this piece of legislation
and 520.
7 million
Mr Share. Uh,
I'm sure Mr. Could we not have
just done this through non
reverting one time money?
Saved us some money on
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinberg about would have been
an option that would have
dropped our reserves down. But
then we would have been
downgraded in terms of our bond
rating because we need that 30%
reserve level. If it goes below
that our bond rating is at risk,
because the bond agencies only
look at what's an actual
reserve. They don't take into
account any of the trust early
childhood or anything like that.
So, um, that's the reason that
it had to be done this way and
in terms of the bonds done
through the board of Finance,
that's cash that's sitting
there. If it's not used, it
would be just transferred to the
severance tax permanent fund.
So the only real part that's
being bonded, which can be paid
off over the next year or two
through General fund would be
the state transportation bonds.
So Section two
Okay?
Thank you for that explanation
later in this chair, I'd like to
ask, um, secretary of for just
him to respond on this package
real quick.
If I can. All right, Rick, you
want to come up, please. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair Senator
just was that just general
generally.
Um, yeah, your feedback. Sure.
So
Are again as I mentioned are
opening remarks are concerned
and hearing. You know, Senator
and
Mr Avila talked about a
commitment to help repay the
debt were supportive, but we
understand as I mentioned
earlier that the state has a lot
of needs, and I recognize those
and understand them well, from
my interactions with my
colleagues at different
agencies.
Duty is unique because, unlike
some of those agencies, we have
the ability to do this as a
measure for addressing our, um
our priorities which are in this
bill.
And so, um
So we're amenable to the
strategy.
There right now, Um, the debt
service again, which we talked
about getting support to payback
is estimated at just under $45
million over the course of about
eight years.
And so as the senator mentioned
the notion of beating inflation
if you take $500 million worth
of projects, for example.
And there's been a lot of
estimates on what the cost of
doing this work will look like
one year from now. Even if you
just take 6%. Okay, if we don't
do these projects this year, and
we kick him down the road
another year. Let's just say
that 6%. That's $30 million
more.
We will spend on these projects.
And so if we were to kick down
the road, two years a package
like 500 million you could be
looking at $60 Million and
increased costs of doing these
projects.
In some instances that will make
these projects on affordable and
other instances it'll just
simply cost taxpayers more
money.
And looking down the road two
years where we have that
capacity with non recurring
general fun, so that's big for
us. The other thing I'll say
about the package and I think
we've talked about this is the
need to add a couple of words to
the descriptions of every single
project is a technical cleanup,
and I think you know Mr Avila's
is going to do that to ensure
that you know we can get rights
of way.
Um, ahead of reconstruction and
improvement. So we thank him for
doing that.
Um, but I want to thank DFA, of
course, for essentially, you
know, cleaning out their account
on our behalf with with what
portions they can pay for it.
And then, of course, lastly, um,
the ability to do that still
hinges on the Senate
Transportation Commission's
approval.
Um, to authorized the FAA to
sell the bonds, so they'll be
more discussions clearly after
the bill about
Um what the savings will be a
world material. The projects
will emerge, etcetera. Okay.
Thank you very much. Secretary.
More helpful information. Thank
you, Adriana. Miss Chen. Thank
you, ma'am. That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator. Alright, we
have Senator Gonzalez next.
Thank you. Mount your I just
have one thing for
clarification. So, although be
an option.
On the number of years.
So so, madam Chair.
Sarah Gonzales in terms of the
selling of the bonds. It's
pretty standard. I believe eight
years for you guys.
Where is it? 10, Mr. Chair we
can right now. We can structure
debt for 10 years We've had
discussions with bond advisers
were with the number as high as
$1 billion for a structured
debt.
Uh, of of 10 years, but our
estimation has been for eight
years. We we'd like to. We'd
like to see that probably expire
alongside existing debt service
for dotty, but our existing debt
service would expire in 2032.
And so we'd like to see you know
the department become debt free
at that time.
So, Madam Chair. Um
So there will there will be a
provision where they can be
paid.
Sooner than that.
Senator Gonzalez. Our our intent
is because as we built this next
year, we're gonna come back and
maybe throw 200 million to bond
payments, right?
Expedite that and reduce the
cost.
If I just did the math, which
The secretary said.
$5 billion project. That's $100
million in inflationary costs
alone.
So if we can beat that five year
timeline with inflationary costs
will saved.
The cost of the bond, which is
about
48 million
I don't have to look and see
what the cost was well saved
about.
60 60 million. There's no other
way for us to get ahead and to
get the agency caught up.
As we head down this almost, you
know, we're gonna have a house
bill that's going to come over
that has set New Mexico up.
For us to do capital.
Cash in capital
For the rest of its life. And
once we get rid of that bonding
debt, I mean, you know the good
Senator Smith.
I always said, you know.
We should be proud of what we
are in New Mexico and and when
we didn't have money, we
struggled. We have money and
they're gonna give us a hard
time because we're spending
money. But are we spending in
the right things? Yes, we're
spending on right places. Are we
spending on roads or spending on
seniors or spending where it
helps people with their
education? Yes.
So as we do that we need to
figure out how to get ahead. So
if something happens, will have
capacity to keep everybody
around and keep funding projects
that need to get done.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have one more part. So within
the
The history of the department.
Have we ever faced the time like
this, where inflation has been
You know that high
With our project chair. Um
Senator. I'm sorry, madam Chair,
Senator. I can't recall a time
and and perhaps my colleagues
have been with the department.
You know, Henrik all the time,
but
It's been, it's been extensive.
We've been fortunate to have a
good group of contractors behind
us that I think have
You know, worked on what
measures alongside us to, you
know, stockpile.
Great cost saving measures. We
know we have some work to do to
ensure that with what's being
proposed that we can technically
do some things to spread. You
know these resources around to
contractors of all sides. I know
we've had discussions about
making sure that
You know the work's days here in
New Mexico and that our contract
community is happy with the
portions that they received from
revenue like this, so
Um, we're we certainly
understand that every year that
passes us.
The cost of doing business is
increasing at a very high rate.
And so the sooner we can get
projects let even if
construction doesn't start, we
can start getting clear
Indications of what it's going
to cost us to do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I I
guess I just want to see to
senator money also.
You know, that's uh
Very nice to see that you have
that vision.
You know, comparing
You know cost too
What we have.
And if we can beat that, you
know if we keep paying back
Before you know the we would
pay.
To where we're paying more
because
Of the bonding.
But if we pay less within the
time
That's really good.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Alright. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. This is just a really
great move. I mean, it's an
outstanding move. I I don't I
wish I knew the mile post
indicators myself in every
instance every inch of my
district, But I don't. Um, So
when we say I don't remember
five, they're real Bravo.
Eight mile post 8.98 to 10.32
Does that include our bridge
there on that section?
Madam Chair Center for the It
does include that bridge. It
would because I don't know where
else you'd spend $100 million on
that road together so that
bridges it, So that's just
that's everything. We need to
get our bridge.
I could hug all of you right
now. I would
Half of that bridge is about to
fall in the water literally so
good with the hang, shake and
shake this pumps. Seriously.
Thank you very much. That's all
ahead things. Thank you,
Senator. Alright. Um, we have
Senator Compose. You're next.
Thank you very much. Madam.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. I'd like to go ahead
and make a motion.
But please let me explain a
little bit in terms of what I'm
looking at, as we move forward.
Yes, the committee would
entertain this. Of course I
would move that we approve
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 300.
But along with that in order to
go ahead and bring forth if you
will a clean substitute without
amendments.
Within that motion. I would also
like to add the acquisition of
right of way to each of the
identified projects.
And then also to add a technical
fix to make it clear.
In Section one, paragraph eight
at the Bonds must mature within
one fiscal year.
To ensure that they are
classified as short term debt.
And again tied to this. This is
to ensure that the committee
substitute would be clean and as
we move forward that within
this this outlines if you will,
the futuristic thinking in terms
of how we're going to work to
eliminate debt, and along with
that, how we're going to use the
resources that we do have
To continue to improve our
roadways throughout New Mexico.
So, Madam chair If I may, I
would like to go ahead and
retain that motion at this time.
Okay. Thank you, Senator. Let me
go on, Senator. Winos. Are you
in agreement? Yes Amendment
needs to be that I think on your
sheet that you guys have. This
is a
Clean up as we substitute this
bill because it was a dummy bill
to clean that up, and okay, now
we don't have the amendment,
formally drafted, but, um, is
that basically based on this? So
this is the temple in the
framework for the amendment. So
in that, in that case, we will
allow to have the amendment
because we know it's going to be
this stuff is going to be in it.
So thank you very much, and
there's there's a motion. Do you
want to move the amendment first
to the substitute or madam chair
within within the motion where I
indicated in order to make this
clean so that we don't have
amendments attached to a
committee substitute?
The one motion was to include
also the particular two issues
that I mentioned within the
motion. In that case, Mr
Chairman, Um then it would be
where the Senate Finance
Committee substitute percent of
Bill 300 is a do not pass
because it's been, you would
have changed it again to the New
Center Finance Committee
substitute with the changes that
have been made, so we're going
to have another substitute over
this one with the changes. So
would you like to? That's it? So
so, madam Chair you, Claire.
Provided and
And that's the way I would like
to proceed. Okay. Thank you very
much. All right. We have a
motion on the floor and we have
a substitute. That's Amanda tour
into another substitute. We have
a an agreement. Hopefully, we'll
see what the what the vote is
that we had a second here by
Senator Gonzalez for discussion.
Can I go to Senator Woods? You
had a question before we go on
and then I just was going to
make a simple comment. Thank you
know, I don't have a question as
long as the
As long as the committee
secretary got all that down. I'm
happy and Madam chair. If I may,
I'll be more than happy to work
with the committee secretary to
clarify not only the motion, but
in terms of the information that
would be included in that
motion. Thank you, Senator
Alrighty. And and I just want to
say thank you. Also Senator and
course Adrian and all staff who
have worked on this
You know, this is something that
we need to do more of, uh, to
think out of the box and be
creative and resourceful. And in
this case, those three things
were clearly a parent. And you
know, our road system has
forever been extremely bad.
And he continues to get worse
because we get more and more
behind and we're not catching up
time. We fix a few potholes.
There it is more needs to be
done and other highways. There
are times I went on. I 40 during
the summer during the interim,
and not only there, we as we
know we travel throughout the
state, but I was truly on I 40 I
could not believe
How bad the whole thing gets. I
thought to myself, how could we
be in a state?
And you know that here we have
all this money coming in, and
and we we have brains that we
can think adequately and and
rightfully like in this case,
but the roads were so bad that
we just weren't funding them.
For some reason. We just can't
find a way to do it, and we just
kept pumping in the same the
same framework every year,
adding a little more a little
more and falling more and more
behind, So thank you for that.
Um, it's I think it's a great
bill and I fully support it. So,
um, let's put it up for a vote.
What are the wishes that this
committee
Winning
the world called Yeah, we're
gonna go for a local. Yeah,
Senator Bert? Yes, Bert Votes?
Yes, Senator. Compost? Yes.
votes? Yes, Senator Bradley,
Senator Bradley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzales. Gonzales
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla? Yes. Padilla
votes. Yes, Senator. Sure.
Senator. Share votes? Yes,
Senator Stein, born yes.
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes, SM
ended. We just have to the new
substitute that was first
amended now into a new
substitute. Thank you. But
Senator compose will work with
you. And And so, madam chair. In
essence, as we indicated, this
is going to go in and be the
0.2.
But we'll work on it. Thank you.
Yes. Rodriguez votes. Yes,
Ceremony knows Ceremonial
smokes. Yes. Do pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Okay, we are
adjourned. We have a democratic
