Yeah, we are.
Resumes fired up. Good morning.
Good morning. Um, Chairman, you
know, it's my name is members of
the committee. My name is an
Hanoch Ortiz, five year retired
LLC analyst and I'm back. Just
helping this session. Scott
Sanchez is the regular LFC
analysts for this agency and his
double booked in HFC. So he if
he comes overall, given the
chair
Anyway. Um we're here to review
the request for energy, minerals
and natural resources Department
with which is agency code 521
behind Tap five, but you might
not have all the handouts
copying putting your binders
yet.
So, um, here with me today is
still infusion. He is the acting
cabinet secretary for the
For the agency and Donna Rivera
on the other side of him is my
idea to counterpart.
The differences between the
recommendations are in general
fund about $4 million
difference. The LFC
recommendation Increased General
Fund by 3.8 Million, whereas the
executive increased it by 7.8
million compared with the
executive LFC allocates more
Reese's resources to the
contractual services category
unless to other costs.
LFC also budgets. The agency's
distribution from the Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund in the
contractual services category,
Whereas the agency um plans to
spend the funds rather than use
the separate expenditure
category.
In the base budget. Both
recommendations include
additional general fund for a
second hotshot crew and
equipment. The executive adds An
additional 1.2 million for grid
modernization grants and one
point million 1 million above
the LFC wreck for a vacancy rate
reduction in state parks. LFC
did add an additional 900,000
for
For vacancy rates.
To improve vacancy rates. LFC
recommendation includes 1.4
million for expansions in the
oil and gas conservation
division, where the executive
includes 2 Million for
expansions not only in that
division but across all three
divisions.
They can see rates are high for
this agency. Overall 36% with
state parks, the highest vacancy
rate of the programs. Reversion
FY 23 was 4.1 million, which was
an improvement over FY 22.
So with that, I'd like to turn
it over to the secretary with
your permission. Chairman
minnows.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Donna Re Veta and I just
like to clarify a few parts of
the executive recommendation.
Um, for example in energy
conservation and management
division. There is a difference,
and it is $1 million in grants
for two local governments for
their grid modernization.
In addition to that the
executive supports more funding
for climate risk mapping, um,
and energy efficiency.
assessments. Um, compliance uh
and 400,000 and more in the
expansion for the geothermal
center, which is tied to the 10.
I'm sorry, $20 Million special
request by the executive for the
Geothermal Center.
Um at New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology and
Socorro. Um, the other thing
that the the other p code that
the executive is recommending
more funding for is state parks
and in addition to more
providing more funding to allow
them to hire more staff to
support and keep the parks up.
Which have 5.2 million visitors
this last fiscal year.
Um, so the goal is to be able to
keep up with that amount of
visitors as well as provide more
funding for infrastructure. Ada
compliance. Um, and the other
thing I would like to point out
is that in the base
In the current fiscal year. I'm
sorry, the FY 23 fiscal year
there was a 23.5% increase from
what they were appropriated for
utilities. Those costs are set
to go up with anticipate this
year as well and they'd like to
be prepared to handle those
costs.
In the mine Reclamation
division.
Besides the FTE expansion, the
executive is recommending
additional support for the
digitization conversion of the
coal mine water data, and so
they'll collect and manage more
information, data and
documentation. So that's what
the additional funding in the
expansion is for.
Program support the executive
would like to point out that
with the LFC recommendation for
FY 25, they would have to keep
at least three positions vacant,
they would not be able to fully
fund fully fill their positions
they project there would be a
$245,000 deficit with the LFC
recommendation.
And so they'd have to make sure
they keep vacancies without Mr
Chair. Members of the committee
alternate over to acting
Secretary Fuge.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
Committee members. My name is
Dylan Fuge. I'm joined here this
morning by the M nerd division.
Uh, leadership who? I know
you're all familiar, so they are
here to answer any more specific
questions about programs, but I
appreciate the opportunity to
talk with you today about our
budget and what we plan to do in
25. If you could go to the
second slide. Perfect. Thank
you. Um
The executive recommendations
for em. Nerd. Six divisions make
critical investments in our
programs. It will allow us and
ensure we can successfully stand
up the Pecos River and Eagle
Creek hotshot firefighting crews
that were authorized by the
Legislature last year. Continue
our investments in responsible
industry oversight and the O. C,
D and M M D enhance the visitor
experience at New Mexico State
parks.
Um improve the solar and Green
building tax credit programs and
other tax credit processing
underway within E. C. M. D
Support Water Data Act
implementation and help us
maximize the deployment of the
significant federal dollars
available to em Nerd under the B
I, l and I R a monies that have
already come into the agency or
that will be coming in both in
this current fiscal year and the
next
I wanted to focus my brief
remarks on the handful of key
differences between the exact
and lfc recommendations that we
feel will have significant
impact on operations. Next
slide, please.
Um, as as alluded to in state
parks, we very much appreciate
the lfc support for additional
money in the two hundred's. But
right now, the LFC Rex holds the
400 money's flat. Um, and that's
a problem Both. We've added
personnel, so that's going to
increase operating costs. Like
all agencies, we're seeing
increases in based utilities and
other costs. We can't control.
We've also made some decisions
to make investments to improve
state parks operations were
deploying StarLink Internet
service.
Uh and I believed 28 facilities
around the state. This is not
for the visitor experience.
Obviously, folks are at the
parks are outside but to help
connectivity of our operations,
Frankly, our parks offices and
other components had
unacceptably slow Internet and
this will address that issue.
Um, we think that's a prudent
investment. But it does not come
without a cost. So we are
requesting a 575,000.
Dollar add back in the four
hundreds, which would bring the
LFC rack in line with the exact
wreck. As I recall, the second
area is in the energy
Conservation and Management
Division. We are requesting
restoration of the grid mod
funding that was proposed in the
executive wreck of $1 million.
We've used that money previously
when it was received to support
critical grid modernization
pilot projects around the state,
most notably the Albuquerque
brain.
Project, which allowed a large
media a large meeting
municipality to seamlessly
manage and track their energy
uses. But we also have built out
a, uh
Community pilot project at the
El Rito.
Uh, campus. And so this is a
project where we see
opportunities to deploy pilots,
both in urban and rural areas
that are critical as we work to
modernize the state grid, so I
requesting it requesting
restoration of that funding so
we can deploy additional grants
next slide.
Um in program support, as as I
said at the outset, M nerd is
Is currently deploying tens and
it will soon be hundreds of
millions of dollars in federal
funding through various programs
administered by the U. S. Forest
Service. Dont that the
Department of Interior
Well, this money and the work
associated with it falls heavily
on our division sort of
technical expert staff. The
burden falls equally on program,
leadership and support. Um, we
need a properly we need properly
functioning financial controls,
legals and other and other
component to successfully and
timely deploy that funding while
we appreciate the LFC supporting
our shift of the regulatory
affairs office from program to
support to E. C M D that shift
without any budget backfill did
cause some challenges.
The regulatory affairs positions
were a little bit more complex
took a little bit longer to hire
them than we had hoped we did.
As a result, we had been using
some of those positions for
vacancy savings without an add
back, as was alluded to, we will
be short and I think we'll have
to hold some positions in some
critical areas that that will
interfere with critical back
office operations were
requesting a $300,000 Add back
in the 200.
And that the LFC match the DFA
wreck for the 400. We've had
some growth. Um and
Subsequent to our submission of
our budget request. Um
We had expanded some of our
office footprint and another
components so bearing those
additional costs is why we are
requesting a small increase in
the 400. I believe it's an
$87,000 difference between the
LFC wreck and the D F a wreck
Next slide.
Um in state forestry. We have no
issues to flag with the op bud.
I did want to flag on the
capital component again very
much appreciate the LFC wreck to
support forestry request for
facility investment, but we did
want to flag
$10 million is significant, um
from the forestry division
perspective, and I'm happy to
discuss this further After my
remarks it is insufficient for
the investments we need to make
to meet national standards for
our hotshot crews. Not only do
the personnel that work in our
hotshot crews
Have to receive the proper
trainings and certifications.
They have to have facilities
that have minimum square footage
is Jim's kitchens the whole nine
yards. They are elite
firefighting crews and the
expectations are once once
certified, um they have the
facilities to support them in
the oil conservation division
and and mining and minerals
divisions. There are no major
issues to flag for this group,
and since it was mentioned if
someone would go to the last
South slide after my concluding
one so to skip
Two down after the thank you.
Uh, the last slide in our packet
has a little bit more granular
detail on em. Nerds. Reversion.
Um
I think is this committee well
knows R h B to Section four
appropriation versions was only
$471,000, but the largest
component of our reversion and
again
These fluctuate were the
penalties collected by OC T as
part of our enforcement work or
considered in a reversion when
they hit when they hit the
budget, But they aren't actually
a budget in line item and then
As our reimbursements for
firefighting response for us, so
the vast bulk of our reversion
in the prior fiscal year we're
in those buckets and the 1.4
Million for emergency fire Dash
disaster reversion were actually
reimbursements from the federal
government. Um, and with that,
um, I'll turn it over to
questions.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Good
morning, everyone. Um, I have a
few questions for you.
Um, the article that came out
recently that we've been
reported on about the LW CF
funding? That was really, you
know, disappointing to a lot of
folks and so I'd like to ask
about
Um, steps that the department's
taking to make sure that doesn't
uh, Mr Chair, Senator, uh,
There were some unforced errors
as highlighted in the articles
that have been corrected. Um we,
um, address the technological
challenge jizz. Um, and there
have been some personnel shifts
in that program. Um, um and
including a new LW CF
coordinator who either has
started or will is going to
start next month.
Um, in terms of the substance of
the article about, um, lost
funding just to clarify a
component LW the LW CF program.
you get three years to use your
formula allocation. If you don't
use it, it's lost in the sense
that it falls into a general
bucket. It was that 2021 formula
allocation the sort of
guaranteed amount that fell back
into the general bucket. We are
nevertheless, in the process of
submitting the 2021 applications
for funding out of that general
bucket. We've had extensive
discussions.
Ah, with the park Service. Um
and we've we're pretty
optimistic that we'll be able to
get funding for those projects
out of it. Um, And the only
reason I can't say they've all
been submitted for is the window
to submit. Those applications
just opened on January 8th. So
we are. We are in the process of
uploading those, Um and it's a
fairly long window so once
necessary.
Cultural resource and historic
surveys are done. We will also
be submitting the 2022
applications and we are
soliciting for 2023. I think
Mr Chair. There is there was a
lot of communication issues,
obviously with with sip
constituents in the state.
Who wanted funding did know the
status of it. Um, do you believe
that the higher of the news
person and the other protocols
are going to improve the
communication and outreach on
this program?
Mr Chair, Senator, That is That
is my expectation for the staff
of the WCS program that we have
better communication about
project status and and and
needs. There are a fair number
of requirements and strings
attached to the LDCs funding and
we need to help applicants work
through those requirements.
Sounds good and then miss
churches following up on the on
the last hearing we had about
the Rio Grande Trail.
Commission. So at this point
Is there a
You are still seeking the funds.
Is that still part of the plan
and
Um uh,
Mr Chair. Senator. Yes. Uh, we
are. We are still seeking the
funds. As you know, the Rio
Grande Trail Commission remains
attached to
Uh, the energy, Minerals and
natural Resources Department.
Um, and the funding would
provides.
Allow us to provide support for
contract work ongoing with
segment designation and also
begin the evaluation process to
actually undertake some formula
designation of sort of defined
segments under the State Trails
Act. And do we have a plan to
Constitute the board and a
viable way and start having
meetings again.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. Ah.
We have two recommendations that
I will be transmitting to the
governor's office this week that
will fill the last two spaces
and, yes, we will. In a resume
of regular meetings of the body.
Just remember, the law requires
three meetings a year. It's a
Let's see if we can't get that
back on track, and, uh but
that's really the end of the
process. It's really about the
muscle of doing the day to day
work of creating designations
all over the state and
completing the drought so we can
get the benefits of it. I'll
just share a little story Last
night, Mr Chair I was at the
border.
Economic Forum, talking with
some of the leaders of Sunland
Park and Parks actually created
their own logo for the real
grand trail that will go along
with the real Grand Trail logo.
They're building trail right
now. They've gotten funding from
the outdoor division. Um you
have communities so excited and
loaded up and ready to go. It's
a little heartbreaking that we
have this great opportunity. We
know from having meetings all
over the state.
Communities. All of the state
are so excited for this. There's
some challenge areas, which are
frankly pretty easy with a
little imagination to work
around, but, uh
You know?
This can be such catalyzing
economic project and, um
Creative cultural project for
the state. I just really hope we
get it on track. So anyway,
Thank you, Mr
Other questions.
So, Mr Chair.
As I as I look through the
budget, and I see how you want
to
Increase your budget and so
forth. How are we going to pay
for all of this? After you, Uh,
do you successfully changed the
oil and Gas act and shut down
oil and gas production in the
Mexico?
Uh, Mr Chair Senator. The
changes proposed to the oil and
gas act. I presume you're
referring to HB 133, we believe
would not have that result. The
financial assurance changes are
critically necessary right now
with known orphan well burdens
the States $284 million short.
That's after accounting for
every dollar in the wreck fund.
And every dollar of federal
money coming in, um and hundreds
of millions short if you make
even reasonable assumptions
about wells that may be orphaned
over their life. So a small
percentage of wells
Assume will be orphaned, just
based on practice. We believe
fairly that those costs should
be borne by, um, industry
through financial assurances. In
fact how the oil and gas act was
structured on the setback
question. The setback proposal
put forward by the
administration has no hard
setbacks. All of them are
subject to X two exceptions and
can be reduced.
20 upon relatively
straightforward and some things
that, uh, align with the oil and
gas X. So there are no cards
that backs in the bill, so
locations can be set and moved
forward. So we do not believe
those projections are accurate,
Respectfully. So, Mr Chair
Setbacks. We're looking forward
here.
I saw one earlier. Wish I could
find it now where it said. Okay,
you're gonna be set back X
number of feet unless the
landowner says okay, and then it
can be something else. But here
it is, okay.
Um
But that's not straightforward.
That means there's a bureaucrat
in the middle of that saying No,
we don't think so.
I am the most powerful
bureaucrat.
And I say no.
And after we passed this, that
bureaucrat is the God and
there's nothing we can do about
it because we've already had
that kind of issue here.
Uh, just was it two weeks ago We
had somebody from PD, the
secretary PD coming in here
saying, Well, we're going to
change the rules to have five
day.
School weeks as opposed to hours
and yet we had just passed a
bill.
After much debate.
Over hours versus days.
And the secretary sat right
there and told us we're just
dumb as rocks, and we didn't. He
didn't care what we're gonna do
is gonna do it anyway. And
that's exactly what you're
bureaucrats going to do.
What, exactly what's going to
happen?
This whole thing is designed to
destroy
New Mexico.
100,000 people.
Will lose their jobs. The
economy of New Mexico will be
destroyed the only people who
will be able to live in New
Mexico or the rich people.
Because we will turn off the
power. You just said that you
needed an increase because
electric rates went up.
Why did they go up? Because
we're closing power plants.
Just insane to me.
Absolutely insane to me.
I can't remember who said it.
Probably come to me later. But
there is no such thing as a
solution, or only trade offs.
Somebody talking to me. So the
trade off here I know that we
want clean air and clean water
and I guarantee you there's not
a Republican any anywhere around
it does not want clean air and
clean water.
I guarantee you there's not a
Republican anywhere that does
not want their Children and
grandchildren and great
grandchildren have a great place
to live.
But I am confused by what the
trade offs are here and what we
actually want to do.
As I looked at as I looked at a
map here that I asked for.
It showed that
If if the setbacks
Or as they are currently
proposed.
61% of San Juan County is out of
business.
Nearly all the Permian is out of
business.
How are we going to pay for your
electric bill?
Uh, Mr Chair Senator, The San
Juan County map, which I am
familiar with does not factor in
the fact that the setbacks would
not apply on allotted or tribal
lands because we don't have
jurisdiction there. It's more
global and sweeping. As I said,
These are not hard setbacks.
There are exceptions.
That can be requested, including
exceptions to eliminate them.
Ah, and in the Permian Ah, most
of the development and
improvement Permian actually
encouraged, encouraging fairly
rural areas, so the long,
longest and largest setbacks um,
are not, um
Are not at play, um, and
economic development of the
formations in the Permian Basin
in the deep, Shales is 1.5 mile
plus horizontal laterals. Um,
and we believe they can be
accommodated within the setback.
distance distances and or the
exception process that is
already
Available again. These are not
hard setbacks that would
preclude development. Within
them. Exceptions can be
requested. Facilities are
grandfathered in existing a PDS
are grandfathered in. Um and so
we believe the, uh, statement
circulating about impact or
overstated.
So, Mr Chair.
Why do we even want these
setbacks? What are we doing?
What do we intend to accomplish?
Uh, Mr Chair. Ah.
Senator during the
During the development of a
facility and overall lifetime
operation of the facility
collectively and cumulatively,
there are increased emissions
with density is another other
components. So on the human
health side, it's separating
those facilities, particularly
facilities that will be around
for a long time and having to
have unfortunate responsibility
for end of life. Emissions often
get worse, especially as
facilities age.
Um, with respect to the setbacks
from water bodies and other
components, there are discharges
and releases from these
facilities, and so setting them
back is prudent so that these
constituents don't enter
watercourses and the like.
So the the well that is
literally three or 4 ft from the
San Juan River in a park in
farming tonight.
Who has not polluted any of the
water in the park in farming or
anywhere else for that matter.
But it was the right place for
that well to be. That's why they
drilled it there.
Without any problem at all. So
we know how to do that, in fact
it although it's capped now,
there used to be a well inside a
closet inside a house inside the
city limits of farming tonight.
That wouldn't that wouldn't
freak me out, But it was there,
and it functioned when I first
saw it when I grew up there.
There was a house house. Well,
pad House house, okay?
In the middle of the
neighborhood.
We know how to do this. We've
been doing it for 100 years.
And now all of a sudden we have
to decide now.
And and and and we know you
might not admit it, but we know
that the purpose of this is to
destroy or fossil fuels. Please
explain to me how this is not
the reason that we're doing this
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator. That is
not the reason this is being
done. Um, I
Well, Wells are like people.
They're all different. I mean,
yes, there are examples of wells
close to water bodies that are
fine and never had a releases.
There's another well in the San
Juan Basin that's disposal pit
was put right up against an
Arroyo and Arroyo that roads
regularly and the pit is about
to collapse into the Arroyo
because it's up and adjacent to
it.
There are other wells in the San
Juan basin that are subject to
such erosion that subsurface
casing components are exposed by
erosion and going, it's hard to
say at 67,000 facilities that
all locations are perfect and
all locations have the same
impact. It's hard with 630
operators to take to paint with
a broad brush about responsible
operation. I can tell you right
now I'm cleaning up Wells from
an operator who walked
Away and walked away recently
and it's spewing.
Oil and gas all over the ground.
One of them was so out of
control. It lit one of my
plugging rigs on fire, leaving
no one passed. So it's not
there. We think these are
prudent steps and again.
If we were trying to cease
production, the setbacks would
be hard. I will reiterate these
are not hard setbacks.
Respectfully. So, Mr Chair you
talked about broad brush, and
yet your effort here is is
bigger than a broad brush.
You're using a whole
Powers spread to paint the whole
industry.
Are there bad actors? Yes, There
are bad people. Yes.
Let's deal with them.
Still with them.
You need to shut down the whole
world. So you said that the cost
you said the cost was what? Um
I don't remember what you said.
The cost of this was going to be
to the state and you're in the F
I r. I believe you wrote
So what's it gonna cost to
implement this?
Um
If if you'll bear with me,
Senator, I don't have the f I r
open in front of me.
Um I don't think we estimated,
Uh I don't recall us estimating
significant cost for
implementation, the bonding and
financial assurance reforms. We
already have a bonding program.
It's just the bonding limits are
inadequate. Um, and so there
would be no additional resources
there. It would just be an
update to the rules. Um and
other pieces and the setbacks
and other components would
process through. Hearings for
exceptions would be held by the
commission.
Ah! That body is resourced and
supported by, uh existing
budgets and components, So I do
not recall a significant cost
estimate associated with this
proposed measure. Well, Mr
Chair. The real cost I'm looking
for is how much revenue do we
not get anymore? How many
schools do we have to close?
How many teachers do we have to
lay off? How many roads do we no
longer get to repair?
That's that, I think is the
cost.
That's the cost.
So we need to figure out how
that's how that's working. So So
what are we comparing things to?
Okay, so it's a million dollars
to fix it? But if it's $100
million in lost revenue, let's
two different things.
So compared to what
And I know that there's all of
these issues here.
That we have to clean up the
environment. Well, New Mexico
has almost zero impact on the on
the globe.
Clean up the environment. Clean
up China in India. They're the
they're the nations that are
doing this not New Mexico. In
fact, some of the cleanest, most
efficient mining whether it's
drilling or
Digging a hole happens in the
United States, and it happens in
New Mexico.
If you want to see nasty
You look at Russian oil wells.
Those are nasty.
Look at any middle Eastern oil
wealth. Those are nasty look at
coal mines or lithium mines or
any other mine all over China.
Those are just disgusting. Ours
are clean. And yet all of the
focus here is to destroy New
Mexico.
With just a zero impact on the
globe.
Zero impact on the globe because
we're already the best at it.
Can we get better? Sure.
One of the one of the violations
that I saw last year.
Was a Coke can thrown in a pit.
It was a violation.
Okay. Technically, that was a
violation was a Coke can in the
pit. Was anybody dying from
that? Cocaine? No. Is it easy
enough to clean up? Yeah, Joe,
Go get the damn coke care.
And yet it was listed as one of
the 900 violations. We had
A Coke can in the pit.
Should have been there. No.
But it was not a threat.
To humans or the habitat or
anything else in the world, for
that matter.
That may have been a threat to
him because he's drinking it
coat but
But these these are the things
that are just really bugging me
And the more of these things I
see.
The more it bothers me.
We're already talking about
Oil production coming down, so
it's going up.
Ah, and it will come down.
There's no doubt about that
always does.
But if we push it down
That's when we are. That's when
we are closing schools if we
push it down before we're ready
for it.
And I just see that coming and I
I don't understand why
So any idea how? How? How.
What the speed will be if we
implement this in in reducing
our
Our revenues versus
I don't know where Charles is.
Lfc has given us his cool chart
here. So this is the way things
are going to go, and then it's
going to cap out. But
I think we're going to do that
pretty fast if we implement
things that are just designed to
destroy production. Uh, Mr
Chair, uh,
Senator as a as I've stated
before, because these are soft
setbacks, and an exception can
be granted. We do not see a
revenue impact on direct
development. Um, when I was
referring to facility cleanup
and cost Delta, I'm talking
about money on the ground in New
Mexico cleaning up wells. We
have fine wells, and we have
gross wells. I was on the edge
of a mega pad.
That, um, that a mega operator
was building and there was an
orphan well, there that the
valve had scaled over so badly,
It was spewing gas louder than
if you let your house do it.
And the crews that were there
just blissfully ignored it. We
have gross wells in the state.
We have top shelf wells in the
state. We have wells that
started with major producers and
were transferred on down the
line and left with operators
that couldn't handle it, but the
hundreds of millions of dollars
I was referring to was money
that could be spent cleaning up
areas like local hills can be
spent cleaning up orphan wells
in the San Juan Basin and other
places.
We've robustly stood up our
orphan, well plugging program at
this point in the fiscal year
we've exceeded our lfc target by
50%. But the cleanups I'm
talking about are on the ground
in New Mexico and the duties I'm
referring to are the duties of
operators to clean up their
facilities. Unfortunately, many
oil wells and their lives with
smaller operators, even if they
started with the majors and
those operators.
Don't follow through on their
obligations, some percentage.
Not all of them. I'm not
suggesting all of them do But
even if 1% of the 70,000 wells
in the state end up in that
state, it's hundreds of millions
of dollars to clean them up. I'm
spending $4 million
rehabilitating a tank battery in
southern New Mexico. That's an
eyesore and an environmental
hazard. I'm spending 2 million
up to clean another one so that
I'm not talking about global.
Cleanups. I'm talking about
cleanups here and I'm talking
about irresponsibly operated
facilities in the state of New
Mexico.
So, Mr Chair.
Right now.
The operators put money into a
fund now for that, don't they?
We clean it up and
Um, Mr and, um financial
assurances they're already
putting money into this right?
Mr Chair and representative, Uh
There is a portion of a
conservation use tech that goes
directly into the wreck fund.
Um, I think last year it was on
target for about $16 Million.
Historically, it's probably more
in the 10 to 10 to 12 range
based on known and protected
projected liabilities,
particularly if we want to clean
up scars on the landscape. We
think it needs to be closer to
20 to 25 million a year between
now through 2050. The bonding
rates are low, the largest
operator by well count in the
state of New Mexico.
Has 11,000 Wells.
We only have $1.25 million in
bonding against those wells. If
1% of them are orphaned.
1% of them are orphaned. That's
a $10 million plugging liability
by itself, and the remediation
liability is another 1010
million, and I, as the oil
conservation Division only hold
1.25 million against those
risks.
So
Mr Chair.
I understand that, um operators
need to
Have to bonding capacity. That
was some somehow some mechanism.
Things need to be there because
things happen.
Um
And I don't disagree that you
need to have enough money to
clean it up.
But maybe we need a
I believe that they attempted to
talk to you about this. Did it
Was there not a meeting. I'm I
might be wrong about that. But
was there not a meeting with you
and yoga and I, P A and M and
some other operators. Mr. Chair,
Senator, I
On this measure. I've been
meeting with a coalition of I P
and M no moga operators NGOs to
discuss this since August, Um
we've had robust discussions on
financial assurance. Um, a lot
of the recommendations. I think
that are coming in our sound.
Um we feel like the Legislature
provided us with a fairly broad
statutory authority in the oil
and gas act and the only
flexibility we need to
Implement some of those changes
and have that discussion is a
lifting of the cap right now.
the cap on a blanket bond of
250,000 forces the OECD to offer
an artificial bonding schedule,
but a lot of the suggestions and
discussions from the Moga and I
very much appreciate the
dialogue from the mogul and I, P
and M.
Are all details that it would be
worked out when we up date. The
bonding rules. Um, what we are
simply looking for from the
Legislature is an increase for
the cap to allow us to
implement.
New models. New tiered
structures We've talked with.
We've talked with operators
about potentially a risk pool,
particularly for smaller
operators, where additional
bonding maybe more costly.
Bonds, ER insurance so depending
on the assurance assessment of
your risk costs very widely
among operators. I'm and I'm
sensitive to that, and I think
those are all models.
But again, they would normally
go through sort of the rule
update that will follow.
So, Mr Chairman, secretary.
So mega company drills the well,
they put up their bond, and then
they sell it on down the line
until builds the operator.
Yes, but everybody is putting in
money all the way along the
line, right? So the mega
operator started and eventually
it comes to me and I put it.
So, uh, Mr Chair Senator, um,
when the mega operator starts,
they have bonding obligations
with respect to their portfolio.
Um, when they transfer it to
maybe mid level operator, they
put up bonds and then small
operator when it gets to the
small operator, The only bonds I
can attack are that small
operators bonds.
Because the bonding obligation
is on the operator and tracks
those wells. So the large
operator at least because of
OECD's regulatory authority, I
can no longer pursue their bonds
or pursue them for the cleanup
unless I can attach that they
were somehow negligent along the
line, and often times when a
well has problems. It's
Poor maintenance of the last
operator or unfortunately,
things don't know he's improved
with age.
You know that that's not
negligent.
No, I agree. I agree.
Wells Wells do not H well, but I
am concerned that, uh, you know,
and I'm got too much paper here.
I'm looking for it. But
Ah, the stripper wells, you
know, so there there are a few
barrels a day, but for decades
and decades and decades
Versace brand new. Well, which
is, you know, unbelievable
amount of oil that comes out of
that now.
Um
But the stripper wells are also
somebody's income.
So whatever we do we want to
make sure that that we're not
just
Shutting down more people making
more people impoverished.
Um, one of the things you talked
about was in San Juan County.
The
Tribal land.
Uh um.
And the allotted land.
I know the alerts have lost
their mind recently because of
Federal rules to say no, You
can't do anything there.
In this has been generations of
income for them.
You're saying yours isn't going
to affect that at all?
How can that be? Mr Chair,
Senator, the soil Conservation
Division.
Has exclusive jurisdiction.
Over down whole activities on
state and feel lands. We have
concurrent jurisdiction with the
federal government. I do not
have jurisdiction over tribal or
tribal allotted lands
Historically, we have partnered
with the sovereign nations of
New Mexico to provide technical
expertise and support. The soil
conservation division has also
served as a repository of
information on their wells and
other components, but in terms
of a pure jurisdictional level
I do not have jurisdiction on
those lands.
So
I still think that you're going
to close down much of San Juan
County.
And maybe all the premium
I live in San Juan County.
Growing up next to oil wells,
oil wells and apple trees.
That's
That's where I left.
And I know that there have been
massive improvements over things
that have happened since my
first real exposure to him,
which was
An oil pad three houses down
with a house on the other side
of it.
So
That was my first real exposure,
and all of us knew that we
weren't supposed to play on
that. And generally we didn't go
near it this kids because it was
just the rule.
Now we have the same. Well,
maybe not that one. But but
another places around San Juan
County in the city of farming
tonight. We have that now We've
got a fence around it to make
sure the kids don't play kids
don't play in it.
Didn't used to have to have a
sense. You had a dad. Okay, but
we don't have dads. Now we have
two offenses, but I do not see
how it is possible.
For you not to just completely
gut San Juan County.
I know that we've recently
gutted San Juan County for
purely religious reasons. I
believe a godless religion.
Because we have the cleanest
coal fired power plant in the
world.
With the technology to clean it
up even more technology that
that was going to be sold to
China and India.
They would have had a real
impact on the planet, but we had
to destroy it.
We just had to in the question
was why
Because it's still cold. That
was the answer.
Gonna take everything out of
that power plant except
electricity.
It's still cold.
And I know that same mantra
happens with oil and gas.
Doesn't matter how clean you get
it. It's still fossil fuels so
it has to be destroyed. And that
is what has me just worked up
beyond.
Not even upset yet.
Because we had a chance to be a
real leader in some things here.
And we chose not to be. We chose
to allow China and India to
continue to spill spew.
Absolutely unfiltered.
Soot from their from their coal
fired power plants that they're
building like one a week.
Why
Because power is civilization.
Power makes a huge difference in
the world.
Do you know?
When the first automobile
started to come online in in
mass.
There was great excitement about
the reduction of pollution that
was going to happen.
You say? How can that be well in
big cities.
You didn't have a car.
You had a carriage in the
carriage was pulled by a horse
or two, and there is no
filtration system on a horse's
methane relief valve.
It just falls on the ground, and
then you step in it.
But the worst part is when the
flies go out there and visit the
street.
And then the flies come into
your house because you have an
open window. You don't have an
air conditioner.
And then the flies walk around
on your plates on your pillow
and on your food.
And life expectancy was about 46
or 48.
At that time.
Why? Because of the pollution.
The nastiest vehicles.
We're better than that. Whatever
was coming out of the exhaust of
the of the Model T, which
clearly had no emission
controls.
Was was cleaner and better.
Then, you dragon. The
Pollutants from a horse into
your house.
Or the fly, dragging it into
your house.
And making you and your kids
sick.
But because we had no good
energy systems. We didn't have
electricity. We didn't have
Oh, water was also a huge issue.
Water is a huge issue here still
in New Mexico today, water is a
huge issue in India and China
today.
That's why they're willing to
build power plants and they
don't care what comes out of
those power plants. Clean water
is more important.
And we didn't have clean water
because we didn't have any
clean. You could pump it out of
the ground.
But there wasn't any filtration
systems for it.
And so you didn't have any
indoor plumbing.
And so the worst part about that
fly wandering around wasn't that
he walked around in the horse.
Droppings.
It's that he visited that plot
that you handle your bed
wandered around in those
droppings and then walked around
on your pillow while you were
asleep.
When we talk about trade offs,
What's the trade off? What are
we going to get for this when we
put fossil fuels into operation?
We got a lot cleaner society.
What cleaner?
Lot healthier.
And why are the Chinese and
Indians doing that today?
Because they want the same thing
if we destroy New Mexico's
ability to create clean energy
And clean energy can be Cole.
Use carbon capture.
San Juan generating station
before we decided to destroy it
for purely ungodly religious
reasons.
Nothing was measured coming out
of that except for trace
elements, except for electricity
and C 02, and we have the
ability to take out the CO two
Mhm that would have had a huge
positive impact on the whole
planet because Mitchell b. She
was going to build that in
Mitsubishi was going to build
that so they could sell it all
over the world. This was going
to be there floor model that
everybody in the world was going
to be able to see and touch and
smell and feel.
They weren't doing that. For
goodness they there was a pure
profit moved in there, but
profit motive was clean Air.
For everybody else.
It's the same with oil and gas
in New Mexico. The Russians
produce lots and lots and lots
of oil.
With almost none of the
restrictions that we have with
none of the clean and I'm not
saying that
That we ought to go to the
Russian way. No, no, no. We need
to bring the Russians toward us.
Same with sue Saudi Arabia and
Kuwait.
Iran's even worse.
This is
I think he told me to shut up.
We need to be careful before we
just destroy our industry and
make 100,000 people unemployed.
Before we decide to unfunded are
schools.
Before we decide to destroy
virtually the entire economy of
the state of New Mexico, 50 some
percent of this budget.
Comes from oil and gas industry
50 some percent.
Typically, it's over 35%.
Yes, There's been a couple of
years when it was less
And those were also the years
that we slashed our budget to
the bone.
We need to think about what
we're comparing things to
If we're comparing
Our operations to the Garden of
Eden. We fail.
If we're comparing our
operations to anywhere else on
the planet, we're winners.
I'm not opposed to making it
better yet.
I am opposed to
To what I view as the radical
Burning desire.
To harm the people of New Mexico
and call it good.
After we take away their
electricity because even you are
asking for a 25% increase for
your electric rates.
We wouldn't have to do if we
stop shutting down power plants
and start doing things that make
sense.
Now we're going to have this
mandate for all electric
vehicles.
Well, where's the electricity
going to come from?
I've checked and fairy dust does
not create electricity. We're
going to have to have natural
gas.
We're gonna have to have natural
gas because we made a conscious
decision to destroy coal.
And wind and solar will not do
it by themselves.
Natural gas is going to have to
do that.
And I would challenge you with
one other thing before we decide
to destroy the economy of the
state of New Mexico. If there is
anything on your body that is
not synthetic.
I would be amazed.
Because even that cotton shirt
still hasn't synthetic thread
holding it together.
And even your cotton underwear
still have that little band
around him holding up and that
synthetic
And I doubt if anybody here has
a real silk tie.
Or real cotton shirt.
Or war.
And if it's not that, I guess it
could be hemp now.
Then it's synthetic. It's not
just fuel. It's everything in
this room. It's everything in
society. It's all the plastics
that make electric cars go. We
can't destroy this and we better
be. Damn careful where we're
going to go, and now he's
clicking. It's all shut up.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Director. Help me better
understand that the proposed
half mile setbacks we know that
we have local municipalities
that already have setbacks in
place. And we've seen studies
that said that, um 500 ft
Setbacks are adequate. Where did
this proposed half miles.
Setback come from? And what what
kind of studies or data or
research supports the need for
that.
Mr Chair. Uh, Senator, um
The literature on setbacks is
actually kind of
All over the map. Pardon the
expression, uh, in terms of
what's required and other
components. Ah,
The studies that support smaller
setbacks tend to look at
facilities in isolation.
Anyone facility one other
component, But oil and gas
facilities tend to be
concentrations of development
and other pieces, the facilities
that justify longer setbacks
tend to look at the collective
whole, um and multiple
And multiple facilities. Um
So the 2250 that was in there
was attempting to kind of split
some of the components. Also all
of them are epidemiological
studies. Obviously, you're not
doing toxicology response on
direct recipients in the field,
so you have to sort through
confounding variables and how
you adjust them, Uh and other
components.
Ah, we also considered factors
of
What are the realities of
development on the ground? How
are resources being developed?
What are the typical wells look
like? What are the components?
What's the spacing? What are the
other piece is? How do we move
it back in terms of arriving at
a distance that we felt was ah.
Technically feasible as well. No
Moga and its own comments. Ah,
now they weren't at the 20 to 50
but mentioned numbers as high as
1915. 100,000 ft. So, um,
there's some discussion to be
had. There is not a definitive
study that points to one number
another that doesn't have a
stream of caveats as to
Um, you know why it may not
apply to you one scenario or
another and again, Most of the
development are sort of multi
wells. It's no longer the kind
of single well and the emissions
from it. Okay. Thank you. Mr
Chairman said to be clear. You
can't really direct us to any
sorts of science based reporting
or data that would justify this
number.
You're you're you said attempts
by we So I guess this proposal
is just from this agency without
any other, you know, supported
evidence to support it. How does
it How does it stack up in
comparison to federal setback
requirements are these in in
excess of federal requirements,
Mr. Chair Senator, the federal
government doesn't impose
setbacks on
Uh, what you would put in what
you would put into the human
health bucket in terms of
schools, hospitals, other things
like that, because they're more
rural development, the
environmental setbacks that
we're proposing for
qualifications actually do Ah.
Align with standards imposed by
the BLM and screening imposed
that operators have to do
currently on 50 50% of their
buck bucket. So we do have
alignment. The federal
government has not considered
human health setbacks because
for the most part of their lands
are in more rural areas, so it
is not benefactor they've
considered to date.
Can considering that half mile
setback proposal. Have you done
any analysis determined
specifically how many wells in
this map?
Will not get drilled in the the
impact to production considering
the half mile proposals.
Um
Ah, Mr Chairs, Senator. As I
said, when I was spoken,
speaking with senator share,
because there's an exception
process that allows for an
absolute exception to any
setback on the bill. As drafted
as we proposed the number of
wells that will be impacted
In our view is zero and we are
not impacting existing wells.
The bill includes provisions for
expansion of existing
facilities. Ah, it doesn't
impact things that are covered
by orders as if it's effective
dates and other components, But
an operator can come in and
requested exception before the
commission, which is a
specialized body that just
handle just handles oil and gas
matters. Uh and so we do not
believe there is a well that
will be impacted their maybe
wells that require an exception.
I will acknowledge that
Ah to the Legislature. But there
is no well that is subject to an
absolute, um, exception. You
could build it right next to a
school under our setback
proposal if the standards were
met for an exception, I would
not advise that. But there is
nothing that prohibits it under
the bill as drafted.
Since Mr Chair, Mr Director.
There's no change if there's no
change.
But you're proposing change. So?
So why even propose additional
setbacks? Why would you we
already have setback
requirements in place, but
municipalities we know that
there are already providing by
federal regulations. In fact,
having to do this would upset
some of the agreements with with
federal government. Our
producers would have to
renegotiate agreements with the
feds. You're saying there's no
change.
If we don't implement setbacks
and yes, you you bring forward a
proposal that would allow you at
a whim without any oversight to
implement setbacks. There would
be changed in that case if you
implemented half mile setbacks,
it would put 100% of the Permian
Basin out of production. The
reason why this is concerning to
the Finance Committee.
Is because, as we know, 50% of
our revenues are generated from
this one industry, and so we
need to know. Have we seen P
production? Are you going to
make sure that this is the end
of production in Mexico? But But
your answer is saying there's no
change if we don't implement the
rule. And yet you're bringing
for us proposals that would
allow you at any time to put
forward.
Setbacks. What we're asking is
if you implemented those
setbacks, What would the fiscal
impact be?
How many wells would be
impacted?
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator, The map
you held up is respectively.
patently inaccurate. The Permian
Basin is predominantly rural in
distribution, the half mile
setbacks. Um
Would would
Be affect wells in and around
primarily the municipalities. To
the extent there were residences
in there. There's already a
pathway to reduce the setbacks
through a consent process
doesn't require approval. All it
requires is homeowner consent,
So the maps there are overstated
and
Um, again, with the with the
exception process. We don't see
it closing in as to
Affecting agreements with the
with the with the federal
government. There's a pathway to
respect and acknowledge federal
decisions about citing, um, and
the reason why we felt the need
for setbacks was to extend some
of those protections onto the
fee and state lands that we also
managing are responsible for.
This is not a measure designed
to cut off production or move
it. This is a measure designed
To meet what I feel is the oil
conservation and M nerds Primary
duty, which is responsible
oversight of an industry that is
very significant to the state,
and I appreciate that It
provides significant revenue to
the state oil and gas
development.
If done improperly, also
proposes a significant
externalities. And so we are
trying to find a measure that
balances those out so we can
clean out We can clean up the
landscapes. We can remove
scarred facilities that are left
behind by irresponsible
operators. And I should have
said at the outset, I need to
acknowledge industry does a fair
amount of plugging work, but the
pace of their plugging work.
The elevated place of ours and
the remediation will not deal
with the scars on the landscape
and will either leave folks with
a scarred landscape or huge
liabilities, and that's what
we're going for, but is a
balanced measure to ensure
responsible oversight so that I
can meet my duty to all the
citizens of New Mexico to ensure
that this important development
occurs in a responsible way.
Mr Mr Chair and director.
Perhaps the map is an accurate
But the agency information
coming forward is already also
inaccurate clearly, and so
that's why we're trying to get a
better understanding of what the
real impacts would do when we
look at an impact, a fiscal
impact report or when the
director sits here and tells us
that there's no financial cost.
That doesn't consider that there
are financial impact. So perhaps
there isn't a dollar sign
attached to what you propose to
do. But the results of what you
will do, the impact will have
great significant impact. And so
that's when we're talking about
the cost The cost to New Mexico
for you to implement implement
this. We have a biased F F I R.
And the problem that I have when
we c f I r. S that come through,
they're completely inaccurate,
completely biased against an
industry is that it? It doesn't
allow legislators then.
To trust the agency that should
be providing us accurate
information to make accurate and
wise decisions is as we
Move forward. I also want to
talk about the intent of
setbacks is to address critical
habitat and species of great
concern in my backgrounds and
natural resources. I can't
disagree.
That there are bad apples in an
oil and gas industry. We have
bad apples in the dairy
industry, and we're not shutting
down milk production. We have
bad apples. We have bad apples
in the classroom with teachers
and coaches, and we're not
allowing that to come down on
entire profession.
I agree that you are running
into bad apples, but many of us
have sat through have have had
eyes on the ground boots on the
ground tours and seeing
The investments in how we are
clean how we are
environmentally safe in the
clean standards of extracting
this oil and gas from the
ground. You have a role to play,
but so did it. So do they and is
the finance Committee. We have a
role to make sure that you're
not implementing ridiculous
measures that were clearly an
overreach without any just
sounds sound justification in
doing so.
Bring us forward the real data,
the real impacts and why this
needs to be done.
I want to close on this is we're
talking about
Critical habitat We mentioned in
here that the reason for
expansion, then would be in
protection to sage brush lizard,
The lesser prairie chicken. I
will one tell you that. I don't
disagree. We have a
responsibility to make sure that
we keep our lands clean for
wildlife. What happens here is
there is a lot of programs in
place and incentives for
stakeholders out there.
When government comes in with
such a gross overreach on this
without any sound, study or
justification in doing so it
discourages producers on the
ground and participating in so
many of those programs.
This. This creates an US versus
them government overreach. What
we want to do is create a
culture with this than this
agency and send the message that
if you work with us to clean up
our environment too clean to put
investments into protect our
wildlife, we will work for you.
We are sending a message that we
don't really care what you've
done over the last decade to
protect our wildlife and protect
our lands were going to come in
and shut it down anyway.
That's a huge setback and
discourages our producers both
in the AG world and out wailing
gas world when they have done
their job and to try to try to
keep the environment as the
number one priority is them as
well. And now you're saying we
don't really we don't really
care because at the end we're
going to come back and make you
know life as hard as we can for
this industry that that's a not
only is it a gross. It's
overreached. It's a detriment
for many industries, and we send
this message that we really
don't care if you've played nice
for the last few years. We
really
I don't care what kind of
environmental sound practices
you put into place.
We're gonna We're gonna blanket
you know, with with one sweep,
we're gonna blanket just you
know the industry by saying
you're all bad apples. You're
all dirty and at any moment we
need we need to implement
ridiculous.
Setbacks to just really, really
to follow up with senator share
was to be able to shut down an
industry at a whims notice. Your
agency should not have the right
to do that when it is one.
Such a direct impact on the
state budget.
This. This this committee should
have oversight. You know what
you're doing to completely shut
off our funding.
And and to what a setback. You
have sent a message that you
were sending to those in oil and
gas country who are doing all
they can to participate in
programs that protect wildlife
and land. It's it's a It's a
huge discouragement for them.
And what a step back for us, Mr
President. Mr. Chair, um done.
Sorry. Thank you. Let me uh
Go back to to your budget. Um,
over the last three years 20 to
2 to 20.
For 23% increase in your budget,
right?
Hmm. It's problem. It's been
pretty targeted.
Yes, tell us today.
Where would you need targeted?
Money Placed in what Division
would you place it?
Well, I think on slides three
and four, I hit my full list of
asks, Um, but critical areas
that impacting operation.
Ah, the ad backs on programs
support and the state parks four
hundreds money. Ah!
Are probably my one in two even
though I love all my Children,
equally, Um I think the grid mod
program, uh
Is meritorious and we're
demonstrating some solid
projects and making meaningful
investments and on the ground
projects, But those would be the
two areas where I would make
targeted investments targeted
investments. Um and then on
forestry. I flagged that was a
capital as opposed to a not but
but issue, but it would be
program support and state parks.
Those asked requested add backs
would be are one and two.
And I did see a supplemental in
the grid and the LFC wreck,
right? Yeah, dollars amount, So
that seems to be there may not
be
Inside your the budget, But in
the supplemental, it looks like
it's going to be there that
supplemental and I will look to
the director. But that
supplemental is actually to
match a different program coming
in, um and is critical to land a
federal grant. It would not be
able to support these grid Mod
brand grant programs, which is
why we had the separate ask
But we're creating a fun for
federal grant matches.
At the F A. Once you draw that
money out of the FAA and use
this money for year
I would like to get Mr Chair.
I'd like to get back to the
committee on that particular
question. I'm just telling you,
you know the understood. I mean,
when you have a new
appropriation you need we're
creating a new federal grant
match fund right at D F A. And I
think that the executive asked
for 100 and were around 40 or 50
sounds. And in some of these
federal grant matches, that's
why
I want to do that and not put it
in the budget. And then when
they don't happen, then we gotta
They disappear on us, Um
Has has has the exact and you
know your new, exact cattle
conversation about increasing
fees on parks and
Where else do you need money?
Um
Um, Mr Chair, actually.
Um uh, The state Parks division
has recently begun a process to
look at our fees and change the
fee structure and changed and
changed the approach. Um, it's
on net.
What's being contemplated and
we're in the very early stages
of outreach, Um would would
would increase fees to result to
increase revenue, But it would
also make day use of free for
new Mexicans.
Um And so we are looking at re
balancing what fees are how they
are assessed to both increase
them in a prudent way to
generate additional revenue. Um,
and also not impact the citizens
of the state who visit uh, the
parks on a sort of day in and
day out basis, so that proposal
is in process That is something
that we can do by rule, and we
are in the early stages of sort
of stakeholder, outreach and
engagement.
And I expect that to pick up our
mining and minerals division is
also looking at the questions
because there is some
misalignment in fees were
supposed to collect and program
operational costs. Um, that
initiative to is in the very
early stage of consideration,
and then finally, under the oil
and gas act, um
Uh, reform proposal that we have
there. There is an increase in
fees so that New Mexico is
keeping track with others and
our ability to use it, And that,
too, would provide some periodic
flexibility for the O. C. D to
adjust fees, although in that
case only by C P I, and you can
do all that by room.
Ah!
Uh, Mr Chair. State parks can
adjust its fees by rule under
existing statute, MMD can adjust
its fees.
By rule.
Under its existing authorizing
statutes. The O C D cannot
currently okay
So
I understand why you're you're
gonna give new Mexicans
Free mean there is a cost to the
state to do that, Um, there's
electrical cost. There's a sewer
cost. There's maintenance and
operating costs means sure I'd
like to go everywhere for free
in the state park, right?
But state parks need to operate.
So, um, uh, Mr Chair. Um,
there's cost associated with
creating day use fees. Iron
Ranger cash handling other
component. There's a whole sort
of personnel infrastructure
going into support those things
and so when you look at the
ledger and balance those
components out, um we felt like
increasing fees and tax
collections. There were some
off. There are some offsetting
burdens there. Um, and that, um,
some of the other structures if
we
Moved, for example, camping fees
in line with sort of neighboring
states, particularly out of
state fees and sort of other
components were better ways to
generate revenue in more
efficient ways. Then day use
fees because in a lot of our
remote parks, setting up
Kind of remote kiosks and other
components is tricky. So again,
you've got the Iron Rangers. I
will look back at the park's
director to see if I missed
anything.
Um, I mean, it's a cost of doing
business, right?
In order for us to maintain that
you also almost sound like the
judges. We want to have
something, but we don't want to
charge fees and fines and
somebody's gotta support it
right and the Legislature comes
back and says We have to balance
the budget. So you want us to
increase your taxes and the
overburden to make these things
operate, or do you want
Perry. The user pays model so
cash in making deposits.
It sounds like the agency just
doesn't want to do it.
We just don't want to do that,
because it's a little too much
work.
Um, Mr Chair. It's not that we
felt like in looking at the
questions. Um
That the burden and users if you
look at the users and who's
paying for the components and
other fees is longer stays,
camping components and other
components presented a higher
burden for the parks and
actually the cash collection and
deposits because of the remote
locations for some of our parks,
Um
Are actually pretty significant.
We're taking personnel for a
better part of the day to drive
into Santa Rosa to make a
deposit. We have special
accounts at banks around the
state because Wells Fargo isn't
located everywhere. Another
components did you cash
management. We have bank
accounts where we have to
maintain the $500 minimum that
we're all familiar with. To
avoid a fee for this cash
collection, and so as we look at
the impact of those users and
other components
Um we felt like there was a
better way to to balance out
that revenue equation and not
result in a net loss in fees, it
would actually be a net
increase.
I mean, other than going to
electronic kiosks and using your
startling to connect that. I
mean, you can make things
optional by electronic methods,
and I think what you call them
Metal Park rangers or something
Iron. Mr. Chair, Iron Rangers. I
mean, they're used everywhere. I
mean, I'd go to Lake Powell.
Quite a bit right. You have a
card and drive by there.
Scan your card real quick and
you're gone. Uh, so actually,
the the the the Iron Rangers are
the quarter inch steel square
columns with the slot cut in
them that you put cash in the
envelope and go if you happen to
have the denomination that's
required for state park fees.
Unlike most of us who I suspect
It's a 20 if you got it from an
A T M, um we are looking at
chaos deployments and that is
part of the investment in parks
in the 400 is putting out
Internet access and other
components.
That would help in some
locations, But there are
locations like Serios Hills and
the public parking. Where that
that that the Delta is too, too
large. It is something we're
thinking about. I'm happy to
have my staff send over some
additional information so you
can see the fi concept We're
putting forward in our rationale
for it. Yeah, I like to see
that. But just saying I got to
go to the bank and makes it too
hard. It's not an excuse for me.
I mean,
We? We? I'm in business.
And I may only have one deposit.
Made him one day May just one
check that straggled and and I
still don't make the bank
deposit because I know that's
income that I have to generate.
I mean,
Agencies have got to
Learn that they're gonna
When their fee based agencies
they need to collect the fees
and they need to keep the fees
in line with the market and and
it may burn some, But you have
At blue Water, one side or even
an elephant butte. I imagine you
have YEP. Rangers checking for a
aquatic species.
On boats.
They can perform the same thing
at the same time while they're
checking their boat and be down.
And so it happens in Arizona
because
I'm closer to pal than and to
really any other like and
You just agencies are gonna have
to learn that.
These are going to have to
offset some of your costs
because there's a limited amount
of money. We've had a lot of
money for oil and gas.
And then when you come back, and
we hear about the setback rules
and that this new bill that's
coming out
And you hear the chatter in it
And then I kind of looked last
night and this morning, I said,
you know, here's an F I R that
has no fiscal implications.
Just, uh, revenue increase of $3
million and then I started
looking at. It's a little more
research and digging into the
bill. And and in the, uh, in the
F I R that was written by Ben,
right?
Operators are taking exemptions
are subject to heightened
scrutiny for compliance and
inspections.
So if you give an exemption then
then you're going to watch him
even harder.
And then it says it authorized
division increased setback
distances, particularly to
protect sensitive environmental
Features or human health.
And grandfather's existing
models. What's an environmental
feature?
Um, intermittent perennial
streams, water bodies, state
Parklands. It could be a It
could be a host of sorry, Mr
Chair. Um, it can. It can be a
host of features, but those
types of things the codified
ones would be the water bodies.
Alright. The water bodies I
referred to
Um, and again, Mr Chair. I stand
behind the F I R submitted
because of the exception
process. We do not believe there
are wells that could not be
moved in the heightened scrutiny
that's referred to you. There is
just enhanced monitoring by the
operator to move it, and I would
say on the responsible
development pushed that this
administration has pursued
We are demonstrating that they
can collect coexist side by
side. New Mexico's production
growth has been robust, both in
22 and 23, even though those
were years that, um, waste
rules substantive provisions
came into their fullest report
effect and the ozone Precursor
Cell rules and enemy D. Began
having having requirements on
their sort of stepwise journey,
So we think we do. We are
striking the right balance and
and and these are the right
pieces, but I do.
Oost stand behind the ears for
the reasons I've articulated.
You think there's a fire is
going Jury $3 million. Tell me
how
Um
As part of the financial
package. Ah, the we're proposing
an increase in fees when fees
were established in 2019. They
were set at the lowest level
nationwide. Now they trail
Ah, fees of neighboring
jurisdictions. The fees as you
well know, support money that
goes into the fee fund that OECD
deploys on operations hearings
and other components. So we are
we are. We are proposing an
increase in fees I believe last
year are fecal.
2.2 million, um, at at current
fee levels, So that's sort of an
estimate. You know, based on new
fee levels, with some
assumptions about development.
So so that's where that revenue
is coming from. Is that enough
be increase.
Um, we actually do believe it's
enough feed increase. Um, and
we've actually requested at some
tart. We've requested some
targeted expansions to the
categories of things we can use
the fee fund for as part of the
bill. Most specifically, we've
asked to support some of the it
personnel.
That's aboard our backbone that
are supporting our transition to
actually full truly digital
forms. Um
And the database associated with
it, and we were proposing to
expand the category of things we
can use the refund on right now
They are relatively narrow, but
again all supporting O. C D
operations and most of those are
in support of direct ongoing
activities.
Did you have any reversion Zinno
CD last year?
The the river versions and O. C
D were 327,000. Unfortunately in
that fiscal year, we had both
the departure of the deputy
deputy director, Um and Bill
Brinker to long serving hearing
examiner. Those were relatively
highly compensated and highly
skilled positions that took some
time.
To fill, so they're the size of
the OECD reversion was driven by
having senior executive
positions vacant and needing to
preserve that money to support
those salaries when they were
backfilled.
Okay, I'm gonna go with center
Stein born real quick and
Rodriguez ship. I just want to
make it first of all, Thank you
for your leadership on all these
issues. They're not easy, but,
um, there's good reasons for all
of them. And, um so I thank you
for them, but I want to just
touch on this issue. The park
the real quick and he stepped
out. Unfortunately.
It's actually a really
innovative concept to eliminate
state Park fees. They use fees
for new Mexicans.
Because what we're talking about
the proposal just to restate it
is too.
Is to increase the fees on maybe
out of state visitors.
Where we're not charging kind of
even what other states are
charging and then using that to
afford the Mexicans, a lot of
which we have a very high
poverty level.
Access to you to get outdoors
and for state park. So so it's
it's it's a kind of an
enlightened progressive policy,
and it's just like we don't
charge New Mexican, they go to a
city park.
Um, it's good to get them
outdoors. It's good to get them
access and even paying the extra
5 $10.
Mr Chairman. I was just saying
it's kind of an innovative
policy to eliminate days these
for new Mexicans for state parks
and what we're talking about
doing is using the funds from
out of towners.
I'll pay for it where we're not
who he charging enough.
So that we can afford to
Mexicans who are living on the
poverty level, whatever access
to our parks and get outdoors
and get their kids outdoors, so
it's something that's been
studied forever. I mean, I've
been
Having the same conversations
for years, So it's another one
of those kinds of
Fairly stalled. Great ideas that
now maybe he seems to be moving
forward. But But anyway, I think
it's very innovative and when we
see it new Mexican struggling
right now.
Financially. It's the right way
to, uh
Help get them out towards and
Do that for them, but not not at
a deficit. I mean, we're gonna
raise revenue from from out of
state visitors, which is great.
Thank you, Mr Chair. That's all
I'm gonna say.
Uh, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Good
morning. Um, Dylan. I couldn't
remember how to spell your name
when I was trying to even
pronounce it. Thank you and to
your staff. Appreciate all your
work. I just have a question,
maybe more on the on the
electric vehicles. I know you
requested some funding for that,
and I'm just wondering where do
you have a plan for
implementation Because the
funding you requested was to
implement it. Apparently.
This is a tax credit on the e V.
Um can you tell me a little bit
about that where you are, and
you can be brief on that. So we
can think uh um Mr Chair? Uh,
Senator that was
Maybe I'd characterize it as a
placeholder request. There is
legislation that has been
introduced, uh, for the state to
adopt an E V tax credit program
that has a certification
requirement from M Nerd.
Actually, there are a whole host
of tax credits that have been
introduced in this session that
have certification requirements
from M nerd. I was remiss in my
opening remarks because I didn't
read my notes to mention that
If those were to be adopted, we
would need funding to support
those projects. So this was a
placeholder request in
anticipation of that legislation
and the work associated with it.
It's going to be investments in
I T staff and other things like
that, so we can timely turn
around the certifications and
other components for the credit.
I see. Okay. Thank you very
much. But do you have like a
written plan already? As to
where all this would go? So if
we if it is appropriate that it
can move quickly as possible and
not sit there. I don't have it
right in front of me, but we
will provide that additional
detail to the committee. Mr Mr
Chair Senator will provide that
additional detail of the
committee if that's okay with
the groom. Thank you very much,
And that's all I had.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Sorry
about being late to the party
this morning.
I, uh I've got a couple of
questions.
I've got your information here
on your contractors, and I
appreciate that, Um, I would ask
if you would do that. Send that
again to me on a C s V file.
And, uh by year and on the thumb
drive, if you would
Mr Chair. Senator. I believe we
can do that, Okay?
I am. Why I asked that on that
particular way.
I've got a gentleman that tells
me that if I do that across
state government
That he would help me sort some
things send inquiries to to find
different information, so I
would appreciate that.
As you can see.
Straight, Forrester. We've
killed trees here so
And that brings me up to my
second my next subject, Uh,
understanding that we've cut
some money for the reef Force
station center.
That we were planning.
And, uh,
Now, Maura, Uh is is that the
correct information? I'm getting
Um, Mr Chair a senator. There is
a delta between the LFC and
executive racks for the
reforestation center. I believe
the exact wreck
Really?
You haven't the sorry there are
there is no money set aside for
it in the LFC wreck in the exact
wreck. That's 30 million for
capital and three point
Five a little bit more than that
force for salaries and one This
is one time money just to allow
the center to get up and running
and then I anticipate it will be
self sufficient through seedling
sales and other things like
that. And so, uh, sorry. I
misspoke that that money is not
in the lfc rack. We went through
a robust, um
Site selection process.
Both M Nerds forestry division
in the coalition supporting it,
Um and it is a, uh we believe
it's a critical investment. Um,
and we urge the Legislature to
provide the funding now that
we've selected the site and I'm
an agreement totally with you.
We have to do Well, I don't
guess we have to do anything, Mr
Chair, but
I would highly recommend this.
This is, uh, a step to not only
re four star force but to help
reinforce other forest critical
juncture in the research that
can be done through site
selection on the forest itself
and and bringing those seedlings
into
Full fledge force trees.
Another question. I have, you
know, we talked about offset a
minute ago. Uh,
I understand that maybe the uh O
I understand that maybe the, uh
oh. C d, um, had some maps that
were incorrect that had to do
with the impacts of that setback
on San Juan in the premium.
Um Hmm. I would request also
from you, Mr Chair.
If we could have some corrected
maps delivered to the Senate
finance so that we could look at
those and see what the exact
impacts that would occur on
those these areas.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator, I'm happy
to provide the information
there.
Marks. We did not, uh, map areas
that would be taken off the
table from development. Because
of the setback structure we
implemented there would not be
any because of the exception
process that was put in place.
So, Mr Chair. There are no maps
is what you're saying.
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh, Senator, we
did not produce maps at forward
looking development, in part
because that would be
speculative. I know where the
app DSR that would be
grandfathered. I know where the
wells are. That would be
grandfathered. I know where the
facilities are. That would be
grandfathered. I even know where
the least components are.
Ah and other pieces but again
because of the exception process
and the fact that there were no
hard setbacks. We did not. Ah,
Feel it was was appropriate or
would be speculation to look at
areas that would be off limits
to development because there are
no hard prohibitions. It's it's
more akin to a
Zoning restrictions were sitting
in Santa Fe in terms of
depending on where you are in
the city. You've got different
levels of restrictions and
requirements. You have to meet
That's effectively what this
would be and different levels of
approvals required. So what I'm
hearing Mr Chair.
I guess so. I got this all
wrong.
I thought, Mr Chair. There was
some rules written.
That said there would be no
setback There would be a mile
setback for many residents.
In the state of Mexico. Is that
a state land rule?
Is that am I completely
Way out in left field on this
that I don't know Mr Charity and
Sir. Um, Mr Chair, Senator, the
land commissioner issued an
executive order. Uh hmm. But
scrutinizing Li see, leasing
within a mile of schools. Um,
and there were maps associated
with that executive order, but I
would respectfully defer any
questions to that to the land
commissioner and her staff when
they when they appear before
you, but that announcement was
made.
Made as I recall in the first
part of 2023, and that was an
executive order by the land
commissioner.
And with specific to leasing
activities within a mile of
schools and leasing of state
lands parcels as I as I'm
recalling the details, but it's
been a minute since I read the
order to them, Mr Chair we're
talking about leasing
restrictions.
By the State Land office, and
you're not with state land
offices. I understand that.
But thank you for I will. I will
ask the commissioner when she
comes in front of us about that.
Uh, but as far as, uh
O C. D.
There's no such maps out there.
Uh, Mr Chair Senator, there were
not maps prepared by, uh
O C. D that are independent
again. We maintain a GIs
databases system with a lot of
visualized information,
including water bodies and the
things but but no specialized
maps here as I for the reasons I
articulated
Okay. Senator wouldn't that
tells me that they did a map in
the G? I s mapping.
And then mapped areas and
started placing wells in that
area started looking at
distances between those wells
and how to send them back. Their
created an electronic system
that Js mapping system.
And so they could. They're not
gonna print them or create them
for us because their maps are
probably going to be
That's your mental to their
bill.
As we move forward, and so they
know in their head. What exactly
that does and they can lay it
out in their system.
But they don't want to produce
some maps because
The Legislature shouldn't see
these things.
But but Mr Chair
This has to do with the finances
of the state of New Mexico.
Can't we compel them?
To provide more information on
that, Um, Mr Chair, and and Mr
Mr Chair, Senator. I'm happy to
produce maps in our G I s system
again. Ah covers robust
reporting on existing wells,
former wells and approved Wells,
none of which would be subject
in any way, shape or form.
To the setbacks. I believe there
are also least there may be some
least layers at least as to
state land office leases. We do
not
Maintain databases of wells or
other components that have not
yet been applied for and again I
go back to these are not hard
setbacks. There's an exception
process and that exception
process allows for the
development within them.
Okay, Mr. Chair. Uh, just a
couple more questions, sir. I
know that we're running behind,
but
Every time I see
Mr Chair every time I see in
these books about people asking
For
You know, pretty high, uh, high
educated.
Labor.
You need to hire people to do
specific jobs.
Why haven't we got that done in
the past?
I know that your HR person may
not be here.
But
We talked about vacancy rate.
O. C. D s vacancy rate, which
was 24%. As of September. 1st.
Do you expect to to use
contractors to do that work if
you don't hire individuals
yourselves.
Um, you know, some of this work
is I'm assuming it's critical or
we wouldn't be asking for an
expansion.
So, Mr Chair and Mr Secretary,
Kind of explain that to me.
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator, uh,
I believe O. C. D s funded
vacancy rate is about 9% on
Unfortunately for us, the
snapshot taken at that time in
susceptible coincided with
Delayed creation of the new
positions that we were very
happy to receive from the
Legislature. So we landed with a
whole bunch of new positions on
our books right at that time
When that snapshot was taken in
September, we have made some
progress. You hit on a strong
note. I need to employ
engineers I need to employ. Ah.
Attorneys. I need to employ
people.
Uh, in in our environmental
bureaus, those positions tend to
get if filled properly tend to
get filled with experienced
folks experience folks who we
have to bring in based on their
experience above midpoint. Um,
oftentimes, because it's
justified who may come in
because they're midway in their
career with families and other
components that we have excess
insurance costs.
Um, and the way as you know,
budgets are set, assume mid
points and single person
insurance loads, so I have to
hire the right personnel to do
the jobs effectively and
oftentimes to do that, I am
stuck holding positions because
of those incremental costs. Um
or
Um or the other needs And so
those are the challenges, But
But that's the explanation of
our vacancy rate. As of
September, sir. So, Mr
Secretary, Mr Chairman.
You're saying that
You are spending all of your
personnel budget.
And
Even though we say midpoint
single person
You. You say you're spending
more than in that budget.
Uh,
Mr Chair, Senator. No, I'm not
spending more. That's in that
budget, but
Because I'm bringing in
experienced folks and sort of
other components. If I go above
midpoint, I have to hold
Positions vacant, Um, to spread
those $200 around. And as I
alluded to O C D had a larger
reversion in the prior fiscal
year because we had
Experienced senior leaders.
leave. Um and there was some
time delay in back filling those
positions and there were
significant salaries associated
with those So in FY 23.
We did not use as much of our
$200 as a result, but we had
three very significant and very
Senior departures occur.
I understand. I understand you
had some very senior departures
and I'm sure you lose people.
Constantly to private industry.
Uh, people that know the rules
and regulations are very
valuable commodity. Yes, sir.
Understood.
Um, across state government.
That happens, But the question I
have, you're not always going to
have these experienced people to
hire our universities.
Not training this specific
people you need.
To do the work. I know they
wouldn't have the experience you
require.
But should we not, and this is a
management question? I'm not the
manager apologized. I'm just
putting up.
For instance, out there, I
guess.
So go ahead, please, Mr. Chair,
Senator, Um
Um
I think we need to do both. We
need to bring in experience,
folks, and we also need to give
a try out for new folks. Um, O C
d over the last couple of years
through a novel partnership has
been running an internship
program with New Mexico Tech and
I think in the last two or three
years, we've had four interns
every year. I'm proud to report
in the last class. We had one
person.
One of those four joint state
government. Unfortunately, they
decided to go to enemy d. I
mean, just, uh they they came
into the fold as a new employee.
So I consider that a success
I've been talking with my office
of general counsel about
opportunities to, uh
Bringing legal somewhat summer
interns and potentially creating
a structure where we can bring
in more unit universities and
other things like that. So I am
working on a culture change to
to bring those pieces about and
our interns are having good
experiences, and I think we're
in our third year. Um and it's
now I hope being viewed as an
opportunity for those students
attack and so we can bring
Some of the more junior folks in
and I'm working with leadership
across the agency to support
training those individuals. Um
and other other component
components so they can succeed
and thrive. Okay. Okay. Well, I
don't want to open bear too much
more. I appreciate the answers.
I really think that we should
Uh huh.
Recruit out of our universities
were losing.
We're losing people losing their
great
Assets out of state.
We We need to attract
Our students where we can hope
that you will go to the other
universities.
And and do your best to to do
that. And I'm just looking in
here. Um, one thing I tried to
look at
Ah!
Whenever agency comes in front
of me and see if you've got any
Uh, over spent accounts. Um and
I know that
Uh, it doesn't show that you
have any over spin account. So,
uh, applaud you for that, Um
I find that people don't even
know their over spending their
money at times.
Uh, it's surprising to me that
the bank doesn't call up and
tell them that they're behind on
there.
Honor revenue side and asked for
a bar to clean this up. You're
not in that position.
Thank you for that. Um and I
know the previous secretary was
probably pretty diligent in that
stuff.
So, Mr Chair, I guess.
Again. I apologize for being
late to the dance. Um, thank you
very much for the opportunity,
sir. You mean you stayed too
late at the dance? That's why
you're late.
Um, I'm gonna kind of wrap this
up real quick because I got to
go another meeting, and we may I
told my members we get out of
here kind of early, so we may
just end at this first.
Whoever's behind them.
We're probably going to have you
back a couple more times, uh,
looking forward to it. There's
nothing wrong with financial
surety.
There's nothing wrong with
making sure when people drill
well and use a well and clean it
up.
That they have to have the money
to pay for that. Absolutely
nothing.
Right. You're gonna make money.
You know what you're gonna do
when you're done. You clean it
up. You leave it where you found
it.
I have no issue with that costs
are higher bonding is higher.
Um, we have bad actors.
Hmm. In certain places, right
else. Wait the age out. But
there is instances where things
break.
I bought brand new fittings
before and they're blown.
Those things happen, right?
When there's reasonable
considerations for for those
And I imagine they imagine their
inventory pretty well on on
timelines and replacements, and
in that
But when you look across New
Mexico and
48% of our budget.
Is reliant on one income source.
And
We start tightening that income
source.
Cuts are going to be made.
You've had a 23% increase in the
last two years.
And
We know that oil and gas
production is still an increased
prices declining and it's gonna
level out within the next couple
of years.
And so we as a legislature are
planning for that.
So the big question is, we look
across these budgets, right?
How do we prepare ourselves even
more for this decline when we
create a lot of funds?
In another operational places
that we can pull money from
But without oil and gas.
You don't have a job.
Right?
We'll still be elected.
We'll still get $150 a day.
But we're gonna We'll make cuts
and you guys haven't been here
during the cuts.
That's the problem with a lot of
these secretaries. In a lot of
these agencies they weren't
hearing in 1011 1618 when we had
cut
When when we didn't even have a
penny in the bank and the
treasurer should have went to
jail, but he wasn't gonna cut
state employees off.
So you guys have got to figure
out a balance. This is a
critical issue in New Mexico for
us to maintain a healthy economy
and a healthy budget.
You overreach your boundaries.
And we will be at your doors,
knocking
There's nothing wrong with
making them do the right thing.
But when you create setbacks,
and you say we don't have a map,
but you we know that I can tell
you once you said the jazz
mapping system that you guys in
a room over there with probably
a bunch of people overlay the Js
mapping system and say, How do
how do we How do we calculate
this? And how do we calculate
that in which which species
I mean, and you're giving it
commission authority over the
Legislature.
Bullshit. I mean, the
Legislature stood here for the
last couple of years and watched
Statutory violations throughout
And because one legislator or
any legislator won't stand up
and charge the exact for
violations of statutes. And I'm
gonna look at GST that
violations costing the state
$153 million.
And if we were to just
Follow the statute.
We have 153 million more dollars
to spend on something like well
cleanups or or whatever we
needed in your agency. I mean,
But statutory policy need to be
followed.
But the other thing is, you
know, I like small producers in
New Mexico.
There are guys right?
And you guys are going to force
them out of the market.
Because
Higher costs that they can't
maintain.
Or I mean, we just saw a Mengel
gobbling of oil companies in the
Permian Basin to the tune and
probably
$200 billion. I think one was 60
million or 80 million in that
range right up in what? I rather
have My new Mexico guys
producing oil, raising their
families and and doing that,
Yeah, and doing the right thing.
Because they're here or do we
want to conglomerate Exxon?
Whoever you want to name
Chevron, right, taking up every
ounce of oil space in New
Mexico, and at some point in
time, they'll get tired and
they'll move off.
Whenever we have this kind of
shift in this talk
I think that
Somewhere. I read it in oil
production. One well is like
roughly $13 million to the
state.
In just revenue. That's not
severance tax bomb that goes
with permanent fund or any of
that.
I mean, you look at the cross
that 10
10 Wells, just $130 million.
That's a big hit.
I mean, we're sitting here funny
in your agency.
With oil and gas money.
And so
I probably want to get that
building. Make sure Lfc gets an
F I r, right?
And we look at production and
cost and the cost of the
industry here from the industry
and what they're thinking is if
this passes
And and moving forward, but
I mean Legislature may have no
other choice. But if you're
gonna force that hand
We'll just defund the agency.
I mean, we we, every teacher,
every kid that rides a bus,
Every moving part. 50% of it is
oil and gas money.
That is, is hard to balance and
hard to manage.
And I've sat here on this
committee making cuts, right?
State employees were laid off or
had to take leave for days so we
could balance
I didn't do it to teachers and
kids because it's critical,
right? I don't ever want to be
in that position. So as you guys
move forward, you think of the
whole picture right?
I mean, we're budget. I mean, we
have to think of here.
Everything from
Early child to zoos.
And
We have to balance that out. And
when an agency gets so
contracted
On on
Income.
Then we have to make changes.
And so I know.
Nobody's gonna sit here and tell
me that you guys didn't look at
it at a map and figure this out
on the map. You didn't print it,
but you looked at the map and
you figured out how to admit
leap that map to to
The advantages.
And
That's just unfair for them to
do that, so
Uh,
Mr Chair. I believe I've
testified before about what we
did with mapping and not, um, a
lot of the OECD increased work
and other components has just
been trying to keep pace with
existing production.
I know this committee focuses on
the revenue. I've got to focus
on the management of 1.8 billion
barrels of produced water.
Getting it disposed of properly,
so we're not shaking of Texas
has never exceeded under either
my leadership or my
predecessors. It's statutory
authority and with respect to
setbacks. We're not proposing a
rule. We're not stretching it.
We're actually asking. We put a
proposal before the Legislature
to consider it. I've heard the
concerns here, but we're not.
Stretching it. We're moving.
We're following the law. We're
actually asking for legal
authorization to do it. Um, And
as senator would noted, I really
do want to applaud my budget
team for keeping our books
straight. We spend the money
were authorized and we don't go
over the line. My my, my budget
director, both my budget
director and my ass SD director.
I believe we're following our
statutory mandate and rule. This
is not a rule proposal. This is
a statutory proposal for
consideration. Respectfully,
sir. Okay.
Appreciate that. We'll see you
back in there. Maybe next week.
Thank you.
