Thank.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee state senator Pete
Campos representing all or parts
of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico it's
great to be here with you this
afternoon thank you.
Mr chairman Pat Woods chair that
happy to be here happy to be
alive great place in America of
this is a.
District seven curry where do
you County Sir thank you.
Senate district thirty five Dogo
Sierra Luna in Dona ana county
happy Friday.
So Mister chairman bill sure
Senate district one well which
is Farmington and I'm gonna go
ahead and introduce myself as
bill Burke to since he's not
going to be on camera but he'll
be on the fall.
Yep so Senator Burt is on the
phone the city maybe enter out
of service so that make sure
that we try to get in touch with
the majority had how is going to
vote.
so work we're still one short of
a quorum.
Thank.
Six.
I guess we're we're close better
just wait and see who else joins
us.
Just to be safe.
Senator Candelaria Senator
Steinborn are you there Center
Gonzales.
Here.
You just need one more for
requirements we can just get
that quorum quickly will be good
just to make sure.
Mr Chairman while we're waiting
I also have built in Judiciary
and so I'll be trying to go back
and forth to to deal with those
as well so I just thought I'd
let you know once are are not to
on screen thank you.
Just why don't you go ahead and
start with Senate bill forty one
as amended.
We'll make some phone calls and
see where our other members are
so Senator Campos once you just
start recent no forty one.
Mr Mr Chairman I'm gonna have to
give me a couple of minutes as
well because I'm I'm moving back
and forth just a.
Let me double check that because
I have several of those and I
wasn't prepared on deporting one
real quick but I'll get back to.
Senator Gonzales is logging in
right now okay.
We are not.
So.
Senator Steinborn all.
Senator Google search you still.
So Mister chair I'm just trying
to to to go back I thought it
was going to go ahead and be
Senate bill one eighty seven.
She is in Judiciary have right
now I just sent her text she
hasn't responded to me yet.
One question to answer about
three seventy seven.
All.
You know what that's sad all do
Senate bill
Forty one center storage bill
sent to Rachel's on right.
Rachel you're with us Mr
chairman both just of Simon and
I and me are on as expert
witness.
I am on.
So let's just do forty one
Senate bill forty one is a
funded school changes this is
the impact aid issue that we've
dealt with for the last couple
years where the federal
government takes credit our
gives us dollars for districts
that replaces taxes and so what
we're doing here is we're
replacing the credit we took to
the state and back filling that
with general fund and not taking
credit for impact aid anymore
this Rachel you want to add
anything else to that.
The only thing I would add is I
believe you have an amendment
for the bill and both Mr Simon
and I are here for for technical
support and to help answer
questions.
You want to do bills and Rachel
get to that amendment.
Yes Mr.
We're talking looking for the
man I have them and make printed
packages that I had today.
Had or do have the NMAA bills.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you Senator Stewart yes
I've just joined your committee.
We're on your Senate bill forty
one and and we're we do have the
amendment.
Senator we just went over the
bill a little bit do you want to
explain the amendment and can I
have a motion to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes hello Mr chairman Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman
I'm not aware of the amendment.
One explaining amendment Mr Mr
chairman Mr Simon explained the
amendment one is a.
The goal cleanup that changes
the title that was a right last
committee the last committees
eliminated a contingent
effective date we forgot to.
I forgot to amend the title the
second amendment on here the
elimination of fortieth day for
first reporting date again is
technical clean up that term was
changed law probably eight or
nine years ago and so every time
we see forty of eighty of the
one twenty F. council suggest we
fix that to say first second or
third reporting date.
I'm it Mr Simon we explain the
number three.
Certainly Mr chairman members of
the committee number three deals
with the calculation of what is
known in the public school
funding formula as save harmless
program units those program
units are are triggered
basically when a school district
or a charter school of with
fewer than two hundred students
has more enrollment in the
current year than in the
previous year of that school is
allocated additional funding so
for the past
you know couple of decades PED
has been cap making that
calculation.
Excluding enrollment growth
program units which are based on
current year member on current
year membership growth
so the department recently in
response to some concerns from
from a charter school that would
that we're dealing with this
had.
You have changed that it issued
administrative rule that would
include it the enrollment growth
program units so this would go
back to the old way PED
calculated it there is
essentially an ambiguity in the
statute about whether PED should
include those were on the growth
program units and because this
wasn't specifically addressed in
the statute PED felt they needed
to award those extra program
units even though they
traditionally had.
Had not done so.
Mr chairman I think that
explains we would stand for
questions and then.
Thank you questions on the on
the amendment there's chairman.
I have I said this ammendment
out distance different tenants.
And they have questions on
number three.
Where it says using the average.
the average of and their
question was.
What are they averaging.
It states find the calculation
of pro but you program unit
using the average of on the
first reporting date.
And I think that the first
reporting date there would be an
average because that just one.
One date now.
Are we all former thanking their
their their request was for me
to strike average of I'm I'm
open to discussion Mr chairman
thank you.
Question Mr chairman I think
the.
The question Senator Woods is
raising we need to pull up a
bill and look at page eleven
line three and see that language
if it's not mirroring
The beginning of that sentence I
think what Mr with the
suggesting would be
Technically accurate.
Three on to the
Thank you Mr chairman
The relevant passage is on page
ten and eleven of the bill so
Page ten starting online twenty
four.
and caring over on to page
eleven so the way the does
statute currently reads is.
They calculate the number
program units to which is school
district or charter school with
the amount of two hundred or
less is entitled by using the
average of the ma'am on the
second third reporting date.
Of the prior year or the
fourteenth day of the current
year I think what Senator Woods
points out would still be
technically accurate if you if
you struck average on the
fortieth day I think it was just
meant to train more the existing
statute I think
but I think it's still works by
striking the the word average.
Mr chairman I would make that
motion those were of average
average out we're in the same
year.
Senator Stewart do you have in
response to that.
you Mr chairman this has to be
from Rachel and Joey I don't
right.
I can't follow the reasoning
from Senator Woods is experts so
I mean if if Joey and Rachel say
it's okay I guess I'm okay with
that but it's unclear to me what
what the problem is.
Mr chairman senator I think that
the issue is more money single
reporting date is not average so
the language that's in the first
paragraph on this section talks
with the average ma'am on the
second third reporting date of
the prior year for the first
reporting date of the current
year when you're simply
referring to the settlement in
the current year it's not an
average of two reporting dates
and so I think
Senator Woods is actually
correct in the school districts
that he talked to have caught a
good a good cleanup issue great
great so let's let's in the
amendment.
So that motion.
This.
Center and crane the amendment
to the bill to the amendment.
Yes yes chairman so I'm what
he's suggesting is taking out
average of.
Yes.
Program units using the NM on.
Yes very late thank you.
Okay we have a motion.
Thank.
We.
We have a motion to amend the
bill.
Senator Woods and ever during
the second that.
Okay we have a motion in the
second so we've amended the
amendment.
Any objection to the amendment.
Don't see anybody's hand raised
Services senator Candelaria CA
SS a quick question.
So you're on the mend.
So we're voting on the
amendments which itself has been
amended.
Correct okay so in that cases
were on the amendment.
Mister chairman Senator Mr jewel
expert
Help me understand so P. E. do
U. explained earlier was using
number three in one way for some
calculation and then that
practice changed and this
changes it back so can you help
me understand.
In what manner was PED.
Using this data.
I I'm here I just understand the
explanation really.
Where was this data being used
in calculation of what's and
what were the effects of
including or not including
number three in that calc
relation.
Senator Mr chairman.
There is a provision in the
public school finance act that
sets for a very small school
district they are allowed to
either use the membership from
the price the average of the the
second third reporting dates
membership so membership in
December and membership in
February or are they can use the
average of the membership on the
fortieth day of the current
year.
historically PED had excluded it
enrollment growth units from the
calculation of the program cost
free school district or charter
school using using that
methodology where they used the
first reporting date membership
for the entire funding formula
allocations.
And there was an argument made
to the department this year
that.
The way the statute is written
didn't didn't
didn't allow PED to.
Not include enrollment growth
program units and it's your
effectively double funding if
you will allow enrollment growth
units and save harmless your
double funding growth in the
current year
At a district and so for years
there was not that funding an
argument was made to the
department this year the statute
doesn't allow you to exclude
enrollment growth program units
and we're suggesting that should
be the senators and amendment is
suggesting that should be
cleaned up
to go back to the old
methodology that PED had been
using as Mr Simon noted for
decades.
Mr chairman thank you and and
senator and Mr jewel which
districts question this issue
and why.
So Mister chairman I don't think
it was a district that push the
issue I think it was a charter
school or a group of charter
schools effectively they're
they're going to push the issue
because it means if they have
growth and students they're
generating both enrollment
growth units but then they can
use the same harm save harmless
methodology to have their basic
all of their basic units
generated with a higher rules
number.
Exact the exact charter schools
PED flag this for us.
Right before legislative session
started actually maybe right
after.
Okay well Mr Chairman that
clears up of the questions I
have thank you very much.
Thank you senator Candelaria so
we have a motion where you
passed by Senator Campos and
second by Senator Rodriguez on
the amendment any objection.
Yes Pat could you call the roll
real quick.
Yes.
Hi.
Do not see Senator Burt so have
senator Byrd excused.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Yes Senator yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill I do not see I had to
have her excuse.
So.
Share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn are you are
muted.
Thank you I'm yes thank you
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes the
gentleman yield.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes I have nine
yes into excuse.
Has passed where you are back on
the bill questions on the bill.
This is the Mr Chairman Senator
Rodriguez here I think the
number of the participants list
is wrong because you're no hands
raised but on the participants
this twenty nine so I think
there's America there I don't
see any other hands
the last time this thing that I
know I don't think we so I just
probably needs to be corrected
on the participants list thank
you Mr chairman without seeing
any more I think we discussed
the bill I'm going to move in to
pass that in all of that with
the amendment Mr Chairman
second center Senator we do have
some public comment but I want
to make sure we got the million
on first and and everybody
understood what the amendment
yeah I need a new one that
announcer Public.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
We received now indication of
opposition to the bill however
in the court of the bell we have
John Thompson.
John.
Issue chairman members of the
committee of the
registered lobbyists there is
any public school districts
stand in support of the
legislation thank god Sanchez
and to reject.
And Mr chairman and members of
the committee we also have Mr
remained at director of finance
for the public schools.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Marc remind the
director of finance for SUNY
public schools we do support
this bill in that it removes all
the credits impact Aid half mil
and forest reserve from the
funding formula I will admit
that due to the recent District
Court ruling on that.
Capital outlay matches and
funding for school buildings we
do have some concerns
reservations on that part of the
bill but overall because this
does move forward the return of
credits to the districts we do
support this bill thank you.
Members of the committee that
concluded public comment on that
bill.
Thank you I don't see any of
these hand raised for questions
on the bill.
I don't know Senator Rodriguez
didn't make a motion just check
my text messages and make sure
it's so weird.
So we have a new passed motion
by Senator Rodriguez and they're
going dollars did you second
motion I correct yes I did.
Thank you
we call the roll please.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt is
excuse senator Tom yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Yes Senator Diamond yes.
Mr diamond yes Senator Gonzales
yes.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes.
yes Senator share yes Senator
sure yes Senator Steinborn yes
yes.
Senator Steinborn S. Senator
Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes I have ten yes and one
excuse.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you your.
Thank you I just want to tell
you I mean we all worked on
impact aid for several years and
it became a willing heart issue
and and we all have our own
ideas the impact aid but I have
actually have all those impact a
the three biggest in my district
so glad we're word went down a
path to get this resolved.
You know they everybody always
complains about we want the bill
perfect and nothing we're not
ever going to get the bill
perfect three years ago they
wanted to this bill and then
whatever and.
And so while we try our best and
do our best to thank you and so
I will tell you that it's really
important to us in in the county
Boller and San Juan county so
thank you Sir start thank thank
you senator Munoz thank you I
should not show up more often
maybe I'd have more people vote
for my bill just kidding.
Your bills for the session held.
There's one more.
So I think we're going to be
built.
What was.
The thank you very much Mr chair
members of the Senate finance
committee Senate bill one eighty
seven is being carried on behalf
legislative finance committee
and the bill was also endorsed
by the tobacco settlement
revenue oversight committee of
the bill is similar to past
years when the legislature
passed legislation to divert the
fifty percent tobacco funds that
does to the tobacco settlement
permanent fund and placed all
the revenue in the tobacco
settlement programs on making
all this year's revenue
available for legislative
appropriation
due to the ongoing arbitration
the legislative finance
committee department of finance
and administration and internet
general's offices are projecting
a total of twelve million
dollars in tobacco funds for
fiscal year twenty to instead of
the usual thirty million to
thirty five million the state
typically receives so the LFC
arms for fiscal year twenty two
budget recommendation would
appropriate all of the projected
twelve million some programs
that currently receive tobacco
settlement funds and they
include I'm gonna go through
these very quickly hundred
seventy one thousand for tobacco
use cessation services at the
Indian Affairs Department five
point four million for breast
and cervical cancer treatment
and the Medicaid program at the
Human Services Department.
Four point five million for
tobacco use prevention and
cessation.
Services that reduce prevention
and control and breast and
cervical cancer screening at the
department of health and two
million for special education in
pediatrics and trauma poison
control.
And environmental health Sir
research and.
Ontology at the university New
Mexico health sciences center of
after the procreation of the
twelve million dollars in fiscal
year twenty to for these
purposes the tobacco settlement
permanent fund is expected to
have a fund balance of two
hundred seventy one point six
million dollars Mr chairman
members of the committee with me
also is RubyAnn is curated and
Donna iglesias of Los Angeles
for the legislative finance
committee and they're available
to make a brief statement there
either for or against the pieces
legislation they're here to
offer the explanation in terms
of what was done with the
legislative finance committee in
regards to this particular sign
so with that Mr chair members of
the committee were available for
questions.
Thank you senator to questions
from committee members.
See anybody's hand raised in the
school up here.
One.
I don't see anybody hand raised
can I have a motion.
Sobel Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman.
Sen motion by Senator Rodriguez
second I'm in a motion by
Senator Gonzales second by
Senator Rodriguez.
That we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Campos yes.
And I'm sorry senator Byrd
excuse Senator Campos yes
Senator Candelaria.
yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes.
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill who just.
The meeting Senator share yes.
Madam chair yes.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez test and
measurement Health.
Yes.
Yes yes I have nine yes and to
execute.
Thank you Senator Campos a thank
you Mr chair members the Senate
finance committee.
Thank you next we have Senate
bill three seventy seven this is
the junior bill this is a
replacement for the way we did
House Bill to before it's
brought a lot of clarity to the
process
of Senator Campos and and a few
others have scrubbed this pretty
hard along with our staff
and we think it's a it's exactly
what everybody asked for we
don't see any issues every
member got to review their
projects.
And it's about twelve point five
million dollars that we're
putting in the state budget.
That I guess.
Senator Campos you want to
share.
You want to do that what we do
bills etcetera couples so so
with that thank you very much Mr
chair members of the Senate
finance committee in essence
over the last several weeks what
we have been working on has been
Senate bill three seventy seven
and now we have the committee
substitute.
And within that we had an
opportunity to work very closely
with each one of the members
within the Senate chamber and so
you have forty two individuals
who continue to work and they
know best when it comes to
dealing directly with the
agencies and their own districts
so they work very closely with
their constituents.
In a word on areas regarding
health education and the public
welfare or as you will economic
development so during that time
but we continued to focus our
services on those people who are
unemployed of those with low
income and service you will the
needs of the population across
the state are within this what
this does is it takes it down to
a more microscopic level where
individuals within the Senate
we're given the opportunity to
work on projects insure that the
wording of our resources what
brought what its purpose would
be would go directly to the
state agencies which in New
Mexico so we dealt with
everything from public education
higher education or are
Department moving across to
Human Services are to the
Department of Health.
Working in the public safety and
and working our within our
specific counties and
municipalities so Mister chair
members of the committee with
all the hard work that is done
on
with the members of the Senate
finance committee with the
individuals who have brought
this forward from their
individual districts what we see
now is an opportunity not only
to find equity in terms of our
resource amount but to take the
resources directly to aware of
the situation so witnesses the
problems and of course for some
of the strengths.
At
our our.
So with that Mr.
So so with that Mr chair members
of the Senate finance committee
before you you have Senate Bill
are it will be the communities
a substitute for Senate bill
three seventy seven and with
that Mister chair were available
for discussion and if there are
questions we'll do our best to
try to respond to those
questions thank you Mr chair.
Do you Senator Campos so
and and we need to move the
substitute.
So can have a motion to move the
substitute bill will Mr chairman
that get.
So we have a motion and a second
was that senator Candelaria no
share even though we look alike
I'm sorry.
I thank you so the motion by
Senator couple second by Senator
share.
I'm sorry I didn't get I forgot
about so as to but that we call
the roll.
Yes senator Byrd Essex you
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
How is it sixty Senator
Sure yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Woods yes.
Senator what's yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
And senator Munoz.
Yes.
So we're on the substitute any
questions on the substitute
bill.
Soon then can I have a motion
some of Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman.
We have a motion by Senator
Campos and a second by Senator
Rodriguez.
That we call the roll.
Yes senator Senator Burt is
excuse Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes senator
Graham that kind of these.
Here Senator Diamond.
Yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Also excuse.
Senator sure yes Senator sure
yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manos.
Yes.
Thank you one yes yes I have
eight yes and three excuse.
Mr chairman members of the
Senate finance committee want to
thank each member of the New
Mexico state Senate for their
cooperation the hard work and I
again working directly with
agencies and what they believe
is needed not only in the state
but also within their particular
areas so again Mr chairman thank
you very much for your
leadership.
Thank you secretary couples I I
also agree and and everybody's
district is a little bit
different and everybody's
district has a little bit
different need in whether it was
through an agency to to health
or through the economic
development members can and know
what's happening and where the
needs are with agencies and so
they were able to put those
needs to use and have a real
good say in what happens in the
budget so thank you Senator
Campos members are going to the
PRC today.
Jacqueline are you with us and
Jason are you with this and it's
our PRC commissioner of this.
Yes yes Jacqueline here Mister
chair good afternoon everyone.
Thank you Jacqueline you want to
start off.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my
name's Jacqueline Martinez the
LFC analyst for the public
regulation commission.
I'm just a quick high level on
the differences we both
recommendations for this budget
the LFC recommendation increase
general fund revenue by two
hundred fourteen thousand this
will replace fire protection
fund that will be transferred to
homeland security starting on
July first the beginning of the
school year.
The executive recommendation
increase general fund revenue by
five hundred fifty two thousand
for the same purpose so the
total difference overall is only
about one hundred and sixty one
thousand primarily in the policy
and regulation program.
And that increased differences
in the LFC recommendation.
The house appropriations and
finance committee adopted the
LFC recommendation and that's
all I have I'll turn it over to
Germany for any additional
comments.
Mr chairman of the committee
thank you for having me today I
the executive does not have any
additional comments the moment
That's all abstract and headed
off to Mr Jason Doyle for any
presentations or production
staff.
She started software is the
commissioner of Mr chairman I'll
start us off if it's okay I can
share my screen and Jack the
presentation that's been
distributed.
Sure thank you.
Mr chairman members can see the
screen okay it should have the
the cover page the first page
they're referencing the fiscal
year twenty to.
Make sure we have it there.
Mr chair thank you thank you for
the opportunity I know it's been
difficult it's been awhile since
I've been able to sit before the
Senate finance committee so want
to recognize all the hard work
you do I want to wish you safety
and and and continued good
health throughout the rest of
the session and and beyond I do
want to recognize that we do
have commissioner Maestas
that'll take over here after a
few slides in I also have other
technical staff available to
respond to any potential
questions that the committee may
have after our after or during
our presentation here we see it
Mr chairman and and and members
of the committee I just want to
take a moment and and just
remind everybody that's with the
slide does is what's the PRC
wise appears to exist what's our
mission vision and some of the
things that we do I also want to
recognize that I think we really
also continue to review
opportunities to restructure the
organization I like to refer to
these as a resulting the
resetting the foundation and
establishing a benchmark that
can be built upon by making
improvements we've had our fair
share of difficulties just like
many other agencies and we
continue to be successful in my
opinion and I think with the
assistance and oversight
agencies such as the legislature
the executive a gentle services
division we we really are
restructuring that partnership
and to make us and and now allow
us to move forward in the right
direction Mr chairman slide
three of the handout is a is a
recap of our FY twenty revenues
and there's there's one huge
take away from the side that I
want to draw everybody's
attention to and that is the PRC
utility fees fund.
In FY twenty we generated
approximately fourteen point six
million dollars and although the
FY twenty two LFC and DFA
recommendations are still well
behind this FY twenty revenue
and now and not still any
thunder away from commissioner
Maestas but you'll you'll dive
into the weeds of why that's so
important and where we believe
the PRC is headed and what
direction they they are revenue
sources that are in black.
On the screen are allocated to
the PRC to pay for portion of
our budget and then the three
are obviously just other funds
that we manage our process
deposit checks and then either
transfer on a monthly basis to
the two department of finance
and administration or to D. O.
T. on a monthly basis as well
you you are familiar with the
motor transportation receipts
fund might be familiar with it
there's a bill in the Senate and
a bill in the house that really
establishes the structure of
repository to the it within the
state of where those funds are
deposited so although it doesn't
change the actual practice it's
just more of a formality so
there's something on on paper
where it actually goes the FY
twenty operating expenditures is
is here on the screen and and
the biggest takeaway for me is
that our investment is in our
people.
It you can see the the L.
portion of the pie chart is our
personal services employee
benefits obviously we need
contractual services and and we
travel we could we have public
safety components that very
oddly sometimes frequently are
conducting inspections or
investigations that could be due
to any formal complaints that
could be due to any schedule
inspection that could be also be
due to any procedural order that
is issued on behalf of the
commission in response to some
educated K. and what not
slide the next slide is our
current as of yesterday I ran
the numbers to update this slide
as to get is current as possible
I'm a pause for a moment and
really recognize that we've had
our fair share of difficulties
recruiting and retaining
qualified individuals and you
know we continue to compete with
the industry that we regulate
and and our salaries are just
night and day on paper when it
comes to economists attorneys
engineers X. cetera
this these numbers are
presenting before this committee
today do not include the state
fire marshal's office obviously
they are being transferred over
to homeland security effective
July one of of twenty twenty one
and so it's a real realistic
snapshot as to what can be
expected of the PRC moving
forward so we'll have a hundred
nineteen authorized FTEs they
currently have twenty five
agencies several of these
vacancies are either in the
process of being advertised are
being interviewed for or offer
is being negotiated and so after
the existing higher plan is
accomplished with our current
operating budget we are
projecting a just right around
seven point five six percent of
the can see right so that'll
leave us with about nine FTEs
thank you and primarily in the
P. six eleven policy and
regulations and commission my SS
we'll touch on that more as we
get into the presentation.
Where you.
Mr chairman and committee
members the next slide is our
summary of the FY twenty two
operating budget request
compared to the recommendations
from LESC in DFA and and I just
want to to focus on the fact
that how we got to this twelve
million dollar operating budget
request we begin with the FY
twenty one actual operating
budget and we added
appropriation requests to pay
for an office many of you
already know that currently the
PRC is without a building
without an office although we've
identified location to partially
return to full capacity that
appropriation is currently
included in the FY twenty two
operating request and and it is
supported by both LFC in DFA in
addition to that as a Jacqueline
mentioned earlier you know we've
needed some supplement for the
lack of the fire protection fund
beginning in FY twenty two so
once you added those two
components into the actual FY
twenty one operating budget last
the state fire marshal's office
reduced it by the five percent
general fund appropriation acts
as requested by the DFA budget
preparation instructions that's
how we came about twelve twelve
million I'm quite frankly Mr
Chairman commit committee
members I I think that's pretty
much down to the bare bones
minimum of how we can what we
can afford to accept and move
forward to maintain a robust
agency you know I wish I had
time to go through all of the
caseload that is before the
commission I also welcome
anybody that ever wants to
shadow me your shadow any of our
commissioners to really get a
good feeling of what we go
through on a day to day basis
you know during session
with respectfully you know would
provide pulling twelve fourteen
hour days just like yourself and
trying to respond to all the FY
are requests and whatnot so it's
really really important I think
to recognize that you know we
follow the do it base budget
preparation instructions to the
T.
And so we we believe that the
twelve million dollars a still
which should be taken into
consideration Mr chairman of
committee members I want to take
a moment and just also recognize
that outside of requests in a
healthy budget moving forward
there are some initiatives and
directives that I think we
should highlight and and
recognize that it's not just
utility regulation the PRC deals
with you know we have public
safety components in the fire
marshal's office that'll be
transferred to homeland security
we have pipeline safety and also
the balance of the
transportation division and so
we've had our fair share of
having to cope and adjust to the
COVID nineteen pandemic we've
implemented electronic filing
system that should have probably
been in place pre COVID but it
will remain public comment and
we're also going to accommodate
and put up safe and prudent
return to work plan together in
transition into our new hybrid
work environment obviously I
think a lot of agencies are
focusing on having of of their
balance between offices and and
teleworking we've also
restructured Senator or several
of our divisions we we thought
opportunity to allow for growth
and development we we've been
like I said earlier struggling
with recruiting and retaining
qualified individuals and and so
what this realigning our org
charts and more but matter
rather than being so horizontal
allows us to recruit possibly
from the universities and
colleges train them internally
developed into robust utility
regulators and economists and
attorneys that can weigh in and
give really good testimony on
the advocacy side of the
equation to allow our
commissioners to make.
Great decisions and allow
hearing examiners to make
excellent recommended decisions
we have consolidated several
roles and responsibilities
within the organization we just
saw an opportunity to streamline
a lot of our internal standard
operating procedures one of the
big things for me now that I've
been I've been cheap staff back
to keep the staff now for a
couple years you know we've been
focusing on building are
deployed around I mentioned
earlier that our investment is
in our people and so we've
reinstated it recognition and
rewards programs for example an
employee of the month
certificate gets recognized
before the commission gets a
certificate we offer training
your point setting improvements
setting goals establishing goals
and creating a real work planned
on on not allowing anybody to
fail basically so we've also
have been very fortunate to work
with oversight agencies such as
the person is office and and
recognizing performance within
that rate increases
one of our key focus is that
continues and in fact we've I
believe even have asked for
supplemental funding is to to
change the PRC's public image
you know I I think we need to
get away from a what's happened
eight ten twelve fifteen years
ago we have a really good city
commission the former commission
was also great and and hands on
very engaged so we really want
to reestablish that working in
professional relationship with
not only the executive but the
Legislature and other oversight
state oversight agencies General
services division department of
finance and administration state
personnel office Xcerra we have
a really need opportunity to
improve our agency's website I
think to be very more user
friendly it could be easier to
navigate through and so we're
focusing on that as well and
then obviously we are always
trying to improve customer
service be more responsive when
issues surface being able to
address them in a very timely
manner with that Mr chairman
and.
I've taken a little bit more
time than I probably should have
I'd like to turn the table over
to commissioner Joseph Maestas
and all remaining control and
just continue for.
Thank you Jason you Mr chairman
and madam vice chair members of
the Senate finance committee.
Thank you for the opportunity
for me to address you briefly
thank you for your service to
the state obviously your your
budget planning process for the
next fiscal year is is it's
close to done and but are you
know I've been on for for maybe
a couple of months and look we
all know that the constitutional
amendment did pass in November
which will change the PRC from
artistic Commission from elected
to appointed and we get that but
I I don't want to be a lame duck
commissioner I I want to do all
I can to further elevate the
commission and truly prepare it
for the challenges that are that
that that the commission faces
to implement landmark pieces of
legislation like the energy
transition act like grid
modernization and there's a
whole host of other.
Pieces of legislation pending
right now that will have a
fiscal impact on the public
regulation commission so what
you see on the screen what is
the the kind of the the cover
sheet of a study that was done
in twenty seventeen under the
auspices of the Legislative
Council Service and evaluated
the PRC and that it was not a
very in depth evaluation but it
had a number of recommendations.
And we're going to go through
those recommendations so here's
the link it's on your own
website there under publications
but I invite you to take a look
at it because what I can say in
general is at some of the same
circumstances that were cited in
this evaluation still exists
today and so not much has
changed since twenty seventeen.
So Jason if you would go to the
next slide.
The PRC is facing some some
headwinds in this energy
transition and I reference the
report if you can see this.
A cryptic quote right out of the
report is is this death spiral
type condition in our opinion is
seriously jeopardize the
capability of the PRC to protect
the public interest.
So the report goes on to say
that we are one of just a few
states that are simply a pass
through we basically all the
money we collect you know it
either goes to the general fund
or other agencies but one of the
primary findings in this
evaluation was that we lacked
the the proper technical
expertise to process rape cases
and there you know we will see
extraordinary cases such as the
PNM aven grid merger that's
currently pending before the PRC
that will require a significant
analysis particularly on the
economic side.
And you know it does recommend
something that I'd like you to
you know to call your attention
to and that is this evaluation
further recommends to you all to
conduct a management audit of
the PRC to bear out a lot of the
preliminary findings and
reinforce some of the
recommendations that came of
this evaluation next next bullet
Jason.
You know one thing that you know
we we have had some hiring
freezes that have set the agency
back in terms of staffing up and
feeling some of the authorized.
Positions but.
What we're also experiencing is
that the position is called for
in landmark pieces of
legislation like the energy
transition act have not been
funded in fact
I think a couple of fiscal years
ago I think in FY twenty
request.
you authorized I FTEs
for the PRC four of them were
called for in the FIR for the
ETA for the energy transition
act and that budget authority in
the amount of about four hundred
sixty six thousand was vetoed
so.
The veto of those five positions
and the hiring freezes I think
it really set us back in
staffing up in preparing the PRC
to implement these key pieces of
legislation and I think Jason
you know fully mention the
challenges that we face not
having an office location we do
expect to move into an office
space in downtown Santa Fe but
it certainly has been a
challenge with a hundred percent
of the staff having to tell work
you know we have many
stakeholders and members of the
public that have had to
participate by zoom and I think
that all of you would prepare or
review would prefer that that
you meet in person with
constituents and stakeholders
and people interested in in the
legislation that you're you're
considering next slide Jason.
So this is just a table that
summarizes our troop budget
needs relative to the FY twenty
two request
if you look at the left most
column
we have the authorize button
funded FTEs again these are for
positions that were called for
four of the nine that were
called for in the FIR to
implement energy transition act
and then we have one
transportation division.
Just to get a position that was
also authorized but vetoed.
this this needs this
comprehensive.
Needs table also includes some
unauthorized FTEs that are
required to implement the ETA
and it it also calls for for
technical staff that would
reside in our office of general
counsel you on our side of the
commission side of the
organizational chart those are
advisory staff and we basically
don't have any technical or
subject matter experts advising
the commission on the advisory
side on the advocacy side of
that is our utility division and
other technical staff report to
the chief of staff.
Exported communication prevents
us from communicating with this
technical staff but any of the
pending cases and so it's very
difficult you know need to work
around ex parte communication so
why do I say that I say that is
because we the commission needs
a cadre a diverse mix of subject
matter experts to advise them on
very complex cases particularly
the ETA we've already our our
our acting on the the
abandonment filing for four
corners power plant unmentioned
the PNM having good merger so
just to get an idea in terms of
the workload we have just in the
chilly docket we have eighteen
active utility cases and on the
average members of the committee
it takes about one year from the
case being opened until a final
order is issued by the
commission so I think you get a
sense of of what we're facing.
The next slide please.
And so if you look at the total
of our request and there's
there's other elements of our
request we we need to have the
opportunity to engage with
outside expertise I black
contracts.
Because again we have
extraordinary cases that would
require more expertise than what
would reside through our staff
and so we're asking for a higher
consulting budget and also to
conduct a management audit but
if you look at the total of
fourteen million for four sixty
four thousand it it's almost
identical to what the PRC
returns to the general fund
through that the PRC utility
fees so
This is really important this is
really really important for the
long term success of the PRC and
I certainly as one of the well
not one of the last one of the
last elected commissioners I
don't want to hand office agency
in tatters I want to I want to
be proud to hand this over to
the appointees on January one of
twenty twenty three at to ensure
that it's it has the necessary
resources to rise to the
challenge that we're being faced
with in our transition to clean
energy next slide please.
This is just a table showing the
you know the the comparison
between the FY twenty two
request Senate finance committee
recommendations and our true
needs.
Next slide please.
So we realize you guys are
wrapping up the budget in a nice
type bow but we are asking all
of you if you have any
discretionary budget and any
latitude to restore the four
hundred sixty six thousand in
recurring funds for those FTEs
needed to implement the energy
transition act.
And also to consider
appropriating seventy five
thousand for the management
audit and I think this would be
a good.
Baseline by conducting this
audit this would put us in a
much better position to go to
you and request additional
funding to address the findings
in a more detailed management
audit as recommended by the
twenty seventeen valuation.
Next slide please.
So I can't end with this this
quote in the report which is
quite eye opening and the let's
let's avoid any major compromise
of the public interest because
the PRC is not adequately.
Financed and staffed in needs to
be it can play a very vital role
it can really assist you in in
in crafting legislation is that
a risk relying on other outside
technical experts in there are
very good technical experts out
there I'm sure that assist you
but we can really serve in that
role and you know our agency is
really not equipped to roam the
halls of the of the capital to
engage in in lobbying I mean we
principally rely on our chief of
staff in our commission and so
I think for that very reason we
relied more heavily on on this
established process you know
through the appropriation
process in the committee process
to impart you know the the
situation that we're facing and
the needs that we have going
forward so and and we don't need
the entire four hundred sixty
six thousand recurring if if you
can find a a portion of that
just to restore that budget for
that was vetoed that would help
a great a great deal and of
course the management audit
would be nonrecurring and I
think that would be again just a
great effort and as a
springboard to to move this
agency forty making and just
truly make it a model in a in
public regulations across the
country so thank you for your
time and attention and Jason I
guess you want to just announce
what staff for are available to
answer any questions from the
committee chair of Mr chairman
committee members and and
commission my SS I think I
introduce them at the beginning
so I I probably just want to
close by also reading the
committee members attention to
the fact that there are several
bills that are currently being
presented before this
legislature that have also been
flagged as unfunded mandates and
see even though we're speaking.
To you about legislation that
has been enacted upon there's
still the potential of all these
other energy bills and what not
that are being discussed in and
possibly assigned to the PRC and
in our FY are we have identified
the need for additional staffing
levels if it were to be enacted
upon so so it's a very very
important a transition period
going on right now between you
know that the current situation
and and where we see ourselves
in a couple of years
that so Mister chairman I think
I would like to probably just
stand for questions if there are
any from the committee members
we do have technical staff and I
can direct traffic as needed.
Thank you thank you very much
yes Senator Munoz has another
the help grant bill and the
committee will be chaired thank
you for your presentation
working of course commissioner
on my S. thank you very much I'm
going to be if we have any
questions I do have a couple of
questions maybe.
Comments but let me see on the
amendment staff we have
anyone in legislators and
questions that seem to work.
Thanks I don't.
Your.
Greater I do we have
and they are they just not
coming up or if there are no one
from.
The chair members of the
committee does not appear that
any members today sent I sent
many had their hands raised
thank you yes well you might ask
before.
We all of their losses back but
I I do have a question if I may
first let me let me just say
that I had spoken to
commissioner Maestas about this
before the meeting and it wasn't
today few days ago but I'm in a
rush usually as we are all
running trying to get through
this whole thing but
you when you were talking to
make commissioner Maestas about
audit that you need
you know it really struck at.
Right here because it seems to
me that you know in this audit
management audit that you're
talking about I do believe it's
unnecessary by the way thank you
for presenting with but I I
wanted to make sure that in this
hope management audit that you
talk about that is the fact more
than that if they can be funded
that is not just a management on
it but that it is not it that
includes what fall back audits
from the lower echelon employee
workforce that you have in other
words not just management but
everyone else in the operations
of the PRC and stop in requests
for this I just wanted to make
sure that that was noted for all
legislators so that they know
that this is broader than just
manage okay thank you for that I
will promise to let you let you
comment on that but
in that also one other point
about the audit I want just to
subject is too is that in that
audit if it's done it needs to
require the the need for
additional funding for call I'm
funded mandates which is what
jasmine spoke about with respect
to potential legislation would
have there's no funding dishing
up we would need to strictly
implement those now what law
that we passed and Phelps that
should be included in New York
and beyond.
It is down so
That I will I'm gonna just make
my plans and all that you we
talk but with respect to the
staff.
You know I really believe that
that's the least we can do we
past years apart for example we
passed the ETA energy transition
act and with that we should have
the staff to be able to
implement that the way it was
intended half in order for us to
continue to pass legislation and
they short change you on the
staff to administer it doesn't
seem like the right thing to do
so I hope that there's a way we
can restore if not all of it
this year because we understand
the issue with the budget
because this is recurring for
the for the I positions that you
need we should at least make a
good faith effort in funding
some of those positions and so
anyway I'm gonna defer to you up
commissioner Maestas would you
like to respond on that on the
audit and sure thank you senator
GS
In terms of the I don't know
what I would suggest is that
Legislative Council services
continue to be involved in state
are the organization that
basically oversaw the audit that
way we can ensure that there's
some continuity in Council
services involvement and and
they can work with us to or
maybe they can develop the scope
instead of having us develop
disco because there's gotta be
some some degree of third party
objectivity in this to be able
to look at the PRC in its
entirety but address some of the
the recommendations that were
made in the evaluation like a
lack of technical expertise like
how can the funding change to
ensure that the PRC has a stable
source of funding because as
funding is remained flat or
fluctuate greatly the complexity
in the challenges in the
industry that the PRC regulates
has been going up.
And so it's we're basically
gradually being set up to fail I
even use that clause and so we
need a mechanism to ensure that
the PRC has stable consistent
funding that keeps pace with the
industry that we regulate thank
you thank you for that and right
now I may just I want to say one
more thing that I think really
says a lot about our technical
expertise oftentimes we have to
rely on intervenors to shed
light and explore the complex
issues around cases because we
don't have the staff resources
and expertise to do so and
that's very dangerous because
interveners often often times
have a distinct interest in the
outcome of the cases so when you
have a regulatory agency that
relies on intervenors that's not
good that's not a good
situation.
And and I want to commend the
legislature for moving on one of
the recommendations in the that
the twenty seventeen evaluation
and that was the removal of the
state fire marshal's that was
one of the findings of that
group that evaluated the PRC
they didn't see the fit they
didn't see the functional fit a
fire marshal of being in PRC and
now it's being moved out so you
you are moving on some of those
recommendations to the
legislature.
Thank you thank you commissioner
for rare constantly elected
thank here that you brought up
what was that you really need to
keep the fourteen mental process
that way that you collect
and use them in other areas
instead of returning that to the
general fund you mentioned the
presentation we're one of the
few thank minority here with the
your reaction three other states
that return this to the general
fund and so now what we do that
it needs you very shortly this
funding anyway I I won't how
long this anymore I can't see
any other and your so far now so
I'm with that in mind Jason do
you want to make a final
comments before we a lot I just
want to appreciate the time you
know I think are points to be
made I think it's very clear
with here don't I want to work
with the legislature on staff
and she and very help budget
that allows the PRC move forward
and addresses all of the
important issues that are
brought forth the the energy or
transportation or whatever
subject you might need that is
passed and enacted on we will
we're not we want to do the work
and wonder right and so we just
need the resources thank you
thank you for reaching out in
that way we appreciate that and
thank you commissioner Maestas
before we go on I see a number
seventeen here on the same
screen for participants anyone
else I think they're gonna win
Office hearing test is hands up
and I didn't know of any
participants speaking for or
against or any that we don't
have any bill to pass so I think
this is just a presentation I
just didn't know what the number
seventeen talking about the on
participants this everyone else
here on you have two points.
Thank you it commissioner and
thanks committee position and
that was citing get back to you
and I absolutely could but we're
gonna hear presentation today
Jason thanks for being with us.
We resolve some of these issues
with language like on back
filling or wear your shorts
safer here.
For your audit.
We do that with other agencies.
Mr Chairman maybe I'm not
clearly understanding how we
back fill it with just the
language and appropriations yeah
requirement for the audit.
Yes I believe so I think that
would need to be in an increase
in the appropriation maybe even
a special appropriation just for
that one one time audit right.
Correct because I believe we can
do that with language because
when we
But the J. on you and we didn't
find that what we need to do is
make sure that we put language
in house bill two that get you
the funding to cover any
additional expenses that the
legislature may have passed.
Let's let's look at that
language then then we set a
number and I think we can help
you there.
I circle around with you little
bit about your budget and see
how we work and Senate finance
and with some of our.
Okay okay right.
Thank you thank you commissioner
I I will get back to the state.
When I only get like a hundred
fifty text today this last year.
I go look for my wife's first
what I did.
Why spend very wisely.
Thank the opportunity.
I care with.
More money off the there.
The screen went blank here.
