First ten pictures are free the
next twenty five or.
Yes this time I did with this
and we can.
Appropriate.
I think we're we're good.
Thank you we have any of our
members of the.
The committee on.
We're going to get started in.
Mr.
On is currently I am.
We've had a pretty good rule
here about twenty four hours.
In this particular bill was not
even listed new on our calendar.
In here it is.
And I've had many people.
Express their concern.
That we did not give them twenty
four hours.
I I I humbly ask as we do this
tomorrow after the the citizens
of New Mexico have had a chance.
Because it is different than
what came out of Judiciary.
So it is a different bills that
they've not yet had a chance to
study.
And I think we ought to give
them that opportunity.
Senator Wirth where the point
I'm Senator sure where the
following the session where at
the call the chair and and we're
gonna have to be moving on to
tax packages and important
things and some of these bills
we're not expert on I will tell
you are amendment right now just
strikes the language for the
diversion on the finance part
because of house bill two we did
appropriate money for that the
lection Fund and so that's
that's the portion of that and
we're gonna get to the point
where some of these bills are
stacking up and we're going to
do tax packages and it's did
reset the pin and things are
gonna change rather quickly.
Mr chair I understand that I
understand we're doing I've also
been here where there have
thousands of bills and dozens on
the calendar.
Today's not that day.
We had three on the calendar
before.
And now we have four.
And I do think that we owe it to
the citizens to do it tomorrow.
Wholesaler sure tomorrow gonna
be still with taxes.
and rolling up committees
because I think is in
corporations voting on tax by
senator today center work.
Mr chairman that's correct I
also think it's important that
When this bill comes out of this
committee and is read out that
it has time to.
Not get go straight onto it on
the Senate floor and how does
how to love and have hours of
hearing on this bill and.
The only issue here is section
twenty two which is about to be
stricken it's in the finance
committee for one reason to deal
with that issue
you know I appreciate what
you're saying I also agree to a
third referral earlier this week
because it needed to go to
Senate Judiciary and we want to
Senate Judiciary we had a good
hearing again I think eleven
hours four and a half hours of
public testimony on this bill in
the Senate rules committee
again I'm I'm not planning to
put this bill on the floor
tomorrow and I I think it will
have plenty of time for everyone
to take a look.
but we are at a point where
again I think you've discussed
with me some things you want to
do on Sunday
and you know with what you're
proposing right now I I
understand what you're doing and
I'm not I'm not in any way
criticizing that but I just I
really think this bill is been
as vetted as a bill I carried in
a very long time and it's only
here for one reason as the chair
just indicated he's about to
take the section out completely.
Mr chair and senator.
We're not going to do tomorrow
are you planning on scheduling
it for four thirty on Sunday.
That's Super Bowl it.
Well the work may not be a
football fan for the inform him
that we're not gonna do this on
Sunday Mr chair what I what I
will assure you is we're not
gonna do it tomorrow synergy and
that will give everybody time.
And I just think that's the
right given given given what
this bill has been through given
what we've been through on this
bill given the amount of public
comment on this bill again the
the substantive issues the
election issues were dealt with
in rules the legal issues were
addressed in Senate Judiciary
we're here today to talk about
section twenty two it sounds
like it's coming out so running
a chance to talk about it so
really that's that's I I respect
what you're saying I think
given.
The three referrals that this
bill had and the amount of
process it's not
I do think it's appropriate to
move forward.
Right so Mister chair.
I don't care if he was abused
but I don't want to use the
secretary of state any further.
There were do you want to go
ahead and proceed with Senate
Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman on with
the secretary of state and the
election director Kerry France
gets Maggie to solder secretary
of state on Senate bill eight
we're here to present the Senate
Judiciary Committee some for the
Senate rules committee sub for
Senate bill eight
this is a bill related to
election on issues of the the
the focus is access and it does
a whole string of different
things that are policy issues
and I'm happy to go through all
of those if you'd like Mr chair
or we can talk about the issue
that brings us to the committee
which is the creation of a fund
which was an attempt to
intercept some money from the
early childhood fund and move it
into the election this new
elections suspense Fund
and it's my understanding
there's an amendment to to
remove that section so so really
that's that's where we are and
if it if Mr chair if you'd like
to get into all the specifics of
the bill I'm happy to do that or
I can have the secretary of
state outlined the funding issue
that's here but I do understand
is an amendment to take it out
so but but but maybe I think
with a program let me let me of
the secretary state leader just
outlined how the funding piece
is proposed in this legislation
and maybe just give us a brief
overview of wire which came out
of Judiciary mostly struggling
Judiciary Committee great track
the voting bill and then we'll
know the financial issue that's
not our.
this is will know what the
financial issue it's an overview
of the bill that I think we need
to so Mister chairman limit let
me walk through it and then and
then the secretary of state can
can jump in here and we'll tell
you kind of exactly where it is
now what this is as it came out
a judicial resolutely absolutely
requires a secretary of state
implement rules for accepting
electronic nominating signatures
this bill was amended in rules
to allow seventeen year olds not
sixteen year olds seventeen year
old devoted statewide special
elections if they'll be eighteen
by the next general election.
On this bill sets forth
procedures for inmates to
register to vote upon release
from correctional facilities on
the section on back and
automatic voter registration was
removed in Senate Judiciary
that's not in the cell.
It provides for a voluntary
permanent absentee voter list
allowing a person to sign up
once to receive ballots in the
mail and all future elections.
increases security measures for
voter registration and ballot
delivery and requires counties
under the sub in judiciary to
have to monitored secure drop
boxes.
This bill enacts the native
American voting rights act in
addresses many of the issues
that we saw in COVID where there
was disenfranchisement based on
our on our current election law
requires County precinct
boundaries to track with
political boundaries improves
language accessibility for by
providing translators and
alternative voting or Google
turn the voting's locations it
allows drop boxes early voting
locations inconvenient center to
be placed on tribal lands at no
cost to the tribe's it allows
voters living on tribal lands to
use tribal government buildings
as their mailing address and it
sets forth procedures for voting
during emergency declarations on
the Senate Judiciary sob removed
the provision that made primary
general local elections a state
holiday the clerks were
concerned about the cost of that
given having to pay overtime if
those were holidays when that
when all their workers were
working on those days the bill
does repeat continues to make
general under regular local
election school holidays.
And then finally I think the
issue that we mentioned it
brings it here is a new
distribution from the excise
extraction tax assessments fund
to the state election fund to
bring the balance to twenty
million each year and as I think
I stated it's an intercept from
the early childhood education
and care fund is what was
proposed in this bill and that's
that's what it does and I'd be
able to madam secretary for
comments and anything I missed.
And thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee Maggie
Toulouse Oliver happy to be
serving as your secretary of
state I think the the poor
leader at and sponsor of this
bill and the it nailed the
overall explanation of the bill
this particular piece that's
before the finance committee
I I I do understand the effort
that's going to take place here
today but give me just a minute
to make the case for why ideally
it should say and as you all
know because Senate finance you
know you all are sort of your
that you're the capture back
there with your catcher's Mitt
on for what comes over from the
house side and of course the
house does really you know
meaningful work but.
Every year I come to you all and
I tell you that we have been
under funded.
We are continue and it doesn't
matter every year we go we go
through all the exercise of the
LFC and we do our presentation
before age KFC and we we never
get the funding we need we are
always operating from a
deprivation mentality in
elections and the reality is
that if if if if not for
elections none of us would be
here we wouldn't have a
functioning government and you
all know because you run for
election and you see the reality
of not having the funds that we
need to be able to implement a
lections so the the proposal of
this fund so we're talking about
twenty million off the top to
begin with and it just always
have that fun there if we need
it we're not talking about
twenty million every year
because we're not going to spend
twenty million out of that fund
every year a statewide election
cost six million dollars.
So we have one statewide
election any here at six million
dollars if we have to it's
twelve million we're talking
about from here forward the
balance being topped off every
year from what we spend that
those are direct county cost
Senator with you now you visited
all the counties last year these
are these are all costs that are
directly borne by the counties
this is not going into my pocket
to hire additional staff and to
do additional things this is
poll workers you all should have
had a one paper distributed to
you postage publications.
County staff.
Election security cyber security
making sure that we have every
single County.
Where it needs to be.
The the problem is that we we
are always having last year even
last year I had to go before a
board of finance to ask for
emergency funding to be able to
cover the costs that I owe the
counties to pay them I
understand there's a potential
proposal on the table to fund us
at us at a certain amount
and and and that will help.
And you all know we have a gap
to close just this year as
before you just a couple weeks
ago to explain that we're still
about two million dollars off
from being able to fund our
primary election this year so
you know that
and and and obviously closing
that gap will help in creating a
fund will help but I just want
to emphasize to all that this is
an ongoing thing.
It's an ongoing issue we're
always going to need to fund
elections and and just like
everything else in this country
it's not getting cheaper every
year.
Right we go to the store it's
like six dollars per gallon of
milk here in Santa Fe now same
with elections right so that's
where we are Mr chair at home we
ask to to keep this in I
understand you know.
At whatever many pros happy to
discuss it happy to answer
questions really appreciate the
support of the committee overall
on and in general very much so
Mister chair thank you.
Thank you are their work you
want to add anything going
nothing further we're gonna go
to zoom for on online for and
against we're gonna start with
for Naomi Maestas.
We do have a clock running
sometimes going to short we're
gonna spend ten minutes on each
so go ahead.
share.
Thank.
lost almost her chair feeling
I'm here to debate have the
feeling that are for the.
Eight February this past Monday
I will go to the section by
section on Virginia two two one
nine point four of the bill and
the order that was introduced
that day as well
each of you a great job of that
info to hire.
You'll know that the majority of
us supported a bill subsection.
Given the staff no opposition
from the affiliate
but you know
the importance right now for us
by title and still along with a
lot of these but
are secretary of state was only
percentages for funding is very
important to have another
unfunded mandates to losses is a
quite a.
there was that poll this is
posturing Committee on one of
our concerns civilian had a
whole as a whole and was we
should compromise to a lot of
concern.
On a side processes bill which
is in the best interests of US
election administrators one we
have the responsibility on the
ground they get it
to questions and.
To do the best for all eligible
voters I'm available to answer
your questions or concerns you
might have relationships and.
Thank you my at a flirty.
But there I chairman of the
committee and I just need to
because we're going to chapters
representing over thirty five
thousand members and supporters
throughout the state police for
us the eight this is makes it so
that every eligible voter has a
few hurdles and barriers as
possible to cast their ballots
while also modernizing and
securing our elections and right
now rigs legislation is at a
standstill in Congress that
would raise a central to
continuing our democracy the
provisions in this bill will
ensure equitable opportunities
Mexicans to vote Senator Moores
heard in our democracy works
best people regardless of race
or background to state elections
this is a less support as the
eight sponsors urged committee
thank you.
Thank you Kathryn Clark.
Thank you Mr chairman I am going
to them first I don't see their
cat.
Camille the woman.
you're in the room to.
That's not going through.
Been shown in there how he's in
the room to we're gonna go zoom
against John block.
Hey there John yes I'm here
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block I am a native New
Mexicans voted their Alamogordo
and I propose as the eight
associate Robert New Mexicans of
their photo right makes our
state in wild west of the voter
fraud the radical provisions in
this bill such as widespread on
security balance drop boxes and
ballot harvesting will make it
easier than ever to see in our
Lexus harvesting those specially
from our senior citizens and
ballot stuffing fraudulent votes
in the dead of night an
unsecured drop boxes will bring
the third world elections to New
Mexico if we cannot ensure that
every single legal tax without
fraudulent ballots canceling out
our voices in the most
vulnerable New Mexicans and
communities in our state will be
victims of voter suppression
caused by this extremist bill
the committee must strip out
ballot harvesting and drop boxes
from section twelve and had a
voter ID to ensure that our
security of our elections stated
in New Mexico and with the
principles of the one person one
vote thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee please
vote against us eight.
Thank you Carlos on thank.
Members are less.
The New Mexico business
coalition we have an outreach of
over two hundred and thirty
thousand New Mexicans we have
yet to find one of our forces.
We are very concerned about the
diversion of up to twenty
million dollars away from the
early childhood education
Fund that is the wrong direction
to go for New Mexico.
The
rules.
J. S. R..
Problems with the rules we have
not heard about system
adequately in the database and
this will only make it worse.
And allowing fully restored
voting rights to felons before
they serve their entire sentence
we just don't agree with that.
Seventeen year old voting is not
a good idea.
We're very concerned about how
fast this is the right through
the system with no notice today
for the public to review what
was done in the last committee
we are two things to sell thank
you.
Thank you Peters so I guess.
Are you there Peter.
Rob.
rob hunt either all guessing.
This is a chair members of the
committee my name is Paul yes
and president of the Rio Grande
foundation free market oriented
policy organization based in
Albuquerque dealing with Mexico
politics political issues are
maybe services what with this
legislation is the absence the
voting a permanent option
nothing is permanent move I
it's strikes me is very
problematic in the state where
we don't have very accurate
model that is something that's
being considered we had actors
over rules about as well as we
could
we we know who's really
registered not
in terms of the members are
allowed to vote upon release
these people should at a minimum
completed or parole and
probation before there are
finally for the serious about
voting in the four years just a
shame that the lower rate the
Senator this legislation bills
that federations voter ID
something strongly supported
across the American public that
is consider thank you.
Thank you rob rob thank you so
you're not there.
Trying to get in I'm sorry
Peters I guess you're not there
and rob hunt we'll go to the
audience.
Are you there yeah hi can you
hear me this is wrong we got to.
That's right I want to bring up
to the committee and make sure
that we understand.
this is the frame is as of right
now and it clearly is clearly of
voter fraud and we have seen
that is that is still being used
for fraudulent purposes
in the as we see Arizona going
the other way Mexico is on the
wrong direction this bill the
focus
we go to look at what was going
on and on George seated us
properties were you use and
there were two thousand mules
are missing out of state in
the
with running about boxes and
drop the
You know ten twenty packages
about running all over town from
boxes are not secure and nothing
is just about right lose and
turn over the control.
The election process in New
Mexico over to the high.
Contest you can.
Most people in the most ballots
around while.
Balance is the most ballots and
boxes this is horrible.
Other stations across got to
some this is a bad bill it does
not Representative Alexis world
rights to taxes
When we look at third party
access provisions you know.
there's proof analysis and
border that that third party
access to use
access the voter information in
New Mexico's
we have proof that in Louisiana
secretary of state was in with
some of this evidence he cared
out of their system updated and
other thing that is interesting
in New Mexico is there is
already accessing our system yet
there is no provision for
learners party access stations
actually do you know what we're
doing right now allowing third
party access without
is that it is currently bill so
again if you let the system
about in UCD mailing them out
more more about this.
You you're wanting us to have
those about Parma's.
And in a very positive Dropbox
and this is a horrible idea
I'm surprised disability on as
far the Democrat or Republican
this is not a matter.
Whether you support this is not
because what matters Alexis.
And so far every vote on this
is indirectly in part.
And that is very.
For for what's going on and it's
just a very reserves for the
Democratic Party.
We would be happy to provide
evidence against this this is
clearly a.
We we had a time limit.
So.
Thank you for your comments
we're gonna move on to the next
one and and I guess Peter's not
there so we're going into the
room for a public comment
Committee have those of four and
I'm sorry.
Caitlyn Clark.
Kathleen Catherine Catherine.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee on Katherine Clarke.
Hello.
Hello Mr chair and members of
the committee on Katherine
Clarke on the Santa Fe county
clerk I'm concerned that there's
talk of removing the twenty
million dollars from this bill
some experts have discussed what
happened after twenty twenty we
think we will lose up to thirty
percent of our permanent staff
I'm as we're seeing with
teachers and other public
servants and so we need to make
sure that we have funding to
keep elections going I also will
say that
as the secretaries to mention is
to run elections but it's also
to make sure that we're doing
our election security it's to do
our recounts is to do our audits
to make sure that elections were
run correctly and.
Finally in.
A little nervous but I do think
it's important to say that
The least violent way of
preventing a voting is simply
not to provide the funding so
that the election doesn't happen
we're seeing more and more
that's harder and harder to
recruit poll workers it's harder
and harder to rental locations
to to have voting we are stopped
very St we would appreciate it
if you consider making sure that
we can fund elections so that
every person who can vote on
does and that we can run the
audits and recounts that we need
to to make sure elections are
secure thank you.
Mrs the woman in this case.
All right been Chilton.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee my name is Ben Shelton
on the policy director for
conservation voters New Mexico I
have been striking out on zoom
trying to support this bill for
about a week and a half so I
thought I would come down in
person I finally caught up to it
and Senate finance so we support
this bill because a lot of what
we do is environmental advocates
is just really connecting
communities to their own
political power to protect their
environment to express their own
values on what viable protection
needs and I have another two
paragraphs that but I caught a
few finance today so I will do
my comments to this this funding
component in this bill is really
really really important please
leave it in place the
communities that are looking to
protect their own environments
that have their own political
power gonna rely on you making
decisions around these dollars
to preserve that for them so we
support the bill we support
keeping the funding thank you
very much.
Thank you anybody else in the
audience in support anybody in
opposition.
All right we're back on the
bill.
In our work we do have an
amendment for your bill.
we did give me the amendment.
Well explained that many really
quickly but really the amendment
strikes the diversion authority
and in house bill two we have
appropriated five million
dollars to the secretaries fund
for the selection of.
Many.
Mr Chairman.
Yes so Mister chair I I get a
we've been allowing the Sanchez
to respond
it looks they don't want to on
just this one at least offer
them that opportunity Mr
chairman to any of the comments
that they heard during the
public comment before we move on
to the next step but if they
don't want to respond that's
one.
Your work you care that I think
we need to under the comments
also Mr chair of the bill and
then having a little bit of PTSD
after one half hours of comments
and Senate rules committee but I
certainly respect the the the
arguments on on both sides of
this issue it's a it's a really
important bill and there's some
philosophical differences about
kind of where our democracy is
and this is a big deal I mean
this is about access to voting
rights and making it easier
provided safe and done that way
and so that's the philosophical
issue kind of with the bill that
brings us here today
I think the.
The question of the year mark of
this.
Fund again as a policy question
I think you've heard from the
secretary of state that she
would you know preferred that
that happens but it is coming
out of the early childhood.
Intercept of the early childhood
fund and I know that there's
other.
Entities that would like to do
that as well and I think that's
what we're hearing from the
Senate finance committee to have
that exact debate.
The what can have a motion to
move the image so Mr chair I
move that the Senate finance
committee amendment to Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill
eight.
be put for discussion.
I have a second on that motion.
Motion by Senator second by
Senator yes more on discussion
of the amendment.
Any questions Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr leader
and secretary of state good to
see you all
Care questions for you
Mr leader so we have separately
if I I guess I just want to
understand the fund more and why
we need twenty million dollars
and and I completely understand
having been here for a long time
in the legislature we're costly
running a deficit that's no way
to run an election in the state
at all and and I think you've
done a magnificent job so but it
but it's no way to run an
election is no way for us is the
legislature to fund the
secretary of state's office so I
can totally appreciate the need
to create a stable fund having
said that you said it cost six
million dollars to run a state
election of which I set fire to
just at it at the most if any if
the council's worse what was the
deficit the biggest deficit you
ever have.
That you had to have made up in
a year.
Mr chair and senator.
That is a good question I don't
think I know the specific answer
to that but what let me let me
tell you.
Why twenty million thirty so let
let let's say worst case
scenario
so we were fortunate this year
Mr chair and that the voting
system certification committee
for the state
recertified are our existing
voting system tabulators and
etcetera.
Back in twenty ten when those
were replaced correct me if I'm
wrong Kerry statewide twenty.
We have a variety of different
that in the early.
Twenty teens
Mr chair Senator when we had to
replace the entire system
statewide that cost
approximately twelve million
dollars.
you know we we're almost ten
years later at this point I mean
technology how how long have any
of you had your personal
computer for have you have you
had it for ten years.
So so and and you know I have
that I have in my personal
laptop his laptop is in FY I can
let it go that long maybe.
But that that's the reality of
technology so let's say we ended
up in a year where that had to
happen it's not gonna be twelve
million dollars this time it's
going to be like fifteen sixteen
million and let's say we have
comment again so we helped fund
our election last year with two
million dollars in federal
money.
Okay and then there there are
just so many things that can
spring up and that we don't know
about extra poll worker costs
extra rental costs that let's
say US PS hikes postage and out
of the blue we still need to be
able to mail out ballots we
could have a record here for
absentee ballots like we had in
twenty twenty so twenty twenty
million is meant to address the
like the perfect storm situation
but again if if if it were
structured the way it's proposed
in the bill and I understand
we're considering an alternative
and that and that's fair enough
at this point.
But if it were structured the
way it was originally in this
bill what we're talking about is
is our office number meeting to
come to you and say.
We have counties we have thirty
three counties around the state
that are now and deficit because
we can't reimbursement for their
cost me a poll workers that
can't get paid for how the
service we you know we can't
mail out absentee ballots so so
that's where that comes from Mr
chair and senator.
Thank you.
All right and so Mr chair just
so I'm clear so the five million
we've appropriated already what
would really be doing is would
be tapping this other fund
fifteen million in reality
because of already appropriated
five million if the bill were to
pass.
As as currently written first
time when what we're doing is
there's a version currently in
the the bill could take it from
the early childhood Fund and so
we're stripping that diversion
well we had planned on putting
twenty million dollars in but
into negotiations negotiations
with the exact they've use that
money in other places and so
we've come to the point
incentive finance where we had
to make a decision
what should happen and so we put
five million dollars in house
bill two for this one the most
it's ever had the first time
it's ever had money our plan was
you know we're gonna funded with
twenty million in in the bill
changed and in once we open the
diversion channel from the early
childhood fund
it's going to everybody's gonna
be trying to divert money from
that and so what we're trying to
do this fun things I will tell
you that last year to during the
special ordered here before when
they said they had to have a
special election in Albuquerque
the cost is going to be three
million three million dollars
only a million a half that that
got used in the election and
that reverted and I think that's
back in in the secretaries hands
in house bill two so.
Let me ask let me ask another
question I can anybody and maybe
my my friend over here is the
foremost expert knows that sort
of putting one on the spot how
much of a.
Surplus funding do we have right
now in the early childhood fund
that this would come out of.
The rescue me yet or whoever can
answer that question all right
you are Representative born
there there is there an early
childhood expert because because
that's important I think
Steinborn on target it's almost
a two billion if if returns in
revenues keep continue down that
path it could hit almost three
billion in the next year and so
there's a lot of money in there
but we voted to dedicate that
for children.
and that's what our that our
goal was and so when we start
diverting money we should think
about that I understand this
chair but you know we're moving
back it's around and making it
work for for the whole system so
I think it's an important
question understand because we
all you know we've all voted to
for the permanent fund amendment
for early childhood and all
super big orders but that's
important to know.
so thank you madam secretary
state for explaining that I
think that's all super
important.
And I think you need to have the
funding to do what you need to
do and we need to right size it
to so that's why I was asking
those questions I'll just listen
to the debate thank you for your
amendment Senator yes thank you
Mr chairman and and thank you
Senator Steinborn for.
Costs in the on the spot I guess
but happy to speak on the I have
to say the just make sure I
understand this is a one time
distribution that you're looking
for or is this a.
Twenty every year.
Me either actually Mr chair
Senator it's it's an initial
twenty million and then a top
up.
So if you don't during the the
tank of gas you only fill up how
however much you need on an
annual basis Mr chair and
funding out of the end of these
two funds or out of just the
early education I.
My understanding Mr chair what
we're talking about and this
particular bill in this
particular section is just that
that intercept
early childhood at.
The before it even goes to early
childhood correct Mr chairman
Sunder.
And I think everyone on a lot of
people may know but this is like
one the whole reason I ran for
the legislature ten years ago
but I have to support this
because this is not going to
dramatically exhaust what's
going on and we've seen some
some records here we should do
some creative things is very
creative and I I see that
Well.
My leader my chairman here let's
see how do we do this one of the
but I I definitely think it's
probably a good idea that we
fund this the right way and
here's an opportunity here is a
place where we can do it.
So is your early education on
the spot person I'm gonna
support.
Mr Chairman Rodriguez thank you
Mr chairman good afternoon
senator Wirth thank you for your
tireless oh my gosh lots of
hours working on this bill and
thank you to our secretary of
state of course Kerry who we
really appreciate thank you
Kerry
Madam the secretary or secretary
of state you mentioned that you
had to go before the board of
finance in the past just to be
able to request a supplemental
appropriation basically because
you have been so short of a
funding.
Are you know that really bothers
me Mr chairman to see that in
something so great and so big as
our democracy that we would be
leaving our funds at the
secretary of state who runs our
elections to a point where
they're not only drain to zero
but below zero and you have to
go and request a meeting with
the state board of finance to in
at their mercy literally to
requests to be made whole just
to be able to do your mandated.
Work.
And.
We cannot continue to do that
it's never the perfect place
when we try to balance things
out here at the legislature and
they're all priorities at some
point take for example we're
speaking about the early
childhood funding early
childhood education and all of
the support at that and I'm
wondering if I have to say it
myself with the biggest
supporters of that but.
I also have to say is our
secretary of state mentioned
without sufficient funding we
can't run adequate fair
elections and to intercept you
talk about interception to
intercept your work to have to
come and set up an appointment
to be at the mercy of the state
board of finance to request to
have enough funding to proceed.
Is unacceptable and it's
something that we need to change
and so
I can appreciate the five
million that we have in the
house bill two that's good but
it's not likely maybe maybe not
be sufficient we can't leave
ourselves in that position
anymore.
We've been through that history
tells us we must make a change
and I think that is what we're
here to do today and I'm going
to support this I think we can
continue to look I'm not excited
about dipping into the child
early childhood fund at all and
I am wondering now how is it
that we couldn't come up with a
different scenario but here we
are it is what it is today and
we have to vote and so
I'm going to support I'm I'm not
going to support taking out the
funding I'm going to support
leaving it in the mouth that
came in here so I I don't
support the amendment to do
otherwise
and and then we will come back
and continue to look at the
early childhood fund as time
goes by based on the amounts
that are coming in there has
already been discussion Mr
chairman members of the
committee as you may recall some
of us in LFC that there's so
much funding that we may have to
go back and revisit it you know
I I have some problems with that
because I think a new program
needs robust funding and we need
to believe it given enough time
to work itself out and and to do
the the job that we were here to
do to do more for early
childhood but you know it's
important that we continue to
look at it to make sure that
this doesn't have a an impact
that is going to hurt it in
anyway and if it does then we're
going to continue to bolster
that frontier and and continue
our our our promise to do that
so Mr chairman that's where I
stand thank you.
There would.
The commission.
I don't see any other questions.
We're on the amendment.
Senator Woods yes Senator Woods
yes Senator Rodriguez no.
Senator Rodriguez no and senator
Munoz yes senator Munoz yes.
That is motion.
Senator Burt Senator Burt thank
you thank you for yes.
That is five to five Senator.
This table on the amendment.
Hi.
Figure that out later and I
guess just lay the bill on the
table until.
Yes yeah I think the failed
construction and then tied.
You yes Sir.
There's member in just one
second.
We're back on the bill yeah and
so discussion on the bill.
Thank you.
There's been more discussion
thank you for the bill it there
are some really important
components in this bill.
I will go through them but I I
just think thank you for thank
you for thank you for bringing
it forward that's all thank you.
Governor.
Mr chairman of the defense.
Thank you.
I do have some questions on the
bill.
And we're on tribal actions.
Looking for the rate the more.
In the new material on page
twenty seven it says each one
shall have at least two more.
secured containers that's
everywhere including tribal
lands.
Mr chair that is in every county
at a minimum.
And our tribal
Our tribal governments and
tribal areas can also request in
addition to that Mr chair for
their specific areas separate
chapter house for a community
center at cetera Mr chair.
And so then on page thirty in
line twelve.
They have to ask written request
for the you guys to do that at
the secretary of state correct
thank you they picked the
locations are who determines the
location yes yes Mr chair and
and it and it it does have to be
pre tribal government building
Mr chair so you know I chapter
house a community center at
Sentara
but now Mr chair that that
decision really does fall on the
train Mr chair and.
Madam secretary in center work
so.
Are they gonna be secured on the
reservation.
And Mr chair they they're going
to have the same monitored
security requirements as any
other and.
secure container anywhere twenty
five twenty four seven video
tamper proof at center at center
Mr chair.
And then I guess my question is
because I actually live just
outside a gap my voting precinct
is in the chapter house in miles
to the south.
And so those gates are locked at
night right.
And some of the older ones to go
in early in the morning how they
get a vote at six AM or drop
those off at six PM at the
chapter houses are locked.
And so Mister chair
You know that that's a very good
question you know I think when
we get that request Mr chair
that's what we'll have to to
negotiate that with the tribal
government that access is
critically important and so if
they do request Mr chair at and
secured monitored container
you know for that let's say that
particular chapter house we're
talking about you know there
part they're probably going to
have to leave that access or the
or they're going to probably
have to located at a place
that's accessible in close
proximity to that chapter house
Mr chair.
So my question would you pass
motion by Senator Padilla.
Second by Senator Steinborn
center.
Mr chair do we want to
reconsider the amendment.
Involved in the list you want to
vote on the amendment it was
tied.
Senator Steinborn I don't think
senator Wirth said that was an
unfriendly amendment.
So I think he was didn't say
much about the amendment I don't
think he's friendly or
unfriendly so let's be clear
about what we tell people.
Chair of the of Bill.
Okay we're gonna vote on the
bill.
We have a.
If you're not prepared right.
So we'll just leave that there
so we're on the bill
We have to pass motion.
Second.
And so I would call the roll.
Senator Burt.
Senator Burton Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Padilla yes.
Fifty eight yes Senator sure.
Senator share know Senator
Steinborn yeah.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz no.
Senator Munoz no that is six to
five.
This past thank you senator
Wirth
I just.
Be aware that people are already
robbing one funds if the voters
do pass the other phone it'll
get converted to and we've
started that diversionary tale
of let's uh to divert money over
here direct money over there and
it'll end up at zero at some
point and then look back to see
what we do is thank you thank
you Senator Shendo are you in
the room.
Okay.
Senator Kernan are you here.
There were to be used to Senator
Shendo over there will just hold
for a minute I don't know if
they're on.
Cloacal shop to table.
I know you're here for Senate
bill twenty six
but the right fielder yes.
In the.
Ready for extension of thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
What this does of bills Senate
bill twenty six.
This the freezers hold harmless
distributions the various right
to eighty fifty the thirty
percent depending on the other
poverty level.
For municipalities with the
census population over ten
thousand that did not act in at
any of the local farmers so G.
R. T. orders as of June
thirtieth of two thousand nine.
And so
I believe the use you have a
short.
Cities and so.
Two of the men.
So
We can have one of the tenants
are kind of the chart in the.
I'm gonna turn it over to my
experts witness of.
My pleasure to to explain once
you have the chart and can walk
you through what what we're
trying to do with this bill.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr vice chair.
Yes referral news I'm a
registered lobbyist for the city
of Gallup and they're one of the
beneficiaries of this bill so
make sure when we're that.
this is really the hallmark hold
harmless that was passed but
governor Richardson was
governor.
We the legislature committed to
cities that they would hold
harmless the loss for the food
tax medical tax that was
removed.
They receive that hold harmless
distribution until about twenty
fourteen when a bill was passed
to phase out hold harmless.
When they phase that out the
again the communities the right
to invoke a three eight up to a
three eights gross receipts tax
to replace that loss some cities
did it right away some did not.
As of last year the right to do
that was taken away when the
legislature removed the
qualification for gross receipts
tax and they can along invoke
that tax Gallup princes didn't
invoke the tax because they're
already one of the highest in
the state almost nine percent in
three eight two to put in
probably the highest in the
state in the course population
the state they did invoke that
tax they also one of the few
communities the tax would not
made a hole that was to lost
money if it invoked.
Because it is such a tremendous
increase of every weekend of
their city population of people
to come from the Navajo Nation
to buy groceries in the other
supplies and then in Gallup.
The rules you see staff was
extremely high for food.
So there's a communities that
did not receive the did not
invoke the three eighths gross
receipts tax on their list on
the back of the issue that has
tended out.
Those communities are.
From the far right you'll see
with a hundred percent of the
gross receipts tax was what they
were guaranteed the number in
the middle there next to it
as twenty twenty one that the
receive last year.
In the number with its as guests
that's number they'll receive if
they're held harmless at the
rates that are proposed.
Posed rates taking effect
poverty level.
With the wealthiest areas of the
state which would be.
will this communities a B.
Carlsbad.
hi this.
In related I'm sorry because
bandwidth in the Santa Fe.
Which of the poverty level of
about thirteen to fourteen
percent the state poverty rate
is eighteen those above the
eighteen substantially which
would be Gallup Las Vegas import
talus would receive eighty
percent.
Well those are close to the
state party level would receive
fifty percent which would be
Hobbs in Roswell.
So this is kind of lays out of
the committees that did not.
Implement the gross receipts tax
and where they would fall on the
scale of this of the bill.
They stand for questions.
Thank you thank you.
Many
of these or or recurring
revenue.
Discuss the bill in the we're
gonna.
Million a year.
That is where the.
You have the.
We.
The officers.
More and more you on the.
We.
Yes.
Yes you.
Okay my name is.
The more.
this is the whole harness is
never going to be all from the
very beginning I mean the the
wealth the cost of living
increase to the questions and
the whole armor hello.
For now and with that the
Preciado the with seven percent
a year I mean it is not for the
office more than anything else
we can we can use it for bonding
because of that Preciado value
but the originally.
The.
The tax on groceries this is
with this almost twenty percent
act over twenty percent of our
budget our budget back then was
like twenty four million dollars
for the whole city and it was
full form
factors and cost of living with
the here going on it is.
The city we just for a police
protection and hard.
Through the years that enough of
the the.
Peter Paul so I.
The Senate twenty six and I
encourage all of that or for a
thank you.
The ability.
Thank you Mr chairman media
members committee and the
president CEO in the county
chamber of commerce
supporters Sanchez
and members of the council
bringing it forward from the
beginning our
whole harness funds for cities
across Mexico as was legislation
we should learn all city and
county governments in their
efforts to provide relief from
legislative continues to create
large gaps in their budget is
directly affect this is the
server recently the.
Committee on difficulties faced
by city county
taxpayers McKinley County in the
city element and forced me to
state cuts in their budgets each
of these are structured hearing
law enforcement agencies
resources and the overall
reduction of services for S.
Census SB twenty is a common
sense approach that taps the
whole harness provided you just
need to find a facility and then
of course County New Mexico yes
we support as P. twenty six
thank you committee members and
Mister chairman for your time
dedication and service to New
Mexico thank you.
The project are you there.
Marion you stick.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee I'm used to the
managers out.
Working in the city from offices
on this two thousand and
fourteen we have been struggling
with the creases all our.
The city about twenty one
thousand plus population with a
very small city tax base but we
have to support public safety
Human Services and
infrastructure finance this is
the populations close to seventy
five thousand every two years
we've had to adjust to address
seven eight by approximately two
hundred last year every year
cost on them to provide to
provide basic services without
raising taxes committee three
hormones G. R. T. since we have
one of the highest poverty rates
Mexico as I think was previously
the city.
Taxes.
Senator Judy and all from this
just want to give you one
example what we have Slevin with
last year really she proposed
cuts I have eight opposition to
use provides.
For our police officers we
cannot afford to cut any public
safety positions Senate bill
twenty six of the city's over
time.
Who have not and.
Three times tax so we're
encouraging you to support this
to be able to eight point.
Thank you very much she
considers.
Hattie Haaland.
The committee repeating
supported and even as far as
forty two twenty six I did give
you a
very
still a lot of money Senator
just a couple of days the
general fund is currently
funded.
It is so every kind of showing
from thank but on thirty four
percent of the state right now
instead of the part of the
services we provide the need
with the public to the hands of
everything else I needed we are
are thank you the rate increases
in wages statewide will affect
our the hire staff without
funding you don't need to do not
on the bottom of the table
trying
to pay the other retaining
qualified that the this is the
key to.
So I do need because it has a
limited floor action between the
funding the services of the
how the state for public safety
I do that for you to have
thank you.
Thank you counselor Garcia.
All right cancer politic.
For all you.
I just.
In Gallup Westgate.
Mexico.
For.
Right.
Related economic development.
Who'd Medical Board.
The program is boxes it is.
Thank you for public safety he
was.
As we have.
About the growth from twenty
dollars to seventy five thousand
people on the weekend and they
eighties without.
These taxes good morning ladies
I wholeheartedly support this is
Lee I think Senator should go
for
really is forward support.
Can you please of the border
said six thank you.
Thank you.
How for Garcia are you there.
Iran are you on zoom I don't see
an audio.
Mr grant.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Market Madam
registered models within the
system Santa Fe
first of thanks for reading is
your homework and also just
trying to see animal.
The more we talk about this all
trump worked on you know
I would have had more this is a
we the the hold harmless K.
happens you need to look at the
right now all together as we
work on a single.
Or call the gender is not ask
Senator three eight service
please allow up because on my.
With that especially in online
and with the comment made from
here.
Of we support this is no
committees hello thank you Mr.
Thank you anybody in the
audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
I think I did opposition on them
but let me check just to make
sure.
Thank we're back on the bill.
I will ask questions about the
bill but we are going to roll
over this bill for the tax
package so we can see what the
capacity is let me ask you first
one question Senator Shendo you
want to add these other
mentalities in here but I don't
see Carlsbad in the room or on
zoom I don't hear any comments
from Las Vegas.
Reporter Alice in.
For a Mr Fleischer's correction
Los Lunas hasn't and.
This is.
And you know why they're not in
the room on supportive in full a
full arm this is so important in
this piece of legislation and I
think Miss Mister chairman I I
can't speak for why they're not
here but I didn't open the we do
know that that'll pop have the
Mr pleasure talk about it met
with the these various cities of
to to talk to them and where
they stood so the first flush if
you can fill the committee in
which our conversation with the.
The protest was bigger going to
be on the zoom and surprise they
weren't I did get a text one of
them saying they had to leave at
five so that's probably why they
were on there but it was before
I that we started but I've
talked to everyone of the city
manager's everyone of them has
expressed the positive support
for this bill.
Thank you I can see that they're
here today source on the bill
Senator.
Thank you Mr first.
What we did.
Whenever we get it was probably
the worst.
Pace of tax reform we've ever
done.
Destroying the the the.
Revenue base of virtually every
city and town in New Mexico.
If we don't fix a city's Mr
chair we can't fix taxes
anywhere in Russia State.
I agree we need to do something
but I also know the in in the
Farmington is not on here
because they just implemented
their last eight they tried to
hang on they don't want to do
it.
But eventually got paid police
officers and firefighters and
things like that.
So well I understand what you're
doing here well I applaud what
you're trying to do here.
I see this is Justin.
Another bandaid on a on a tax
system that we ripped apart.
And we got to come together and
figure out how to fix the tax
system and we need to do it
pretty quick.
We have to fix cities first we
can't fix anything else thank
you.
Thank you Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
agree with Senator that was a
painful painful bill I now.
At the very the page where the
world turning them.
I believe in honoring moments
and so
But we're in agreement that that
was the so that was a painful
Painful moment in the city of
Los crucis you know raise taxes
as a result of that bill when we
eliminated hold harmless
payments they they did it it was
painful really painful for the
city of the residents did like
it.
They felt they had to do it.
And
But it was weird because we
exempted out certain cities from
from
from having their payments phase
out all together so this bill I
kind of understood well let me
just say this Mr chairman I'll
cut to the chase I I had an
amendment here to put a sunset
on this bill.
because I think that to the
notion that we're going to
create a whole new group of
cities that we're gonna give
these payments to infertility is
just you know just kind of goes
against I think our tax policy
here trying to broaden our G. R.
T. face and you know it's just
asking for future fiscal
problems to do it I think also
some of the cities on this list
are really in different
situations I see both Santa Fe
Gallup on this list and I see
the cities and kind of different
situations so I don't know that
the proposal is kind of right
sized in that way.
So I realize we're gonna roll
over at but.
For myself.
If we're going to do it we
should put a sunset on and we
should right size it
and even then it's worth
discussing with us right thing
to do it all but I think we
should absolutely not have a
going for perpetuity because I
would just I think be unfair
even though we've already built
that unfairness into what we've
done because we've exams all
cities that are going to get on
in perpetuity under the current
law so it's no more unfair that
just my thoughts on it thank you
Mr.
Representative I'm over the
past.
No no no we're gonna tape we're
not gonna or not taking a vote
on this bill and it will slow
going to make sure we're clear
on the oil to temper of the
table.
We're not going to table adorned
with the scratch the move to
table is.
They're close to motion how many
times I talked
to get change.
I'm gonna have to have a
conversation happens across the
hall to.
Let me ask you some questions
currently how much is Gallup
distribution right now Mr
Fletcher.
The current one last year was
three million was two million
four hundred forty four thousand
one of us is a virtual what was
it prior to a hold harmless
being invoked three eight three
million eight hundred eighty
thousand.
That's a difference of about one
point eight hundred four million
less it is gone down another
seven percent this year.
And so.
As we move forward the do you
know what the differences for
Hobbs or Las Vegas in the bill
there in the back of the she
dated up for Hobbs there
originally receiving three three
million fifty nine thousand.
In twenty twenty one to go to
million nine twenty seven.
Los Vegas.
One point five.
They got nine four seventy one
last year.
One point I was the original
distribution the million five
forty two correct and then the
Los Lunas.
Louis Louis.
Two million hundred forty six
thousand initially received a
million three fifty one.
And is that because they gave up
their G. R. T. receipts for
construction for Facebook what's
the decline because of
population increase in Lawson
this is has exploded this is
really the groceries and
medicine G. R. T. only.
I don't know if that's because
they give up their gross
receipts to Facebook because I
was a billion dollar development
and so they may have given up
their gross receipts on their
own.
that's a question what about
Roswell.
Will was five million six
hundred twenty four thousand
eight to the C. three million
five hundred forty three
thousand.
And Santa Fe.
Santa Fe originally would have
received thirteen million sixty
nine thousand laughter they
received eight million two
hundred thirty three thousand.
And that is the year twenty
twenty that you're looking at
twenty ending in twenty ending
in June twenty first of twenty
twenty one yes twenty twenty.
Then I'll probably want you to
bring that the twenty nineteen
numbers so we can look at the
defeated in seven percent more
in the issue the B. seven
percent last changes seven
percent a year.
I mean I wasn't here and I love
to take away the tax.
The COVID big issue and when I
first got elected I told the
city council the mayor that this
is going to be coming towards
them and they looked at me
laughed and so.
Now the the not this is current
city council or the city current
mayor.
I want kind of laughed about it
and thought it was funny but we
told him it was coming happen it
happened two years later.
you know.
We need to fix our tax structure
and not Senator Steinborn you
may be right for the census and
we may be forced in that next
year to fix all this hold
harmless the food tax everything
will be on the table in order to
fix the structure for
communities
and so as we move forward and we
start discussing that we'll
discuss that with the sponsor of
the bill
and see what we're gonna do it
in the tax package and how we
score this in there so thank you
guys for your testimony today.
Of.
We're going to we're gonna bring
that bill back on the floor and
it'll be in our committee will
begin to start work on the whole
structure and make sure the
capacity is there.
All right thank you Mr members
of the committee.
Yeah one more thing left of
center you Mr.
Senator Senate bill one fifty
five.
Thank you madam chair Senate
bill one fifty five.
You know as New Mexico moves
forward.
We've always done our
bookkeeping or accounting on
recurring revenue and non
reoccurring revenue.
In what we need to do in New
Mexico is separate to the non
reoccurring money.
As a budgeting process and can
make a reoccurring money really
Kerr mines really reoccurring
money we have a historic
opportunity think about how we
appropriate oil and gas
revenues.
with the state can changes in
growth in the global energy
occurring and how the decades we
need to act now to reduce our
dependence on oil and gas our
budget.
And we don't we're gonna
continue to ride this roller
coaster for ever and ever so
this bill creates and economic
diversification and climate
resilience Fund.
Using fifty percent oil and gas
production tax revenue that
would otherwise flow into the
general fund and we use those
for recurring revenues these
taxes include the oil and gas
emergency school taxed oil gas
and.
Oil and gas conservation tax.
The bill would essentially treat
half of those production taxes
as nonrecurring dollars which
they really are it would divert
those into separate treasury we
appropriated by the legislature
for for disbursed cation of our
economy.
This maintains the legislative
legislature's appropriated
authority it does not putting
money under a mattress but
instead allows us to spend it
and despite that decide the best
use the money with that madam
chair will stand for questions
thank you senator we're going to
go to is to see if we have
anyone I've got three
Members of America are you there
Walter.
Okay.
Author Bradley on zoom I.
Have you on the list.
Okay we move on to the next one
I will come back to you Walter
at TJ Trujillo from strategies
three sixty are you on zoom.
Madam chair I am can you hear me
yes we can hear you.
Thank you TJ can you proceed.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee of many teachers I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
council or city as well as
Freeport mac Moran I want to
think Senator manuals for bring
four one of the most transform
ability session simply put of
Mexico is going to be serious
about economic diversification
and climate resilience this is.
This bill is an important step
in in reducing the general fund
reliance on gosh Revenue and
redirect insist Revenue to
important economic development
efforts and other planets ready.
My client's urge this committee
members will thank you.
Thank you to J. all right we
have Camilla of people then.
Are from the Sierra Club are you
there Camilla.
So you're here in person okay
they gave me this present all
right before we go to you then
commitment to the audience let
me and let me ask for anyone on
zoom against if there's anyone.
Okay I don't we don't hear
anyone let's go back to Walter
Bradley are you there now Walter
we want to just make sure we get
everyone.
Not there okay thank you very
much so we're going to go to the
audience do we have anybody for
Camilla you on the in the
audience thank you can we stand
up please thank you.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair members.
Director of the DOHfunded
chapter this year.
And I think I want to.
You know.
And how deeply invested we are
interfering.
The diversification of our
economy and making sure that
every community has the chance
to be successful and I know that
it's not always that easy to
figure out what that path is and
I know how hard it is sometimes
when I watch my five year old
trying to work out how things
work I think honestly could all
just getting and we might be
able to figure out the solution.
So I want to express excitement
about this idea the idea of
economic diversification along
with climate resilience I did
want to point one twelve passed
last session the renewable
economy task force.
Established a tax
relief officials at the
department of course for
solutions and so and it might be
worth including expertise of
that task force in the
consideration of the use of
these funds.
Make sure that we're really
moving towards climate
resilience while diversifying
our economy and I hope that we
can figure out how to do that
together because there is no
land like the land of
enchantment.
And together is only.
Thank you.
Thank you Camilla anyone else
for in the audience thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Missy Currier and I work with
strategies three sixty and on
behalf of the city that pops
Carlsbad and Eddy county we
would like to stand in support
of this bill we would like to
thank senator Munoz for bringing
this forward we appreciate that
this fund would not only help
existing industries that help us
diversify as we move forward
thank you for your consideration
thank you anyone else we have
one more.
Madam chairman in the district
and I can not a served as an
elected supervisor on the Lee
County still water conservation
district and I stand in support
of this bill expense to the part
about sustainable agriculture if
we can invest in New Mexico
agriculture infrastructure and
resilience to the changes in
drought I think it will be
beneficial I encourage my
members of this committee to
support it thank you thank you
very much anyone else for the
bill.
Okay thank anyone against the
audience.
Thank you to the committee next
Senator Steinborn we have
Senator Woods.
Thank you Madam chair Senator Mr
chairman so questions for you so
number one.
How much money is it estimated
that this would.
This would put into this fund
from what is now going to the
general fund which.
Madam chair and senator so if
you look at the estimated
revenue in FY are that would
divert annually B. three hundred
ninety seven million.
So Mr Chairman is that a
diversion from the general fund
no Mr.
Madam chair and centres not into
version from the general fund
it's saying that these revenues
from these
Tax collections collections from
the production tax would not go
to the general fund we're going
to this fund and not be can't
scored as reoccurring money.
So what we currently do is take
all money put it in the general
fund whether recurring or non
reoccurring and then shifted
around and account for in every
direction that we want to
account for it and this is
saying if you really want in
your dependence on oil and gas
and and it's coming the future
is coming.
Then you better start planning
for it can you better start
diversifying your content me in
one other way shape or form you
need and so that would not be a
diversion.
Thank you Mr chairman so right
now my observation omitted
because as.
This in fact is that we could
use our general fund that this
goes into for any other purposes
that are in the bill already
right Mr Chairman.
That is correct okay so we're
simply saying we could use it in
the general fund for entities
purposes and so we're going to
create a separate fund where we.
Have to use it for one of those
purposes but I guess my concern
is Mr chairman is that the bill
is so broad.
It's not you know any of those
individual things like what we
did the other day with housing
you know we said we're gonna
create a.
Revenue stream for this purpose
okay we can see that with this
we're taking a huge amount of
money we're putting it towards
all these different things.
But having anything on the the
universe included there what is
it really.
I just don't know I just I think
that in a way kind of loses its
effectiveness a little bit.
Because it is so broad what are
your thoughts on.
Senator the main purpose of this
bill is for us to understand
what reoccurring money in on
reoccurring money into in our
budget is and in up turns and
downturns reoccurring money is
classified is we.
What we do is in downturns we
take our non reoccurring money
and put it into reoccurring so
we're never really budgeting on
exactly what reoccurring money
is and what we incur any money
should be and what this says is
separated out.
If you really want to be intent
on changing New Mexico.
And and it's so broad which you
can do.
That you had better start to
plan for that in the future.
I just seen the tax from one of
my friends in Arizona in the
largest development there in the
history of the state is almost
fourteen billion that's going in
there.
We need to start a tracking that
and changing that so we not
reliant on what industry
to support our teachers to
support our budget and and ride
the roller coaster with them up
and down up and down you've been
here during the cuts I think
you're here and on line and when
we got a billion and and got
help and and you see that slow
recovery what we got to say is.
Make it it intent that you want
to change New Mexico and you
want to use one time money to
diversified economy thank you Mr
chairman of the Senate possible
the that I don't know if I
taking this money out of general
fund we could put ourselves in a
situation where if we're saying
prescriptive Lee you can only
use is one time money for
example.
Is education included in this C.
workforce training.
Madam chair depends what section
of education.
you could take one time money
and you could create tax centers
all over the state but you
wouldn't want to count that
money in reoccurring for the
SCG.
What you want to do is build
infrastructure so you change
education whatever it is photo
tech schools nursing schools if
they were going to invest in
those things that change New
Mexico and investment Mexico you
wouldn't want to put it in
programming because that be
reoccurring money and that would
be the correct way to put
reoccurring money Mr chairman I
guess what I'm concerned about
is that we be taking money out
of the general fund where we
prescriptive we have all the
tools of how to appropriate
including for education could
be for education one time money
for that matter.
That's not included in here but
we're creating almost like a
parallel budget in a way we're
taking a lot of money we're
putting into another fund.
With.
With
Different reduced parameters the
general fund.
So I I just
Big idea I appreciate where
you're coming from very much on
it I just
I'll keep listen to debate.
Thank you senator Boren Senator
Woods thank you madam chair.
Senator I guess what I'm
wondering about.
Is who's going to make are we
setting up a board to to
administer this or.
Who's going to.
What the **** you gonna apply
for this money so that I could
maybe that's a question madam
chair and senator Senator the
most important things we can do
is we the legislature
appropriate the money.
For the money goes into the fund
and if we decide we want to put
fifty million dollars in the.
We appropriated through that
fund because that's job growth
in a new direction that we
should have if we want to put
twenty five million in soil
conservation districts for range
management or drought mitigation
then we decide that.
The legislature does it loses
Authority it has a broad range
of everybody in New Mexico can
get it and of so that's the most
important thing we do not lose
our program at thirty or
whatever want to give that up.
Think of understand it a lot
better on that and it says look
appropriate use but because
we're still appropriating money
out of these funds.
So thank you madam chair thank
you senator any other questions
from committee members Senator
purple Senator share I had you
for Senator sorry about that and
then I have senator Byrd sorry
Senator thank you madam chair
and senator.
I love oil and gas bill might
heard that once or twice but I
also know we have to diversify
we have to do something
different.
I also know that we've known
that we have to diversify we
have to do something different
since the nineteen seventies.
So insanity is doing the same
thing over and over again and
expecting a different result.
I believe the good chairman here
is trying to do something
different.
To expected different results.
Will it fail or pass I don't
know but let's give it a try
because at least it's different.
Thank you senator Here and
senator Byrd thank you madam
chair and senator
I I guess number one.
This is this kind of
compete with economic
development.
The department of economic
development and and what they're
attempting to do their bring
industry to the state and so how
is this different than that
besides being pretty happy.
You know.
Center I mean do you would want
one time appropriations to
economic development and if we
use a bill from last year they
said oh we have this three
hundred and fifty.
Million dollar project inside
New Mexico and we need fifty
million dollars in order for
them to complete that project
would appropriate that money and
say here's a fifty.
Instead of saying oh here's Lita
can you get ten million and they
get three hundred thousand and
you get two hundred fifty and
they get three million so we we
do have the ability to to work
on big projects and you don't
fund the agencies out of one
time money you want to fund the
agencies out of reoccurring
money but you want to fund
special projects or needs
whatever
You know the hydrogen plant
right you want to fund that at
one time money because you're
not going to do it as
reoccurring lesson was tax
credits then you have to score
differently this is.
If New Mexico really wants to
have the direction.
And we know how targeted oil and
gases with amount of bills that
were seen in the capitol.
in some oil companies will just
leave.
But if you really wanted to
change New Mexico it's different
in every section for you if you
needed bill military housing.
In order to expand housing.
You would appropriate something
that develops on I'm a girl for
that.
Instead of saying oh here's some
reoccurring money or instead of
using capital outlay we know how
well that works two point five
billion sitting there on spent
with cost overruns that the
estimate into the the hundreds
of millions how will that work
force.
But if you want to change New
Mexico and you don't want to
change the way that we operate
then this just keep going down
the same road.
It it's like having a radio
station and have reoccurring
accounts and you have one time
accounts coming in and you know
that one time account is only
gonna be one big by during
political season and you know it
that the reoccurring accounts
are the ones that keep you alive
and so you have to.
Spend that money differently as
you move forward.
Yeah and in the.
The madam chair and senator I I
I like the concept here
I just a little concerned about
structure I know you the
legislature's going to I guess
take on a list of these and will
dictate which ones we from which
ones we don't fund
I just don't I'm comfortable
uncomfortable with the structure
because somebody needs to
oversee our time that happens
though you dollars just to
start.
so somebody's got to drive this
boat someone concerned about
overseeing this
and
The lack of structure of this
initially so that we make sure
that all communities of all
sizes and throughout the state
are kind of getting an equal
shot at this thing you know more
representation in certain areas
of the of the state we'll get
more votes on certain projects
and programs and I don't want to
short change anybody so I'm just
looking at a little bit more
structure to make sure there's
some of some equity built into
this and madam chair etcetera so
if we wanted to give twenty five
million to tourism.
and take it you know throughout
the four regions in New Mexico
that's how you appropriate the
money other if you wanted to get
money to.
Environmental research or
whatever throughout the state
you put it in the put the
appropriate out there put the
language other so you're not
limiting the structure of who
can do what and who's getting
what you appropriated in
different ways saying you're
gonna have this twenty five
million go grow New Mexico I'm
gonna have this twenty five
million go make New Mexico
environmentally better
reforestation river watersheds
whatever it is that they know
the dollar amount they're going
to have and they're not coming
back to sing hello really got
this and and we need more a
little more money so we can
appropriate a lot different.
So Madam chair in the center.
But we would not appropriate you
know you would appropriate to
the state agency in order to do
that and then they would manage
the project or whatever it is.
So there's no preconceived limit
per county or city or anything
like that it's on a first come
first serve basis no I don't
think we preconceived anything
about how we're gonna do this.
you can only say correct if.
The goal here is to changed we
the way we do things in New
Mexico.
So I can't pre conceived that I
want to fund tourism for a
hundred million and not fund of
the egg Department for a
research for zero.
So there's no preconceived
conceptions it's if you want to
diversify.
Here in Arizona all also if you
look at the boom that's
happening there if you don't
diversified economy you're never
gonna get any growth.
It and we're going to continue
to ride the roller coaster till
now until Senator sure and I or
oil products.
I don't want to be around to see
that.
the madam chair and and I
appreciate the as as I'm I I I
appreciate what you're trying to
do want to support what you're
trying to do I guess I just look
for a little more structure and
and
Little bit better understanding
how the money would be
distributed so
I appreciate the information up
to this point thank you madam
chair and madam chair if if we
have a bunch of these questions
this just roll over and let's
get on to explain everybody how
this functions and so they they
get a good comprehension of that
so it's gonna be very important
that we are yes Mr chairman I
thank you very much I do feel
compelled to explain something
that perhaps the committee needs
to know and that is that in our.
Action that we took for some
**** in in to change the house
bill two
in there is one hundred and
twenty five million already that
would come out of this fund that
has not been established yet
that would be kind of like the
in the act I guess the the
indication that it would be
contingent upon but it doesn't
say that in those additions is
just merely taking these ads
Senator lot of these ads in that
last page you have it in your
sheets from yesterday or this
morning whenever it was and it's
it's as a hundred twenty five
million of funding that would
come out of this fund that has
not yet been created
is something that is in there
and so I just wanted to make
sure that people understood you
will see the title on top where
it says the economic this this
fund to the act the economic
diversification climate
resilience so.
If this if this doesn't pass
then we go back to the drawing
board and find out where we can
get those a hundred twenty five
million if it does pass that and
you know those are in there just
the committee had reviewed and
and looked at and and taken some
action so it's I just wanted to
it's just information that I'm
passing on to make sure that the
committee remembers and
understands that Senator that's
about it New Hampshire Mr chair
on that point yes Senator said.
Yeah I think that we need to hi
everybody needs to understand
how how the functionality is
going to work in and so I just
that's a really important
comment that the chair just made
it that I think we need to know
is did we approve funding in
house bill two that's contingent
on this bill passing yes yes yes
that's the point I'm trying to
I'm sorry your responded media
the film school.
So it was.
It was all wrapped into this yes
a laugh one hundred twenty five
minister men.
I think that's not appropriate
Mr I don't know if that's
because our house bill two
decisions this is this is kind
of a different policy decision
and I just want to say that I'm
really troubled by the thank you
and if I may just interject on
the final here is that in that
it's not yes approved house bill
two hasn't been approved but the
amendments to house bill two
have been approved in your right
that's it's really it the bill
has will to have to get approved
by the legislature but this here
were approved on the by the
Canadian for House Bill to thank
you.
Yeah thank you.
This is.
