Senator Rodriguez can you make
share like or.
Yeah I I am I need Senator I
just needed to talk to you but
I'm I'm going to get like I was.
We're getting some back up from
somewhere else it's I don't have
a single noise he can see use
Mike's opening closer Mike's
force and then Senator teaching
you know you have the floor so
go ahead and start.
Mr chairman and committee
members.
Senate bill sixty one.
Visibility them out of the
interim health and Human
Services Committee.
And.
One of the bill is to try to
find different ways.
Increasing the number.
Nationals who were were able to
work in rural areas.
And what it does is.
Well as you know we have a
number of things that we've
tried in the past.
Service for low for to pay back
a loan programs we had
well programs pay off medical
debt.
Medical school debt and so on
this one is a little different
indigenous would make money
available directly to the
clinics that would employees
health care professionals.
Then the idea is.
They would do the recruiting and
they were able to be able to use
this this money in the fund as a
loan repayment work for a health
care professionals who are
willing to work in those clinics
in rural communities of the
state.
The bill was amended.
In the in
in the earlier committee hearing
to which was in
Tax business and transportation
and it was amended to include.
There is midwives and Thomas.
In case needed to hire buying
recruit.
And hire those questions I would
be able to use these funds to do
that as well.
With me is the are both the
other thing is although the
title still says making
appropriation which I just
realized is still in there that
would probably have to be
straight in because there is no
money in the bill we don't have
an appropriation in the bill.
The increase in in the future we
may be able to come up with the
state appropriations in the
meantime it would be a
receptacle for contributions
gifts requests whatever.
And with me is as my extra
witnesses the.
Former head of the
primary care.
It makes in the state Mr David
riding.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David Roddy
and I'm the health policy
director The New Mexico primary
care association primary care
clinics in New Mexico would be
the main beneficiary and that
patients would be the main
beneficiaries.
Of I'm getting a real roller
even though I'm used to.
In any event
they would be the major
beneficiaries them in that
patients of this legislation the
primary care clinics thanks to
the strong bipartisan support of
this legislature in the past
forty years and able to build
one of the strongest primary
care safety nets in the country
either a hundred and fifty four
medical sites including fifty
two school based clinics hundred
forty one of which are for
behavioral health services we
have sixty one dental clinics
and we serve and ninety
communities with eighty percent
of the clinics in rural
communities with limited I know
what to provide us three hundred
eighty three thousand patients
go to these clinics and two
thirds of the people under one
hundred percent of poverty.
A service by these clinics as
well as almost half of the
uninsured people in New Mexico.
We gave out over sixty million
dollars in deeply discounted our
low cost no cost services to
patients last year we serve
forty thousand diabetics hundred
twelve thousand with depression
another beagle behavioral health
conditions ninety thousand oral
health uses and we're very
dedicated to quality screening
over three hundred thousand
patients annually for of
depression and obesity
with the outstanding leadership
of the department of health and
Human Services Department we've
been able to provide over ninety
thousand patients with COVID
testing and it surpassed forty
thousand COVID vaccinations
we're talking about in clinics
from IT must to quest the and
from spring to
down to our job so we're all
over the state this bill would
establish a loan repayment
program under the department of
health as the sponsor related
and it would it would solve a
big problem for our provide is
under the current loan repayment
program in the state I'm only a
fraction of primary care doctors
can be approved
I also the big problem is that
that clinician recruitment is
the number one you know issue
priority for our rural health
clinics and the people were
recruiting one of the first
questions asked generally is is
loan repayment available when
that question is asked we have
to tell them in all honesty.
Please come to New Mexico you
know take a job here I take a
job in a clinic and six months
six to nine months after the of
site at work you can apply to
the annual loan repayment cycle
and you may have a one in three
one in four chance of getting
approved so we're as this
current program rewards people
who make commitments to New
Mexico it certainly doesn't help
us in recruiting those people
who are on the fence I will have
other staff the people will will
speak to the issue of the ones
of long recruitment later on
this loan repayment program
would allow the clinical
organization to apply for a slot
with the department of health
the department of health of one
the program because they have
the expertise they know all of
our clinics they know the areas
of the state with the most the
need is and they know the
organizations that have the most
financial need you know for
section one so they could do an
excellent job of prioritizing
these funds once the clinic was
approved for a loan let's say
for instance a fifty thousand
dollar slot for two years of
position loan repayment program
that would have six to nine
months depending on on how the
department you know constructs
the regulations.
Recruit someone.
This would make a tremendous
difference
I want you know thank the the
sponsor well I guess that's not
my at this point in time but do
appreciate the committee's
consideration of this bill thank
you.
Mr Chairman will stand for
questions and the lead COVID
yes.
Thank you make them do we have
any public comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes we do.
That we've received no
indication of the opposition to
this bill we do have support
yes.
At first we have Rachel Biggs.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Rachel Biggs and the policy
director Albuquerque Health Care
for the homeless the federally
qualified health centers serving
about seven thousand individuals
without homes throughout
Bernalillo county we stand
strong support Senate bill sixty
one we are facing a continued
rise in homelessness due to the
fallout from COVID nineteen and
we're currently setting up our
recruitment efforts to meet the
increasing demand for integrated
health services the rural
primary care loan repayment
program would help us immensely
in our recruitment efforts
particularly as we're facing
challenges in recruiting high
quality clinical staff with
leadership experience to meet
the really complex needs of the
population that we serve when we
payment programs are really
essential tools in our
recruitment package and having a
guaranteed loan repayment slot
to offer our prospective
candidates will allow us to
better compete with other states
for these top quality commission
leaders we urge your support of
Senate bill sixty one and thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bar in thank you.
Next we have and Dr Jerry
Harrison executive director for
New Mexico health resources.
Thank you.
We were done right.
Net and now add we had a doctor
Harrison.
You are muted.
I'm I'll go online and we have
Eileen good to New Mexico
primary care association.
Good afternoon and thank you
chairman and members of the
committee my name is I am the
CEO The New Mexico primary care
association we represent the
federally qualified health
centers and lookalikes and some
other safety net providers here
our state our member
organizations as David Roddy is
already mentioned Sir over three
hundred eighty thousand New
Mexicans in approximately two
hundred total delivery science
primary care is a comprehensive
services provided by these
organizations primarily in rural
and very underserved communities
and it's often difficult to
recruit and retain health care
professionals we hear this as a.
Cry often from our organizations
for assistance in trying to
figure out better ways to
recruit and retain we believe
that Senate bill sixty one more
being extremely valuable tool
that will assist with this and I
would like to voice my strong
support for this bill and thank
the sponsor for bringing forward
thank you.
Next we have Dr Derek Nelson
chief medical officer with the
dolphin medical services.
Mr chair and members my name is
Eric Nelson a family position
serving and grant double
counties southwest of sports
more state I'm here today to
operation testimony indicating
that these programs work
I interviewed for two jobs in
twenty ten one here in Silver
City of without a medical
services of a qualified health
center another one in in show
low Arizona with north country
healthcare another all I health
center
I received by members from both
both locations twenty chat and
ended up choosing one here in
Silver City the reason was with
because I was offered loan
repayment.
My my medical school loans valid
paid off for about five or six
years now and I'm still here I'm
still here Sir we used loan
repayment in my role as chief
medical officer to recruit high
quality clinicians to our rural
areas in particular to our our
high need areas like Baca County
more for the New Mexico so I'm
here to offer my support for the
Senate bill sixty one and would
like to thank the sponsors.
Next we had Severino monthlong
LCD out across from Lacazette
family health services.
Mr hunt I know you are muted.
Okay if you're gonna yes we can
good afternoon chairman Nelson
committee members my name is
available Daniel I served as the
CEO for like a family health
center serving the counties of
career Roosevelt Travis I've had
the privilege and honor of
serving in this position for
over forty years and as director
I
have the added responsibility of
recruiting health professionals
which for this part of the state
is extremely difficult hi
I can tell you that from
experience
Having the ability to have
additional.
Funding to offer in order to
recruit would be invaluable to
be able to bring physicians and
other health professionals to.
To this part of the state so I
support this bill in aspen to if
they will they will
consideration thank you.
Next we have to guarantee after
executive director with the
cleaning that del pueblo de Rio
Arriba.
Yes.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Darren gap executive
director of law clinic of the
Pueblo are we serve Rio Arriba
County we're located up in yes
yes Mexico right next to trauma.
I've been with the executive
director for over twelve years
and the clinic and I'd like to
share my personal opinion that I
think this type of legislation
is a game changer for health
centers in our ability to and
retain providers I do want to
share it during my twelve year
tenure I did have an experience
where we went for about a four
year period and with we were
unable to recruit providers and
I do attribute that directly to
our inability to offer
guaranteed loan repayment so I
think that that had a
significant impact on our
ability to recruit and retain
providers so I want to voice my
support for Senate bill sixty
one and I ask that you also have
favorable consideration of the
bill thank you.
And I I believe Dr Harrison is
now needed Dr Harrison.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I am executive
director New Mexico health
resources we are a not for
profit recruitment organization
and refer health professionals
to every community in the state
that has.
Health care offerings the single
largest question that health
professionals ask us is does
this position have the
opportunity to compete for loan
repayment.
R. I am very much in support of
the bill it create gives some
much more flexibility for us to
say something differently then
you can compete for the our.
For a loan repayment either
federal or state again we stand
in strong support of this bill
thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Thank you.
A question from committee
members I seen center share your
hand is up you want to go ahead
so Mr chairman I got two things
the first I would like to move
an amendment I would like to on
page one line fourteen strike
the words making an
appropriation.
Chairman.
Senator Rodriguez thank you may
I interject for just a moment
here is that is Senator share
it's my understanding that the
language that is the title when
we when the staff within
language like that it's just to
be able to accept an
appropriation in the future this
is just creating a fund there is
no appropriation in the bill
this is creating the fund itself
or some day if funding goes into
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino says so I
don't see any for having to
remove the appropriation.
We just we just confirm that
with that staff.
I want to confirm that our.
Thank you yes Janet.
Yes this creates
a fund of funds and if money
gets into the funds in the
balance.
Is appropriated the used for the
purposes of the fund.
Okay even out yes this bill has
no dollars in it right now you
would want to have that is
appropriated language in the
funds so that if in fact they do
get money are able to spend.
From the end I was just trying
to help out the the chairman to
provide.
Required to make your weekend
with the lanky you can have in
your.
Thank you I do have one other
question Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman.
This is have this is run into
the anti donation clause issues.
Mr chairman and senator share I
don't believe it does we already
have any number of similar.
Programs and to because the the.
The money is actually in return
for service.
You know it's not like the
answer is yes.
You have to actually be willing
to work in the state of New
Mexico in order to receive these
funds so I think we're okay on
the account it's very similar
ones we already have on the
books all right thank you Mr
chairman Mr Chairman.
Thank you senator share
I see somebody else's hand
raised.
Something happened here I don't
see anybody else's hand raised
Mr chairman it's I should should
tax I'm sorry it's job on time
and on the phone Senator go
right ahead.
Mr chairman I want to thank you
I want to thank the sponsor
Senator Ortiz it can I just have
a few questions.
Maybe working from the back of
the bill
with respect to section eight.
Which is the section of the bill
that creates the fund the remote
rural primary care clinician
prepayment gone.
The bill provides that that fund
is non reverting.
I think I think there's a
challenge at times with.
Non reverting language.
Is it a makes it difficult from
annual appropriating
perspectives to submit to you
that it just makes a little
challenging for an annual
appropriation perspectives.
To really understand the true
nature of the program because
there's always this carry
forward amount right that's very
difficult to predict.
and so would you consider
amendments to the bill that made
the fund revert to the general
fund at the end of the year for
a friendly amendment.
Chairman and senator.
I don't think we would consider
it a family member it would make
it very difficult for example to
solicit gifts from foundations
and so on yes the money is spent
in one year and then immediately
reverted to the state general
fund so there's no state money
in this at this point
if there's ever an appropriation
in the future to this we could
consider and suppose that
portion of the funds come from
the state being considered to
junior returning but I think to
take that language now makes it.
Increases the the difficulty in
soliciting contributions from.
Foundations are going grants
from other organizations.
Mr Chairman that makes sense I
think I agree with you given
that there's no state
appropriation maybe that's just
a ritual we can have that talk
later so yeah okay so moving on
that Mr chairman to to section
seven.
And section six of the bill.
So as I understand that.
There has to be a contract in
place between the department and
the beneficiary of a loan.
And part of that contract must
require a commitment of two
years of service correct Mr
chairman Mr chairman.
Yes I believe it is three years
for the exact.
Maybe Mr ready to help me as is
it for two years.
Mr chairman I don't know that
that language and I Senator
Candelaria I don't know that
that language was.
Inserted into the bill I the
loan repayment term is generally
you're eligible for two years of
loan repayment but to clarify
the department of health would
actually control all funds the
funds would not go to the member
organizations the department of
health would make payments
directly to the recipient's bank
on a loan holder only after each
quarter of completed service so
in the event that the person
left they would no longer be
eligible for a loan repayment.
Actually Mr chairman and and
senator Candelaria you're right
on page six.
And lines.
R. eighteen and nineteen is on
site including a minimum two
year period service so we did
that language and.
And Mr chairman I I thank you
and I think that that that's
that's sort of the foundation
for my my questions regarding
section seven.
Which is in the sections titled
Enforcement but there's
the enforcement mechanism under
the bill seems to be if the our.
This is the.
Qualified with the term in the
bill but qualified.
Sorry sorry sorry the eligible
health care provider rate if the
eligible health care provider
let's say after thirteen months
leaves it seems to me that the
only penalty the bill
contemplates is that the loan
repayment will stop.
Mr chairman I assume.
Correct Mr chairman and senator
Hillary I think that is right.
And I think Mr chairman David.
There I think there's and then
may not need to happen here it
may not even have to happen this
session but I think at the point
where there may be state money I
think to them that there needs
to be a specification Mr
chairman that the state's
commitment is on a month to
month basis or only in such
quarters the contract is being
fulfilled because you know it
appears a language allows for
example the department the
discretion to enter into a
contractual agreement for the
full two years right but the
bill doesn't provide any call
any clawback provisions that I
see so that piece of it I think
just needs to be worked out and
sought out a little bit more
is maybe just some prohibition
on.
I'm just allowing the the
department to front load the
awards Santa Fe will
contractually commit to paying
every payment for the next two
years without some specification
that the service has to be
ongoing the legal kind of thing
kind of persnickety but I think
it's important from up.
Thank barriers in that
contractual relationship Mr
chairman I just submit that.
Thank you thank you Senator and
thank you Mr chairman
I think there is some tension
that Indian section of
paragraphs and.
G. where they talk about the
recipients have to serve a full
quarter of service initial
request approval of the services
so yes Sir reporter in you
reimburse but it may not be as
stringent as as you as your
conditionally I think Mister
chair I just a question of
marrying the language a bit more
I don't think it's fatal to the
bill at all all I just think
it's something that you know
because this is the program
involves yes one one piece I'm
sort of concerned about it the
inmates appropriates last one
will discuss Mr chairman is on
section four the delegation of
duties.
And it it basically contains
some language in the B. Frank
I've never I've not seen before
and it's that the department may
delegate to other agencies or
contract for the performance of
services required by the
provisions of the role primary
clinicians underpayment Act I
think my concern Mr chairman is
two fold one I don't think we
need to give the Department
express of Florida you to enter
into a contract if the
department feels they need to do
that.
First part is sort of
challenging because.
Under cuts you know assigning
these duties of Department of
health if that we're gonna give
the agency the authority in
statute just transfer those
duties to another agency so on
this piece I'm wondering if you
would feel comfortable striking
section for from the bill today.
Chairman and then Senator on the
let me let me check with my
expert witness.
What would you say that Mr Reid
Mr chairman.
Senator Candelaria members of
the committee I believe the and
this came from other loan
repayment bills and the intent
certainly was to allow with the
department of health for us is
to contract with the finance
authority are that type of an
entity to actually handle the
payments made to the banks and
again I don't know that it are
you know.
We would be essential are if
they could do that without that
authority but that has been a
the current thing and a lot of
joint powers agreements in these
type of programs.
Mr chairman I ate I
Ag and I don't think it's fair
to the bill but it it it is
challenging language for me I
will say and and and maybe it it
is language that appears in
other areas of law the challenge
I think for me is being
presented with this and I do Mr
Chairman note that.
There is the provision section
for for the performance of
services required.
I I just I just deposit the
language because for example the
small business react we had a
similar sort of relationship
between the New Mexico finance
authority and yes I see and we
didn't we didn't necessarily
have to include language that I
think is as broad as this that
being said I think that we're
doing here is setting up maybe
up a pilot program hopefully
there can be some private
support that is accrued over the
next year or eighteen months to
really prove the concept
it now and before you know and
and then set the stage for
discussions Mr chairman as
charges if you know discussed
later down the road.
For us state appropriations so
thank you I'm for the discussion
and
Council disclosure my has been
as a physician would benefit
from this bill but
But I I fully understand the
need to compete in recruitment
and served and more than that to
retain.
Because at the end of the day.
Part of this about quality of
care is continuity of care that
you your primary care provider
was embedded in the community
status the challenge I think we
face just in closing Mr chairman
is in some health contexts that
revolving door of physicians
really does affect patient care
so you know I appreciate the
conversation today thank you for
the time to ask questions thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman
thank you senator.
Thank you senator Candelaria
I don't see any other hands
raised.
Double check care.
Thank you etcetera etcetera I do
have one one question on the
bill in in our FIR it's looking
in the out years it's looking at
state money.
And so is their future plans to
do this a statement.
Mr Chairman absolutely we hope
that you know we had this bill
in the revenue forecast we're
we're pretty dismal and
Been pretty much still to
in particular the time there
revenue forecast came a little
more.
A little brighter so are in the
economy is improving and there's
room we were certainly consider
asking for legislative
appropriation in the future.
I think that's all my questions
Senator can have a motion from
the committee.
Mr Chairman moved to pass thank
you Mr chairman.
Way way way that means shop here
share.
I just want to double check that
was a new path motion Senator
right.
Mr chairman I could substitute
motion for something else but
yes it was.
Your maintenance of your motion
for new path that I'm just
because I didn't hear anything
about the fans and then also and
I'm I bill and are a center.
I might need a primary care
physician and checked.
Thank you a that we call the
roll useful a clinic yes Mr
chair Senator Burt yes Senator
Burt yes Senator Campos is sixty
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales is sixteen Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Hell yes.
Senator sure yes Senator sure
yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yeah Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
Senator then yes yes that is
nine yes into excuse.
Thank you senator you have in
the past motion and and you saw
the biggest shock of the
sessions etcetera.
I I really appreciate the
support of the committee on this
bill thank you so much.
Thank you Senator Tallman are
you with us he's going to be.
Hi I'm reading your pages place
and and staff and he'll join
here right us Senator Duhigg are
you around I don't think your
bill's going to take very long.
Senator Wirth is here to put on
Senator Duhigg spill okay.
This is the yes.
Yep.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Senate bill one
sixty.
Does a couple things involves
public financing and we're
taking the PRC out of the public
financing act currently the PRC
and our appellate judges are the
two groups that qualify for
public financing on and this
bill replaces the PRC with our
district judges
So.
The gist of the bill it does not
have the new.
Procreation on because the
current language of the statute
provides for allocation of money
that's available for public
financing among those different
races and so on this would mean
that if the district judges came
in the amount available would be
allocated between the district
judges and the appellate judges
are the money comes out of the
motor action fund and one issue
I would like to Mr chair I know
you've been on a an effort to.
get the not withstanding
language out of the statute
and basically we have a
situation where some of the
voter action money has been used
for the secretary of state on so
I'm not sure whether that's
still happening or not but the
real just the bill is that we're
putting up the district judges
into the act in place of the PRC
on page eight of the bill on
house amount that would be
allocated to the judges and
varies depending on the size of
the district and so that's what
the bill does Mr chair with me
as an expert witness is Sydney
tell as COVID cost what we will
be on the phone if you could
have heard a say a few words and
then we're happy to go out to
the audience thank you Mr chair.
Senator Wirth me are you there
yes I am I thank you so much Mr
chairman I have a very unstable
internet connections so I'm
sorry that I have to keep my
chamar off but I will be very
brief so good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Sydney
Taylor as an I'm the associate
director with common cause New
Mexico common cause has been
leading public financing as a
policy you and a good government
initiative for over a decade and
we also specialize in reforms
that focus on keeping our
judiciary free and impartial as
an essential component of
democracy so our current system
of private financing of judicial
campaigns is quite frankly
absurd judicial candidates are
expected to raise private funds
for their campaigns fall at the
same time not knowing who is
contributing to their campaigns
this consistently puts them in
an awkward position of holding
fund raisers with the room full
of potential donors the also
they are expected to turn a
blind eye when a check is right
in and handed to their campaign
treasurer in twenty sixteen
common cause conducted the
study serving various attorneys
judges advocates and district
attorneys regarding potential
opportunities to strengthen on
protect our judiciary and we
concluded that the first thing
that we could do immediately was
to expand our state public
financing program two other
candidates for judicial office
and from the findings in our
research several judges have
indicated to us how problematic
the process of campaigning is
most of them would much rather
be spending their time focusing
on their court docket and not
fund raising for their campaigns
I do want to add on one one
thing that if this legislation
is to be passed through our
legislature New Mexico would be
the first state in that country
to expand public financing to
our district courts so not only
is this an op.
Internet to ensure our judiciary
remains free and impartial what
is an opportunity for us to to
be the leader on this issue and
with that I will stand for
questions thank you so much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Thank you sent me make and we
have any comments from.
That Mr chair members of the
committee we received now
indication of opposition to this
bill.
In support we have Trish Lopez
transcribed.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and staff my name
is Trish Lopez I'm a native New
Mexican born and raised in the
land I UNM graduate mother of an
eight year old and and deeply
rooted in this community along
with you because I run a
statewide nonprofit.
I'm I'm here on behalf of myself
and over four thousand New
Mexicans who couldn't be here
this afternoon but some of whom
you've heard from last night
over email and thousands of whom
signed a petition asking you to
create public financing as an
option for New Mexico judges we
support Senate bill one sixty
the opportunity you have today
is personal to me and to every
New Mexican who's had a case
with the judge who received
money from lawyers in the
program for almost two years I
represented myself pro se in a
family court matter because they
couldn't afford three hundred
dollars an hour for an
Albuquerque attorney
as a single mom of running a
small business and nonprofit I
would stay up at night right on
my own pleadings make oral
arguments hearings participate
in all the other events that
come with the court case and it
was overwhelming but after my
last hearing where the judge
made several rulings that left
me puzzled someone sent me a
Facebook invite which show that
my opposing counsel on how law
partners for hosting a
fundraiser house party for my
judge so while she was presiding
over my case in fact she was the
biggest contract contributor to
my judges campaign and she had
just been appointed to the
position.
Secretary of state records
revealed that this lawyer for
were the largest contributor to
my judges County does this mean
that this was the reason for my
judges decisions no.
But the New Mexico still code of
conduct requires the judges
disclose campaign contributions
or recuse themselves in these
circumstances but this is never
enforced and if you've never
been a party to a court case I I
must tell you it is traumatizing
no matter the outcome and no one
wins and no one wants to hear no
one wants to hear that this kind
of conflict of interest is
possible in our judiciary it's
painful and confusing
particularly to pro se litigants
none the less the judicial
standards commission has refused
to intervene or even require
judges to disclose donations
just received from lawyers with
active cases in the programs so
therefore we are asking you to
lead where the JSC has not on
behalf of thousands of New
Mexicans and allies the support
Senate bill one sixty thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Thank you make a question is
from committee members.
Anybody's hands up Senator what
this is just we're just
basically switching media the
the PRC dollars for elections to
the judicial which I agreement
because I go judges struggle the
whole time and how they do that
so.
I don't see any questions from
committee members are gonna do
passed motors this.
I'm not so much Senator
Steinborn and also thanks.
We have a quick and then and
then yes after the motion Mr
chairman I'll just add and I
think this is this is great I
mean the judges need to be free
of politics all together and you
know it's better if we all are
but I.
I think it's good to eliminate
that control reception a complex
so thanks good bill thank you
Mr.
Senator Rodriguez you're in the
midst of a moving your motion
hello Mr chairman of the past
thank you.
Thank you.
A second.
The motion presenter rod recent
second from Senator Hemphill we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burke.
Yes.
Yes Senator Campos excuse
senator Candelaria yes.
Senator Cappelletti yes Senator
Diamond.
Yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales is excuse Senator
Hemphill yes.
Yes Senator sure yes Madam chair
yes Senator Steinborn yes.
Steinborn yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes yes that is nine yes and to
excuse.
Do you hate it no no also noted
Senator work you have to be
passed thank you.
Hi we appreciate Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Tallman are
you with us.
Yes I am thank you.
Thank you and we can get started
on on Senate bill ninety eight
When we talk.
The more people are going to
vote now.
Only got a lot of pressure.
I have to repeat this on the fly
you go center.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair for
scheduling this in a timely
manner so that we can get this
through this is Senate bill
ninety eight this is one of
three transparency
accountability bills are
sponsoring this year this bill
is very similar to a bill that
got through the Senate floor
last year but then we ran out of
time in the house is a thirty
day session
I got interested in this issue.
Mr chair when I read a recent
report by the peer to peer
charitable trust which stated
quote New Mexico lacks a well
designed plan for regular
evaluation of tax incentives and
of quote.
In two thousand eleven governor
Martinez signed an executive
order.
That was issued requiring a
taxed relative to prepare an
annual report.
On tax credits exemptions and
deductions however the valuation
of each program typically
consists of only a few
paragraphs of discussion with
very little if and very little
okay I can I can else's.
So.
Has a lot of.
Information but very little
analysis so unlike most states
the regular evaluation sentence
on New Mexico studies are not
required by statute this bill
will correct that.
The local government is going to
provide an incentive there needs
to be some kind of clarity what
the realistic expectations are
but what you might get back in
other words are we getting our
money's worth.
Ninety eight.
Will require companies profiting
from tax funded support to give
back some details on how these
dollars are in turn supporting
the taxpayers a tax incentive
recipients will be required to
report the number of full time
jobs they were able to create
what wages they are paying and
how much they're spending on
local infrastructure three point
will be do an annual report each
of the five years after they
receive their incentives
detailed information will
largely be available only to tax
and Representative in order to
shield.
It And proprietary information
but those state employees will
we'll be able to analyze the
data.
So.
Mr chair this bill.
Will only require detailed
analysis of economic development
to.
Costs are greater than ten
million dollars per fiscal year.
The bill also requires if the.
Texan Representative able to
Analyze the bill then they will
make a recommendation to the
legislature that the changes
that what changes can be made in
order that economic analysis can
be conducted.
Incidently in two thousand
nineteen the state legislature
passed a bill that provided for
a some fairly robust analysis of
the film industry but that
doesn't apply to all the other
tax incentives that that we are
the get low and.
Mr chair the up to ten top
economic development tax
incentives total at about a
hundred forty six million
dollars ranging from a high of
seventy million for the.
The film industry to a low of us
what a half million for the
software development services.
as mentioned earlier Mr chair
the pew charitable trust for
right right New Mexico it is
trailing other states in the
valuation of tax incentives this
bill creates an evaluation plan
for high cost economic
development incentives providing
a starting point for the state
and developing a more
intentional process for
thanks expenditure evaluations
this is at the heart of what
we're trying to do with this
bill is to provide a up in
valuation and give us some
concrete answers as to whether
or not we're getting our money's
worth in the second.
Major points what we're trying
to do with this bill
Mr chair is to up.
Report.
Report includes a number of
clients an estimated total cost
and expenses well useful the
descriptive that are included in
taxed Reds text.
Report is generally insufficient
to verify whether a tax
expenditure is meeting is
resulting in the desired effect.
The report does not focus on
outcomes and does that cover
information that could be vital
to determine whether or not
these tax incentives are
effective.
So Mister chair I'm almost done
I see that you have a anyway.
it's really a balancing act.
What we're trying to do is get a
sufficient amount of
information.
But to to balance have a balance
between the desire to maintain a
high level tax payer
confidentially on one side and a
desire to provide public
accountability and oversight on
the other side.
So.
Much I'm gonna lose my remarks
like to close with a quote from
Our chief economist LFC LFC
though on the iglesias.
Are there is that senator you an
ad in the Albuquerque journal
November eleventh of last year
the title that was New Mexico's
one billion dollars in annual
tax breaks the justification and
on the last year is our chief
economist LFC was quoted as
saying quote tax expenditures
create obligations that have to
be paid no matter the state's
fiscal condition.
It's often hard to know whether
a tax incentive is doing what it
is designed to do the quote
ended my cot comments Mr chair.
And
I have a.
Done because she just on stand
by to answer any questions and
now it would be up.
like to hear from any other
opposition are supporters.
Senator Woods center we do have
an amendment for this bill I am
here where the amendment.
Thank appropriations so maybe in
a few amendment
of the amendment is pretty
simple extraction The
appropriation of monies are and
how House Bill to and we can
send that Senator Tallman on to
the next committee
Thank you for the amendment and.
Mr Chairman I'm of the amendment
up for discussion.
Thank you have a second.
You have a second.
Senator Tom any objection to
that amendment I'm gonna do
Senator com a rival guesses I
don't see anybody stand up and
Jackson to.
Mr Chairman is no objection
thank you.
Thank you senator
No objections amendment is at
the bill are back on the bill
questions on the bill.
Senator sure so Mr Chairman I'm
all confused now I try to help
somebody out by striking making
an amendment an appropriation
and that was wrong and now we
did the exact same thing I'm
just so confused.
But I also do have a question.
LFC has these three double books
of things that are going on.
Isn't this what.
Those books are about you know
trying to figure out what this
stuff does and why.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman thank
you just Senator for the
question well as I stated
earlier.
But it provides a lot of the
information but there's no
analysis is to what that whether
that there really working our
referred to
Dawn Iglesias maybe for a
additional and more detailed
answer are you.
Don can you please the.
Yes help answers senators
questions yes absolutely Mr
chair Senator share so the the
three volumes that LFC puts out
they deal with policy budgeting
on in various addendums in terms
of graphs and charts for
different things are going on
within state agency LFC doesn't
actually put out anything
specifically on tax expenditures
will do hearings every now and
then on it the big document
that's normally reported on tax
expenditures is the taxation and
revenue department tax
expenditure report so this piece
of legislation would codify that
into statute so that it wouldn't
be to the whim of AT and
executive order who could at any
point at any executive could
resend that executive order in
this would no longer be required
so this codifies that in statute
and again as Senator Tallman
mentioned it gives data on how
many people might claim are how
many taxpayers may claim a
deduction or credit and what
that total cost is but it
doesn't do anything to say how
many jobs were generated
what type of infrastructure
investments were there it is it
really doing what it was
intended to do so this bill
attempts to take a step in that
direction particularly far large
economic development incentives
so with that cost over ten
million a year this would
require the tax department in
addition to still doing their
tax expenditure report to also
report an economic analysis
every three years on those
particular tax incentives that
are particularly expensive and
after they can get into a
rotation on this and and get
used to that process and
analysis it would be our hope on
it for the LFC that the
legislature would come back and
add additional types of
incentives to be reported on and
evaluated with an in depth
economic analysis that this at
least it starts with our most
expensive economic development
incentives.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
yes the the tax expenditure
report of that had its you know
read.
Right yellow and green things
talk about how how accurate they
thought they were.
Appreciate that I didn't know
that wasn't in statute already
and I like that report.
But this this now will not only
include how much it costs the
state but how much it benefited
the state at the same time.
Yes Mr chair Senator share that
is that is correct Senator.
Okay so the budget just in terms
of jobs or the because you can
you can have a hundred minimum
wage jobs or you can have twenty
really of a high paying jobs
Is it just gonna count jobs
there's a gonna count payroll
and in gross receipts tax
generated by this and personal
income tax and
whatever other things that might
generate.
Thank you for the question
center I'll defer to.
Don the clashes.
Mr chair Senator share so at the
moment the way that this
legislation is drafted it
requires TRD to do an objective
economic analysis and so I would
can I would agree with you that
an objective economic analysis
should include not just the FTE
but you know what are the hours
what are the wages how much
gross receipts with page how
much income taxes paid now
granted a lot of that would be
left up to the discretion I
guess up to the department to
include that in their economic
analysis the report does require
TRD to work with the economic
development department and LFC
in producing these economic
analyses and I can guarantee
that this is something that
those are things that LFC would
want to see in those reports and
they do have to work with the
these agencies are with with
LFC and with EDD introducing
them it does not require it
specifically in this legislation
but those are definitely things
that I would consider as part of
an objective economic analysis
and so those are all pieces of
information that we would want
included in that in that
analysis that they perform.
Thank you miss Iglesias Senator
Mr Chairman is all yours again.
Thank you senator share of.
Any other questions from
committee members I don't see
anybody's hand raised.
Over the past Mr chairman the
less you have any comments or
questions no we're good center
out of you stated you passed
motion can have a second.
Chairman second from Senator
Campos Sir Senator Hemphill
That we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator yes Senator Campos yes.
Property yes.
Senator Candelaria.
It is.
Stepped away Senator Diamond
yes.
Yes Senator Gonzales.
Is excuse Senator Hemphill yes.
Yes Senator sure.
Yes.
Your share yes Senator Steinborn
yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
minerals that are there are yes
we need to do one cleanup
language center we would you
change your motion for us to
pass as amended yes thank you
very.
Thank you.
Thank
you for as amended yes thank you
thank you
Senator Hemphill second set so.
Thank you Senator Tallman.
How many bills coming time to be
banned from the Senate finance
are common.
This year a total.
Let's just start with it this
year.
This is the.
First or second I'm just curious
what why are you asking Mr
chair.
And how many times were you in
front of the Senate finance
prior Sierra.
It's as if Senator fire F. I. R.
E. no no how many times were you
before and Senate finance prior.
I don't know three four five
six.
That's a big blur this is a have
an exasperating experience.
Thank you senator Tom and that
would make your we met your for
your quota in New.
Well I I appreciate your a
getting the schedule fairly
timely manner as thank you Mr
chairman I think the members of
the committee for their support
this bill thank you thank you
Sir have a good weekend I use
whether Senator Lopez are you
there for Committee Senate bill
two ten and you do have to
amendments for Senate bill two
ten.
Senator Lopez with us.
Can I'm here Mister chairman all
right Senator you want to set of
bills to pay and and you do have
to amendment for the bill.
Okay yes Mr chairman.
There are two amendments to
propose Mr chairman Senate bill
two ten is proposing of a a
change with regards to
our education system is
proposing an ethnic studies
requirement for graduation it
will take a half credit that is
from the existing shows social
studies
requirement for graduation for
high school seniors it will also
be asking for students grades K.
through three to have age
appropriate instruction with
regards to ethnic studies New
Mexico history and then grades
four through eight of course
it's incorporated into those
grades also in a start date Mr
chairman once we had of course a
complete the amendments it'll
make sure that all of this will
begin in the school year twenty
twenty three slash twenty four.
The bill also Mr chairman a
creates a council of ethnic
studies and is made up of
members of his see the public
education department the
legislative education study
committee higher education
department but also the list
that you'll see they're listed
in in the the bill itself Mr
chairman of the amendments one
amendment is a a change in
language
and it was suggested by Senator
schools before we left Senate
education so is proposed here
requiring of the fed of public
education department instead of
saying may appoint is is it
shall appoint
and then the other amendment Mr
chairman specifically just adds
to date to making sure that we
are of going across the line
with regards to
Having K. through twelve all of
it starting in the school year
twenty twenty three twenty four.
Message Mr chairman.
For for the amendments and the I
do have some expert witnesses
who are here also Mr chairman to
add on to our discussion today
thank.
Okay Senator we have the
amendment so I in there pretty
simple amendments yes.
Still the minutes just because
making got him up before had a
chance.
So any objection to this
amendment number one bank can't
see the number at the bottom of
the tracking number any
objections this ammendment.
During.
It's been amended.
I have a motion to adopt the
minutes sorry.
And I'm all for adoption the
Senate amendment one to Senate
bill two ten.
I thank you Mr chairman a motion
the second any objection to the
amendment.
During the and see none on zoom.
In those been mended.
The second
amendment makes we want to put
that up.
Mr chairman before we do that
I'll move the second amendment
just up for discussion so we can
have it right on the protocol
thank you.
Thank you senator Rodriguez in
I'll second that motion.
So this is the the second
amendment.
What's the time.
Four to begin there is some
stuff going to happen with PED
and in twenty twenty three
twenty twenty four that aligns
with this bill.
Any questions on the amendment.
I don't see any.
No questions on any objection to
the amendment.
Gentleman I move a.
Sentimental number two is Senate
bill two ten.
That meant that motion Mr
chairman thank thank you any
objection to the amendment.
See none center you have and
then amended bill twice amended
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the.
Center
You want to go to expert
witnesses right now and then
we'll go to public comment okay
I appreciate it thank you Mr
chairman I'm with us this
afternoon we do have and I
believe I did see her Mike a bit
Cydney.
I think I saw her on our zoom.
There you are she's one of my
witnesses Mr chairman.
You Mr chairman and
distinguished members of the
committee.
I am sharing the UNM native
American studies endorsement
today I have years of teaching
experience and local indigenous
studies global indigenous
studies social justice academic
reading and social studies and
personally I have seen the
transformational effects of
ethnic studies courses and
content I think studies directly
correlates to positive student
outcomes and make settings
inspire and challenge the minds
of students and also in rich
traditional school subjects
through unique pedagogies that
draw in students social and
cultural capital and the study's
approach develops necessary
critical thinking and civic
civic engagement that benefits
local and wider communities
using a strengths based approach
is necessary in public education
because they help recovering
nourish communities that will
address our rich diverse New
Mexico communities and the state
is reinvented students back into
local communities in ways that
restore local ways of learning
transmission of knowledge and a
sense of belonging and ethnic
studies classes students and the
communities are viewed as
sources of knowledge in our
local schools colleges and
universities they are in effect
the foundation for greater
learning in addition ethnic
studies teachers collaborate
with local community and
stakeholders to collectively
support student learning and
development and finally ethnic
studies curriculum and
programming is rooted in real
world issues experiences and
problem solving students will
have relationships with New
Mexico and fully belong to the
please land and people they're
learning from and when we care
for something we want to take
care of it and help it grow
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman my next
expert is Fraulein oral school.
You Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is from
our school and I am a PC
student.
Senator language language
literacy and social cultural
studies in the college of
education at UNM just be to ten
provides the institutional
framework for statewide
implementation of ethnic studies
in K. through twelve schools in
addition the bill will establish
a statewide ethnic studies
council which will strengthen
relations between and across
ethnic studies programs and will
assist the New Mexico public
education department with
curriculum development.
I speak in support of SB two
cents today given my
understanding of the positive
effect of ethnic studies on
student outcomes in the K.
twelve system programs like
these can contribute to raising
graduation rates among under
represented and first generation
students for instance and took
some Arizona students
participating in Mexican
American studies programs
demonstrated a ninety three
percent high school graduation
rate a Stanford study found that
overall students taking ethnic
studies courses had if academic
benefits that lead to higher
attendance higher grade point
averages and higher course
credit her programs consisted of
predominantly students of color
its target the group was Latino
which is nationwide has
historically had some of the
lowest graduation rates more
ethnic studies programs
encourage higher rate well
college enrollment for
historically underrepresented
students I think studies
programs out of UNM already
inspiring more New Mexico high
school and community college
students to seek a higher
education as such implementation
of ethnic studies can help raise
graduation and college
enrollment rates in New Mexico.
Education scholars have
demonstrated the positive impact
of culturally relevant teaching
on the success of diverse
students populations in the US.
This work stems from examples
established by ethnic studies
scholars scholars dating back to
the civil rights era with that
studies young New Mexico will be
better able to ask.
It again okay puts it use
cultural knowledge prior
experiences frames of reference
and performance thousand
whatever students to make
learning more relevant and
effective.
In a state like New Mexico where
the population has remained
ethnically diverse since the
early foundations of the state
the statewide implementation of
ethnic studies research pedagogy
and curriculum K. through twelve
schools well positioned the
state as a national model ready
for the twenty first and twenty
second century's were ethnically
diverse populations will be the
norm in the entire US as such
with the input of an ethnic
studies council the New Mexico
public education department can
develop a model that best
prepares young New Mexicans to
critically understand the past
present and future significance
of ethnically diverse
populations thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I do have
Robert frost who's my last
expert witness.
Madam chair of our.
We'll let him talk but your
expert witness almost opponents
our opponents Health.
so Robert do you want to go
ahead and.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak today I'm Robert
macro story teach Mexican
American studies as an elective
it I love the high school in
Albuquerque is also a dual
credit class through the UNM
through U. N. M. in addition I'm
a PhD student in the together to
global studies at doing that
based on the experience and
research about the studies
programs in Arizona we created
an ethnic studies program at are
I school to address the high
drop out rate among Hispanic
students in the seven years
we've had the program the
graduation rate for students to
take the class has been equal to
or higher than the state average
we've had a fifteen to twenty
five percent increase in
graduation rates for students to
take the class.
The central part of that success
is due to the collaboration
would you got it to double
studies department at UNM which
is functioned as an aide at Nick
studies council as the ethnic
studies council this legislation
creates the department has
proved to be invaluable in their
support for my students through
our collaboration we have shared
curriculum and strategies and by
students have been able to
participate in conferences and
other college prep activities
the programs and curriculum
we've created shared an
implement of help students
achieve success in school and
have become more engaged in our
community students I taught in
high school or not taking my
class that you want to.
Research has shown the efficacy
of the big studies program we
have known this for years it is
time to put this tool to use
ethnic study should be a
required part of a comprehensive
curriculum thank you.
Thank you Robert.
Senator anything else that the.
Mr chairman that is all.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn you
sent me a text and I did Mr
Chairman so trying to work out
of my computer.
I need to get some professional
tech thank you figured out Mr
chairman but I I do feel
compelled to just say something
madam chair Senator Lopez thank
you for this bill and
Representative Google yet I I
have many constituents of ask me
about this about how we're
teaching history and.
And both Hispanics and African
Americans specifically and so
you know history is always
taught out of the eye of the
beholder the one who is telling
their perspective but other
people's perspective is is also
another important history so I
think this are.
What will do a great service to
our students if we do this to.
To give them a richer sense of
real history the whole story so
thank you for doing this bill
this bill just perfectly
captures I think what we ought
to be doing and I just want to
thank you for that so I have
Mister chairman.
I move.
Thank you bye morning in center
and just give me one second
Senator Campos had hand raised.
Thank you very much Mr chair of
members of the Senate finance
committee
just a couple of other questions
for Senator Lopez and her our
expert witnesses.
In terms of the correct what is
being proposed and I'm hearing
that at the secondary level
there's already some curriculums
that are are being utilized is
there going to be
one unilateral curriculum or
will there be
various curriculums it'll be
adopted that would be used in
different portions of the state
again because as we do come from
different parts of New Mexico
the Hispano G. Connell G. Kernan
studies as we move forward
other different implications and
I'm I'm just curious in terms of
have a curriculum is going to be
developed so Mr chair Senator
law office in maybe one of your
experts can.
enumerate a little bit in terms
of what it is that they
anticipate the the curriculum
developing into.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman and
senator Campos it and I
appreciate the question because
we're not going back to the
drawing board there is
curriculum that does exist of
that is being used currently in
our schools today and that
covers Africano studies also
with you know for native
American studies and she got
educational studies so those are
already in existence and what
the council will be doing is
reviewing
What is in existence in making
sure that there is the ability
but utilizing the information
that is already there and
disseminating it working you
know through our public school
system and there's already a
council that's been established
Mr chairman members of the
committee and I know that doctor
Vasquez maybe could add a little
bit more information if you like
with regards to the council that
the another council that existed
in higher at I would thank you
very much of Mr chair thank you
very much Senator love this
place for C..
I drive by this Mr chair members
of the committee that is an
excellent question I I do want
to share with you the process we
create we have participated in
to make sure that we develop
locally based ethnic studies
curriculum and the way that that
has been done is that we have
are you NM up faculty were
matched with high school
teachers who create a kind of
hybrid curriculum that not only
draws on the best of what our
high school teachers are doing
but we're able to provide
expertise in the content so that
it's not a cookie cutter
curriculum will specifically
address not only the needs of
the students at the school but
the regional difference that
characterizes our wonderful
state.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez in terms of adoption
cycles
will there be an adoption cycle
or will there be as you
indicated this is not going to
be of cookie cutter curriculum
this will be developed
specifically for schools or is
there going to go ahead and be
if you will
the correct would be ongoing and
it would involve so that the the
curriculum itself is going to be
current and it's not going to be
something that of what we do is
five ten years from now then
indicate well this is what we
were teaching that way back then
but we also need to go ahead and
keep it current is there going
to be that the current component
tied into the adoption cycle.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
yes in fact that's what the
direction that the council will
be giving as a as everyone it's
what I call their expertise
together and then informing us
is the legislature with what
their suggestions are for us to
consider this legislation or
whatever else that we need to do
slide next to us but think it's
July of twenty twenty two I
guess is ample time for us to
look and see with regards to
funding whatever else needs to
work had as part of this
discussion also as we talk about
the a drive adoptions cycles for
our books so it it's all
encompassed and that's part of
the direction building number
one of this council that drive
buses was talking about but that
involving us and other stake
holders in in this whole
conversation about how we
prepare training and everything
else that needs to happen for on
going but it is just part of
that system at this council
undertake and then present to us
Mister chairman Senator.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course Senator Lopez and this
is something that we have been
working with with the CS the P.
R. for many years in terms of
the curriculums and well the
specific adoption cycles and it
leads to just my final question
when it really comes to the
curriculum development.
And and that is in in moving it
forward and with that adoption
will the information
the coming from existing sources
or will there be if you will the
practicality practitioner pieces
were information will be
gathered so that the history if
you will is going to be current
verses if you will something
that is taken out of.
Past text books.
Maybe one of your experience
with that woman Health
responsible thank you yes Mister
chairman Senator Campos we have
doctor Lara from New Mexico
State University if you would
place.
Thank you Senator Lopez and Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I am the director of
borderlands and ethnic studies
at New Mexico State University I
teach ethnic studies my PhD and
I think that he is the united
New Mexican from southern New
Mexico and this is a very
exciting opportunity I've been
working with last Christmas
public schools the second
biggest district in the state
since two thousand sixteen and
twenty seventeen and they
unanimously passed a resolution
to implement ethnic studies K.
to twelfth and this is an
exciting opportunity to build
that capacity to start making
the curriculum and start doing
the professional development
necessary to have this in the
schools already I am working
with the the Public Education
department I'm on a committee
currently to we assess social
studies standards and actually
the standards are really great
we just don't have the materials
and that teacher training to go
with those standards so at the
same time that we're working on
completely revamping those
standards to be up to date as
you mentioned Mr Campos I'm
working with a cohort of
teachers to start writing those
new lesson plans that will be
part of what what you call a
uniform comprehensive curriculum
which is what we need and
locally all the pieces are in
place and the path is very
supportive and we have statewide
agencies that are doing the work
we have actual schools that are
already piloting these lessons
so the work is well under way we
just need that council to bring
us a statewide together so that
we can have a living curriculum
thank you.
Thank you very much of course Mr
chairman members of the Senate
finance committee and Senator
Lopez thank you very much for
bringing this legislation
forward okay and I wish you the
best of luck as you move forward
because this is not only
exciting but it is going to be a
strong practitioner piece for
each and everyone of us so that
Mr chairman if I could I'd like
to a second the motion that
Senator gonna Hemphill has made
in regards to passage of Senate
bill two tenants by amendment
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Campos we have
Santo Burgstaller Senator Burt.
Yeah thank you Mr chairman and
and thank you for bringing forth
the bill and I just a couple of
questions I seen some of the
analysis and things the term
appropriate instruction is there
definition for appropriate
instruction because I I that's a
big.
The term I think so I'm just
trying to understand the
definition.
Thank you Mr chairman if I could
drive by this.
Mr chair members of the
committee of that language would
be for two of referring back to
standards for each grade level
and ensuring that the
instructional materials and
approach our state are
addressing you know the state
the educational standards at
each level from K. to twelfth.
Thank you and and Mr chairman
and this agency I guess Moskos
or miss Lopez Center Lopez
Okay so we're going to make sure
that you appropriate for grade
level.
But what I still am and looking
for a definition of appropriate
what.
I understand that you want to
teach the level but does
appropriate also me I I don't
know what appropriate needs can
you define their.
Mr chair members of the
committee of that would be four
to the specific standards that
each grade level have and
ensuring that you are fulfilling
those standards through
curriculum.
Okay so it has.
Chairman and and madam it
doesn't have anything do with
content.
It.
I'm sorry Mr chair members of
the committee yes the standards
in fact to lay out content for
instruction for each grade level
and what the outcomes are in
relation to K. through twelve
education.
And I I wonder if I drive Lara
would also want to respond.
Dr Lara if you would please.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm I'm guessing that
this refers to culturally
appropriate culturally
sustaining our curriculum in the
the broadest scope of this bill
appropriates is referring to are
teaching students in their
native languages in their native
cultures earlier it was referred
to that to ethnic studies
curriculum really focuses on
regional and local specificities
within a broader state and
global scope so I am I am taking
a guess to say that it's about
culturally appropriate and
culturally responsive curriculum
which like I mentioned earlier
the standards really build that
in it's just that we haven't had
the capacity to fully address
those pieces.
So Mr chairman and and madam if
if you're in the northwest part
of the state for example
native American history and
culture as well as but more
specifically maybe Navajo since
it's such a big part of that
area up there that would be
emphasized in the north west
part of the state but it would
be emphasize state in the
southeast part of the state or
the a in the western part of the
state.
I'm just trying to understand
better what we're trying to do
here.
Mr Chairman a doctor Lara if you
would please.
Sure that's fantastic question
thank you so much the idea is
that knowledge of production
would best take place in in
these regional pockets so your
your example is wonderful of a
curriculum that Stanek coming
from northwestern New Mexico to
be implemented in this
comprehensive statewide
curriculum that every child has
access to in New Mexico where I
live down here in southern New
Mexico there's a lot of
borderlands knowledge that that
students are aware of our Apache
knowledge so so these knowledges
would sort of be created in this
state wide council in concert
with local historians experts
teachers and then that would
become comprehensive I would
love for our students down here
to know more about the next
level culture they themselves
don't know much about Apache or
borderlands or not I'm forty or
the indigenous cultures of
southern New Mexico so it's
certainly a synergistic plan to
have all students of New Mexico
know about themselves and each
other but traffic question thank
you.
Yeah and and Mr chairman and and
all of you thank you for the
answer I'm just trying to
understand content and and now I
understand more regional content
I mean you may have this big
curriculum but if depending on
what part of the state you're in
it may emphasize more
specifically that area of the
state is that a fair under
a understanding of what you're
trying to do here.
Mr Chairman I'm Senator a doctor
Lara place.
I think so I mean I think that
the the experts on internet
culture since you mentioned that
the whole nation the experts of
the net culture have already
started making curriculum does
exist in the school the
languages exist in the schools
that's not available to us down
here at all so it would be a
comprehensive curriculum that's
inclusive and I think where
people shy away as they say well
there's so many indigenous
communities how can we include
all of it we can and we will so
I I think it's it's regional in
terms of the construction of
knowledge as a whole but then
that the idea is for all
students not just students of
color but all New Mexicans
students on stand to benefit
from knowing that the richness
and diversity of our state.
Well I and I would.
Mr chairman I agree with that I
think that's the beauty of New
Mexico is is the blending of
cultures sums up forces and I'm
again I'm just trying to go back
to my original question but
appropriate instruction
understand what we're trying to
accomplish here
You know as as we look at this
piece of legislation
she had one other question but I
forgot it now so but this is a
good discussion and I appreciate
that or I'm sorry who who will
ultimately make up the this
curriculum
how many people will be involved
or how we can afford to do I
mean you're looking at it just a
ton of stuff if you will for
example how the will it down to
two or Wirth curriculum and who
all will be involved in that
process.
Mr Chairman Senator of doctor
Faustus would you.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you again for
the question
as in any state of course PED
sets out the curriculum and
standards of instruction for all
subjects that provides the
framework by which
educators and schools that
develop specific types of
curriculum we have great
examples in the central part of
the state in Albuquerque public
schools because in the
development of the ethnic
studies course through APS a
number of our teachers who were
a serving in public comment
today we're involved in looking
at the state standards
specifically at social sciences
looking at their course a little
by and their lesson plans and
addressing the specific
standards and outcomes that PED
requires so there is the largest
state framework and then by
region depending on the district
each district addresses their
curriculum and each school so.
That.
It seems like a big project but
you already have a framework by
which the curriculum is
developed.
Amongst teachers.
So teachers are used to this
process they in fact you know go
to go through this process on an
annual basis and we have a
number of high school teachers
here.
Participate in curriculum
development every year and then
the guiding force is the
framework that the state
establishes.
And I appreciate that and I
don't want to belabor the point
I just am curious for I'm a
native New Mexican one race
Deming but I live in Alamogordo
I've been there for thirty two
plus years.
In Alamogordo I didn't know that
much about the community the
was and an older educator
who actually is name is buried
on the library at New Mexico
State University and David
Townsend very well respected
there and his friend cliff
McDonald who is I think there
for generation in the Otero
county that tourism basin area
and they were in two or three
books about the any brothers and
railroad and how that all
developed in there so.
I don't want to students but I
would assume that even linking
County is which is for my
district and and what all went
on up there in the the mining
and and the chamber you know up
in.
In that could occur Cloudcroft
in the trestle and the returning
that brought it all down and
there were a different
minorities that works.
in in that process and I would
just hoping the format really to
truly do a regional thing that
every area within New Mexico
would be represented in in
developing this curriculum
and and the it could be truly a
wealth of knowledge for New
Mexico if if all of this were
put into it even the the initial
ranching and agricultural
community families on the
eastern side of the state I I
hope all that is is included
because it's just too rich
heritage not to exclude some
areas of of the state so I just
wanted to make sure that the
curriculum and its development
and and understand what they're
about appropriate instruction.
Will be included in all of this
so at all relinquish my time
here but thank you all for the
answers a good look at the
project and thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Byrd Senator
Candelaria thank you Mr chairman
and good afternoon Senator Lopez
and thank you to your expert
witnesses.
I'm following up on senator
Byrd's questions which really
provoked me to think about.
What fault what does and does
not fall under the concept of
free markets I think studies an
approach this from a slightly
different perspective
so for me yeah I really want to
bring to the justice discussion
does this also have space for.
You know the history of queer
New Mexico right the fact that
many of the cultures of our
state who have been here for
thousands of years before you
know colonialists ation by the
Spanish and then the Americans
or the Mexicans didn't have a
concept of one gender or
another.
So for me it's very important
that as well as this does
develop that the that the queer
history of New Mexico actually
is incorporated.
And not and not ignore from that
discussion
So I met Senator Lopez what your
thoughts on that thank you very
much.
Before we do that if they can
not raise our hands and you
could call your sponsor how you
want to.
And then we just want to make
sure we get time to get your
Senate bill one twenty seven.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Candelaria that is all
part of the context we talk
about the intersection ality of
what we are and who we are where
we have come from in our
communities I I I maybe am
mislabeling but I think in in
some of our native American
communities there's a two spirit
you know of whom and where and
how we honor those that have
been in our communities prior
and current this is all
encompassing because it is part
of who we are and are histories
here the state starting with our
native American communities they
were here first before any of us
showed up and and how we we
build on that but Mister
chairman Senator that is part of
looking at this whole picture of
who we are here in the state yes
it is inclusive.
Mr chairman I appreciate that
and and I I look forward to you
know should this pass sure just
saying that work bear fruit and
you know I want to endorse you
know what senator Byrd said I
think that the.
The rich and different histories
and experiences of New Mexicans
from every county.
Deserve to have space in these
discussions.
and I just want to make sure
that the experience of we're New
Mexicans who.
You know until the mid seventies
and sixties we're just
completely erased from our law
if not criminalized
and so that's really important I
think the other question Mr
chairman last question last
research for Senator Lopez is.
You know there's there's some
criticism of this approach in
the sense that by creating a
standalone credit it's it's it's
sort of compartmentalize is the
discussion as opposed to an
approach which fundamentally
incorporates all the diversity
we've been discussing into the
into the base curriculum.
Right and fundamentally changes.
And incorporates all these
experience so that everything is
inherently diversities right I
mean it's it gets rid of the the
the approach that there's only
been one narrative history
that's ever occurred.
Right and exposes people to give
space for those other history so
so how do we how do we how do we
bridge that discussion and and
do you think that do you think
that this approach is the best
or do you think that we need to
continue that work of
integration and what do you
think we are current.
Mr chair and if any of your
experts you want to handle that
from a I think I know it's sort
of like you know like.
Not to the committee question
it's like you know.
No academic and kind of out
there you know but so I
appreciate it thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator Candelaria.
I just wanted to clarify
something for my own doctor so
one P. does require you to redo
the curriculum in twenty twenty
three or twenty twenty four I.
I can't remember this will PED
will design this part of the
curriculum
Correct.
Mr Chairman this eight step of
planning time for where again as
we've been explaining and and
sharing here in committee it's
it's this whole process coming
together so that slide twenty
school year twenty twenty three
slash twenty four we are ready
to roll and there's nothing
going back to the beginning and
this does compliment the
multicultural education which is
and and and our law different
schools to have if you look at
some of the school districts as
to what they have Farmington has
it others if you look at what
they do you propose that this is
more specific for those in and
the diversity in our community
so it's just
letting us spend X. Mexican
American or native American
communities our African American
communities and how all of
different richness has
contributed to our state it is
inclusive regions because
different regions there was
black down which is back in
southeastern New Mexico and if
we have all these different
areas that we do need to explore
and it gives our our our
students and their families
because they take the
information back Mr chairman
a conversation to go back and
share I'm so that we can
understand as as a people
my self as a woman of color you
go back and feel the pride as to
what and how I am here based on
the history and understanding
the history not just by what is
written by that the majority
authors of the people who ride
on the east side of the
Mississippi but what they bring
it what we have here from our
own authors and local history.
Thank you senator.
Can I have a motion for a Senate
bill one.
Senate Bill.
Mr chair.
General glass as amended twice
chairman Mr chairman.
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman you already
have a motion by Senator home
that's great and I'm sorry
Senator Campos.
Of forty do pass on Senate bill
two tennis twice amended.
Thank you so we have a motion
and a second
that we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Byrd pass.
Representative past Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes.
A yes Senator Diamond.
No.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzalez K. excuse to.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator sure no.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods will.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
Senator yes so that and Senator
Burt yes I want to.
Pardon me.
I'm gonna vote no thank you.
So I have four no six yes and
one excuse.
Thank you senator CNN do passed
you want to start with committee
service to percent of the one
twenty seven yes Mr chairman
thank you for Senate bill two
ten Mr Chairman I in front of
you is Senate bill one twenty
seven and this is Senate bill
one twenty seven originated out
of a task force of which I was
honored to be a participant and
dealing with family
representation for our families
namely looking at the children
and families are involved with
children youth and families
department and this deals with
the card item system that we
have for our our children not
the adult system this is for our
children.
and Mr chairman members of the
committee I do have my expert
witnesses who are here with me
this evening
to say a few words and then of
course there may be some public
and then we can stand for
questions but I do have Mr
chairman members of the
committee a Chief Justice
barbecue.
Thank you.
Excuse me thank you Senator
Lopez Mr chair nice to see you
and members of the committee I'm
actually senior justice of the
New Mexico Supreme Court justice
Michael E. Vigil as chief but we
both share the same surname no
relation but we share the same
surname so thank you Senator
Lopez.
My name is up Barbara B. hill I
am a senior justice on the
Supreme Court and I'm here in
support to ask for your support
of Senate bill one twenty seven.
By way of background I'd like to
share with you the fact that the
quality of legal representation
of children parents and
guardians in child abuse and
neglect cases has declined over
several decades.
And the time is come to make
fundamental changes to the
structure from which legal
services are provided in these
types of cases to address this
problem the legislature created
the family representation task
force in twenty nineteen to
study the issue and make
recommendations after a year of
complex and and very thorough
study the task force published
its report setting forth its
recommendations for the
provision of legal services
through an independent.
State agencies similar to that
of the law office of the public
defender.
This independent law office
would provide the necessary
structure oversight guidance
support as well as fair
compensation to lawyers who are
hired or contracted to represent
only will children and their
families in child abuse and
neglect cases.
Ladies and gentlemen Senate bill
one twenty seven along with S.
J. R. eleven are the first step
in creating this independent law
office we are confident that
this change will result in
better outcomes for children in
New Mexico thank you Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee and Senator Lopez.
Thank you
I apologize senior just.
Thank you Mr chairman I also
have chief judge Jennifer the
lady.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee on
Jennifer Delaney and I'm the
chief judge in the sixty usual
District which is granted Largo
County I also had the
opportunity to chair the family
representation task force and I
now chair the New Mexico Supreme
Court family representation
commission I was a foster parent
I am an adoptive parents and as
an attorney I served as an
attorney for parents youth and
children prior to becoming a
judge as this committee is aware
of children and you come into
foster care for a variety of
different reasons related to
abuse and neglect appropriately
The New Mexico courts are
statutorily required to provide
legal representation to these
children and young people as
well as to their parents
guardians and custodians the
administrative office of the
courts has been managing the
representation of children and
parents since nineteen ninety
three through its court
appointed attorney program with
funds that have been allocated
by the New Mexico legislature to
provide the representation AOC
contracts with over a hundred
attorneys would any point in
time engaging about fifteen
hundred cases statewide that
impart involved constantly
twenty four hundred children and
twenty one hundred parents
guardians and custodians it is
unwieldy and the administrative
office of the court has neither
the staff or other resources to
monitor these contracts to
ensure quality representation
this is not a new problem over
the last twenty years and number
their efforts have been launched
to improve performance and while
some games happen maybe it is
not enough and we have data
showing that it's not working.
Senate bill one twenty seven
before you today creates office
of family representation and
advocacy with the structural
model as you heard from justice
the hell that is patterned after
the law offices of public
defenders it includes an
oversight commission as well as
budgetary independence the
practice model will be in
evidence based model of best
practices which is the
interdisciplinary legal teams
services this means that parents
and children will benefit from a
team consisting of lawyers
social workers navigators and
peer mentors New Mexico is way
ahead of the game on this as we
already have a model the family
advocacy program that will be
adapted into this new office for
the fiscal year twenty to we are
not asking for any appropriation
whatsoever them we are we do
propose hiring an interim
director the administrative
office of the courts contracting
with the interim directors
through monies that are already
being allocated in house bill
two under the unified budget
moving forward we are looking at
a potential overall cost in the
next five plus years of
seventeen million dollars this
would be a potentially up to
seven million dollars in new
money which would be spread over
this five year time period
however our economists Kelly
o'donnell we have the luxury an
opportunity to work with during
the task force and now with the
commission has estimated based
on studies around the United
States that there will be a cost
savings to New Mexico anywhere
ranging between four point nine
million to eleven point seven
million based on reduce times in
foster care for children.
What we have seen around the
nation is that when you improve
the quality of representation
for children and families
involved in the abuse and
neglect system children either
our unified more quickly or
reach the other alternatives for
permanency such as adoption or
permanent guardianship in a much
more expeditious way which save
state not only does it save long
term from the effects and trauma
that these children to work but
it saves the immediate cost
savings of their time in foster
care.
Thank you it's.
Thank you Mr chairman and judge
we also have retired judge of
justice that the document just.
Thank you very much Senator
Lopez and members of the
committee for giving me
opportunity
I've been working on this issue
to try to get active and
representation for our families
find themselves in the this next
lex system for over twenty years
and still in retirement I'm
continue to work on this issue
which is very dear to my house
to my heart so the creation of
the office of Family
representation advocacy will
address the two most serious
failings of our current system
which are one the inadequate
presentation advocacy which
raised two children manning a
foster care for longer periods
of time than necessary creating
lasting damage for children and
their families the issue of
turnover and inconsistent
representation and the calls are
created by the attorney
contracts you Mr by the court
system the office will get the
best legal representation and
advocacy possible to keep
families together when we can
define other means to permanency
in this way the office will lead
the way to creating an
independent agency with evidence
based practice model I strongly
requested you affects this bill
when I thank you very much for
the opportunity for quick
hearing today.
Thank you justice Mr chairman we
also have
Alyssa
we're solicit list the Davis who
is a a use.
Please listen.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee
I am said Davis a youth leader
with and can't I spent about
twelve years in foster care
before aging out
proper representation I believe
I would have had a more stable
and permanent experience in
surviving the foster care
system.
I only spoke with my lawyer
fifteen minutes at the
courthouse before my my
hearings.
I never would have had I never
had a consistent
I'm sorry I never had a
consistent lawyer I had to
advocate for myself most of the
time.
I also believe that if my birth
mother had had proper
representation to it I had a
better understanding of her
right or have had received
assistance to get out of
homelessness.
Not all parents are bad and
regardless they deserve I'm I'm
good I'm the seed also that's
why I ask you support Senate
bill one twenty seven thank you.
Thank you listen Mr Chairman our
last is Catherine.
I think she's I just see her
account at all.
Please if you would Cathrynn I
see you hello my name is
Katherine bell ski and I'm here
in support of the Senate bill
one twenty seven.
Okay.
And we lose our.
You to herself.
Catherine if you would please
put out I'm.
Ask your support for Senate bill
one twenty seven I was given an
attorney who was not educated in
child welfare and I lost my
children because of not having
adequate legal representation it
is very important that in New
Mexico we have adequate
representation your your level
of poverty should not mean that
you do not get an attorney that
knows what they're talking thank
you.
Thank you Catherine and thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator we do have an
amendment to this bill center.
And and so
I had a motion to move the
amendment.
Karen I move the amendment up
for discussion Senator
Rodriguez.
And all second center yes so you
we have an amendment for
discussion purposes Senator
Lopez is your man that you want
explain your amendment.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee what this amendment is
is to an and this was an issue
that was raised in in our prior
hearing from Senator Pirtle it
is Senate rules is always taken
care of Mr chairman members of
the committee is making sure
that there is representation
from around the state and in
working with our expert
witnesses this is the language
that we that is being proposed
and if you can see Mr chairman
I'm again this is asking that
the commission that we've lacked
adequate representation of the
geographic diversity of the
state of the Chief Justice of
the New Mexico Supreme Court
shall appoint members from
different geographic regions of
New Mexico.
Thank you.
Any questions on the.
No questions.
Have a motion to adopt them and
hello Mister chairman Senator
motion and all of second
amendment any objection to the
amendment I'm looking for hands
and text messages and.
I don't see any here any so
Senator having amended bill we
will go to the audience
And.
Then we'll chat right after the
audience thank you may think you
ready.
Make sure you start time clock
me.
Mr Chairman I'm all set
Mr chairman members of the
committee we received now
indications that opposition to
this bill in support we have
as a secretary.
Blaylock with CYFD.
It thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity comes and support in
support of this bill as you've
heard more powerfully than I can
articulate I just the power and
the value of strong attorneys
the setting up this
representation office will be a
great step in the right
direction for New Mexico so we
can ensure that all children and
families have good
representation and this aligns
very well with others district
to perform and the work we're
doing at the way to strengthen
our families and we keep
children at home whenever
possible and to for that reason
that you're strongly support
additional thank you very much.
Next we also had that you know
we do not see why anti.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Annemarie blue line the
acting director for protective
services
as as Secretary Blalock stated
our agency is in strong support
of this legislation we for all
the reasons that everybody
articulated we are excited about
the prospect that our families
and our children can just got
high quality representation
thank you.
Next we have Erica Sanchez.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Erica
Sanchez I'm with New Mexico can
an organization that partners
with young people impacted by
foster care to improve their
transition to adulthood we stand
in support of Senate bill one
twenty seven in our work with
young people we see the impact
of inadequate representation
including young people remaining
in foster care for longer
periods of time than necessary
having numerous negative
consequences for children and
their families I families
deserve to have highly qualified
attorneys who are properly
trained have support staff
receive decent compensation and
are accountable for their work
thank you.
Next we have the judge Jim for
you.
Good.
Hello can you hear me yes I can
hear you.
Okay my name is Jim Floyd thank
you Mr chairman for the
opportunity to talk with you
today I'm a judge in the sixth
judicial district I do
children's court cases in both
Silvercity and Lordsburg New
Mexico I've been a lawyer and
I've been a guardian ad light in
my taking care of kids I have
also Representative parents and
and the fact of the matter is
the two most difficult things
that I do day to day being in
judges I relieve people of their
freedom.
And I relieve parents of their
obligations as a parent with
regard to children in abuse and
neglect cases those are very
hard things to do and I would
really appreciate the
opportunity to do that when we
have adequate representation in
in all respects it's not
unlikely or not it's not uncanny
that you might have the tax
lawyer representing the child in
my area you know we're Lord
where we don't have lawyers
downward burglars come from
Deming lawyers come from
Silvercity and we're hard
pressed to get lawyers to
represent kids and parents we
really believe that Senate bill
one twenty seven will go a long
way in adequately compensating
people so that they would take
on the role of that we're gonna.
We are.
Support Senate bill one twenty
seven.
Next we have Mimi laughter.
It's not.
Yes I'm here thank you very much
for allowing me to speak on
behalf of Senate bill one twenty
seven my name is Mimi labor and
the director of legal
representation at the American
Bar Association center on
children in the law one of our
the things that we pride
ourselves on in that we work on
so much is important as
improving legal representation
and improving legal systems for
children and families we believe
that high quality legal
representation like the type
that is spreading in your state
of New Mexico will be part of
and will be part of the office
of Family representation
advocacy are key to improving
outcomes for children and their
families we know from a lot of
research around that country
that these outcomes include
keeping children with their
parents when possible I'm
honored to be a member of the
family representation commission
and before that the family
representation task force the
work that these committees are
doing to spread high quality
legal representation throughout
New Mexico is significant and
very exciting I believe that
this bill will move you and New
Mexico to be leaders across the
country and I'm asking for your
support for Senate bill one
twenty seven thank you for
having me.
Next we have Lindsey Fuks.
Request to pass my time for
others here to support the bill.
I A. as in the children's choir
program director for the AFC and
what about.
Next we had Marianne staining.
I believe she locked up and that
concludes public comment on this
bill.
Thank you and
Senator at you know we had a few
questions on the floor in and so
I want to kind of mention some
staff to the committee members.
I have no problem with the bill
and what you're trying to do in
support but the out year funding
it is is what we need to really
work on and how we're gonna
handle that funding source well
we know that currently we're
roughly a hundred million
dollars short we can have the
federal funds in this year.
So I I really want to sit down
with you guys and and I will
vote on this bill today that the
that the committee members ask
their questions and figure that
out year funding source because
I don't want to start a program
and and and and have to stop it
or figure out where to pull
money from one program to do
another.
So we need to figure out the
long term funding source and and
then the joint resolution has to
pass correctly before this can
become in effect is that
correct.
Mr chairman if I could judge
Delaney.
This resolution eleven not have
to pass for the office to be
created under the statute the
office would be created but it
doesn't have the complete
independence from the judiciary
that the constitutional
amendment would get it and so
the goal is to have that
complete independence from the
judiciary from the Supreme Court
through the constitutional
amendment but the office can
still be created in the
judiciary under as a semi
independent office through the
staff you and and what I need
for you to understand Mr chair
is that.
Use the turkeys are already
being contracted with and there
is already an allocation in the
unified budget to deal with that
but realistically we're paying
for bad service and if the state
of New Mexico doesn't invest in
high quality representation with
regard to these families we will
continue to have extended time
in care which costs the state a
large amount of money I'm as
well as the long term socio
economic impacts of all of these
families going forward when we
don't break the cycle of abuse
and it continues on and we have
generations of families that end
up in our system.
Judge I'm I'm not gonna argue to
point to the bill with you are
you the longevity of the program
and how we fund that in in if
they are chose to
contract with judges that were
our.
The attorneys that were
inadequate that that's on them
that's not on us that's their
responsibility.
So what I want to make sure is
we don't start a program that we
can't.
Fund and then have to change in
the long term longevity this
program I I agree with the
person is more important than
anything and so I want to make
sure that we have that
conversation.
Mailing take a day or two in
center we may put it back on but
we'll go to questions from
committee members so we can get
through those and so Center
Rodriguez you have your hand
thank you Mr chairman and I just
want to think Senator Lopez for
bringing this forward and our
justices and judges and in that
everyone who testified it's
obvious that the Natalie
compassion but the determination
to do something meaningful to
change this
into something much better than
what we have today it is clear
and I I certainly appreciate
that you know what has been
missing always in the state is
that direct focus the focus that
we need to truly a given the
attention to families and
children that have the special
abuse cases and the collected
abuse cases and this would be
all income encompassed into one
streamlined office in one
streamlined focus to want to
really have better outcomes so I
want to say thank you to one
Senator Lopez and everyone else
here today for continuing to to
to try to help in this area and
I I yeah I know that you know we
will do everything we can to
come up with something here to
see if there's any possibility
that we can get this done once
and for all and go from there
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
center Candelaria.
No questions thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
See anybody else's hand raised.
Secretary Blalock you are on
could I ask you a question.
In case you their minute ago
could you jump off.
R. C. Y. FTE and and maybe are
they are sisters.
See you sorry Mr meeting this
morning but I I got kind of Mr
secretary
In CYFD it is there any any
federal funding that we could
fund this for children's
advocacy children's court is
army there any revenue sources
that we could look at.
Yes members of the committee I I
appreciate the question.
Recently the federal government
ACS is allowed for forty funding
which is the federal funding
stream for representation of
children in the juvenile court.
And so that's something that we
just started setting up with the
AOC that's why I think the
timing for the setting of this
office from a fiscal perspective
actually perfect because there
will be new federal revenue
that'll come in the next few
years we've got some preliminary
projections that looks like it's
probably between one and one
point five million dollars per
year new federal dollars which I
think will at least come close
if not meet the new money needs
for the provision in the next
five years well.
Thank you.
I believe in in chief judge
I'm the chief from council.
I don't remember the name of
COVID but you said in in five to
seven years just to be a
seventeen million dollar program
correct.
Over us if we are able to fully
implement everything as
recommended start Mr chair as
recommended by the task force
with the with the I want to
quote you the wrong numbers with
the five point seven million
that is currently allocated to
the court appointed attorney
funds attracted from not plus
the way the forty works is those
are matching dollars and so
there has to be general fund in
order to match to make that that
money from title for either we
heard from the secretary grow
and so we estimate with that
potentially we could get up to
four point three million of that
title forty funding with an
overall budget and so.
If we were able to get this
after the.
Optimum which the task force
recommended we would be looking
at a seven million dollar
increase over the next five to
seven years however.
We don't have to get everything
that we want here one in order
to make this more successful
than it is right now and so we
are the this program has always
adapted with the budgets and so
it just lost money when the
courts lost money and we adapted
in in games money when the
courts gain money and we adapted
but there's no way this can be a
for priority with the court when
the court is trying to manage
districts around the state and
that's one of the reasons that
it needs to be moved it also in
the statute allows for people to
give yes there are people around
that in the on the United States
in New Mexico extremely
passionate I mean you saw senior
justice retired justice my as is
still working on this after
twenty years to we believe that
gifs could come from to help us
an additional funding source and
so we do not think the left for
the general budget is going to
be something that is prohibited
of this office building create.
Yes.
I just need.
Center if I could Mr chairman
justice be here would like to
add also.
Okay justice thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I just want to
reiterate that.
The creation of the office can
be funded with current existing
funds it's the expansion of the
office that will be ten
dependent upon additional
resources and that expansion as
as has been testified to is
pretty nominal per year it's
anywhere from one point seven
two maybe two point three
depending on how we want to
expand so that if indeed there
were limitations on our our
resources in New Mexico we could
choose to still operate
independently.
From the judiciary as an
independent family
representation office within the
confines of whatever we're
budgeted so I I I don't want to
leave the committee and you Mr
chair with the impression that
we're we're always going to be
expanding every year every year
only if we're given the funding
for that expansion would be
proceed down that path it's the
creation of the independent
office that is critical this
year and there's a dish there's
already resources to fund
existing operations thank you Mr
chair.
Yes but whenever we do an
expansion and and and and grows
everybody comes in for a budget
increase repair regardless AOC
will come in for a budget
increase and and they will give
us their numbers and we'll see
what we can afford expanded and
I really do believe in this I
think you got a lot of hard work
into it I just want to make sure
you know.
That when we do this that you
can grow and can expand and we
planned for in our budget and
we've given you the ability to
do the right thing for our
children.
That that's the number one thing
I want to make sure that we
don't create a problem that we
under fund in New Mexico like we
do a lot of things we have a lot
of problems and we never fix the
one problem at a time we just
keep adding to problems are
turning a little bit of water
here and I dropped there may
never fix that thing so I want
to give you guys the best are we
can make sure that we understand
that the committee understand
that there's not a lot of floor
debate in that you guys long
slow yourself.
Center that's All I Want to do
is is maybe I want to get with
you over the weekend and and
let's talk about the I will put
you on first thing Monday to get
this wrapped up I will not hold
up your bill I just want to make
sure that when we do this
we don't create another thing
that we under fund and people
are underserved when we were
trying to do the right so
Senator is are you alright with
that.
Mr.
To our conversation.
Mr chairman I look forward to
our conversation this weekend
yeah thank you and I'm gonna
reach out to the CYFD secretary
and have my staff maybe start
this evening a little bit for a
little while since Friday and
see what other sources are out
there and how we can convicts I
just I think I've said this I
don't want to start something
and then under funded and then
not give enough money to succeed
and I want to make sure C. so Mr
Chairman just on that point in
closing in the Senator
Candelaria the I think really
HSD should be brought to the
table some of the services that
were described as being offered
through this kind of multi
disciplinary approach some of
that should be able to be picked
up by Medicaid and we should be
able to get federal matching
dollars so I'd strongly
encourage folks to take a look
at Dr Scrase is advice on how we
can try to get Medicaid to cover
for at least some of that money
and generate more thank you.
Thank you senator Candelaria we
will reach out to secretary
Scrase over the weekend in
center you'll be first on the
agenda on Monday and hopefully
we'll have some results for the
future and and make sure we.
We.
Do the right thing.
I appreciate it I appreciate Mr
chairman thank you the
importance of thank you it is it
is important for me to because I
think it's going to work.
So thank you.
Committee members are we will
not meet tomorrow
yeah we had a few bills left in
in our skew.
So we will meet Monday I may
reach out to Google you over the
weekend there are all of the
over the weekend make sure we
want to sit face to face on
Monday for you and maybe one by
one or two by two we're getting
close to wrapping up House Bill
to.
I think it's committees formed
and people review languages and.
Get ready for house bill two
since for about two weeks away
from sessions thank you guys I
appreciate it.
Have a good weekend.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
