So.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm here today the
Senate bill fifty one.
This is a a consumer bill.
It came out of the governor's
drug task force this last summer
Dr MacNamee is the chair of the
yes force she might have been is
going to be heard.
One minutes.
And
the be sidestepped American any
we had page to home all from
the.
Office of the superintendent of
insurance.
I miss Tina diplomacy the health
policy adviser to the governor.
So Mr chair the members of the
committee the Senate bill fifty
one sorry.
We don't have any of teacher.
That
new substitute this committee.
Okay all right let me get it he.
We came out of another
committee.
Areas is going to participate on
soon missions out fine I can
wait to get my breath.
Yes this is.
Yep this.
Sen here we don't have any
substitutes correct.
No this Mr chair that substitute
I have came out of tax and
business.
One of the.
We are.
Thanks go ahead.
Thank.
Yeah of care choose handout that
document the prepared for your
committee the talks about drug
costs here in the
State and across the country
these are
materials that she gathered what
she was doing the drug task
force for the governor we've
taken the recommendations for
the drug task force and divided
them into two bills this one is
a consumer bill the other one
the other bill Senate bill
fourteen our regulatory issues
for the pharmacy benefit
managers and that's in Senate
bill fourteen and that's going
over to Judiciary.
So Mister chair members of the
committee this has to do with
banning copay accumulators and
have and having our maximize use
review these are issues that
affect consumers and their
pocketbooks when of the pharmacy
benefit manager when I'm gonna
do my best on this one because
she's the expert but when of
pharmacy benefit manager works
with the entity that they're
they're working with the
insurance company etcetera the
This is miss Tina diplomacy from
the governor's office in our is
I said our other people will be
coming in.
They can they have these coupons
that can help defray the cost of
your deductible but they counted
against your deductible so that
you really don't have the cash
savings you have a coupon
savings so there are fourteen
states that have banned copay
accumulators because it actually
takes of money.
Our makes you pay more money for
your drugs in your prescriptions
the maximizer is are the coupons
that are divided evenly
throughout the year rather than
at one time and so I just drive
mechanism would say she
specializes she is the director
of the New Mexico cancer center
a private entity that issue is
state you know when you have a
very specific illness you might
be on a drug and then it might
be changed.
because the drug is not
F. you know it is not showing
efficacy you might have bad
reactions to it it's cetera so
maximizer is the coupon that is
used throughout the year so it
doesn't really help you up front
so this bill is a consumer
protection bill it is as I
mentioned it's implemented in
fourteen states we originally
started with this in the health
and Human Services Committee and
then the governor's office
included some of the drug force
task force recommendations into
this the end section G. of each
section it has language that.
Make thinking about three bill.
Okay it has language that
prohibits our state from doing
anything that federal law would
not permit so some of the
applicants wanted us to put in
very specific language about the
iris but I arrests statutes and
rules can change so in section
G. throughout each section of
this bill it just has to enact
language about we can't do
anything that federal law
doesn't permit us to do.
And Mr glossy would you like to
say a few words thank you
senator Mr chair members of the
committee Gina the blessing
health policy adviser in the
governor's office what you have
before you is the work that was
completed during the interim but
led by Dr Barbara Mack in many
it was a governor's task force
to really look at the rising
costs of prescription drugs so
which would you have in front of
you is the result of that work
the investigation of what was
recommended from the task force.
Thank you and Mister chair I'm
sorry I did find one more
handout that explains copay
accumulator copay maximizer
copays and deductibles so
perhaps the committee would like
to have this.
To just help with the
discussion.
And then I'm sure there are
opponents and supporters in the
audience and and we're happy to
take your questions.
Before you go to the audience.
I will tell you that the other
day I don't know how this really
works right I had to pay six
hundred twenty nine dollars for
prescription right.
And then one other time and pay
a thousand dollars for
prescription.
And luckily that I have the
ability to get those right when
you talk to a person that
doesn't have that ability that's
what we really need to fix in
this that's what the on fair is
about it's when those lobbyists
come up better make sure that
they got their stuff right
because a majority.
That let's go to the audience
for those in support.
I'm in support.
Those in opposition in the
audience.
Let's get the thing is there's
three so come on out.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Brent more
of a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
in which you have to understand
about this bill is there are two
things there are coupons in
there coupon accumulators
coupons are used by the
pharmaceutical manufacturers to.
Don't have told now good all
right thank you for that coupons
are you selectively throughout
the year to incentivize certain
folks to use certain high cost
drugs cumulated Sir used by
health plans and PBMs to try to
offset that but the real
underlying issue which we all
know is drugs are very expensive
and coupons are there to try to
incentivize our drive behavior
the real underlying issue is why
that why don't the
pharmaceutical manufactures just
reduce their prices one thing
you should know about coupons in
the federal government has to do
that has determined that those
are illegal kickbacks and they
do not allow them in the
Medicaid program for in the
Medicare program so when you
look to this bill and you're
looking at accumulators you're
looking to try to ban the use of
something that we use to try to
combat coupons which are not
allowed on the federal level and
you should really take a hard
look at it our our suggestion
for the bill and for
pharmaceutical manufacturers is
just lower your prices don't use
coupons selectively to try to
incentivize our drive behavior
make coupons allowed all year
long and to everyone you can
reduce your prices so you have
to understand the difference
from the coupons and the coupon
accumulators and our suggestion
to this body into others is if
you really want to reduce
prices.
Just get rid of the coupons and
reduce prices that is what we
would ask of this can we stand
in opposition to this bill thank
you very much.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is a
Frank Roland I'm a pharmacist
with Presbyterian health plan
and the executive director of
pharmacy services there want to
follow up on what was just said
about coupon so funds are not
available for all drugs are
available for very small subset
of drugs and using more
expensive brand name drugs it's
one way that manufacturers can
bypass copays or high deductible
health plans or or other ways of
driving innovation to more cost
effective agents generics right
so our goal is to help and is
that a low cost of care for
clients or members who funds by
pass that ability because
members gets established on a
very expensive drug when there's
a far more say equally safe and
far more cost effective but
that's available in in terms of
accumulators the picks winners
and losers so only some people
get the benefit of a coupon the
vast majority members don't so
those members that get the
benefit of a coupon and it would
apply to their team leader they
get that benefit the the rest
the members so so it's kind of a
win lose for those those
members.
Thank you for let me speak.
Mr chairman members of the
committee model shows registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross blue
shield of New Mexico and we
stand in opposition to this
legislation.
Yes we have all been working
through the interim on and the
issue of drug costs and how we
try to lower those drug costs
and then I'd like to say about
this bill we agree completely
with what they're saying about
Vigil coupons Dr certain drugs
to certain populations and that
basically those should be
eliminated but with respect to
drug pricing we need to look at
transparency a long the supply
chain and as we talked all
through the interim that was
supposed to be a focus of a big
part of this task force that
never really has come into play
we now have two bills that have
become very confusing which is
Senate bill fifty one and Senate
bill fourteen and those have
been amended in and out in and
out we're not even really sure
frankly what the cost of this is
we have some very high numbers
of what is going to do to our
our population and our our
members but we do stand in
support of transparency through
out the supply chain and for it
to stop and think at the door of
the drug manufacturers we think
is a real problem and not why
that has not been taken into
account and you do it these
bills we stand in opposition of
this bill and look for
transparency along the supply
chain thank.
The morning Mr chair members of
the committee on Pat block with
terror consulting registered
lobbyist for prime therapeutics
and we rise today and respectful
opposition to Senate bill fifty
one it's important to note that
copay assistance programs and
manufacturer coupons are not
need based assistance programs
in fact as you've already heard
the target only those of certain
types of insurance including the
plans covering public employees
and retirees like me I I get my
health insurance through the
retiree health care authority
and so the FIR points out some
of those costs but it might
contain an omission I wanted to
bring to your attention the FIR
for house bill one thirty two
included a multi million dollar
impact the retiree health care
authority that didn't make it
into the new FIR for this
committee supper house bill
fifty one when the language that
costs that cost increase came
across.
Well I will also say that
several new policy concepts are
introduced in the committee set
up that weren't in the original
bill these concepts were
included in the new bill the use
of excuse me they directly limit
PBMs and the plans and their
ability to use the time tested
cost saving tool of guiding and
released a quality providers who
agreed to provide their services
at a substantial cost savings.
When it released choose to use
those providers insure chair
those cost savings with the
enrollees at the point of
service this left legislation
would specifically prevent those
cost savings from happening with
the and being shared with a
little.
So we oppose any legislation
that will increase for sure that
prescription drug costs for New
Mexicans and this legislation
would do just that thank you
very much thank you one to
provide economy if they're paid
lobbyist I'm not gonna take and
they they got a job they can
come to the capital there's any
people that are not lobbyist.
Because of that but all of them
I believe they're both represent
a.
Point seventy Mr chair.
Mr chair quickly I tell see
Canada on behalf of the New
Mexico chamber of commerce I I
won't repeat what has already
been stated but we appreciate
the tension and we oppose this
proposal because
many reasons but we appreciate
the tension the legislature and
the executive to look into cost
drivers of health care in New
Mexico our members support
transparency initiatives that
address the entire prescription
drug drug supply chain to ensure
accountability but this proposal
does not provide for that and
only first focuses on specific
elements so that's why we we
oppose thank you I don't think
we're gonna hear anything
different zoom there lobbyist
state can come the capital city
home.
To make any would you like to
anything for we go to questions
yes doctor Machen any is one of
my experts she was the chair of
the drug task force and page two
Hommel works at the offices
superintendent of insurance this
really is a consumer bill so
Dr MacNamee is really the person
who has the expertise in this
area thank I want to ask your
expertise but I have the hand
everybody in the room does it.
Thank you very much.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee for allowing me to
speak and I apologize for being
late I wanted to address several
topics that I'm sure you heard
in the line up just before this
one is the FIR so I investigated
the FIR because that's why we're
in front of this committee with
the third committee assignment
and what I found was that the
brand new staff of GST had the
nice offer from their vendor to
write their FIR for them their
vendor is CVS Caremark CVS
Caremark has a distinct conflict
of interest because they are
number four in the of fortune
five hundred and they stand to
make a significant amount of
profit by blocking this
particular bill they were also
concerned at GSD whether or not
that would take the rebates away
from them this bill would not do
that if they charge a minimal or
no copays to the people that
they serve the rest of the
rebate would go to the purchaser
of the health plan which would
be GSD so I think that is not an
argument that is worthy of your
consideration the rebates as you
heard discussed are not on
generics less than one percent
of the drugs that get these
rebates have a less expensive
alternative for patients they
are brand name drugs with no
generics and they are ascential
chemotherapy arthritis medicines
multiple sclerosis medicines in
my practice alone we had three
hundred or nine hundred and
sixty eight of our patients
needed oral chemotherapy over a
third of those needed our
practice to provide copay
assistance for them or over a
third of the New Mexicans we
treat would not be able to get
their chemotherapy because New
Mexicans simply cannot afford it
it does that.
Program would go to the people
who are most in need which are
the people who have cancer bad
arthritis multiple sclerosis et
cetera.
We sent to the Texas state I
think this is most telling in
the state of Texas and this is
not part of Texas we want to
emulate because in twenty
sixteen about fifty eight
million dollars of profit went
to the pharmacy benefit managers
five years later a hundred four
percent hundred four thousand
percent increase fifty seven
billion dollars of profit.
I five hundred fifty eight and
five point seven eight thank you
I'm doing this for members of
the but that was this is the
amount that went to the PBMs
bottom line at the expense of
the people who are purchasing
their insurance that's why this
is a consumer bill in a business
bill because those of us to
purchase health insurance for
our employees are paying for
this profit from the PDM and
this graph that you have if you
look very closely you see the
little bitty green one on the
top that's the amount that goes
to the patients for this and we
think it ought to go to the
patients it's not just cancer
it's even diabetes if they can
get rid of some of these copay
processes we would have better
compliance and adherence for
diabetic patients and the
estimates from old data two
thousand and twelve health
affairs shows that we would save
about a thousand dollars per
diabetic in our state and what
that means is we know that most
of those people are on Medicaid
so this falls directly to the
bottom line thank you they will
of told you that their premiums
will go up if they allow if we
do not get rid of the if we are
allowed to the Caribbean and
restrain the PPO but the data
shows that that is not the case
Milliman did a study and cut and
they're big actuarial for Kaiser
family funded a study and
several states have had the
first hand experience to say the
premiums do not run by when the
control of these things they
will said that CVS CMS Medicare
does not allow rebates but the
average per patient out of
pocket for Medicare patients is
four hundred and forty five
dollars as compared to the
average silver.
Portable Care Act patient who
pays four thousand eight hundred
and seventy nine dollars and
these are our poorest people who
are on the silver plans under
our exchange so when we look at
what the CVS and CVS Caremark
Optum Centene and other
corporations do when they take
our independent pharmacies and
they take the money from the
independent pharmacy which is a
really important part of the
infrastructure of health care
and every local community when
they take that money out of
state not only do we lose that
independent person who is buying
locally hiring locally using
local accountants and attorneys
etcetera the estimate is that
nine hundred and three million
dollars leave the state because
it goes to the states where the
PBMs are in charge so for all of
these reasons we think this is a
strong consumer bill yes it is
complicated but drug purchasing
is complicated we have learned
from other states the
transparency is absolutely
necessary but not sufficient to
control drug pricing and that's
why we want to give our
superintendent of insurance
office the ability to truly
investigate this and to make
sure that these corporations
have to pay by some regulations
that the rest of us live with
every day thank you.
You want to think about this
year thank you Mr chair of
members of the committee
obviously that money thank you
Fund.
Meet with the office of the
superintendent of insurance I.
I love the provision.
We're gonna members let me ask
you something Dr my community
you said that GST CVS offered to
write the the FIR for GST or GST
request the FIR language from Mr
chairman members of the
committee I was not privy to
that conversation but in my
conversations with the brand new
members of GST who'd been there
less than a couple days the FIR
was provided to them as a
necessary thing that was part of
their work to get done for these
committees and so they said
here's an FIR send it down.
And so the.
I think there's a violation of
the contract when they're
writing FIR is percent NFI
owners to GST for us to review I
think FY are done internally
should have been written by GSD
maybe some input but when a
contracting pharmaceutical
company or whatever you call
center in FY party GSD at dawn
is sitting next to me let's get
a letter to the Attorney General
let's answer that question if
that was a violation their
contract of on the on to
influence on the legislature in
trying to.
Fluff and an F. I. R. in in
their yeah but I I'm I bet
there's language in the in in
the in the contract that says
this this really unethical.
And it's unethical for GST the
even have entertained that.
Mr chair
it's been many years since I've
been at risk management but when
I was there we had our own
independent actuarial firm on
contract to assist us with these
questions I have no idea if
that's being done now or not
this is a pharmaceutical company
that the.
that either did it on their own
what is GST requested them to do
it is GST want to write it but I
imagine in their contracts
somewhere it says that you can't
have on do influencer or
something or make a F. I R. look
something favorable to them when
they're under state contract the
stock to make any but let's
let's ask the turning general
that question that that bothers
me quite a bit FIR is always
going to be quite a bit because
they can be influenced by
legislators that can be
influenced by lobbyists they can
be influenced by a lot of people
but when they're influenced by
country something that has a
contract with the state.
I think there's a big problem
right there and and I think
that's on fair to us as a
legislator when you read F. I.
ours we're soon in any member
can say we're assuming that
agencies wrote the F. I. R..
That are telling us the truth
that's what we're assuming we
start we just because we don't
have the settlement of the
anybody who has a medical
background we don't have any
this is one of the hardest bills
are going to do because it's
hard to comprehend us for
financial committee when the
state and the cost but we may
not understand all the other
language and so I want to make
sure that have questions from
committee members.
Senator.
Make a list.
Chair Senators Rodriguez madam
Steinborn Senator thank you Mr
I'm.
I can't remember who it is but
there's an ad that says you know
coming here and you know our.
You can get your your medicines
for half the price return to the
price of whatever it is then in
anybody else if you if you come
to our pharmacy but then it says
this is not insurance I wish I
could remember who that was
from.
So good are ex yes so how does
this happen they can do it and
we have to have a lot of good Mr
chair Senator I'm gonna have
after making enough.
Thank so about fifty percent of
the cost of the drug is added
after it leaves the manufacture
by the pharmacy benefit managers
so if you bypass that process
particularly for generic drugs
and eighty five percent of the
drugs that are prescribed in the
United States are generics but
if you can by pass the pharmacy
benefit managers in the
insurance process that are
adding profit for themselves to
this to every prescription
written then you can bring that
price down significantly it's
useful for the drugs that good
are ex can carry it is not
useful for the exceedingly
expensive drugs that patients
with serious illnesses require.
And so Mr chair.
So what we're.
With this the help me because
I'm still struggling here.
In my wife is a.
Kidney pancreas transplant lots
of trucks that I'm I have no
idea what they really cost I
just know I don't pay.
What we're trying to do here is
tell the PBMs that there's that
there's a cap on what they can
do.
Is that in essence what it's
trying to do Mr chair Senator Dr
making any thank you Mr chair
Senator.
What we are trying to do is to
regulated industries for that
for the past five years has
taken advantage of the lack of
regulations they used to be a
basically administrative
function where they would go
around the manufactures and
negotiate prices which would
then be passed on to the people
paying the bills then they
figured out that if they charged
as a percentage of the cost of
the drug they could make a
significant amount more money
and that's when the costs
started to really rise over that
last five years and so what
we're trying to do here is to
return PBMs to their original
administrative function by
requiring that instead of it
being paid based on the
percentage of the cost of the
drug where it's in their
advantage to have more expensive
drugs rather the less expensive
drugs that they're paid a flat
fee for an administrative
function and truly fulfill that
mission of lowering drug costs
for everyone.
Who is your question answered
Senator but okay so Mister
chair.
I guess my big concern is is the
market I'm I'm always concerned
that when when any government
city county state federal.
interferes with the market
ultimately bad things happen.
Might sound good it might feel
good it might actually do good
for a little bit but ultimately.
The people you're trying to.
Regulate or go find a another in
worst way to get around that
regulation.
and so that's that's my concern
here I mean.
I like the idea that we did the
drugs are to be more affordable
I think that's true I also think
that there's a lot of forces out
there that are taking advantage
of like you said so the driving
up costs to necessarily.
But I'm struggling with with how
we're actually going to keep
that price down because they
will find another path.
So.
Please.
I I just I'm not sure that I am
not not sure that I get where
you're going in in in that in
that it'll work let me put it
that way.
Mr chair Senator would you like
Dr McKinney to respondent.
Yes if you have a thank you Mr
chairman Senator you are
absolutely correct that this is
become a distortion of the
market to the level that the FTC
is now investigating the
pharmacy benefit managers I have
a letter in my computer's copy
of going to CVS Caremark
demanding significant amounts of
information because when you
have a demo monopoly you destroy
competition and seventy five
percent of the prescription the
come in the country are managed
by three large pharmacy benefit
managers and ninety five percent
are done by the largest six
pharmacy benefit managers so
what we're trying to do is level
the playing field we do want
them to work to get pharmacies
in network but pay them the same
amount so that we can maintain
those independent pharmacies and
therefore maintain competition
what we've done with the
combination of Senate bill
fifteen fifty one and fourteen
is to try to find all of the
ways that we can that the
pharmacy benefit managers can
distort that market and plug
those loopholes you are probably
right that they will find new
ways but it's our job to be
vigilant about that and maybe
back in the future to try to
plug the new loophole that is
been found.
Mr chair.
Maybe going back to nineteen
eighty four back to the future
monthly all right.
But
All right all right I think I
understand I'm not sure that you
get where you're going where you
want to go.
In what I fear is that we just
keep doing more more more
regulations until drug prices
ultimately are higher.
Because.
In general regulations cost
somebody something somewhere so
thank you Mr.
Senator Steinborn.
Chair.
Well thank you all for your work
and thank you for this bill and
doctor Machen any thank you so
much for your leadership on this
issue I spent some time working
on this issue in a bipartisan
with former representative bandy
when I was on the house
appropriation we found out we
had different state agencies
paying radically different
prices for the same prescription
drug thank what are we working
together when we negotiating
cost containment liner so I
entered the world of the PVM
and.
And in it is like water Senator
share it's like you can squeeze
it one way and it'll come out
another way and you have to
have.
Equally or greater expertise
taking on the system if you're
going to contain these prices I
feel like Dr mac in any is that
person and others but
Any right so I do have a few
questions about your bill and
how it'll work
Number one and I'll just go
through real quickly so you can
get quick answers to what types
of insurance.
Carriers does this help people
with and what's excluded.
So Mr chair Senator I think our
superintendent insurance office
can answer that.
Mr chair Senator the types of
insurances will apply to is the
fully insured in the.
Market and public employees in
the state so in total it's
probably about four hundred
thousand people right now all
the the fact more to Jennifer
but the end of the public health
emergency okay thank you Mr
chair compared to see again and
that doesn't include self
insured plans Mr chair Senator
it does not at this time of the
those self funded plans are free
to negotiate these types of
terms in click you Mr does
include the publicly public
plans I back you know publicly
funded health care agencies Mr
chair Senator yes not your
amendment not not Medicare or
Medicaid or Medicare right and
on the subject of that have we I
didn't see it is still deal with
three forty P. pricing at all
maximizing that.
Mr chair Senator now it does
not.
That the committee will speak to
the more.
That's excluded Mr chair of
Senator this bill does not take
on three forty B. wait figured
it was large enough as it is and
we try to limit scope however
the attempts to expand three
forty B. into a contract
pharmacies delivers a new
revenue stream to pharmacy
benefit managers because those
contract pharmacies then create
this three forty B. discount and
mostly they keep it they may
give some of it back to the
three forty B. hospital who's
hoping to see it back but mostly
when we you use contract
pharmacies it goes to the to the
PBM that runs that contract
pharmacy particularly with their
wholly owned ones like CVS and
so three forty B. pricing from
my college that's like Medicaid
or Medicare pricing simply Mr
chair Senator it is a form of
pricing that can be negotiated
for very large group our
correctional systems actually
uses uses three forty B. if when
we develop the health care
authority there will be
discussions among those groups
whether or not three forty B.
pricing will be pursued to lower
the costs okay thank you Mr
chairman at the center and so I
just.
As we look at different things
here that retailers have to pass
on as it applies to cost shares
or column it's just interesting
that maybe you could have
included three forty B. as
another thing that that they
would also have to account for
pass on to a consumer maybe I'm
wrong on that but.
I was not printed go ahead.
In any thank you Mr chair
Senator three forty B. is
limited to a very specific
category of introduce a not for
profit hospitals at center and
I'm not going to affect the the
three forty B. discount does not
go directly to the patient so
yes that needs to be discussed
because the three forty B.
program tends to raise the
prices so that farmers can
offset that three forty B.
discount that goes to select
hospitals and other institutions
but there is a lot of data in
the literature that says that
very little of the charity care
that we're supposed to be
getting through the three forty
B.
of funding actually goes to
patients in fact three forty
beef hospitals tend to deliver
less charity care.
Thank you I have a question how
do you know.
Index we index one of the when
the mechanisms for determining
price total amount of pharmacy
will be reimbursed from an
insurer.
Kind of how do we know that how
much they're reimbursed that's
kind of throughout the bill I'm
looking at page two line twenty
for example.
The bill.
Yes of the committee substitute
yeah that taxed when sixty.
I
on page two line twenty twenty.
Remember yes Dr making any.
Mr chair Senator an excellent
question one of the things that
we are working hard to empower
the superintendent of insurance
office it is the requirement
that all of these prices must be
delivered with penalties if they
do not to the superintendent of
insurance so that we can
determine that we the
superintendents because these
are proprietary the
superintendent of insurance will
have the ability to know whether
or not the laws being followed
and the prices are being
disclosed thank you yeah and
drug pricing transparency I know
that groups like Health Action
New Mexico been working on this
for years to try to get more
transparency in pricing.
so is it possible.
Just to be clear that all of
these discounts could lower
someone's out of pocket to zero.
That when you factor in all
these discounts.
Mr chair Senator yes it is
possible but pro the discounts
are the rebates on the copays
and co insurances are set and
determined by the insurance
company so it is our goal that
any rebates and discounts go
first to pay the patients out of
pocket costs they're they're
costsharing and then anything
that is left over over that
amount would go back to the
insurance company or the
purchaser of that insurance.
So it could it could if you if
you include rebates and
different different things like
that then it could not offer co
a co pay.
To reduce it further which is
pretty amazing and then I want
to go on to page four.
I thought this is pretty amazing
on line eighteen.
Well actually line twenty one.
That insurers will not charge a
different costsharing amount for
drugs to pay that non affiliated
pharmacies so this is pretty
wild so I different pharmacies
charge different prices does
this mean you will get the same
lowest price no matter where you
go for direct.
Mr chair Senator another
excellent question.
What happens currently is the
thing called spread pricing
we're in order to be in network
the pharmacy and the little
local pharmacy has to apply and
so the pharmacy benefit managers
under this bill would be
required to reimburse your local
independent pharmacist the same
amount they route they apply to
their own own pharmacies like
Caremark the PBM owned CDS the
pharmacies so they couldn't say
we're gonna pay you less
independent pharmacy and paid
our pharmacies more.
Interesting.
So thank you Mr so pharmacy
could charge more I suppose.
In market up more and and you
get higher prices there for me
Walgreens they have their own.
The structure I think but anyway
okay but we're time at the
ensuring ensure prices
I just want to ask you a fake
one final question which is on
page five online seventeen.
Page five line seventeen yes and
this language is also throughout
the bill that we allow.
The remainder of these discounts
or whatever to be credited to
the insurer.
And so I was just curious about
that will be
How does that work so
Mr chair Senator we're gonna
have page of from the
superintendent of insurance
office answer that.
Mr chair Senator the remainder
will be credited to the insurer
the insurer for the most part
will pass that along.
Actions for me because there
happens to be through the
individual market on how much of
ACA on how much they can.
Descend on medical services
administration.
Okay thank you finally I just
want to add on my thought that I
think having of having a vendor
right your FIR what I read there
in previous the in seat and
Caremark or whatever was like a
like us the those.
Sure for that program and even
threatening to reduce benefits
if the bill happen yes pretty
incredible Mr I agree and.
Any agency listening.
Don't ever do that.
That's your job to scrutinize
scrutinize that so
yeah thank you very much for the
bills right so the committee is
almost.
Thank you Mr chairman of the.
In the thank you to our panel.
For sponsoring this so I guess
in trying to understand from the
testimony that was given on the
on the coupons who authorizes
those.
Mr chair Senator drive
mechanism.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
another great question so the
coupons are not actually
components are not things you
click out of the paper what
happens is that on specific
drugs where the co insurance set
by the insurance company could
be as high as twenty percent of
the cost of the drugs and we see
those for oral chemotherapy
where the drug can be five
thousand dollars of the patients
supposed to pay a thousand
dollars every month for their co
insurance.
What happens is we apply we pay
about three people in the office
at the cost of about two hundred
forty thousand dollars a year
for their salaries to sit and
watch the copay foundations
where people put free money and
for the patients we apply for
that money fill out paperwork
get that money and pay that
patients
co pay for that so what a copay
accumulator would do is say
that's not fair you can't count
that money and then when the
foundation money runs out and
the patient still has a thousand
dollar payment and they don't
have it they can't afford the
drugs.
Mr chairman of a just a little
bit more of following up on the
system.
Of the I'm a similar case so
Senator then when you mentioned
about his experience with the
prescription.
The end of this last week I had
the same thing.
And so they quoted me an amount.
And this was the pharmacist
though us actually doing the
transaction.
The the the she said well let me
see if I can find you a
discount.
And the discount was way way
down compared to what it was
going to be.
The the the question that I have
is so.
First of all is do they have so
much information on me.
That that only apply to me for
does the person in front of me
or the person behind me can get
the same treatment.
Mr chair Senator of it's not
information on you as much as it
is information on your insurance
plan and what rebates and
discounts have been applied.
So Mister chairman that means
that.
Possibility could not apply to
the person in front or behind
now this the second part to that
is set off.
What if the pharmacist would
assess.
Well that's what it is.
Did not offer a discount.
Mr chair Senator if the
pharmacist if there is no
discount or the pharmacist does
not search for that discount.
then you are stuck with paying
the price that's quoted and
that's why about thirty percent
of prescriptions get offended at
the pharmacy counter which
results in poor health outcomes.
Miss Mister chairman the I guess
that's hard because.
When you see someone that needs
a.
The
problem alright.
We should all be be treated the
same.
You know and I understand
insurance versus not having.
But you know on the other hand
of.
You know the big difference of
twenty can be.
The.
So we'll just continue listening
to the rest of to some but thank
you.
Senator Padilla.
You can only for Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Thank you Senator Stefanics for
continuing to just carry that
that torch all the on the stuff
thank you so much I know it's a
big lift so Mister chairman on
the coupons one thing that I'm
just kind of.
I don't want to I think hope
this doesn't sound the way it
might send that to be insulted
but that is a kind of gimmicky
Billy go away without really two
plans just not appear at some
point.
Mr chair Senator I'm gonna have
doctor making any that start to
address that Mr chair Senator it
would be nice if they actually
just had a clear price that was
determined without all of the
rebates and coupons and
discounts etcetera that goes on
because every time you have
something like that it's a way
for for money to vanish from the
system.
So and I guess you can answer
that right because that's just
market conditions and whatever
okay and I think I heard in the
tent in the testimony originally
and I think it was you doctor
reckoning and good to see you by
the way thank you for all your
work we're very lucky to have
you in New Mexico
independent pharmacies I think
you said independent pharmacies
can succeed with a model like
this is is that accurate and how
how do you see that happening it
you've got one for a couple of
pharmacies there and how does
this how does this play into
that market.
Mister chairman Senator this
would absolutely help
independent pharmacies remain
viable currently with all of the
ways that money is pulled out of
independent pharmacies for
meaningless fees and and fines
and various clawbacks that occur
after the sale has been made
independent pharmacies currently
find themselves having delivered
a drug to a patient and then
being paid less than the cost of
it took them to buy that drug
for the patient so this would
eliminate that and level the
playing field between the
independent pharmacies who are
in that work with that insurance
company and the PBM owned
pharmacies who are in that work
with that insurance company so
then they can compete on service
and and knowledge of their
patients.
Senator out Mr chair I just want
to add in your in the power
point the document provided on
page two all the entities that
are involved in pharmaceutical
funds I just wanted to point
that out in this state after the
title page yes that.
So I guess in the last question
I have most of my Mardi answered
thank you to my colleagues
I guess I'm just concerned again
once again on the coupons all of
a sudden you're going down the
road and you're you're you're
feeling good about the you know
what you're able to obtain with
these coupons and is there a
possibility at all that just the
carpet can be pulled out from
under you.
And suddenly you know that this
could some of the things could
bankrupt a family.
Sir anything legislation would
prevent that or a.
Maybe a tapering off for.
Mr chair Senator your point is
well taken if we did not have
the entire bill but just a they
found that they allow the copay
accumulators are maximizes to
occur then there will be a lot
of patients who are seriously
harmed which is why in this bill
Senate bill fifty one there is
very strong language that will
prevent that from occurring.
I think that's all I have for
now thank you.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman good morning to a
Centers to families of course Dr
math in any in staff
we heard this situation this
whole scenario in the summer
this year remember
more than once in different
forms and I remember inTaos very
clearly when we were there
discussing it at length.
And.
Through the whole process I
remember thinking that I was
really see when going through a
nightmare to put it mildly I
could not believe that the
profit.
I these benefit managers are so
is so astronomical we knew there
was a lot of profit but when we
heard and continued to hear more
and more about it it is
unconscionable.
It goes to one place here and
that is the fact that maybe not
shell.
The insurances are not crediting
the patient for all these for
all the the payments and and
discounts and so on that they
receive.
When I look at this here it
resonated again I saw it in the
summer this same map the same
graph thank you for this because
pictures say a lot.
And we could see work eighty
seven percent I memorize that
number from the summer because
it was so shocking truly eighty
seven percent of these rebates
stay with the PBMs.
Their intended really for the
patient to benefit in some way
but the patient only gets
thirteen percent.
That is not acceptable and
something needs to be done this
is about people who are at their
lowest point in life.
Not only are they poor but they
are at their lowest point with
the most difficult in the sense
that they can face we should all
be grouping together to help
them come out of debt and get on
the medications they need so
they can have some comfort and
go on in life in whatever light.
And so what we're doing here.
Is hoping to be able to find the
effectuate something that is
meaningful enough for patients
that are hurting to be able to
two four if anything because
when you're that sick you can't
work.
And and you know if you have if
you have a retirement it's I
don't know how big your
retirement has to be to come up
with all these co pays and so on
but I'll tell you what if we had
to come up with a thousand a
month just for for medication
when you're sick with cancer you
know even that is humongous and
so I just can't you know when
this scenario was brought up
about GST and and the I have FIR
and so on it didn't surprise me
but it did very much disappoint
me in that this is the fox
watching the henhouse.
Thank you you know we cannot
continue to do this type of
staff to people of any whether
they're ill or not in here we
are you know with the most ill
the poor.
Reaching out for a few moments
of life and comfort and we are
still looking for more profit
for the PBMs this chili has got
to change we're looking we
mentioned fifty six billion
dollars in profit.
As one there's many other
numbers I remember seeing them
in in committee and you know it
is just is just terrible I do
have one question if you can
help me answer and thank you
doctor Mack in any you know what
truly I was looking at you and
and and listening intently of
when we were inTaos that day and
I was so grateful that we have.
Decisions like you who are
deeply caring enough to where
you are here genuinely and fully
committed to the patient and
their needs.
You are not here to advocate for
profit like we hear many times
unfortunately and so thank you
for that but I do have just for
explanation maybe you Senator or
drive mechanism on the sheet
that was passed out it's as a
copay maximizer spreads donated
money who donates the money is
that that is that like from a
foundation or it says donated
money across the entire year so
the chair gets the benefits of
two copays so Mr chair Senator
I'm gonna have drive mechanisms
thank you Mr chair Senator that
money is donated to foundations
a lot of it comes from pharma
from the manufacturers and some
of that comes from patient
advocacy funds etcetera all
right thank you thank you very
much let's see what else I had I
think
C. yes okay it was indicated and
with all due respect for for
those who stood up to speak
that's what the process is for
you to speak up and in and say
whatever you have to say whether
it's for yourself or where you
work with and we respect that
there was one of them who
mentioned that manufactures a
reduce should reduce their their
prices and stuff your face
because I know it's getting late
but but you know it's it's not
only manufactures and need to
reduce our prices this is a
ripple effect where were there
several years obviously like a
ladder of these organizations
businesses grabbing one after
the next opportunity to increase
these prices on patients and so
it is insurance companies that
is manufactures up PBMs even
pharmacies you name it it has to
be a collaborate effort if we're
going to help these patients so
Mr chairman I know I I have
expressed a lot of that
just a lot of feeling and and
and passion to get this thing
change but if you all have been
through what we went through in
the summer long days of this the
more I heard it the more I was
floored literally to see that
that's what we have no wonder
patients are saying I can't take
my cancer medication in the
morning for chemo I just cannot
afford the next thousand dollar
payment five hundred.
But you look at these numbers
and they're continuing to grow
as we speak thank you Mr
chairman hopefully we can
approve this bill quickly in.
Thank you so Rodriguez.
Go back to page four on line
twenty.
One of.
Check on something quickly if
there is a small private
pharmacy and trauma.
Munoz Chama for example I don't
know if that's right or wrong
how would that affect that for
small.
I want to see in there some in
Santa Fe I don't have any gal
Committee some in Las Vegas that
a local farm so
Mr chair you're indicating page
four line three or twenty twenty
twenty twenty twenty small funds
help.
How would that affect small
pharmacists in Springer or Las
Vegas or how does that affect
them Mr Chairman
What this would do would level
the playing field between that
small pharmacy is that a small
rural area who would then be
paid the same they couldn't do
it different costsharing so one
of the mechanisms that they do
to try to get their pharmacy
used at the disadvantage of the
local retail the pharmacist on
the pharmacy in your community
is that they say if you allow it
to be through our mail order or
go to our preferred pharmacy we
will charge you a lower copays
so they grab business from that
local pharmacy and move it to
their wholly owned pharmacy both
are in network.
And then state Senate UNM and
they have a pharmacy that right
how does that work if if I
believe in the doctor's office
they said we call the
prescription down below you just
need to pick it up does that
change anything that has that
how does that work.
Mr chair Margaret drive making
are just right.
Mr chair with with them as a
governmental entity I'm not sure
that this was affected but for
for example in the pharmacy that
is in my office it would mean
that my office would be paid the
same with the same terms of the
contract as any other pharmacy
that is in network with that and
I believe that would apply to
the UNM pharmacy but they may
have some of the rules I'm
unaware of.
Let me ask Senator wings GSD or
retiree health care contracts
with those express scripts and
whatever.
Are they allowed to set the
right in that contractor how
those rates at who sets those I
mean fifty percent margin I mean
anybody in business would love
the fifty percent margin and go
on call it a winner and then
taking small businesses out of
the market by doing this how our
those.
Right set it in GST retiree
health care so Mr chair of GST
wristband prevent group health
benefits and retiree health care
in M. CNA PS are all part of are
the interagency purchasing
collaborative they go out to our
F. P. together to have a
proposal but it's not on
individual drugs it's on how
they will keep the costs down
for the massive population and
then once they select of the
provider each of those four in
right now get to negotiate
separately with those with that
express scripts serve Caremark
as Senator Steinborn has been
working on he wants them I back
and all the groups to purchase
together said that there it
would be lower prices and all
the drugs for right now even
though there is it's an RFP
process is coordinated it's not
a purchasing a true purchasing
that's coordinate.
But it's not cost it's not a bad
project the lowest bidder gets
priority number one priority
number two you are and they're
gonna have it it is price but
it's also along with the
customer service the
availability in state for
example you get points for
having a call center in
employees who can do the work in
state versus out of state so
it's a proposal process where
points are awarded based upon a
variety of measures.
Thank.
And then just.
It still bothers me that GSD
allow that by.
How how true are really are part
of the state our FY ours then
and how good are are peas if if
some the chicken the foxes in
the chicken coop.
And and they're working together
to get all the chickens and it
it really bothers me that we're
we're not getting accurate
information when we're depending
upon agencies to give us that.
then from OSI in the in the FIR
X. as indeterminate but possibly
substantial what does that mean.
Mr chair Senator
I believe that the
FY are that we grew up on this
was for a prior versions of
them.
but it may have some according
to the requirement or something
but at this point I don't
believe it's possible side.
To inform.
What about to the health each
insurance exchange I thought we
every time I do think we have an
updated FIR written this week.
Okay Mr chair Senator the
exchange
The exchange plans
that is are offered I believe
and talking to other states they
have seen.
Decreases in the costs by
eliminating or transferring to
the rebates directly to the
consumers the original the
objections that others say
or C. isn't decrease in premium
switching.
Bridging.
Mr chair we have an example of
one or two states yes the gentle
Virginia Mr chair and have.
Members of the committee yes in
Virginia and Nevada they have
done these kinds of bills and
transferred this interestingly
CVS and Optum have also in their
own employee count plans have
decreased their copays and
deductibles almost to zero or
sometimes to zero and I've
discovered that their own
employees saves significant
money.
There in lies the truth right if
they can do it for their
employees and still make a
margin I mean they should be
able to reduce that I have a
full you know some
pharmaceutical information that
defies are made a hundred
billion dollars last year at the
lowest in seventy was forty two
point billion dollars so that's
that's how much money they're
making in pharmaceuticals and
and it's.
It's the people that can't
afford.
Their prescriptions right the
seniors that are on fixed.
Incomes with Medicaid in and
sometimes a difference in twenty
or forty dollars that means the
difference between do I pay my
light bill or should I do
baloney this week coming the
lower quality food it's all a
cost factor that relates to
their health issues and and how
we do that so I mean if we can
get some control on this I'm all
point so with that I think
Senator Steinborn.
Yup
a motion for due process in this
time board a second by Senator
Padilla.
So we want to call the roll or
do you want
Collect thank.
Yes.
Dina.
There Gonzales yes.
There have.
Yes.
Here.
I.
It
Rodriguez yes chairman of yes.
No.
Senator explains vote ninety
two.
So thank you Mr chair Senator.
The voted no because I still
don't understand and I don't
trust what's going on it'll
trusted things in here and trust
the things in here not that I
think anybody's line it's don't
understand them.
I think what you're trying to do
is renewable.
But I have to know more and and
unfortunately I don't in I don't
know what vote no so that's.
Thank you have in the past
center thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee.
This discussion has been that.
If it's working today Senator.
From some water.
We're gonna do house bill two
next
What is a dream is a dream and
set up there with you David.
That is a good.
Thank you.
This is on back order.
Thank.
Before we get started and and
their seating you're gonna dolls
me for a few minutes
I think there are certain people
that people just think this this
thing magically gets made in a
sixty and thirty day they don't
know everybody that's working on
it so I want to thank service
thanking them personally name by
name
from LOC director Avid trials
John Courtney I need a ledger
those are those are the top
level staff and then Christina
Tapia and share in the and
Andrea in NMAA Montoya and Renee
Montoya those are some of the
LFC staff that travel with us in
terms some of them you don't see
there and LESC all the time do
the work in the background you
may not see them.
Our analysts like ginger
Anderson and Kelly because well
in capital Nina is this capital
to Eric Cheney Amanda Dick
Peddie Helen.
Brandon Brandon
Sarah Jessica Iceman Scott
Sanchez.
Joseph Simon RubyAnn Connor
Jorgensen Kelly Klein sunny lu
Ellen Mexico looking over for
ending
those are the Stallis that do
every agency across the state.
those are our economists are
Jennifer beyond and it smelled
our we all know them in our
program and valuations are any
Armitage John Campbell Kathryn
Dr Rachel Garcia Kelly K. I. G.
and Ryan till then
Senator Diné is Nathan at
compared and Kayla Fisher and
Clayton longwall I mean these
are the reasons that they make
us look good these are the
people that do all the hard work
and that we has to at right
after hours work on our bills
Ben Salazar put him in the
budget tell us how to make are
built better in the state in New
Mexico and if you don't have a
good staff and you don't have
good people behind you.
We would never succeed in the
way we are so I personally want
to thank you want the committee
wants thank you may think about
all give LESC a hand around.
Then you know we have our staff
insight into that the work
pretty hard Donna Donna cooks
right next to me Helen it I
don't think hello is here today
but Maria who sat in the back we
Chavis very ana Cisneros was
here yesterday scrubbing House
Bill to making sure everything's
correct and estate
all messed up his name but I
want takes about SG.
Just J. RO to code the other day
that we could we House Bill to
and track changes numbers
everything in the state up till
four in the morning one night
writing the code so actually was
in here one day and that's where
it was that that's pretty
amazing for twenty three year
old kid to be able to come in
here without any financial or
our legislative experience and
determine how to write a code on
house bill two and in the and do
that so I I just she's a great
asset to I hope these agencies
are listening to these people
these are people that you could
pick up that have provided
experience in a budget across
every aspect of the state in New
Mexico and if we don't create
these young people in the
director Avid is getting older
I'm getting older there's a lot
of older people and we have
timelines in this place but if
we don't train young people to
do this that they want to do it.
She's going to get harder and
harder for us to accomplish
Sonya are committee secretary
she's on zoom I know she's not
feeling good I want to thank
Sonia because sometimes I run
about two hundred twenty miles
an hour in and she picks up for
me I really appreciate her
Gloria my secretary Claudia
Center Rodriguez's secretary
they're all a team in that
office and they don't tell
anybody go to this person go to
that person they all work on
everybody's everything are zoom
at the operator I called little
band but Francisco valor we
appreciate you Jamie our staff
for over their hands up she and
you won't be any better off than
we are with this guy sitting in
the middle.
He hates when I say and do this
but I want to tell people how
many degrees you have.
Only if you Mr chair.
Fire away early.
Right so.
I I have a master's degree from
the university of Edinburgh and
management of bioeconomy
innovation in governance.
I got my undergrad degree from
the university of New Mexico I
got a B. S. A. in psychology to
six and a BA in history
international management I got
my teaching licensure through
CNN.
And then I have a certificate in
quantitative sciences from
Harvard in certificate in public
health from Columbia University.
That that's it.
Our.
I couldn't find anybody more
educated.
And then you know our.
Our consulate Tory over here
Representative our state helps
you want to stand up.
I mean Phelps is one of the
greatest person to ever meet to
sit and have a conversation with
them and give advice and in work
and and we appreciate you to
Phelps every day for all
together for sixty days and and
it's a lot of hard work in the
beginning and and and the.
Conversations go forward and and
we're here in the mornings at
seventy during Phelps and I and
and talking things about and and
they're here every single day
doing that and helping advises
and from what folks we can make
a so I I just want to thank them
give them a big thank you to our
state.
We're going to get started
Adrian are you gonna start us
off for David we're gonna start
off on the back of a the key
budget issues.
We have we're doing catch up
clean up let me say something in
LFC we've never done language
and completely in public before
we've done a little bit of
subcommittee language we've
never done
Senate amendments in public
that's never been done before it
was always done in a different
way which I think needed to
change that's why we did it
people may not like it people
may object to it but it's fair
it's open and transparent not
everything can happen in the
budget.
There's a limited amount of
money that can be spent and so
well with a nine point four
billion dollar budget I don't
know lost in the state I can't
find any losers in the state
So I I think that's a key point
who's gonna start saw.
We're going to start off on the
back the last page on the back
just turn just turn it
completely over last page in the
back and this is a cleanup for
language Charles right Mr
Chairman yes it is our technical
adjustments and catch a cleanup
ahead on some of the highlights
in and answer questions for any
of the details of the first one
it highlights is a line for the
environment department this
would add general fund
appropriations to help cover the
cost of the races for that
department.
The next one I'd like to
highlight is just below line
language expand said the fifty
million dollars appropriation
for a hospital that's been
allocated Valencia counties been
allocated the money this would
allow them to use that
money for a to include
operations up to five percent.
The next one I'd point your
attention to is line eleven this
just recognizes the fact that
there's not a restoration study
act in the language that came
over from the house so this
would just replace that with to
independently analyze the
remediation plan associate of
the San Juan coal mine.
the next big changes there was a
discussion about removing two
million from the house version
for game and fish this restores
that adds five million for the
game and fish department broad
latitude on how to use that.
Line thirteen clarifies
the earmark from the Kiki savage
of fine to include one point
nine million for nutrition
security programs for senior
statewide and to clarify that
the general fund appropriation
and other state funds
appropriations would revert back
to the key piece of age Fund.
Line fifteen this is a cleaning
up the language you for low
income New Mexicans that would
not qualify for rebates to
remove the cap since you're
still working on what that would
look like for the rebate bill.
there were some language changes
for permissible projects online
sixteen for the transportation
appropriations those are not
your mark specifically with
money those are just permissible
projects that have been
identified.
the other big changes just below
that the fire protection fund
currently pays for the
firefighter survivor Fund
this would move that the money
that was in the Senate amendment
from the fire protection fund to
the general fund.
Another important one line
seventeen Mr chairman I think
there was some confusion on how
to read the Public Education
sheets this adds five hundred
thousand for the panic button
appropriation from the public
school reform Fund.
line eighteen just clarifies
that since.
moving the sixty million for the
K. twelve put toward K. twelve
plus programs from section four
to section five.
Line nineteen restores the
reduction for the special
appropriation for the water data
management so there will be two
hundred fifty thousand in the
bill and then also adds two
hundred thousand for.
New Mexico tech to hold water
education sessions and then that
the biggest change Mr chairman
is on line twenty one reducing
the severance tax permanent fund
transfer by three hundred
seventy five million dollars.
And they clarifying that all
transfers are for FY twenty
four.
That Mr chairman I'd be happy to
answer any questions.
We can take a moment to to look
at that.
Questions on the.
Center what's.
Thank you Mr chair.
We're talking about quite a bit
more for you to the severance
tax funded earlier.
Could you give me a brief
rundown why this figure came
into for this amount.
Senator the house came over with
eight hundred fifty million
dollars
going to the permanent fund
we had booked rebates in our
scenario at three hundred and
six hundred as the agreed upon
House drafted a bill to increase
rebates to five hundred to a
thousand and so we had account
for that money moving over and
so that is and is the reduction
on the rebate.
Let's uh.
I have five hundred million
dollars for that one item.
No three hundred seventy five
we're at eight fifty three semis
three seventy five is a balance
of four seventy five that will
be transferred to the permanent
fund.
Thank thank you thank you
Senator that.
Is it.
A hundred million dollars for
each.
When we move from three hundred
per person to four hundred
that's a hundred million You
moved five hundred that's
another hundred million so
that's two hundred million with
the other hundred and seventy
five go.
Mr chairman I think you related
to
The extra hundred million or so
of recurring appropriations
notably the opportunity
scholarship the first things
that was discussed trying to get
a hundred one million more to
reach the executive level
boosting recurring expense so
you add that to about two
hundred and.
To
replace because two hundred and
fifty more that pretty much
explains those the the the need
to reduce the transfer in order
to come close to percent
reserves Mr chairman so in that
same.
If I'm looking at these things
right it's not the opportunity
scholarship now at a hundred and
forty five million.
But we wanted a hundred million.
When we came in here.
no the cost estimates for that
program skyrocketed at the
beginning of the session Mister
chairman Senator.
I was a forty five million
dollar bridge right the bridge
language in the bridge money
didn't come over it came over
under funded.
and so that's a we had a balance
that in some way in short in
short with that.
Mr chairman that.
That number there seems
astonishing to me that a hundred
million dollars forty five
minute decisional hundred
million dollars.
I I I think I could see a
hundred million total I mean
that makes sense.
But the hundred and forty five
because it deducts from here for
one thing but also can we really
spend a hundred and forty five
million dollars in one year.
Without squandering any of it
that's the question.
I think it's two two eight four
one I don't think we can spend
it in a in a logical the hundred
forty five million but also that
takes a hundred million out of
the permanent fund which then
reduces the power of compound
interest.
Which over the course of the
permanent fund will be colossal.
So I'm concerned about that that
that one hundred ought to be
enough for opportunities because
of not trying to kill I just
don't think we can do a hundred
forty five the way thank you Mr.
Thank you senator.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman so.
Just to follow up with a train
earlier today I don't sent from
a concerned about one item
On the special appropriation for
transportation on page
All center work we're on we're
on.
But but it is language though
that didn't make it in so I'm
trying to I know it I know these
are some language changes here
also so I don't know if I can
mention that.
Okay so
On page two forty four.
On the special appropriation
section nine for
Transportation.
We've been working through the
project on this level of art
from bridge Boulevard to the
reservation.
And it didn't make it in the
language and make it an even
though we've already talked
about this on a.
Number of times we put money in
their last year we we need to
finish that thing up this year
and I it didn't make it into the
language there and it did last
year specifically in when I
spoke to Adrian said well these
aren't specifically projects are
these I want to put words in his
mouth but I think that's what he
said that's what I heard and
there are specific projects with
specific street names here I
don't want to miss out on the on
the extra seventy some odd
million or whatever the
redditor.
It would be at this level of art
in Bernalillo county district
three.
I think there there is a real
problem all of our.
Yeah that's not applicable of
art.
And is that then that D. O. T.
begin that work on his leverage
already there's an average of
this letter there's a there's a
real problem bridge which is the
the real Bravo Boulevard in
transportation district three
that's the bridge the.
That's a
East West.
quarter in that bridge that were
rebuilding their just level of
art is north south so it doesn't
it's not the same road.
All different road.
Mr chair Senator yes so I
inquired about this and.
Apparently the counties that
they are doing a project already
there on site I would not be
able to use the money so that's
where the real problem and input
is that because the money's
already there.
So the idea of the when it's
next phase begins that's when
the money would come into the
building next year's one.
I was told last year we have it
in there is specific language we
got it in and and I appreciate
that introduction Mr chair
So does that mean that the money
we put last year because they
haven't done anything so the
county isn't anything so on the
road so does that mean the money
evaporated that was but last
year the thirty million.
Mr chair for my understanding of
that money still there from last
year so this new we've got it on
the record here I'll hold you to
it and we'll get it done the.
That was very concerned I do
have some very very concerned.
Yeah at the verify that with
your County that's what they're
telling that will we did that
and we we met on this it was
agreed that the language was
specific specifically gonna be
in there that's why I'm
concerned when I don't see it
here and we double funded
project that they can't
complicit of a funding agency
chairman of prospectively it's
the completion of the project
that's what these additional
dollars were.
Mr chair I'm not sure is the
answer right.
Thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr so I want to ask
about the game into this item
first up is chair on page
sixteen the technical
adjustments.
For full who made these Mr chair
the technical adjustment for
their originate from they
originated between me and
Representative Smalls that came
in fish language was there and
then
Because the game and fish.
Fishing license bill is not
going to get out of committee it
sounds like they may be short on
funding so we had an additional
five million to start offsetting
those costs for game fish.
Mr chair so we're saying that we
replace the
The species of greatest
conservation needs but we really
did as I say this language we
have specific funds for species
of greatest conservation need
that we took out we simply
replace it with seven million
dollars to the game and fish
department with no requirement
that a penny Spence on.
On threatened species so unless
that language is there as you
just preface Mr.
Mr chair you know they need
money for operations not
threatened species that's where
that funding was so important
because it's it's always comes
up as an afterthought with
whatever pennies are left over
kind of a thing so.
So did we add specific language
that two million would go toward
certain species and species of
greatest conservation eight that
would be replacing it and
putting it back.
That Mr Chairman Senator
Steinborn it just reads the way
that you see it before so to be
very clear we've we didn't
replace that we just give them
seven million dollars
Unlike twenty one of this
technical adjustment.
The three hundred and seventy
five million reducing transfer
amount for would you to six
point outline and the.
Mister chairman Senator there is
a eight hundred fifty million
dollar transfer in the house
version of house bill two that
came over to the severance tax
permanent fund that amount is
reduced by three hundred seventy
five million.
Mr Chairman.
You know I'm just saying that
for the first time I'm still
trying to process what's in it
we had a lot of changes that
were also saying for the first
time.
So I don't know that I can
supported until I've had a
chance to process it and
I'm sure I'll have more
questions so thank you thank the
other question.
Can have a motion to send a
revolution question know the
motion to adopt the technical
adjustments and clean up in the
language hello Mr chairman six
we have a motion by Senator
Padilla second by Senator
Rodriguez wasn't here to motion.
Call the roll.
But I'm gonna have to.
There Campos yes.
Their dominance yes.
It's also yes
well yes.
Yes yes.
Their share.
Senator Steinborn of.
The number of.
Or not.
What.
There was no.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Technical.
No
Yes.
Yes.
Seven yes.
invoking paths.
If they are
able.
Mr Chairman.
Maybe just to go and clarify
center but it did not make the
motion I made the motion on
notice yes but I did not
direction simply Ms look at
Center combo Center complex made
a motion Senator Rodriguez
second and Mason center because
is shuffling back and forth get
the steps.
Where we where we going to next
in house bill two.
They got an amendment to house
bill two before you Mr chairman.
So Mister chair the amendment to
house bill two as it came over
from the house.
Basically and I'm gonna go over
the high level of it.
So it's a nine point five seven
billion dollars which is
up from forty percent from FY
twenty three the spending level
of this amendment has stayed
approximately the same level as
both the executive and
legislative recommendations
within education public school
appropriations are going up by
about eight percent from FY
twenty three for about three
hundred and two million two
hundred fifty two million of
that is going into the SCG for
extended learning fifteen
million for educational
assistance to raise their pay up
to a minimum of twenty five
thousand thirty two million for
at risk students forty million
for career and technical
education.
If we look at higher education
the total preparations are up
about a hundred and eighty seven
point one million or about
eighteen percent over FY twenty
three the opportunity
scholarship is now at a hundred
and forty six million recurring
so it's fully funded and we're
also increasing funding for
athletics by four point seven
million over FY twenty three if
we jump to early childhood
education the early childhood
education department is not
receiving a hundred thirty five
million.
From the front page yes one of
the highlights thank you so
members know when we made the
changes that this is an
amendment to house bill two.
The changes that we're talking
about is the amendment passed.
So yeah I ECECD hundred thirty
five million dollars more which
is a sixty nine percent increase
we're sharply increasing funding
for both pre K. and child care
and then we're also increasing
the distribution from the early
childhood care and education
fund five hundred and fifty
million which is contingent on a
bill that you all passed
yesterday I believe CYFD is up
six percent and includes funding
to fill hundreds of existing and
new social worker positions and
includes funding for evidence
based programs at to help
modernize the state's child
welfare system in terms of
health Medicaid is up two
hundred forty six million from
the general fund appropriation
or twenty one percent increase
this will provide Medicaid
provider rate increases that
with high rates to between a
hundred percent and a hundred
twenty percent of Medicare rates
the department of health will
continue to fully fund
developmental disability slots
and we will provide significant
provider rate increases for
those programs in terms of
behavioral health.
Health and Human Services CYFD
and the early childhood
department will fall
Committee cumulatively receive a
hundred sixty four million
recurring and nonrecurring
appropriations and then we're
house bill two also has twenty
one million from the opioid
settlement revenue to help
expand housing services
telehealth and substance use in
research treatment.
Economic development is seeing a
recurrent recurring budget
increase of one point nine seven
million or eleven point three
percent and there are numerous
one time investments in economic
development which total a
hundred and six point one
million these include fifty
million for public private
partnerships focus on energy
related projects three million
for business incubators and
entrepreneurs support two
million for creative industries
one million for Lida three
million for J. to one million
for outdoor equity grants ten
million for trail infrastructure
grants and thirteen million for
the venture capital fund.
Tourism is seeing a recurring
budget increase of four point
two million or twenty point one
percent increase this includes.
Just as he is also has approved
to this point a total of twenty
one point seven million in one
time investment tourism for the
agency's top priorities which
include fifteen million for
national marketing campaign and
three point five million for
local tourism development.
In public safety House Bill to
has a hundred million in non
recurring general fund
appropriations for law
enforcement programs this
includes thirty two point five
for workers capacity building
fifty seven million for state
and local law enforcement
agencies for person ten million
four felony warrant enforcement
and five hundred thousand for
drug related operations.
If we jump over to natural
resources EMNRD is seeing a
fourteen point seven percent
increase in general fund
appropriation the department of
the environment is seen at
thirteen point five percent
increase which is more than what
was recommended by either LESC
or the executive and the state
engineer receiving eight point
eight percent increase these
increases for natural resource
agencies Representative a total
of four hundred and eighty nine
point five million which is a
significant increase for this
upcoming fiscal year in terms of
compensation the house bill two
came over at a five percent pay
increase
on average five percent pay
increase for public school
higher ed and state employees
you all have adopted to increase
that by an extra one percent as
a supplemental so everyone
statewide will receive six
percent and there's also
targeted increase for many jobs
that are hard to fill including
nurses crime lab techs case
workers judges and district
attorneys and lastly in terms of
special appropriations house
bill two has approximately one
point one three one point one
thirty two billion dollars in
general fund going toward
special appropriations.
And with that Mr chair we stand
here ready for questions we need
to get caught up on one thing
we didn't rack up or put in that
scenario the calf canyon fire
that we had to account for in
special appropriations that's
probably counted one point three
two billion that Greg David
that's in addition to the
amounts that sent that our in
house bill two though the
accounted for in the general
fund financial summary Mr
chairman and so on the account
for that to be counted for that
as part of the eight fifty
coming over to correct is that
where we may be the difference
on the hundred million it just
kind of popped into my my I
don't know where it counted for
that it Mr chairman that is
accounted for in our estimate
that.
With the tax bill as we
understand it the higher rebates
at five hundred and the calf
canyon for a hundred million
reserves would be about thirty
percent in the black fire week
the other two fires the black
fire we can for those of those
numbers right there in this bill
at five million two million
thank.
Russian from committee if I was
going through this I actually
saw the make bright fire.
Actual bill but I didn't see the
others in the actual bill the
other state energy and minerals
in just a special in a different
place for two million thank.
Steinborn.
There are a couple questions
number one if the intent was to
restore the two million for
species of greatest conservation
need can we make an amendment to
specify that in the seven
million that we're given came at
this we can't.
I would hope we could still then
this document not coming back
through the proposition since
that was the intent that the
language was unclear I think
that's super important will get
spent that.
Senator the two million came
home from the house was.
L. Sanchez when we talked to him
last the two million what was
good and he would work that out
fish if you want to make
amendment you're more than
welcome to of the.
Maybe the last amendment.
But I think.
Okay well would make that
amendment Mister chair if this
intention and hopefully that be
a friendly amendment that we
specify that of the seven
million increase to game at
fifty two million go for spaces
of greatest conservation needs.
Anybody second.
So that really wasn't our intent
okay okay
so then I have a question the
practice funding
where is that in the budget.
It's not in there okay but when
I asked Mr chair the other day
so I wasn't I was mistaken I
thought we sing in the language
in their prior but it was not in
there so there's no funding in
the budget for that project
we're in the budget is the
funding for these pants Energy
project can you take me to that.
In the specials in economic
development unit patient please.
Page one ninety nine.
Item seventy seven Mr.
And then.
Thanks to all.
I'm reading this to the looking
at for the first time.
I think senator that was in the
prior rack up from.
It was it was but it was two
days ago there was an issue with
this is budget language so this
you know obviously things change
right so.
Senator energy project is in the
first one of the program.
Your question Mr chair read
somewhere that advanced energy
in the house bill that came from
including nuclear energy
projects is that is that what we
know to be advance energy.
Carbon sequestration just
curious we confirm Senator we
have an.
That was to representative bill
of the the bills there I don't
know why don't I don't know
enough about that to to answer
that question for you.
The lightning bolts is.
I feel Mr
Of the thank you.
Questions.
So much.
I I missed something local.
And I think.
We were talking about reserves
under this budget what kind of
research Mr chair are we talking
about Senator we're gonna end up
right about thirty percent
reserves
Two point.
Two point eight seven billion
Mister chairman Senator Woods
okay and the other question I
have usually we have another
revenue forecast.
For this goes up have we not had
a a revenue forecaster did not
admit happen while I was gonna I
missed a full week there was
personally February first and
you committee received a letter
from the consensus forecasting
group DFA tax LFC staff
affirming that it was still the
best numbers the December
numbers remain valid to use for
development of the project okay.
Okay that that the other part
because.
There is some speculation
happening with oil and gas but
it's speculation thank you Mr
chair up to the main point
Senator.
Mr chair as we go through this.
We had in rough numbers three
point five billion dollars more
than we had last year is that
correct been rough numbers okay
in that and so.
Approximately a billion of that
went to capital outlay pool
still on track they're
approximately a billion one
special projects in here little
more than a billion I read that
right one point one three with a
K..
we're still putting in less than
half a billion back in the
permanent fund.
So the other billion dollars was
spent.
Somewhere which in this budget
recurring so that account for
all of those all of the money
all right I is is what's pointed
I am very concerned about the
recurring expenses that are in
here.
Because I don't believe the
price of oil and gas is going to
stay there.
I've been here too long I've
seen it too bad and we all look
important and fuzzy in.
In the two thousand four
whenever it was Richardson we we
jacked up the budget a lot and
we had to come back and cut it a
lot and then we had to do the
same thing under the Martinez
administration which act up the
budget a lot and we have to cut
it a lot and it's because
revenues Representative you
don't slide down the trough.
In my concern here while it's
both positive.
For the world.
But if the war in Ukraine stops
tonight all of that Russian
wireless on the market in our
oil is.
Worth less.
And.
And that means our our income
drops like a rock.
Is the we're gonna stop tonight.
That would be great for the
world's.
Yes what's going on in the world
but it be bad for the state of
New Mexicos oil prices.
And we don't know if that's
going to happen there could be
other things okay.
Could decide that there's going
to be a nuclear exchange and
then the oil prices are
relevant.
But.
I I just want to be cautious.
Madam chair.
Over how much are our recurring
revenues are because of that.
In volatility and because we've
somehow absolutely refused to do
any new.
New industry we had we had
chances this year to do several
new industries and we just voted
him down.
And so as long as with that
volatile and we've been we
refused to even look at a new
industry.
We ought to be really careful
thank you Mr madam president
speaker.
Thank you I need to see him go
is like.
Thank you thank you very much I
don't know that there's anyone
on this list over and who was
first here.
Okay Senator Diamond Senator
Burt thank you and anyone on the
site not.
Or or Charles I have a question
on on page eleven of the non
recurring online twenty two
there was two million dollars
allocated to the black fire bill
but that still was a three
million dollar ask which really
barely cover the needs of those
fires for four counties.
And it was introduced as a bill
I see it was reduced but but
then like on my on page thirteen
there's a million dollars for a
telescope purchase was that did
that ask committee for bill
also.
Not a current.
In the form of appropriation
bill Mr chair right.
not to my knowledge.
The money.
So there wasn't a bill request
to put the million dollar
telescope and.
But there was a bill that was
passing through it.
The black fire and that was
reduced from three million to
two million.
The amount.
I wouldn't say it was reduce
those two million put in the
house bill two.
Just last okay.
Also on thirteen in New Mexico
State University I have two
different I have three
different.
And I know that these are all
like living documents but we
went from eight million for the
online for NMSU to the last the
last draft we saw was ten
million for NMSU and then this
is back to eight million is
there another two million
somewhere towards the total
eight.
Mr chair I believe the total is
ten it came over with two you're
adding eight okay so to confirm
the total H. B. two that would
include the two and the eight
correct okay thank you for that
clarification thank you madam
chair.
Your question.
Yes thank you Mr chair
Just a couple of things of early
childhood.
At early childhood still boggles
my mind an amount of money that
they have.
But in the budget on top of
everything else they have a
sixty seven point five percent
increase of I think governor
Bill children to more in a three
hundred fifty so a million where
is that money going how's it
going to be spent.
There's two large buckets of
money for early childhood the
first came from the school
permanent fund that the voters
authorized to be spent on pre K.
for that money is going to go
out to pre K. providers both
public and private mixed
delivery system in the same
proportion that they're getting
now in that for the increased so
that's that's part of that
increase correct there's a just
a bump to home visiting programs
those are the intensive in home
parent education programs and
then there's the early childhood
Trust Fund where there's a bill
to increase the distribution
from that without damaging the
corpus two hundred and fifty
million and that money is
primarily going to child care
assistance which is with the the
department's priority list.
I move on but I just.
It seems early childhood has so
much money and they never use it
they can't get all the things
they put into the budget.
any other types of old budget
money.
That could be placed in other
places so other question is
do it I. T. it the increase in
their budget is a hundred eighty
two percent.
From three six million I think
is what we're is that increase
has that going to be applied.
A Mister chairman Senator do it
is primarily an enterprise
agency where they charge fees
for services that they deliver
so when you see a general fund
appropriation to HSD like that
you'll see a large percentage
increase that increases for
their new cyber security efforts
on behalf of state agencies and
also work with higher education
in schools and then there
special appropriations that will
supplement that as well in New
Jersey in the the server
security I think that's what I
understand that
So just to clarify.
Thirty in the and we're gonna
get to about thirty percent
reserves is that what you said
right at thirty yes Mister
chairman Senator Burt was was
the REC I thought the
recommendation was thirty five
am I wrong in that order the LFC
recommendation was.
Percent the executive was a
little bit higher around thirty
three.
Okay.
And when the dust clears only
put in seven hundred fifty
million.
Dollars in to the permanent fund
is that correct at a three point
five.
Missing some.
I thought that was a figure that
was mentioned was four hundred
and seven one hundred seventy
five million yeah.
Plus another two hundred million
to
well a hundred fifty million to
other new permanent funds in the
water trust fund
on that point Senator Rodriguez
has a bill to make a transfer
are we adding that eighty to
eighty nine million additional
transfers ninety two million Mr
chairman thanks for the because
you're not debt financing your
capital outlay there will be
more money with that bill that
will flow into the severance tax
permanent fund over the next
decade as well you've also put a
provisions in the bill that if
you're concerned about agencies
ability to spend all this
general fund increase and
they're not able to spend it
those revisions about seventy
five million would go into the
severance tax permanent fund as
well say if you've created a
number of mechanisms to be able
to save for the future we can't
spend it all now and Mr chairman
and intrust bank that I forgot
about those triggers that's very
important
It.
It just.
I don't think we're reserving
enough because I think what
Senator said I think we're all
concerned about oil and gas way
too volatile and I think I just
think thirty percent.
Is too low and I'm very
disappointed when we put forward
say five million dollars of the
permanent fund only gasp only
gases to listen ten years they
will not give us enough tax
money to make our our base
budget and that's based on
current tax levels that's not
that's I mean current budget
levels that's not what the
budget will be in ten years
we're making a very small
provision to help buffer that in
ten years the interest off of
four and seventy five million
dollar I'm not economist and
went to Deming so dimming math
is not my best suit but I'm just
telling you I don't think we're
gonna be anywhere near enough
money to compensate for oil and
gas in ten years we had a golden
opportunity this year to do
something and.
And we're not going to do it so
that's my comment was this
chamber.
There was.
Of Mr Chairman on loan one sixty
five we show that higher
education is going to be
increasing.
Two hundred eighty nine share
the it came over.
the house said.
Some of eighty four million.
And after the fund under eighty
five in the.
Of Joe.
Elaborate on that just a little
bit for me on what we're doing
there is that all opportunity
scholarship Mister Mister
chairman Senator.
An entire amount that the Senate
is adding is for the opportunity
scholarship which is of in the
financial aid program at the
higher education department now
when we Mr chair and and Charles
when we tell.
Our opportunity scholarship
early on when we were at LFC
talking about the needs the
future needs for this
scholarship could you kind of
remind me of what we were
talking that will kind of money
was we talking about the that we
would be needing for this.
Mister chairman Senator in the
fall we were struggling to work
with the department to try to
price this program out and we
had had an operating assumption
coming out of last session and
it would need about a hundred
million dollars but we weren't
quite sure so the LESC took the
approach of increasing some of
the
Recurring appropriations to
cover the cost but because of
the uncertainty to use a larger
amount of non recurring money
for that the executive
recommendation recommended came
in the session and had new cost
estimates that we're at first
about fifty seven percent higher
than that hundred million that
we're working with the
department and our analyst sat
down and work together refined
those estimates and settled on a
hundred and forty six million
recurring cost of hence the need
for the additional hundred and
one if you're to make it fully
recurring fully funded according
to the department's estimates of
of what the program would cost
there's another forty five
million dollars in a
supplemental appropriation to
help the program get through the
rest of this academic year as
well in the budget for you.
So.
All of sudden those costs grew
by that amount.
From the summer till now.
The estimates are are are.
Can we can approve these
increases I mean I know we can't
total approval but we got that
many more students coming in to
colleges to need those gun
increases Mr chairman and
Charles Mr chairman this fall we
saw about a two thousand student
increase what we saw that was
driving a lot of the cost was
something that was not
anticipated one house bill two
was crafted which was that
opportunity would provide
lottery students in their first
semester
there was language that was
partially vetoed in house bill
two that allows HEDT to
supplement what used to be paid
for by the institutions called
the bridge scholarship
and that was not contemplated
that bridge scholarship is now
being fully funded by the state
through this recurring general
fund appropriation there's
assumptions built in for tuition
increases that the institutions
constitutional power allows them
to do.
And then there's assumptions
around if there's going to be
anymore enrollment growth.
As a result of the free call in
and Mr chair what's expected
enrollment growth we're
expecting we're we're putting in
a hundred and forty inspectors
million dollars Mr chairman I
believe the estimates were
between two to four percent
enrollment growth and about four
percent tuition growth.
Well if you could otherwise come
right now but could you put that
into actual student numbers is a
Mr chairman we find your table
yeah because I'd like to know
cost per student number.
One hundred and forty million
dollars increase Mr thank you.
Senator was if you remember done
a couple things to hire an
attorney do a study and I engine
and then we had a bill that they
have to justify increased our
rails on opportunities and see
whether water explains where
they're spending is really
driven by.
With that in that sense my exact
concerns Mr chair two bills are
in the house now that are doing
that as as we put money into
this.
Inflation all of a sudden takes
off with tuition.
And some kind of control the ad
and keep throwing money at it I
mean I'm not against education
but.
The it it seems that the and
then you did say that the bridge
co ownership was funded by the
AG is that right or chairman
it's funded by the opportunity
scholarship the opportunity
scholarship okay.
A quick numbers.
See more questions let me kind
of wrap this up you know when we
got eleven point nine over from
the house
went out the executive ads are
spending in in the Senate what I
just been right at ten point we
understand by the end of I
remember correctly students
spend everything we could
because there was no need to.
In the executive ads were the
largest part opportunity
education like it love it hate
it whatever
that was a big is asked the food
appropriation was another twenty
two million that we had to add
in here so those are the two
biggest items that the executive
wanted in and I think that our
committee agreed with I think
we've thought of those bills out
unanimously at
And so those if you look at the
others planning it's pretty
small aging a long term services
for New Mexico Air development
disabilities the department of
health so those are some of the
things that the executive
requests
in our spending scenario in this
committee to our members of the
we don't even spend the form out
coming from the house.
That.
Also do agree with with people I
don't think.
We come in as legislators and
and if you didn't grow up with
your dad digging a ditch and
cutting weeds and learning what
a dollar means.
Right.
It's imaginable that me sitting
here today turning committee
that's going to spend nine point
four billion dollars right.
I mean.
If if we take into thought what
it takes a person a company the
amount of energy thanks to put
this amount of money inside a
budget in the state of New
Mexico this goes to everyone.
And private industry to those
guys making pizza dough today to
the dishwashers to to what it
takes to fund go and do things
correctly I think a lot of this
is on the agency and the exact
to make sure that it doesn't go
to waste that people get what
they need that money is not
wasted in some way shape or form
because otherwise we can just
open the window.
Are thrown out nine billion
dollars and then see who who
survives and who doesn't survive
but we try to make the best
scenario.
There's different segments on
both sides and sometimes I'm on
their side and sometimes on the
side but but cost to make a
dollar.
The cost to take home your take
home pay.
Is is hard for the everyday
citizen to fathom that we're
going to spend nine point four
billion dollars in this this
bothers me all the time I wake
up in the middle of night is
that done correct did we do that
the best way we could do it
right what we try.
we try to do our best LFC tries
to the best say this is the
correct way to spend dollars
when we do
What was what was a system that
we use with Representative
Lundstrom
thank you the LFC workforce
ledges that Legisla- I mean that
gives the best ability to track
dollars and how spending is
correctly and then scoring
agencies are spending their
money correctly they just
wasting we know last year they
they reverted about four hundred
fifty million about two hundred
million was that are but so we
know that thanks they didn't
spend two hundred million
dollars that we put out there
now it's even a bigger number
with the same agencies and I
don't think they're going to
spend this money I I I see the
secretary from early childhood
and she talks about a portion of
my district that it's a pleasant
for early childhood what we put
more money in their this is
renewable and he's got to have
the people wanting to provide
the services how do we find
those right it could go any
direction in the state.
There's communities that believe
in things in this community I
have a lot more people that can.
But I I think these are the some
of the things you have to target
you know we we look at economic
development hundred fifty
million dollars it is that real
economic development that we're
targeting is to do that we look
at the work force they say the
unemployment rates at three
percent but then you look at the
numbers that say that people are
in the work force and how do we
get into the work force I mean
the tax package as a low income
tax credit which will put we
people in the work force that'll
help them once they get in the
work force to get that credit
there's so many moving parts of
this budget and and I've only
been in fellowship thing maybe
twelve years in my first term I
wasn't on LOC a and you still
don't it's still gonna surprise
a director at these wealth and
knowledge to spend a detail out
that nobody even knew existed in
in in the provided financial
Bible I guess we'll call it
is amazing to me in the value of
the knowledge center Campos is
value on learning the budget
seen how many years have you
been on it on Senate finance and
L. C. sick of those control of
the.
Thank you very much Mr chair
course members of the Senate
finance committee I I really
don't remember but through all
of it has very very good
teachers so thank you and I
mean.
I'll talk about term limits and
knowledge but you got to have
knowledge when you put this
budget together and it at the
end of the day.
Nobody's ever happy and
yesterday more people sitting I
didn't get this and get that and
you walk around the state nine
billion dollars and how anybody
could not be dissatisfied well
I'm a little dissatisfied
because of the taxpayer.
Right and when you got to pay
him you want to see efficiencies
and that's what I kind of look
at as we move forward but these
are hard things to do I mean
that's what we meet every day
and and I appreciate the
committee I want to thank each
and everyone as we started you
know two and eight I just wanted
ace to a day's weather was water
what was capital how do we fix
the building issues whether was
R. P. S. P.'s I mean the
committee the more knowledge we
can give to you guys the better
we are in budgeting and that's a
key point in this committee but
I I really do appreciate each
and everyone doesn't matter to
me I vote we all have
differences of opinion we all
don't get we want you know.
And in but I appreciate each and
everyone hear input even you
Senator Steinborn sometimes you
give me gray hair make me pull
out my hair but I I do
appreciate your input and and it
does make for good questions a
better policy and that's what
we're here for so with that
Senator Gonzales.
Us too House Appropriations
finance committee substitute for
House Bill to we just amended.
And the second set of course.
The second motion call the roll.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Well yes.
There have been.
Yes yes.
Here.
Yes input for.
Yes.
Let's.
No one explained muffled.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Yes yes yes.
We have has yes.
Yes to the.
Senator.
I got one minute quick that long
care there's there's lots of
things in here that.
But I hate to make you want to
not supported like.
The huge increase after a huge
increase last year.
But there's also things in here
that I think are important.
Not sure how I'm going to vote
on the floor.
Because I still have to study it
but I.
I voted for today kind of
reluctantly because there's a
lot of good stuff in it despite
the bad stuff that I don't like.
Senator Steinborn it was not.
So Mr chair you know I'm really
concerned about the process and
that's kind of one of my one of
my things and and
I know that the the finance
committee world has been wanted
to very kind of an insular world
I served on the house
Appropriations Committee to but
we have to work to do better I
mean when you're passing a nine
billion dollar budget.
Number one is committee members
we should see documents and have
at least and I process and
number two the public to see the
same documents they should be
online just like any bills vote
on gets put on line but we won't
do that with a nine billion
dollar budget.
I'm I'm mystified and we we need
to just collectively to better
understand the history is what
it is but we can we can involve
number three I think there are
things I'm not happy in this
budget because precisely we
weren't given process case in
point there was an attempt of
take a good faith to restore
that two million dollars we can
write it that way if if I
someone who was knowledgeable
had been given thirty seconds to
review of what caught that
mistake that's happened many
issues we saw in the legacy fund
bill as well.
So that's why you have people
double check your work and no
matter what you do in life if
you care about the work quality
you have someone check if and to
not give committee members that
opportunity when this as well on
this committee level on the
public is just really
disrespectful and it produces
bad work so consequently there's
things in this budget I'm really
not happy about there's a lot of
good stuff in here too and
that's what does it for me
appreciate the efforts made to
support my constituents and some
of the some of the things that
were included.
So.
I'll just leave it at that I may
have a comments on the floor but
thank you Senator what.
Real quick.
Voted for the LFC budget Mr
chair I thought we adequately
funded by state government with
that budget.
After we came in here we find
out that the recommendations
that the executive made.
We're loaded again and we come
back in here we had three
versions.
Those very versions come back
let them come back into the
general fund.
But if we could and the now we
increased fourteen percent more
we didn't increase employees Amy
therefore we increase
contractors contractors who is
who that does the work for the
state because you can hire
employees but my biggest gripe
is with these reversions with
this bloke that we're not going
to be able to spend we could be
putting it into the the
investment council stands in
actually making money off of it
instead of a passbook savings
account overnight in the state
treasury so I have a real
problem because we don't go
ahead and take charge and put
their stuff into the permanent
fund and make some real money
for the future generations thank
you Mr chairman thank you I I
just want to say again thank you
the LFC thank you to our staff
thank you to the committee
members of Senator Steinborn to
your point as this process is
move forward as since I've been
chair there was not sent and
then it's done somewhere else
they've been done out in the
open language is been done out
in the open never been done that
way before and so you claim to
the press you can complain to
everyone to complain to you but
the openness and the changes
that since I've been the chair
and is very clear to the public.
Now one member stands up here
and say I want this and I want
that
I mean is that too much feeding
is that their own pet projects
but you got to treat everybody
equal because remember in front
of each and everyone of our
names is state not my district
it's not your district
representative district we need
to be tried if be fair as
everyone as we can and so that's
the way we should budget in
fairness and equality
inefficiencies in government I
do agree and I I've said this
cautionary tale before I wasn't
here in only when it tanked but
I was here no nine we had to cut
a billion other budget.
And the news agency's in these
higher ed institutions anything
happens.
I'm gonna make you do the
cutting you wanted the money you
do the cutting if you got to cut
thirty percent of your budget
you're going to do.
I'm not gonna do it for you.
We're going to do it you made
the request for the additional
money used efficiently if you
don't use it efficiently then if
anything happens and Kanemi
you're going to make the cuts
yourself so.
Bear that on your shoulders when
that money's on spent it's on
your shoulders don't spend it
correctly it's on your shoulders
when.
A recession comes I hope it
never happens.
In additional money cuts are on
your shoulders not on ours so
with that thank you Mr Abbey
thank your staff Adrian thank
you center working to do it's
eleven twenty right now the
state thank you guys we
appreciate it
Did you read about the
throughout the vote.
Was.
Yes.
Seven yes for no some sorry.
In the past seven.
Thank you.
Thank.
I was.
Representative Dixon we're going
to your bill.
Representative.
Recognizes about.
Bring back the seventies.
Don't be jelly.
Okay good morning or that
afternoon are it it's still
morning okay right let me see
where we are here.
Hey.
Are we on three fifty seven is
that what six one of six or
three okay because we've got
okay but this is the result was
that yes thank you when I I
didn't drive right thank you
could good morning
Representative Dixon and of
course Representative Eli good
to see you in our staff okay we
are on
Committee substitute for
Committee substitute for House
Bill three fifty seven law
enforcement workforce building
fund so can we get started here
this morning thank you.
A good morning madam chair good
morning members of the committee
so this bill creates structure
three funds one deal
specifically with law
enforcement the second deals
with district attorneys and
public defenders and the third
deals with corrections officers
and within each fund there are
guidelines to make sure that the
the funds that we allocate as as
the appropriating body of for
recruitment and retention
actually go towards that end
obviously we have a have a need
across all agencies from a law
enforcement perspective and so
the first one will help
address that issue with regard
to district attorneys and public
defenders if you've practice in
the rural areas of our state
then you understand the
desperate need to recruit and
retain both district attorneys
and public defenders and so the
second fund will do that and the
third fund sadly our our vacancy
rate in corrections is
shockingly high we have a
handful counties that are above
the fifty percent vacancy rate
of Bernalillo county for example
that fifty two percent I believe
Santa Fe County some around
fifty three percent and so the
third funds to address the
vacancies in corrections is
targeted to recruit and retain
within the corrections because
context and the last thing I'll
point out for right I turned
over Representative Dixon is the
the part of how these funds are
built as we're we're requiring
that we don't poach from each
other so we want to encourage
outside recruitment whether
that's outside the state or
folks who are in this industry
right now and that's part of the
emphasis in these funds as well
so if turnover Representative
Dixon thank you Representative
now Representative Dixon thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee just to add on to
what leader lane said this bill
was actually a product of our
LFC.
The public safety working group
and there is thirty two point
five million dollars in the
budget for the creation of these
funds and one of the other nice
things about this bill is that
we're really working to address
all of the aspects of the
criminal legal system so it's
not just the law enforcement
component but we're also making
sure that we're supporting our
public attorneys and in the
future corrections department
so with that if I can introduce
we have with us Ellen right in
from LFC and she's our expert
witness but I think there any
questions we'd be happy to take
those thank you Representative
LA did you want to say anything
at this point madam chair and
members of the committee no I
have nothing else to add the
Representative seperti presented
very a comprehensively but I'm
happy to answer our system
answering any questions thank
you thank you and I do have some
the state I want to say thank
you Alan you work so hard I see
what to do and I I can't tell
you how much I appreciate you
thank you yes
I'm gonna go to the audience now
and see if anyone is in support
of this bill one person can you
come up in state your name
briefly please because we are
running out of time so if you
can state your name here thank
you for that for waiting to.
S. H. this is the yes of course.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Joyce
person I'm the executive
director for New Mexico counties
we are extremely grateful that
the sponsors have been willing
to work with us no thank you for
your time on this to incorporate
the emergency crisis that we
currently have in detention
centers we have over five
detention centers that are at a
fifty percent or more vacancy
for us this is dangerous for not
only the inmates but also for
the employees and so with that
we are extremely grateful we
stand in strong support thank
you so very much thank you joy
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
Can anyone on zoom.
Okay
yes hi Josh can you hear me are
you on zoom yes madam chair
members of the committee Josh
Anderson with us apologize I can
be with you today but just want
to stand up and support and of
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward thank you madam
chair thank you Josh okay
committee members any comments
or questions Senator Steinborn a
Senator Padilla.
The committee thank you all for
for this bill
I just have one question comment
and and I see it in the bill but
just want to he could could talk
back to me about it I represent
both the city of Los crucis and
some really small jurisdictions
including ability to hatch who I
talked to about this issue
before the session saying Hey
you know we have a hard time
competing and senator I mean was
there as well who represents
part of that area and they're
like Hey we have a hard time
recruiting getting some of this
funding for us because maybe
it's been absorbed by the big
big and I see that you
proportion is funded different
size jurisdictions although half
falls within a bigger County
jurisdiction even though they're
really small community just talk
to me about the eligible funding
for them and how we make sure
small communities like that can
get funds.
Thank you madam chair and
senator you're correct so the
bill does try to a portion of
funding to ensure that all
entities are eligible and would
receive some so currently.
I'm in the bill we have a twenty
five percent up to twenty five
percent may be used for awards
to counties with populations of
five hundred thousand or greater
so that's really Bernalillo
county and so that's up to
twenty five percent then up to
thirty five percent may be used
for awards to introduce in
counties with populations
between one hundred and five
hundred thousand and then the
remaining up to forty percent
would go to all of the other
counties entities within
counties of populations of under
one hundred thousand.
Thank you for that in Madam
chair representative and leader
so so Dona Ana County obviously
then that hundred thousand five
hundred thousand.
It I guess is that gnostic at
that point as to whether or not
you're representing the county
or the city of Los crucis for
the village of hatch with
thousand people.
At that point they're all
competing.
Just within that part of money.
Within madam chair and Senator
Steinborn yes within that part
of money it is It gnostic
however when the committee is
awarding the grants they are
taking into consideration
vacancy rates local cost of
living and comparable market
expenses as well as crime rates
and so there is a prioritization
that will occur additionally.
Okay thank you and I would just
hope and so they met chair so
they come up with the criteria I
saw the work criteria.
In the bill amended they re
evaluate the criterias that
cannot work so they come up with
it from the beginning.
Madam chair and Senator yes
The yes the committee is tasked
with developing and periodically
review revising the criteria for
awarding the grants and part of
that is gonna be based on the
evaluations as well as the work
for studies so what we're doing
is building in a system where we
are using that data and
requiring reporting information
back so that we can make sure
that we are improving as we go
along.
Sounds good well that sounds
great can ask for more than that
and hopefully you know equity
and opportunity here sometimes
those things could maybe get
lost in other metrics so.
Leave it at that thank you again
for championing the bill thank
you Mr will the.
Of the
I don't want to debate because I
think you'll know where it is
based on what I'm gonna do this
move to pastures okay
west thank you there's a motion
for adoption of this bill from
certified yes second from
Senator Diamond
can we call please.
Yes yes the process excluded.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Yes yes yes yes yes.
Share yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Sir I yes
Senator Woods yes yes yes yes
we know six.
Before we call the full vote out
here let me I had to step out
for just a second here somebody
needed to see me but I wanted to
say profusely thank you for for
this fourth you know as for side
and in the fourth thought that
you put into this whole thing it
is so necessary that we put
these funds together for that so
thank you and you were inclusive
and doing that very smart thanks
for your work and then what
counts please Madam yes
Representative Alcon inspectors
okay where is the back there
high representative of.
Is now.
Did you guys just decide.
I thank you all.
And you know that we may be in
my office from the governor's.
Yeah if they want as this
year's.
Alright what is.
There's another.
Because there's.
This.
Thank you.
Okay good morning Representative
are on and the Anthony always
good to see you here yes thank
you you know Representative
before we go on I was just
handed an amendment from here
have you seen this ammendment it
now okay we probably okay
there's Jamie she was
transferring this is this from
Santo office Donner operated
system he requested that we.
Okay okay so.
This ammendment tents to
Representative just so you know
by a purports to remove
on page two lines nine through
nineteen and I guess because
there's another bill on just on
it can you tell me Donna wrote
the the information okay so
there's there's one another bill
maybe and that.
It's it's is that the language
is in another bill or.
Programs.
The state for the session it
casts said the.
Section two.
That's the way.
To remove the state police
because it's in another bill
one.
This is.
Yes I okay.
Yeah okay this bill is that by
by the so it's making it it's
making a drive with the other
bills so they can both be the
same so there's no discrepancy.
Madam chair.
What happens here is I
understand it senator Munoz
wants his bill to get through
the house into the governor but
this bill includes his bill for
us it is this is more.
So what he's doing this is
amending his fired out.
And the thing is what if Israel
doesn't make it through the
house landing in this that we're
taking out of state police and
everybody else that we really
need to and maybe new only the
municipalities.
It's I don't know how to explain
that but I we were but by taking
the Senators and who amendment.
We are basically taking the
chance that we're going to leave
out what we the agencies that we
really want to take cover.
Thank you for that explanation
and let me tell you what based
on what I just heard now and
this system we saw this I don't
feel comfortable putting that
this amendment for this bill he
can be far impacting and far
reaching and and I will let
whoever the sponsor is
interested with us may have his
own reasons for doing this that
at this point it can derail if
the budget contingent upon a
bill passing in the house and
the bill does not pass we get
into big trouble here and so I
want to make sure that we
understand what exactly this is
doing so yes I am going to wait
until he gets here and he's not
doesn't come before the meeting
is over then we will call the
the amendment until later okay
so can we proceed to presenter
bill Representative thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee I hundreds of pleasure
being here on a Saturday morning
would be up I haven't been
around for a long time US Senate
bill
One of six pretty basically
immense the public employee
retirement that to raise the
maximum amount of the pension
benefit from ninety to a hundred
percent of an employee's final
average salary the like I said
earlier before you heard a
portion of this bill before but
this one in offices that
includes various abilities
another I to government that
that.
I'm not in the other bill.
Well with me as a he's my
godfather here and it in
November.
It I will let him introduce
himself and explain to you what
is position this year thank you
thank you very much
Representative Senator what else
did you want to weigh in on this
at this point you know
Representative the amendment
just takes out the state.
And that means that that's
amendment I.
That is another bill this bill
the state police.
Mr chair that is how I read the
amendment.
The the the state police
provisions within this bill from
from the bill.
What does remove the state
please.
And then there's everybody else.
The.
A good man Mr chair again
Senator back right here the good
why do we want to remove state
police from this one.
Another bill that deals with the
state police that I made a
commitment to them that that I
did on my own with their in
junction in a
We had a with a column during
the interim.
There is a memorial to set up a
structure for state police
you'll see another I think
there's one or two other police
bills that I have and that was
my commitment and that's why I
want to put it that way.
We just couldn't put this to
within the way Mr chair.
So basically are you talking
about the one bill that I heard
and I was labor just the the two
percent in the house labor which
includes head of state police
and corrections and the
provision pearl Act okay so.
Will be a no it was my question
there's there's another bill
that.
Thank you for this was that the
first trained think was the bill
we heard the other day was that
because of the twenty thirteen
Senate bill seventy two Dan
include.
It comes great.
The the increase the wanted have
multiplier like we did before
left and that was that the bill.
Mr chair the lead in the last
one that I heard to two percent
in my committee was the one
where we're taking care of the
high and higher level officers.
And then the one before that was
basically the same bill as this
except the mining complexes of.
A little more it districts for
everybody money just in the
state police and and then the
other bill was the to bring the
in the one and a half multiplier
to the ones hired for prior to
twenty three those came out of
a.
Interm memorial bill that they
did and the state police asked
me down that way that's what we
did in the stand alone and then
I think the governor somebody
asked you to address the issue
in this bill right correct and
then and then I had I made a
promise state police and that's
that's the reason I want to keep
my word does affect anything
else but the state police thank
you Mr chair I I have no problem
with that the.
If we amended and for some
reason your bill's is not make
it through the house would leave
state police completely out.
And
The governor issues both of
them.
We can't sign both because
they're duplicates in in some of
of the bill the correct.
Wait Anthony.
In which bills I get signed last
is the one that comes a lot but
if they're two separate issues
Mr chair if
Because the language would be
duplicative and there would be a
conflict my understanding is
that the
that that that they could
reconcile both of those together
and that they would both be able
to take to to take a fact but
I'm I'm drawing upon some some
some previous knowledge from up
in council service but I'm not
sure if there would be an issue.
Well Senator okay you know
number one question I wanted to
ask users what year doing in
your bill and what's in your
bill the same benefit to state
police.
That identical so because your
bill is different than the
representatives bill Anthonys
comment I think in the
representative Connor what was
important they can both pass.
And they get reconciled because
they're not duplicate bills.
And but if we want to help the
state police we want to leave
this and because we double the
chances that they'll get it
through one bill passing or the
other but both bills compacts so
I I just
Why would we want to do that.
Well because my commitment.
The state police right in my
bill I think was introduced
before Representative was a
commitment I made to amend the
task force on their
recommendations and that's a
commitment I made and so thank
you very good on your commitment
Esther chair by introducing the
bill with
they went I'll just leave it at
that I I think we want to leave
it and so we diversified make
sure that one way or another
they get it and.
Since expertise.
Anyway Mr chair out this will be
on the menu in the summer and
the process consider this left.
Only on the.
So we have a motion for
management for discussion
purposes.
So we're on the amendment and I
guess need a motion for the
amendment for discussion
purposes thank a motion and
second any objection to the
motion for discussion purposes.
Wanted us to measure built
together they said we did done
that when I asked the state
police they said leave us a
stand alone that's what we want
to.
So I'm gonna have a motion on
the amendment.
So with a motion on the
amendment I'll second the motion
we call the roll.
To divert.
yes.
Senator Campos.
Senator Diamond.
Gonzales yes.
You
yes.
Peter.
There was no.
If.
Yes.
For yes three.
Bills are back on the bill
questions on the bill.
The motion for to pass a second
second licensure call the roll.
Yes.
On both.
Yes.
Phil.
Yes yes yes share yeah this year
yes four five four yes I would
yes yes yes.
I'm sorry I came back I can do
that.
this is utilised a conversation
but I vote yes on the bill thank
you as in New Mexico this.
Eight zero.
Thank you thank you thank you
members of the committee thank
you this.
I have to go meet with the
governor so there's a little bit
of the issue on.
Doesn't affect anything
financially over really over
house bill one thirty days
versus ours so that goes this
morning.
I want to give you some advice
and
your concern with this with the
international.
And I don't know how our system
works through house bill two
that maybe quicker than meeting
that.
What.
The code.
And let our members if we need
to figure out how to let them
use it not just in your face but
page what we can do this.
Search form or.
Access to.
That will help you with house
bill to see about.
Used.
And.
That option for you welcome to
the twenty first century with
the work we're done just.
Yeah.
So.
I knew about this thing that you
were going to go and talk to the
governor backstage with talk to
several of us from what I
understand so are we going to
make some language changes here
before we go down I'm just
asking because that we were all
prepared I don't know at this
point.
She went downstairs to talk to
leadership.
And that I don't I don't I don't
know what was going on I just
know that I had house bill one
thirty year that was waiting for
an agreement on one thirty and
now it's ramped up today you
guys million prevent a
conversation but that's reason
health.
