All right, we'll start off by
Indian Affairs is not here,
correct, right? The tiff.
All right, come on up.
Did you have a handout or no?
Yes, I do.
Yeah, go ahead, let's start.
He's going to start this.
Senator,
We have um a chairman, excuse
me, um, we have the, um, TIFF
people here as well. Do you want
us to start? Would you prefer
that we're already sitting
there, so let's start with you.
OK, do you want me to go.
OK.
I forgot his Anthony.
No
You're gonna start us off,
right?
OK, let's go.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Antonio Ortega, and I'm
the Indian Affairs Department,
LFC analysts.
Uh, joining me today is the
Indian Affairs Department
cabinet secretary Josette Monet.
Uh, and getting started, please
reference relevant budget
details in the LFC budget
document Volume 2, pages 249 and
250.
You may also reference tab 6
agency code 609 in your binders.
OK, we're gonna go over any
highlights from LFC?
Uh, yeah, I'll just go over the
broader context of the
recommendations. So
During um the LFC
recommendation.
Which maintains a flat budget
over the FY 25 operating budget
was adopted during HAFC.
And the executive recommendation
proposes a 7.7% increase over FY
25.
Including $289,000 for 3 FTE,
uh, one contract attorney.
One, chief procurement officer.
And one office clerk.
Additionally, the executive
recommendation proposes
Um, $100,000 to support costs
within the other category.
And I'll pass it over to the
secretary.
Thank you.
DSA go to DFA and then the
secretary.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Committee members. I'm Mary Beth
Dinsmore with DFA, um.
I don't have anything to add,
uh, it's pretty, pretty simple
stuff, so I will hand it over to
the secretary for you.
Madam Secretary.
It's your bullet points on your
presentation.
You got 15 pages and we, we
limit them to 5.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, yes, thank you, uh,
the 1st 5 or 6 pages or so of
the, of the presentation are
actually our budget presentation
the last few pages are related
to TIFF.
So, um, as you know, IED is a,
it's a small agency. We have
been working to really expand
IED over the last several years,
uh, we, um, have expanded, uh,
About 5 physicians are so in the
last couple of years, and we
have been really working to
ensure that we can continue to
expand to continue to meet the
needs of the constituents, the
nation's publics and tribes that
we work with in all Native
American citizens in New Mexico.
And so my goal at IAD has been
to ensure that we have enough
staff.
And capacity and human resources
to make sure that we can meet
the needs of our people, and um,
and New Mexicans, and so we've
asked for the 3 positions and
$100,000 in addition to that for
uh expansion of our, our office
space and then an extra $50,000
that would help with uh any
extra fees that would come along
with additional staff. The
The positions, uh, to go over
some of the positions that we're
asking for. So we're asking for
a contract attorney, uh,
IAD has one general counsel.
And that's one general counsel
that oversees all of the
contracts that go through the
Indian Affairs department. On
average, we have roughly
200/200 different contracts that
go through the Indian Affairs
department every year. That
includes capital outlay
contracts, so the IDAs, um, tip
IGAs we do growth funding. We
did special funding, we have
stuff and um funding that comes
through our recurring budget and
so we have one general counsel
who focuses on getting us those
template IGAs ready, but then
when those IGAs come back to IAD
after they've been executed by
the entity.
Our,
um, general counsel then has to
review.
That entire
That entire IGA to ensure that
uh there hasn't been any
changes, no modifications, no
comments prior to sending it to
me for for signature, and so,
um, as you might imagine, having
one general counsel, uh,
overseeing, uh, you know,
hundreds of IGAs and, and if
there are any modifications or
changes or any concerns from any
of the entities modifying those
appropriately or having those
conversations becomes somewhat
burdensome.
On one person. In addition to
all of the other things that a
general council might be doing
in an agency such as advising
the staff and the secretary on
personnel issues on other
statutes and policies and laws
that we need to be aware of, so,
um, so it would be extremely
beneficial to IED to have a
contract attorney who can focus
on those contracts so that the
general council is able to focus
on some of the other works that
we need completed and I.
Uh, the other position we're
asking for is the chief
procurement officer, that is to
fulfill a statutory role. We do
have a staff member right now
who is acting as um as a CPO in
addition to her other duties,
but in order to ensure that we
have somebody to make sure that
we're following the procurement
code, it would be helpful and
beneficial for IED to have a
chief procurement officer
specifically dedicated to
procurement matters in
particular, again, as we're
getting out all these various
different types of funding.
And then finally, an office
clerk and so looking at some of
the duties right now we did, I
reclassified a position this
past year to ensure that we
would have an executive admin.
We were previously uh IAD was
paying a contractor to have a
contract executive admin, so we
reclassified a position to have
an executive admin. Uh, however,
uh, we don't have a general
office clerk to help assist with
other duties and so my executive
admin often
is working on greeting visitors
and managers doing the mail log
stuff, um, meeting and
scheduling and preparation of
documents and stuff, and we've
got myself into deputies and so
it would be helpful to have our
executive admin be able to focus
on providing the meetings and
agendas for her role, so, and
working with the executive a
little bit more closely so that
we, um, so that we ensure that
we're making our deadlines for
such and having an office clerk
to assist the rest of the staff.
And our um constituents with
other things. So, overall, uh,
as was mentioned, uh, we are
asking $389,000 for those um for
those positions and that extra
$100,000 overall. Uh,
additionally, in addition to
that, we did ask for
non-recurring funds of $2.5
million which would allow um IED
to administer funds to nation's
and tribes to do a comprehensive
planning.
to regarding infrastructure
again, ideas pretty well known
for doing capital outlay in the
tribal infrastructure funds,
that's what a lot of people know
about the Indian Affairs
department. It is not all we do,
however, um, we do a lot of
that, and so one of the things
that we have heard in our
conversations with nation's
publics and tribes throughout
the last year is that it would
be helpful to have some funds to
be able to really do a little
bit more thorough, uh.
A plan to ensure that when they
are asking, requesting for
capital both from executive and
the legislature that they have a
clear direction on how they
would like to go.
Moving on onto page number,
slide number 4.
It just, that's a general
overview of our vacant
positions. I know that vacancies
have been a concern, um, and
that IUD has had vacancies and
that that's been a concern, but
looking at what we have done in
FY 25 over at least the most
recent year FY 24, on average,
uh, for, for the 1st 7 months of
FY 25 IED still averaged about 5
to 8 vacancies. We are, um, a
lot of 25 FTE, so 5.
8 vacancies on average, and then
for the 1st 7 months of FY 24,
we had averaged between 9011
vacancies during that time. So
we have decreased that amount of
vacancies. In addition to that,
at the beginning of the fiscal
year, we made a determination to
hold 3 positions vacant because
our projections looked like we
were going to be over the amount
allocated in the personnel
category and the 200 categories.
So in order to ensure that we
didn't fall short and we were
able to continue
paying our staff who are
currently there, uh, we did make
a decision to hold some of those
positions vacant. We, our
projections have cleared up and
it looks like we're doing OK,
like I think we're spending, um,
we're doing a lot more. We do
just as a quick note, we have a
CFO position that has been
vacant for quite some time,
quite honestly, we have a mobile
CFO from DFA. She's here with me
today as well, uh, but that
position has been difficult to
feel, uh, that, so that is one
that has been vacant for a
while.
But we are working actively.
To fill that position.
Moving on to page 5. So looking
at, again, IEDs, historical
reversions and what we were
looking at, uh, IED reverted
about a million dollars last
year, a little over a million
dollars, but over $700,000 was
in the personnel category, was
in the 200 category. And so if
you look on the chart, it shows
you, um, in the little graph at
the bottom, it shows you how
much we have remaining at
this time right now and we've
got about $3 million left for FY
25, and that's just from the
first, uh,
Sorry, yeah, that's, that's from
the 1st 7 months of the year,
but we have been expensing money
and like significantly reducing
our money and the percentages
that we've brought down. So
we've been, um,
We've been hiring people, and
again, of course, we've had some
changeover. Uh, I, I think
that's to be expected in any
place, and so, but we have been
actively recruiting. We
currently have about 7
vacancies. We are looking at
filling.
4 of those very soon, um,
probably in the next couple of
months, quite honestly, um, a
couple of weeks, hopefully, but,
uh, so we have been really
Strategizing.
And working to ensure that we
are spending our funds, um, and
that we are filling our
vacancies, and again my goal is
to ensure that IAD stabilizes,
and that we fill positions, and
that we're able to continue to
expand, um, and I'm sure as many
of you know Indian affairs
touches almost every aspect, um,
of, of any topic. And so we try
at IED as best we can to work
with our sister agencies as
closely.
as we can, um, in working with
them, but it is important that
IED have the staff to be able to
ensure that we know, um, and can
work with those agencies
appropriately.
Moving on to slide number 6,
just kind of an idea, general
idea of where we're sitting
right now for a recurring funds,
uh, so this is our operating
budget that we've got right now
and you can see, uh, through,
through the, the various totals
we've got.
Uh, it shows you kind of that
3rd column from the left, how
much has been encumbered, and
then the second column from the
right, or I'm sorry, yes, 3rd
column from the right and then
2nd colum from the right shows
you how much we've gotten
encumbered as well. So if you
look at the balances that we're
looking at right now, um,
Our overall balance for our, for
our entire budget would be about
$675,000 but that's including
300, over $300,000 per
personnel, which again, we hope
to uh decrease significantly in
the next couple of months. So,
um, that's where we are at with
that, uh, and so again we are
making concerted efforts and
being strategic, we have been
doing consistent meetings
internally to ensure that we are
meeting the
needs my staff has been amazing
at ensuring that they get things
done when we ask for them, they,
um, have been really good about
ensuring that, uh, they're
reaching out to nations,
publics, and tribes and getting
the contracts out and finding
out what it is that we need to
do better and so, uh, I've been
really lucky to have such a
great staff that's really
dedicated to pushing out money
through IED and helping us
expend our funds and ensuring
that our constituents get what
they deserve.
Moving on to slide 7 is just our
annual financial audit summary,
um, just to note that in 2024,
we did have a material, material
weakness of $185,000 which was a
restatement from a prior year
due to improperly recording it.
Uh, we are cleaning up our
administrative services division
right now, there are some
things, um, that we're ensuring
that we're making sure
everything's kind of cleaned up
and going through, and Lisa has
been an amazing assistant with
that.
And
Mr. Sure, that is all we've got.
OK, what a question to committee
members.
I guess I have a few Senator
Shao, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
Senator Truhill.
I don't mind deferring to
Senator though. He might ask my
questions.
All right.
I know, right?
We don't have all day,
Mr. Chairman, um, secretary,
it's really nice to see you.
Thank you for being here. Um, I
have just a couple of questions.
One is on page 6 of the current
status of reoccurring funds and
so 324 position dollars,
$324,000 remaining that's about
3 positions.
So out of those vacancies that
you have, you can hire 3.
Or more because this is just
what's left to right this year.
Mr. Chair Senator, some of the,
um, funding has been, we kind of
set it aside for those positions
as well as while we have the
mobile CFO, we are still paying
that CFO um funding.
OK. All right, Mr. Chairman, and
then, um, on the next lines, I
noticed that under the 300
category suicide prevention has
150,000 that hasn't been
expended at all.
And then down in the 400
category.
Um, it, there's again another
line for suicide prevention and
there's 85,000 left. And so
those two suicide prevention
seems to me there's $235,000
left and there's been very
little spent for that. Can you
help me understand why?
Mr. Chair Senator, we have been
We had this special
appropriations, uh, that we got
in 2023 and then we got
reauthorized in 2024, uh,
altogether it's about $6 million
and so we've been working to
expand that funding and that's
kind of where we've been going.
Um, this funding, we've been
kind of holding, but, you know,
to make sure that we've, that
we're meeting the needs, but I
can tell you my deputy has been
on me to figure out exactly how
we're going to get it out and so
we are, we are working to figure
out um what is the best way.
we've talked about, do we bring
on a contractor or do we try to
see if we, um, have some other
needs that need to be met and so
we do plan on expanding that,
but the reason why it hasn't
been expanded yet is because we
have been trying to spend on
that special funding, OK, Mr.
Chairman and secretary, um, as
we come closer to the end of the
school year and you know, uh,
senior parties and all of those
things, um, it might be helpful
to, I hope you can get that
money expended before the end of
the year. Let me just put it
that way. You've got plenty of
ideas, I'm sure.
Um, but it would be really
helpful to have that expended by
then. And then I just have one
last question, Mr. Chairman. Oh,
on page 10, you didn't get into
the special appropriations,
you've got a Z fund there.
Um, I also see that there's 100,
1.4 million remaining for health
services.
And 2.2 million remaining for
infrastructure. How long is that
special appropriation good for?
Mr. Chair, Senator, it is good
until the end of fiscal year
2025, so it does expire June 30,
2025, um, and, and you'll see
that that is why, uh, on average
for the behavioral health again,
last year, uh, in FY 23, we
expended about $1.2 million of
that behavioral health money,
this current fiscal year we're
looking at about $1.2 million.
We have been making contacts as
much as we can, um, to try to
get the money fully expended,
um, and
It, I, to be completely frank,
I'm not sure if that money is
gonna get fully expended before
the end of the year, which again
goes back to why you'll see the
behavioral health money in the
other, in our operating budget
still, but we are, we're, we're
hoping, we are trying as hard as
we can. All right, thank you,
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Thank you Secretary.
Thereindo.
Well thank you Mr. Chairman,
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, just quickly, I know you
mentioned, uh, you have one
general counsel and reviews all
the projects. How many projects
are added to an affairs because
I, you know, I haven't been in
that position before.
Anytime we do any kind of uh uh
award to the tribes. There's
intergovernmental agreement.
How many are added to your
How many IGEs are added on
special purpose or anything like
that on the, on the average on a
yearly basis.
Mr. Chair vice chair the, it
depends on what type of funding
it is and how it's allocated,
and again, sometimes it can
depend, are we gonna do an RFP?
Do we need to do an RFP for is,
are we able to get it out to a
nation pueblo or a tribe. Are we
gonna look at a professional
service degree, so it could be.
Maybe as little as one, but it
could be dozens, and so every
time, or it could be 100s,
depending on all the funding, so
like the $25 million the Z
funding special appropriation
did become um something where
IAD had to learn how to ensure
we were getting the money out
appropriately and getting all of
those contracts out constantly
and ensuring that our general
counsel was doing all the
different types of uh IGAs and
contracts that needed to be
drafted, so there's, there's
always
and lots of IGAs and contracts
going through IAD. Uh, one of
the, so, so your, your general
counsel in addition to his or
her responsibilities just kind
of taking care of the
organization.
He or she's the only one that's
also doing the IGAs.
Mrs her vice chair, yes, that is
correct, alrighty, um.
Members of the committee when I
was cabinet secretary way back
in 2004 and we did the tribal
infrastructure fund, the tribal
infrastructure Fund was 3
million.
Now
They're reviewing hundreds of
IGAs and I've had a lot of
complaints from tribes just
because of uh not having the
capability that, you know, we
allocate these projects for 3
years, but it's taken anywhere
from 6 to 78 months just
everything out and, and so
forth. So your 3-year window now
becomes 2 years and 2 months.
And so I think uh I really want
to support and I think having
having another attorney who
really get these projects out so
that this, so that the
communities have the full,
hopefully 3 years to complete
these projects. I think that's
important because things haven't
changed in 20 plus years. I, I
had one general counsel and now
we've added more responsibility
and more money and so forth, so
I just want to make that comment
to the committee, so.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Let me
The woods.
So, so, uh,
his chair and said Shindo.
Thank you.
Madam secretary.
On page.
I was gonna ask me the question.
I'm not, I'm not cabinet
secretary, Senator.
Madam Secretary,
The, the, uh,
The infrastructure fund.
All right, we've got
like 2019, there's still
You know,
$600,000 in that.
Um
What, what are you gonna do? I
mean,
That's way more than 3 years, so
what do we, what are we doing
with that? I mean.
Explain to me.
What are you planning on
happening with these balances
that are pretty old.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, just a
real quick question that does go
into the TIF portion of the
presentation if you'd like, if
Mr. Chair, if you'd like, we can
move into that or if you want me
to let's keep on the agency and
then because we're gonna move
some stuff around.
OK.
Any questions, any more
questions for the agency?
Miriam McCheese.
Any other questions from
committee membersina, let me ask
you, every year you're reverting
about a million dollars $500
billion. I mean, if we right
size that agency because the
more we increase your budget,
the you're kind of with the
increases come the same amount
of reversions.
And so,
get to page 6.
And so,
page 6.
I'm sorry, page 5.
Um
So I mean 2024.
You, uh, budget was 4 million,
the expense 3.8 reverted a
million.
Uh, 2023, same thing, 3.9,
expenses were 2.
So as you're coming up, you're
still not covering your total
cost of your expenses you
request is for 5 million this
next year. Are we going to see
the same reversion trend of
approximately.
We're growing too fast and you
can't keep up is what it tells
us, you have a million dollars
or a version, so you're your
dollar amount.
is exceeding your gross amount,
and so we need to rebalance
that.
In order to make sure that
you're not reverting that kind
of money.
think if your budget was to
remain the same at 4.82, you
would not have a $1 million
reversion.
Mr. Cur, I do believe that if
we, if our budget stays the same
that we won't have any
reversions. I also don't think
we'll have enough money or
enough resources, including
human resources to do the things
that IED needs to do. FTEs are a
different level.
But every year you've reverted
money.
The other agency would
I have a million dollars and not
reverted.
And so we're
The trend is showing us, we're
growing your budget more than
you can spend.
And so if we take a pause for
one year.
And see if you don't have a
million dollars reversion.
And then we talk about the FTEs,
but you have 1234567 vacancies
in your flow chart, so those are
funded FTEs. So why are you not
taking that funded FTE money and
making a transfer to higher.
Um
The expansion for your to
procurement office, right?
Office clerk in contract
attorney.
Of the 7 positions you could,
you could transfer.
From your 200 category into that
level. You may have to do two
FTEs for one attorney, but
there's capable room within your
budget. Why haven't you done
that?
Mr. Chair, uh, we have plans at
IED to fill these positions. The
deputy secretary position is
looking at getting filled the
communications information
officer. I'm in communications
with people right now. The
project coordinator position,
I'm in communications with
somebody right now, the CFO
position is one that we have to
have, of course that's been
difficult to fill. The, um,
public relations coordinator,
uh, one of the ones that is
vacant towards the very bottom,
we are reclassifying that
position to ensure that we can
meet the needs.
The tribal consultation
specialist position is currently
advertised and we're hoping to
make an offer in the next week
or so. That leaves us with 12
remaining positions, the
management analyst position and
the public relations
coordinator, which are two of
the positions out of the 3 that
I had decided to leave vacant in
order to ensure that we could
cover those costs this last
fiscal year, but seeing that we
now have that funding available,
the goal is to hire those
positions, which means every
position in IAD will be filled.
OK. And you have never barred
out of your 400 categories
instead of learning the
The million to the to the 200
level to get your FTEs.
Believe they can do that, right?
LLC.
Antonio.
Tell me your name again.
Oh, all right, I thought it was,
but I wanna make sure
that is legal to do.
out of your operating budget DFA
shaking their head and, and not
revert that balance and hire
those 3 FTEs, so you have the
flexibility to do that, but you
haven't done it, so.
Why not?
Mr. Chair, if, um, looking at
this slide that we have and I
forget which page it is. I'm on
page 5.
In page 3 you were murdered a
million, you could have
transferred.
5 150,000 for the F3 FTEs that
you're asking.
In your 200 categories.
those and not revert that money.
I did that and that happened.
Mr. $700,000.
of what we
last year was for.
Personnel, it was for not
feeling those positions and so
on page number 6.
You'll see that.
We are really pushing to fill
the positions that's been one of
my goals, uh, since being in
this position is to ensure that
we are filling the positions
and, and if and when we need to
reclassify physicians, we have
looked at doing that in order to
ensure that we're.
Agency, and then you'll see from
our 300 and our 400 category
under there. We do have plans to
expand most of that funding.
And so that, that
That's why we're hoping
shouldn't have to um do what.
Bars for for this fiscal year
for that and then.
Why
I
next year and just to note real
quick, um, and
Mr. uh, it
If ID
Is
Given
Any extra positions. I just want
to know for the records that we
also need some funding for
space. We've got no space left
in our office, um.
Uh
Cubiccle set up and
Um
almost every.
Open spot is filled with um
people.
It is so.
back to historical budget.
is
2022
The secretary just came out last
year.
In 2023 is in maybe DFA or the
analyst know the 1.2, how much
of that is after.
page 5.
of a million
2 and 23 in a million.
24.
I would see the 24 number.
See the 23, how much was that of
FTEs in that year.
to help you
That's right
Tell me what the Shenon Project
is.
Yeah
I
I
I'm not sure what the product is
other than, uh, we, we, we're,
we're, we have money, uh, that
has been recurring money that
has been there and I, I'm
guessing it is like funding that
has been available for years,
but we have looked at is, um,
looking at special projects that
we can provide to nation,
publics, and tribes.
You should not put a
legislator's name on that. I
mean, it's, if it's not that
intended purpose. Please don't
do that to members. I mean.
It's
It's funny, but it's not funny,
right?
And so it just makes it look
like he's doing something
special in there and I don't
want the parents of that, um.
A lot of the money while we're
waiting for the answer, suicide
prevention, I mean, it, it's
getting out in small amounts,
but it's not getting out in
large amounts where suicide
prevention should be working,
uh, in the 200 category, you
don't have the FTE for 150,000
in the 300 category, you've only
spent uh.
8000 of the uh
1
13,000.
And you're 6 months away from
them, into the budget year, and
so, I mean, those are critical
things that need to happen, um.
You know, the same thing with
self home construction 197, not
even encumbered within 6 months.
Indigenous youth council is
encumbered, but I don't know
what that is.
Language preservation is
encumbered Sindo specials not
encumbered.
Mhm
Um, oh no, it is, it's in
progress.
Some of these special projects
seem to
Suicide prevention is really
critical on native lands, and we
had an outbreak a while back in
the, and so that has to get
done.
If you're not gonna do that,
we'll send the money to
somewhere else where they're
gonna get it done, cause it has
to get done in tribal
communities.
She
Mine in in through when there
is.
them, so
We have that answer yet,
Anthony.
In 2024, the reversions of 1
point.
2023, 1.2, how much was that of
the FTEs?
Mr. Chairman, uh, members.
So in 2024, the FTE version was
699,000.
For 2023, that was 621,000.
But this year we're hoping to.
come pretty close to fully
expanding.
Well what's come pretty close in
expanding.
You still have 7 vacancies right
now.
I have been vacant for how long?
How long are they vacancies on
this chart then.
Senator, members of the
committee, I believe the
The CIO position just recently
got reclassified. The project
coordinator position's been
vacant for
Maybe a month and a half or so,
uh, CFO position has been vacant
for quite a while. The deputy
secretary physician's only been
vacant for about a month or so,
um, and like I said, those other
three positions were positions
that we were holding and so we,
those ones have been vacant, but
again, we are, we just
reclassified this public
relations coordinator position
in order to ensure that we could
fill that position, it should be
getting posted in the next day
or two. And I'm gonna speak for.
Shindo and I.
And cause when we go home and
they tell us Indian affairs has
a problem.
Whether it's getting grant
contracts or awards or
everything, and then we come in
here looking at the budget and
you have 7 vacancies in in
roughly 60% of the million
that's reverting every year is
because of vacancies.
And we say, well, we give him
the money.
They're not hiring.
It's tough to explain to them,
especially when they're working
on capital.
Some of those capital projects I
see the prior secretary had not
signed off on the IGA contract
since 2023.
And it's hanging out there like
that.
I mean, we want efficiencies. I
mean, cause we have to face the
brunt when we go to the chapter
house and we have all the
eastern agency chapters there.
We represent the state issue in
in
We're gonna blame you.
I mean, because you have to fill
those vacancies, you have to,
you have to get the suicide
money out, refunded, and it's
just not moving along, and so
it's hard for us.
When we fund you and we, we,
we're funding you correctly.
It's just not happening.
And a response if you want.
Uh, chairman and members of the
committee, I, um, I hear you. I
face the same communities as
well, and I do hear the
concerns. One of the things, I
mean, again, what we have done
is we have actively filled these
positions. These are not
positions that have been vacant
for extended periods of time,
they are positions that have
kind of changed throughout time
and again we have looked at
reclassifying positions. We've
reclassified appropriately as we
see fit to meet the needs of the
agencies and um we're
planning and constantly
strategizing on how to ensure I
am actively trying to fill all
of these positions. My staff is
actively working to ensure that
we can fill these positions, and
again, I understand, I
absolutely agree about suicide
prevention. I've had suicides in
my own family, my aunt, my
uncles and cousins, and so I
understand the need for suicide
prevention in Indian country and
grew up in Indian country. I get
it, but also again, I want to
reiterate that we also again
we've had that behavioral.
money and that is we've done a
couple of millions of dollars in
behavioral health into Indian
country that's focused on those
things.
But I mean, we're sitting here
for 6 months and let's just talk
about suicide prevention, and 3
they had an outbreak and that's
kind of where we started.
And we're 6 months into suicide
prevention.
Whoever gets appropriated the
money or the contract in the IGA
to move in 6 months in suicide
before the money is reverted in
in July.
June 30th deadline.
is a short window to do suicide
prevention.
These things should start.
The minute the budget is signed
saying we have this money, let's
start getting contracts ready
for July 1, because then we have
a full year and not 6 months,
cause this is, this is a 6 month
shot in time.
Call it 6 months cause
7 months now that we're in.
February.
A 7 month shot of time, so you
only have 4 months.
Before you have to start in
April.
With what you're gonna revert
and no expansion cause you don't
have the budget capacity and
it's getting scary.
But something like that would
not move the way it needs to
move.
I mean, you're the secretary,
you've been there for a year.
I mean, I, I, I'm, I'm
lecturing, but I'm lecturing for
a good reason, right? Because we
want it.
And it has to happen.
And 4 months is not in time to
set up and spend.
I forget
The dollar now is on suicide
prevention two categories, and
it's just critical that that
stuff happens.
Uh, but we'll look, uh, you said
the house.
Antonio, the house.
Mr. Chair of the House adopted
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you.
We're gonna, we're gonna jump
real quick because I gotta run,
do some bills in committee, and
they have enough voting members
right here to pass some bills.
So send their soldier right
there, uh.
Senator Woods you're gonna go
next.
We'll try to get and then keep
the tip in place because we're
gonna jump back because if we
lose a quorum, then we can't
pass bills.
We're ready when you are.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll
be fairly, very quick on my
intro. This is uh Bill that is
endorsed both by the LESC and
the public school Cala oversight
task force of which I believe
you are a member, uh, we lately
in building public schools and
uh the funding for it, uh, we've
seen large spikes and increases
where sometimes it's been up
towards $1000 a square foot.
This makes it very difficult,
particularly on our smaller
rural districts and what the two
main things that this bill does
is on.
Page 5 about halfway down it
extends out one year, the uh
Reducing the match that local
districts need to uh come up
with in order to get their
projects on the list that's a
big help to small districts that
don't have a lot of money and
then the other two over towards
page 7, there's some strikes
that change the criteria for
districts to request a waiver to
be allowed to go in front of
the, the board to have their
projects considered, um, that's
essentially what this does is
it, for the most part just
extends the reduction in
out a year, so we can try and
push out more money and help
more of the districts.
At this time
Thank you, Senator, uh, we're
gonna go to the audience and
support anybody and support.
Uh, I take one or two of you,
anybody in opposition. Come on
up. There's nobody on Zoom in
opposition or support, so we'll
take.
to you and I was gonna say the
exact same thing.
Good afternoon, Senator,
Chairman Gene Strickland,
Superintendent Hop schools, and
we stand in support of this
bill. It will allow us to
continue our capital projects
with state funding. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, once again, Silver
schools likewise stand to
support this bill. We appreciate
the efforts to recognize that
we're in a situation where we're
now getting funds and we want to
continue to complete these
projects, so we thank you for
the support.
Vance, Vance Lee Catan Municipal
School Superintendent, uh, we're
in support of this in support of
this bill, especially coming
from a small district, uh, that,
that share uh is an important
increase in the longer we can
hold on with that, the better.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
The
Thank you chair and thank you,
uh Chairman Soul. So just a
quick question on um
The um certain criteria uh what
is, what is the certain
criteria?
Which age?
Mr.
Chair and I can find the page if
you want me to, but I
Just know that there's criteria
that you're no longer either
holding to or what is the
certain criteria, Mr. Chair and
Senator, I think you're talking
on page 7, where there's some
strikeouts where it has at least
70% of its students eligible for
free and reduced lunch. That is
no longer applicable in schools
where we're feeding everyone and
so any measure we have of that
doesn't match, so it's the only
criteria that you're getting rid
of.
has phase two formulaevaluation
calculated pursuant to so a
greater than 50%, I mean they're
mostly technical types of
things, OK.
This is an extension of what we
passed what 2 or 2 or 3 years
ago.
I, uh, Mr. Chair, I believe it
was 2 years ago, so it extends
it is the main piece, but then
loosens the criteria for small
districts who would like to be
considered for an exception is
what these other two places are.
Mm
It it allows more of them to be
considered for exceptions. OK.
And we feel good about that.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair and
senator, it passed, it's uh
was, uh, endorsed by both the
LESC and the public school
capital outlay Committee and we
have the dollars, Mr. Chairman,
to do that.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, uh,
the public school finance
Authority has lots of money
right now that now is the time
we wanna be pushing it out to
districts. OK, thank you.
See any other questions? Seem
Senator Woods.
So Senator uh was chair and
Senator, you say that it's
This is not a
Budget buster when we start
thinking about 44 more million
out of the.
Capital
Uh, the school's capped out way.
Mr. Chair and senator, no, the
money is already sitting there
for most of these projects.
We've got a committee in place
that determines which ones are
highest up on the list, uh, more
than anything, it's a capacity
to go out and spend the money,
uh, particularly when prices
have been very high, uh, I think
my understanding is there's
plenty of money in this
particular fund for public
schools and so we're trying to
push it out when the
When the iron's hot, so to
speak.
OK, you're just, I'm just
asking.
There's adequate money to cover
this.
Mr. Chair and senator, there is
and there's a committee that
looks at each project, how much
it's gonna cost and watches that
budget as to how far down the
list we can go to help
districts. OK, thank you. Thank
you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
None can I have him for
adoption, Mr. uh Mr. Chairman,
the motion. We have a motion for
you passed by Senator Campo,
second by Senator Padilla we
call the role.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier
Yes. Si your lineerbosia,
Senator to Padilla.
Yes, Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobias and votes yes,
Senator Trujillo, yes, Senator
Trujillo votes, yes, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shado yes.
Senator votes yes, Senator Munoz
Senator Munoz votes yes, we have
a due pass 9 to 0.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
committee. I appreciate your
time, Senator Woods. I thought
I've seen Senator Ramos, uh.
Oh, he's hiding behind the
curtain.
You have an expert witness with
you.
Sure
You know, when I, when I come, I
come with both barrels loaded.
So to speak.
I didn't hear you.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senate Bill 222 is uh LFC
endorsed bill, which has two
main purposes is to require
posting of all terms, the state
settlement agreements on the
Sunshine Portal.
Even those that occur outside
the risk management division.
The risk management division has
voluntarily posted most of
information to the sunshine
Portal since August.
2019 and late 2023, the division
began posting all settlement
information.
Including
Settlements involving minor
children and diminished capacity
individuals.
However, the agencies that do
not opt to use.
Rich magistrate position, legal
representation can and have been
able to avoid posting amounts in
terms of their settlements.
Requiring RMD to a point.
A loss prevention review team.
When a death, serious injury, or
substantial losses is alleged
are suspected to be caused at
least in part of the actions of
the state agency. This bill was
modeled after laws in Washington
state which also require after
action loss prevention teams
substantial losses are defined
as those over 250,000 of those
identified by the RMD director.
The team is required to compile.
An incident
Report including written
responses to findings.
And recommendations from the
head of the state agencies
involving the losses.
RMD is required to report all
losses, prevention team
activities to the legislature
annually.
What we're trying to do here,
Mr. Chair, is transparency.
We, we appreciate the
The
LFC staff and all the work they
did on this bill.
And with that, I'm going to turn
it over to Senator Ramos and let
him.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
having us here today. This bill
introduces new requirements for
transparency and risk management
in New Mexico state agencies
within three main components,
settlement agreement
transparency, uh, definitions
and administrative updates and
loss prevention uh review teams.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Caitlin, send your
waiver or no?
I can just say, uh, Mr. Chair,
thanks for hearing this bill,
um, and for the LFC for
endorsing it. This is something
you heard about way back in an
LSC hearing in the fall of 23
when we were at seeing him on
risk management funds, really
shocking that, you know, after
we have these big losses that
there's no requirement that
agencies or anyone go back and
say, well, what happened here?
And how do we prevent it from
happening again. And so that's
really what this bill hopes to
address the $63 million claiming
Gallup.
And we have no idea what it was.
Um, we're gonna go to the
audience, anybody in support and
come on up. Anybody in
opposition, come on up.
Anybody in opposition see none.
Nobody on Zoom it either or
against.
Yeah, she, she
You are in support, correct?
Yes.
OK.
Hi,
Chair, um, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Dusty
Harvey. I'm a trial attorney in
Albuquerque and we support the
transparency in, in order to
help prevent future harm. Thank
you.
Anybody in opposition.
And we have nobody on Zoom.
Questions from committee
members, Senator Trujil.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Woods, and Senator
Ramos. I, I don't have a
question. I just want to say
there's two things that I really
like about this, and I'm in full
support of this that you
included potential legal.
Right, because it's not always
that that somebody's sued, it's
that somebody's threatened to
sue, um, or you think that
there's a possibility that
they're gonna sue when they come
forward, and there are claims,
there are settlements that
happen even at that point. The
other thing that I, I want to
say thank you for is that you
put a definition of what serious
injury is.
And it's pretty clear what a
serious injury is. It's not cut
from the file.
Um, it's not a, a smashed finger
in the door. It's, it's really
something that's very serious.
So thank you for this bill. I
appreciate it.
And you haven't see anybody
else. Let me ask you or Shindo.
I think it was Chairman and
thank you presenters. I think
certainly the uh endorse or
support this bill, but can you
speak a little bit to the
concerns around medical
malpractice.
OK. Thanks so.
Mr. Chair and Senator Schendo.
So,
This is relating to claims
against the state. And so when
you're talking about medical
malpractice against the state
like say at UNM Hospital, those,
uh, damages are capped at a
certain level, they are capped
at 50,000, um, so this would
still require a loss prevention
team, probably at UNM at Health
Sciences Center. I think they do
this kind of internally already
to go in and say, OK, we got
We had, we had a malpractice
suit. It was above this $250
limit, $250,000 limit, what
happened here, you know, do we
need to make some changes to.
Mhm
Thank you.
Will this also disclose the
attorneys in the in that have
been on the case and whether
they're.
State attorneys if they're suing
us over.
Civil rights includes all those
disclosures for attorneys and
and.
And what the incident was and
the damages. We'll disclose all
of that.
So, Mr. Chair, um,
I might be wrong on this, but if
you look at the, the settlements
that are posted currently on the
Sunshine Portal. I do believe
they named the attorneys in the
case and the amount of the
settlements in cases when you're
dealing with a minor, you know,
a child or an incapacitated
adult often they'll.
initials or black out some
information, but certainly the
attorneys on the case and the
settlement amount are disclosed,
yeah.
Hm
The cases are public and they're
tried in public court.
Why would we black out the names
when it's already in the public
court record already do that in
the public record
for minor. They'll say, you
know, instead of
Johnny
Johnny B. Hill will say JB, you
know.
OK. And is, although this is all
of them, this is public schools,
everybody, correct?
Rachel's shaking her head.
OK, I'm sorry. Um
This, this would cover anybody
who's part of that's underneath
the risk management division.
So, um, public schools are under
PSIA. They get their liability
insurance elsewhere, but some of
the colleges are under risk
management division.
sinners, I would
Look at him in this.
to make sure it covers public
schools also because
We have issues with with they're
asking for $160 million increase
in insurance.
We don't know what the risk was
and what the settlements in the
contracts.
Do you have any interest in
doing that?
I'd be interested in doing that,
yes.
We need, we need to draw up an
amendment to do that, Mr. Chair.
I mean, that's, that's your
guys's probably about what's
going to mending on the floor if
you what's your thoughts are, I
mean, if you wanna roll this
over and get an amendment to
include them.
I think we, I need to look at.
We we do need to look into that
and see if it will fit into this
bill but if possible we'll try
to mend it on the floor.
OK.
tells me no other questions, you
have a motion.
We'll Steinborn, you have a
question? Thank you, Mr. I just
have one question. I assume.
This bill deal with HIPAA and
things like that.
We're not gonna
Obviously can't violate law, but
that we would prevent the
disclosure of protected
information.
health information, you have
settlements here regarding
medical issues.
Mr. Chair and Senator Seinborn,
like if you look at the current
settlement.
Um, disclosures on the sunshine
Portal, those already best for
UNMH. They don't
kind of
Larger terms, you know, usually.
In this bill, Mr. Cha, doesn't
this expand the settlements that
would be required to be
disclosed.
So, Mr. Chair and Senator
Steinborn, it would only be in
the case, so right now.
The Sunshine Portal
management division has been
voluntarily posting great.
They've been since a couple of
years ago, they've even been
doing.
Um, there are cases where state
agencies do not use risk
management in those cases, those
settlement. And so the HIPA
issues, Mr. Cha, is at all.
still
Protected in this bill.
Right
So, Mr. Chair, I think that's
amazing.
Uh, thank you.
Senator Linni.
I was just gonna move to DuPass.
So.
Motion Purdue passed by Senator
second by Senator Trujilalo.
Senator Brent Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Lannier, Senator Lanier
Botsia, Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Sinner Steinborne Botsia,
Senator Tobiasin,
Senator Tobiasinbotia, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Bosa, Senator
Woods, Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Sendo.
Yes. Senator Sendo votes yes and
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz
votes yes, you have a Du pass 9
to 0. She's right there.
Um, congratulations.
Madam Secretary, let's come back
up and let's jump into tribal
infrastructure. I, I gotta run
to another committee. Oh
you know you 23 tomorrow.
Yeah, let's do tribal
infrastructure and then
Uh, workforce solutions and then
veterans we're gonna get to.
No.
Risk.
Madam sector, you go ahead and
uh
Mark, you wanna
Join the secretary there since
you're a part of the uh tip
board and then we go ahead and
uh we'll continue where we left
off on the presentation for the
tribal infrastructure Fund.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, thank you. We will
start off looking on page 11 of
the handout.
From earlier, uh, just briefly
to give a little bit of
background on the tribal
infrastructure fund, um.
It is in statute.
6-29-1 at that is that is the
tribal infrastructure fund, it,
we
The fun, it's funded by getting
about 4.5% of the estimated
bonding capacity each year from
the STVs and so we, this past
year, um, or this year, I'm
sorry, this year, the we're
looking at around $80 million
which is a significantly more
than what we've had in the last
couple of years. Uh, we have a
board, a tribal infrastructure
Fund board that the, the
Secretary of Indian Affairs
department, this is the chair
of, and then
have representatives, 5 state
representatives or tribal
representatives, and then we've
got
We've got 4 non-voting members,
And um so the, the board has an
application and evaluation
procedures and forms. We have
TIFF guidelines and procedures
that are posted on IED's
website. We, um, it's admitted,
the board is administratively
attached to IED, the funds do go
to DFA, however, and IED and DFA
have an MOU, uh, to get the
funds allocated.
Uh, moving on to page 12, we
have an application process that
the, the TIFF board has a TIFF
review committee, we call it the
TRC that actually reviews the
application in that's way. I
have Mark Thompson here with me,
uh, who will chat a little bit
about what the tip application
and what we, what we're looking
at when we're looking at
applications, but every year
there's a portal that opens, it
generally historically has
opened on the first Friday in
February.
which is American Indian Day, so
it's open right now, stays open
for 30 days on average, but
there's nothing telling us how
long we have to leave it open,
so we've been able to extend it
in the event that um nation's
and tribes needed a little bit
longer. It works, uh, kind of
similar to Capitol Outley in
terms of the types of projects,
so planning projects are 24
months or 2 years, uh, design
and construct projects are 36
months, or 3 years. We have, um,
Not reauthorizations, but
they're called no cost
extensions and the entity just
has to ask us for a no-cost
extension 60 days prior to the
expiration of the IGA and if we
get a request for one, we call a
meeting of the board to um hear
the presentation from it. Uh,
I'm gonna turn it over to Mark
to talk a little bit more in
depth about the application
process and how the TRC he's
currently sits as our chair of
the TRC and how that process
works.
This
Thank you, Secretary, uh
Chairman, members of the
committee.
I didn't know I was going to
talk to the.
We're gonna make you talk.
Can't come this far and sit
silent in the audience. I just,
just for show, Senator, just for
show.
Uh, yes, I, and TRC TIF Review
Committee is a a five-member
committee that reviews all the
applications um past couple of
years we've been averaging 50 to
60 applications that 5 member
committee appointed by the chair
of TIFF, the Secretary of Indian
Affairs Department, um reviews
all 60 applications and reviews
of this scores those based on
four criteria, critical need, 30
points.
Um, project readiness 30 points.
Capacity, 25 points.
And
Leverage 15 points.
We evaluate those and score
those and rank them.
And submit them forward toward
uh.
The tip for the full tip board
to vote on. So that's it in a
nutshell. It's a competitive
process.
Um, and a heavy lift for the TRC
and right, wrong or indifferent,
I've been on the TRC for a
while, I guess I kinda sort of
know what I'm doing cause
Senator Sin Sheno showed me how
to do it 15 years ago or
whenever that was, been around
it a while, senator. So I
understand the tip process and
it's been going on.
Quite well.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Um, any, um, is that it?
OK, yeah, any questions from the
committee just uh
Senator Trull.
Um, Mr. Chairman, thank you for
being here again. Um, so I'm new
to this process, unlike you've
got years of experience, um.
Curious why
So little was expended in 2024.
If I'm looking at this right.
It shows only 914,000 expended
in 2024.
And there's a balance of 61.3
million.
How come such a little amount,
even the year before was 10
million.
That didn't even rise to a
million.
Are there no needs?
In Poland.
Mr. Chair, Senator, these are
ongoing projects, so some of
them may be 2 or 3 year long
projects and so oftentimes we're
working with the nation's hubs
and tribes and they're doing
there RFPs and getting their
contractors and so, um,
sometimes it looks like we have
a pretty high balance, uh, TI is
pretty good about getting it
fully expended, quite honestly,
uh, in what we, again, we can do
the no-cost extensions if, if a
nation public or tribe needs it,
but sometimes what we'll get is
like
bulk of requests for payments
kind of towards, you know, a
certain end of the quarter or at
different times and so sometimes
these numbers don't quite
reflect that there's constant
movement in those projects.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
I, I will just, I just wanna
again understand because it
looks like in 2019 there was
just a balance of
665,000 and then by 2020 there's
6.4 million balance.
2021, 6.5 million.
22 jumps up to 24 million
balance and then in 2023, it
jumps up to 57 million as a
balance in 2024, it's up to
61.3%, almost 3.61.4, just seems
like it's growing instead of
shrinking.
Mr. Chair Senator, again, most
of these in particular the ones
from 2020 and 2021. Uh, many of
those might still be active
projects, and so they're still
getting expended and drawn down
on.
If, if I may.
Uh
Right during that time frame,
um, Chairman, members of the
committee, um, those are COVID
impacts.
That's fair. Uh, things were
shut down, um, certainly.
Uh
You're just beginning to see us
come out of that, and I was here
last year, testifying before the
Senate Finance Committee, um,
for what a trust board do as
well, um, on, on the bubble
that's out there.
And getting those out. And so
now we're out of it and folks
are getting hired and, and
contractors are being awarded,
but um there's still is a
capacity issue now regarding
general contractors, architects,
staffing, all of that. And so we
are experiencing what cities and
um counties are experiencing the
same thing. So there's a big
bubble of expenditures that need
to happen out there. And that
one in 2024, um, once the bonds
are sold.
It takes a bit of time for the
IGAs to get processed.
So it does ramp up a little bit
once it ramps up, then the
expenditures will, will move
quite quickly. Thank you. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
and, uh, secretary, so Mr.
Chairman, I hope you're gonna
talk about
The MOUs because I've heard that
there's challenges with MOUs,
but I don't understand what the
challenge.
MOU between um in getting this
money out between the pueblos
the intergovernmental agreements
IGA. OK, all right, I was,
I knew there was a memo between
DFA and in an affairs with
regards to this money, but OK,
so it's OK, yeah, I'm gonna let
you talk about that because you
understand it better.
Thank you.
Yeah, it's Steinberg. Thank you,
Mr. Chair Secretary. Welcome.
I'm gonna follow up a little bit
on my colleague's question here.
How much of the 60 million is
unencumbered.
We asked the question now.
Kind of new capacity.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, the
amount that's been obligated so
far out of the 62 million for
2024 is $10 million
but again, uh, is Mr. Johnson
was stating, so I believe the
bonds were sold for these in
December, and so we've been able
to get this since December and
so of course, since, you know,
the bonds are sold in June and
December and um
So, so we have to work with
those within those confines.
Um, another follow-up question,
Mr. Chair, and secretary is
Kind of and the amount's going
up, that's a good problem to
have, right? But how much of
that 60 million will ultimately
you want to spend down.
I mean, how much capacity you
like to leave in the account and
how much on target to.
And
We are told the amount that
we're given each year and so we
try, we
Give out money, the TRC works to
give out money or
recommendations to the full
amount that we've given, we've
gotten for that year. And I
think, and I believe, and I
don't know these numbers, but I
believe there are projections
for the next couple of years
already and what we're looking
at, um, I don't know those
numbers, but I know for like I
said, for this year we're
looking at $80 million and so we
will, the TRC will is, will be
looking at the applications very
soon and reviewing those and
then we will give out projects
or award projects up to that.
$80 million that we have and
then we will work with the
nation's publics and tribes to
get that money fully expended
for the length of the project.
OK. Thank you Mr. Chair, and
then just final question for me.
How much of a match is this
unrequired, I mean, like, I
assume you probably don't fund
every single thing that comes
your way, and like, what's the
threshold qualification.
Oh
Chairman members of the
committee, that's an excellent
question. That's actually a
scoring criteria, it's leverage,
you get up to 15 points based on
how much.
Other people's money you can use
to to match this. And so you max
out with 15 points if you can
come across with 50%.
match to that. So it depends.
And there have been grants given
with zero match, in particular,
we're big on and what I heard
here today is planning
opportunities. You want to be
able to spend money on proper
planning. So planning grants are
a big deal with the TIFF and the
TRC and those are typically
given with just possibly.
In kind match with staffing and
not a cash match. OK, thank you,
and I'm gonna just nerd out a
little bit further, Mr. Chair,
and ask him one final question
here. Uh,
So how about like
sustainability, right? Like your
funding infrastructure and
building infrastructure, but
then you need to be able to
operate it and needs to.
Of sustainability. So is that
part of what you're requiring as
well.
Um, to fund the project.
Senator term members of the
committee that relates
specifically to capacity.
The applicant has to communicate
that they have capacity in 3
areas. One is project management
capacity, one is technical
capacity about design and
construction, um, project
management is really overseeing
budgets and schedules and those
types of things and the other is
administrative capacity.
And so capacities and important
aspect to this and O&M should
relate to that too, and it's up
to the applicant.
To communicate that they have
the capacity to one, build it,
and the second is to maintain
it.
Miss Char sounds like we got.
The right guy involved in
running this cause you know your
stuff. So thank you for your
service doing that, Madam
Secretary, your service as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think Senator, Senator Woods.
Yeah, I, I thank you, thank you
for all your answers.
Um, what I'm trying to get in my
head.
Let's look down here on on on
this.
4 page 14.
Um, 2019.
There were 11 awards, 14
million.
In the words
Uh, obligated was 13.
Um
Expended was 13.
And balance was 665,000 left
over.
So what are my question is,
655,000. Is that part in Casey's
projects weren't finished.
Or is it put into a fund to be
reallocated later.
Miss
And Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
I'm actually, we, we should have
updated that number because
There's only the balance was
about $11,000. We actually had
uh a tribe that we needed to,
we, we actually paid out
$665,000 to that. So it's, it
actually was only about $11,000
the money doesn't, it, it just,
we don't keep the money, it just
kind of, we have to give, we
revert the money back, so to
speak, afterwards, um, into the
fund.
So you, it reverts back into a
fund to be reallocated.
Well, for a tiff our allocation
that 4.5%, we always get just 4.
4.5% off, yes, so, so I'm not
exactly sure. I, I don't know
that I'm, I, I'm qualified to
testify Senator Woods.
The way we have our capital out
structure right now, any CT I
mean STBs.
The revert.
Go back into the fun, any
general fund monies that the end
of affairs allocates and reverts
back goes into the tribal
infrastructure fund.
So if there's general, general
fund money that's allocated to
Indian affairs.
Uh, and if those funds revert,
then they go back into the
tribal infrastructure fund, but
if there's the, you know,
severance tax bonding of funds,
then they go back into, I
believe, uh,
The general point or wherever
they go back to.
I think that those funds so if
if it's, let me get it in my
head. General funds goes into
tip, stays in there to be
reallocated again.
Uh, correct, and, but the
severance talks, severance tax.
Actually goes a different
direction if it's not spent
right wherever all the, all the
severance take from statewide
projects wherever that reverts
to I'm not exactly sure.
But that's where he goes to.
OK, so.
When we see this toll down here
at the bottom, whether it's
whether the dollars are right or
not.
The, the 156.
Million dollars there.
Um, there's a certain amount of
that that's just in process
that's being spent all the time.
And so this is kind of a, a, uh
I mean, it's, it's a, it's a,
it's an amount, but it's
Some of it is going to be spent
in the future. It just
The 1st 2024, it just hadn't had
time to even been put out
anywhere. I mean, it's just very
little of it's obligated even,
but I guess what I was getting
at?
Of this money right here, this
is severance tax bond money that
we're seeing.
In this chart.
That correct, because it all
comes off the uh bonding
capacity of the state just like
the water trust fund and then
the 4.5 comes to the tip and
then the 4.5 goes to uh a
colonia fund. So those are the
funds that are all part of the
bonding capacity of the state.
And so sooner or later this
money will come back in to the
state treasurer if it's not
spent on these projects listed
on over here.
Right.
OK, thank you.
Thank you for that. Thank you.
The other,
any questions? I just want to
make a comment in, in, in this
column on the balance, what's
important to understand is that
no fun goes out. These are all
funds that are sitting in our
account.
And it's only when we make that
reimbursement back to the entity
is when this number comes down.
Let me give you an example. When
I was cabinet secretary back in
2006.
Oh no, when I first came in in
2004, they were telling me that
there was a $17 million
outstanding balance.
Uh, Tribal projects.
That's a lot of money.
So me and my deputy secretary
and started diving into
everything and what it was, was
that the tribes had spent all
this money.
But since we didn't have a
cabinet at that time, I was the
first cabinet secretary, this
agency was handling it.
The reimbursements weren't going
out.
So the tribes had spent
Literally
About $15.5 million.
So when we got done after 6
months, getting all the
reimbursements out.
The amount was literally, I
think $1.6 million.
Because this balance here is
what's in our system.
It's when the tribe gets
reimbursed.
For those expenditures that this
goes down.
So it's, it's important to
understand that, that
The sooner our agencies
reimburse these monies, then the
sooner this money, this balance
goes down.
And uh, any other questions?
So, thank you. I just want to
say uh this young man sitting
right in front of me, as a
former student of mine in
College of Engineering at UNM,
uh, from Amo Pueblo, an engineer
and uh now works for the uh in
Pueblo Cultural Center is a
facilities manager and done a
wonderful job and uh he's been a
great member of the uh of the uh
uh tribal infrastructure fund
committee because of his
knowledge of projects
management, engineering
background and, and able to
really guide this process in a
way that I think it's done very
well, so.
Thank you, uh, former Lieutenant
Governor Thompson from from
Akimo Pueblo for your service.
Uh, I believe, uh, we have.
I came in a little late, so do
we still have workforce
solutions? OK, yes, come on.
And then veteran services, are
you still here? OK, great. OK.
We'll continue on. The chairman
is presenting.
Our bill to another committee,
so uh we'll continue on with
these presentations. Thank you.
Mr.
Were really the LFC folks and
then we'll go and then at last
we'll be some secretary.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is uh Rachel Garcia, I'm
the LFC analyst for the
Workforce Solutions department
where um you're gonna be looking
at agency code 630.
631, um.
And uh
It looks like this. You do have
bullets, um, for the workforce
solutions department. Um, first
thing to know, uh, is that HAFC
adopted the LFC recommendation
for the workforce solutions
department for the FY 26
operating budget, um, that
budget total is 131.
134.1 million. Um, I will note
the executive recommendation was
134.8 million. These
recommendations were very close
to one another and actually none
of the difference uh was in the
general fund. Um, and on that
note, uh, both recommendations
had actually included a general
fund increase of $250,000 and
that is to backfill a transfer
that comes from the workers'
compensation Administration that
the agency uses to fund um
apprenticeship.
programs, the workers'
compensation, uh.
Administration fund balance is
declining and so the transfer is
reduced and both recommendations
backfilled out with $250,000 and
if you're following along on
your high level, that is the
only general fund increase, uh,
for the workforce Solutions
department.
Um, both recommendations also
included 9.67 million uh for
apprenticeship programs. Last
year you all, uh, as a
legislature created the
workforce development and
apprenticeship fund, um, and
that fund will distribute 5
million to Workforce solutions
department in FY 26 for
apprenticeship programs.
Within the workforce solutions
department, most of the
investments come in
non-recurring, and so you all
have in your packets the line by
line, non-recurring
appropriation differences. I'll
point out a few key ones, but
again, there were very few
differences actually between the
LFC recommendation, uh, in the
executive recommendation. So a
key, uh, few key investments on
the non-recurring side, um,
750,000 for an employment case
management system.
750,000 for a study to
understand um workforce
participation when it's holding
people back from participating
in the labor force, and 500,000
for intensive outreach uh to
engage out of school youth and
unemployed youth.
Those were recommendations um
that came, um, first from an LFC
program evaluation, um, and are
things that the department wants
to implement. And then there's
also uh an appropriation to
increase uh the
pre-apprenticeship programs by
600,000 and the non-recurring
side, that'll keep them at
essentially a flat level going
into FY 26 as they're currently
funded through the Grow, um, and
then I'll note one other thing
about the LFC recommendation on
the non-recurring side, that,
um, there is an
Appropriation of 35 million for
startup cost contingent upon um
the passage of paid family
medical leave. So that's a
special appropriation that um
would only be appropriated to
the apartment should you all as
the legislative body, pass the
paid family medical leave, uh,
bill, and that is probably the
biggest difference um between
the two recommendations, um, in
the non-recurring site.
Um, I apologize, Mr. Chair. I
didn't uh introduce my
colleagues here at the table,
um.
We, we, we've all done it, so uh
I'm so sorry that was so rude of
me, but those are my key points
and now I will introduce my
colleagues at the table, um, and
I turn it over to them, uh, so,
uh, we have
Mario.
From DFA, uh, a joke I called
him by the wrong name, uh, in
the past and it was very
embarrassing, uh, and then I
have secretary in there, uh,
with me at the table to talk
about the agency budget.
Thank you, Rachel. Uh thank you
committee members, Mr. Chair, uh
Mario Sumiglia, DFA analyst, uh,
usually have the courts and the
DAs, but since Simon left, I'm
filling in for him. This is a
big scary agency. Uh, I've never
seen a budget this big before,
but uh I've been uh here to kind
of answer any questions, Rachel
did a great job at
Uh, talking about the
differences and the only thing
about that is that the executive
recommendation but the
apprenticeship program into its
own pe code and there was a
discussion about that and HFC
about whether or not to go that
route, but um, as Rachel said,
they adopted the uh the uh LFC
wreck, so we will, I will pass
it on to Secretary Nayer. Thank
you.
Madam Secretary, go ahead. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I wanna always start
by thinking of my legislative,
go ahead.
OK. Oh yeah, I have some slides
here, um, I'm thinking my, um,
LFC analyst Rachel Mercer
Garcia, who is fantastic and um
thinking Mario especially for
stepping in for Simon, who is
also fantastic, and I have some
of the members of my financial
team here today, Joanne, Steve,
and Erin, and they're back there
in case we have anything really
hard to ask me. Um, so I have a
bunch of slides that I'll go
through really quickly as
always. So slide number 2.
Um, is just some recent
unemployment and job growth
data. So New Mexico's seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate was
4.4% in December 2024. That was
basically unchanged from the
previous month, uh, up about
0.4% from the previous year, uh,
the national unemployment rate
for December was 4.1% and uh
total non agricultural
employment grew by 13,100 jobs
or 1.5% between December 2023
and 24, um.
And that a lot of that growth
came out of construction and
mining industries. So the map
shows you our rate compared to
the region, and then the bar
chart has our uh regional over
the year employment growth, um,
highlighted among the regions so
you can see we're doing a little
better than the nation as a
whole, a little better than
California and a lot better than
poor Nevada, but, um, you know,
Utah is just kicking butt, so um
they're at the far left end of
the, the chart. Next slide.
Uh, this, if you've been here
for a while, you've seen for
many years now, but for folks
who are new, um, this is what we
think is probably the most um
robust indicator of what is
going on and what the, what our
businesses are feeling, um, from
community to community. We call
this the estimated employment
gap. So, on the bottom half of
the chart, the red line is the
number of people who are
unemployed and looking for work.
The blue line is the number of
estimated job openings. And the
difference between the two is
what we call the estimated
employment gap, and you'll see
that before the pandemic in
2020, there are always more
people looking for work than
there were jobs available. Those
two lines crossed and it got
really bad um in July 2022,
there was a 38,000 person, um,
estimated employment gap, and
then I got to the department in
August 2022. So this was one of
my first uh jobs was to, to
figure this situation out. I'm
happy to report
that we've cut that in more than
half. So the estimated
employment gap is now 17,779,
but that's still means that if
you are hiring, you are having a
hard time finding candidates if
you were hiring for a highly
skilled job or in a rural area,
you're having an even harder
time, um, and so what we'd like
to see is those lines continue
to keep getting closer together.
That orange line at the top is
total employment, which is um
doing really well. We're at
893,000 jobs and I, I keep that
on here so that you know that.
It's not just that people are
giving up and not hiring
anymore. People are still trying
to hire. We are closing the gap
and we are growing the number of
jobs. Next slide.
So, um, these are just some of
our fiscal highlights, uh,
apprenticeship, we, um, we're
very excited, of course, to get
the uh distributions of $5
million from the workforce
development and apprenticeship
fund, and, uh, as Mario
mentioned, we do, um, we were
looking for a new pe code for
that, and that was really just
for transparency. I know there's
sort of a bias against creating
new programs because it just
starts to get kind of busy and
complicated, but because that
money was especially created for
this purpose, and now it just
gets it.
It's just sitting in a very
large employment services line,
we thought it would be helpful
to pull it out.
Um, reversions, um, we, when I,
uh, before I got to the
department, um, it, it was a
rough situation. We were
reverting way too much money and
I'm happy to show you that we
only reverted 0.7% of our
budget, $29,000 this year.
And then uh we also have been
trying really hard to get
competitive funding is, um, most
of you know, we are 89%
federally funded as a whole. Um,
so we like to hit the streets
and not just come to legislature
for money. We've gotten $5.9
million for apprenticeship and
pre-apprenticeship, $1.5 million
for climate and infrastructure
career grants, and I know that
that's private money, um, as is
the 250,000 that we got for the
Office of New Americans and then
also just recognizing thankful
for the grow money that we've
got, um, 600,000
pre-apprenticeship too.
million and be probably be
proud, um, and that that will be
in our budget again this year,
next.
Um, so this is what Rachel
reviewed in terms of what we
asked for and what we got and
I'm not gonna go into detail on
any of these that, that were
agreed upon unless you'd like me
to, cause I just presented these
at LF at LFC in the interim,
but, um, the 50,000 for
unemployment assistance, happy
to see that in both
recommendations. That is
specifically to deal with the
technical issue that happened
during the CA calves Canyon
Hermit's peak fire where people
were paid incorrectly and we
don't want to have to try to
pull that money back from them.
The $750,000
For the labor force
participation rate study again
included in both
recommendations, and that's to
help figure out how to get more
of us, um, New Mexicans off the
bench and into the labor force.
And then $750,000 for a line
case management. This was, um, a
big topic when we had our
performance evaluation of some
of our programs. It was actually
a recommendation from the LFC
that we developed this and we
had already started, so that
would be um some money for the
person people in program part of
that, uh, effort, and then uh
500,000 for intensive.
Outreach for out of school youth
because we know that out of
school youth and especially out
of school men, so those are
folks who don't have a high
school degree and are not
working and are not looking for
work, they're the hardest to
reach and also we have
statistically higher uh
population of those folks than
we do, um, in the rest of the
country. So the only one that we
didn't get that we asked for was
$500,000 for a continued funding
of the local journalism
fellowship in the next slide is
my attempt to pull at your
heartstrings by showing you the
lovely faces of the recipients.
So that, uh, fellowship to date.
So next slide.
And, um, as you can see there,
this is just uh a few of the
graduates of this program, um,
we partner with UNM School of
Journalism and they place people
all over, uh, the fellows in the
current class or in um the
towels, we've got one in
Carlsbad, we've got one in
Gallup working for the
Independent and one here in
Santa Fe working for the
reporter and, uh, you know, we
just, um, this wasn't a program
that we developed, it was one
that, um, Senator Steinborn and,
um, majority leader where came
to us with a few years ago.
know, we were happy to, to get
the money, the idea behind the
500,000 was that we would be
able to do this for probably 4
years. We, we spent about 100 to
105 $150,000 per year on that.
Uh, and then, um, that's it. So
happy to take questions. Thank
you.
Committee Senator Steinborg.
To my far, to my far left, I'll
start, I'll start with Senator
Tobias this,
yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and sorry
I had to yell to get your
attention, yeah, these are all
far right we have our far left.
Um
So I'm a, I'm a business coach,
um, Mr. Chair, secretary, and
this is, this is something that
we work with with through with
every single client across the
state, um,
So I have a few questions here.
One,
do you
Do you have an idea of what the
fix is. I know that's a hard
question, but what is the fix to
engage New Mexicans into the
workforce. Do you have any?
bu ll et points you want to
share with us, Mr. Chair,
Senator Tobiasin, um, yeah, so
our approach, you know, for the
past couple of years has been
doing a lot more intensive
outreach. So, you know,
historically and especially
before the pandemic, our folks
sat in the in the um America's
job centers and kind of waited
for people to come in and get
help and, and now we're trying
to go out proactively into the
community and find people where
they are, whether that's school,
faith communities, and also um
be much more proactive in our
work with businesses.
So that we are really tailoring
our services to what they need.
Um, it's great to post it on our
website and it's great to have a
hiring fare, but what is we've
found is really helpful is when
we can do things like resume
review or social media marketing
for those businesses to reach
people who may not even realize
that they should be looking for
a job, but maybe they see
something that catches their eye
in their interest, um, so for
example, we use that combination
of tactics, including a pretty
robust social media campaign for
CYFD hiring event recently.
that we got over 500 people
statewide to come to, so that is
probably the hardest to hire an
employer um in the state and so
we know it works. Um, it's just
doing more and more and more of
it, um, but part of the reason
we're asking for the money for
the 750,000 for the study is,
we're, we're just kind of basing
this on what we've done before
and what we see it works. What
we haven't done is ever called
and gone door to door and done
all those survey techniques and
engaged community groups to say,
Why aren't you working, you
know, literally asking people,
why aren't you working? Why
haven't you been in the labor
force and, and hear their
stories and understand what the,
the actual reason is, um, is it
because they don't need to work
because they're wealthy or
because they, they can make it
by on some other set of finances
finances or is it because they
feel discouraged, you know, is
it because they feel
undereducated.
Most of the time when we have
those conversations, folks don't
know about half our programs, so
I think there's a lot of
opportunity in this study to
come up with some new techniques
in addition to the ones we've
been trying.
Excellent. Thank you. And Mr.
Chair, um, when you say social
media, tell me the platforms
you're on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasin
is an agency we are on all of
the major ones, so we're on
Facebook, um, Instagram,
Twitter.
Blue sky in LinkedIn, um, and we
also, you know, have our of
course our website and those
sorts of things, OK, and Mr.
Chair, have you thought about
TikTok and Snapchat, where most
of the people under the age of
30.
Play in the social media sphere,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Tobias
in, um, and my comms director
might have slipped you a, a note
to ask that question. Now I'm
just kidding. I, I have young
men in my family, so yeah, we
would love to be on TikTok, our
cybersecurity, um, doesn't love
the idea of being on TikTok, so
we continue to work through that
and, and please, I, I wish I
could tell you the technical
reasons and I'd be happy to
follow up with you on that, um,
but we do a lot on YouTube and
we also
have a podcast, which I know is
more for like old people like
me, but we're actually seeing
quite a bit of uptake because
what we do is profile people and
their jobs and their career
journeys and you know, their
career advice and um it's
actually pretty fun, so, um, but
not TikTok. OK. And Mr. Chair, I
would just, I would
Question that person on your
social media security because
every federal candidate, um,
including our prior president is
on TikTok, so I think they've
figured out a safe workaround,
um, that's the biggest platform
in the world, um, and a lot of
the younger people you're trying
to reach are there, but they're
also on Snapchat, so.
Just
If they would think about that,
I think that could be helpful
for you. And then I know you're
doing this study which I, I
thank you for doing that
actually or wanting to do that,
um, do you have an understanding
right now of, is there an
average, is there like a sweet
spot overall in the state of New
Mexico, using my terminology,
but a sweet spot of, of where
the gap is, is it a certain
skill level? Is it a certain
industry or two? Is it a certain
pay range where we're missing
the mark in
finding people to apply for
those types of jobs.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, uh, I mean, I'd be
happy to share with the entire
committee some, some better
numbers, um, but in general, the
service industries, the entry
level, um, jobs are really,
really hard to place right now,
and it's because the wages of
that end of the market have been
become so competitive, um, and
that.
Starts to then bleed into like
things like home health care,
which used to be maybe one step
up for minimum wage, but now you
can work at McDonald's and have
a relatively stress-free life
compared to doing something like
home health care that is
emotionally draining, physically
draining, and you're making the
same amount of money. So that's
where we're seeing a lot of
pressure um in the in the job
market, yeah.
Good enough. Thank you very much
for your explanations. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Zeler Steinborg.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
gonna have to like sit on my
hands and
Create more space here so that
So that those eyes can travel to
the left and the right. We'll,
we'll all get back we'll all get
better just so you know my side
does look to the right, not just
the left.
Not that clever, I admit. But
anyway, um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, um, Madam
Secretary, I just want to thank
you, start off by thanking you
first of all, you know, it was
just announced that um a lot of
New Mexicans who were caught up
in, in a COVID glitch of
overpayment.
That we're now subject to having
to pay back money and they
didn't have her, I mean, it's a
real hassle, including a
constituent of mine, and you've
really been an advocate for
helping them out and it was just
announced that that's been
resolved, including a
constituent of mine who has
really been struggling, and I
thank you so much for your
advocacy for, for New Mexicans
struggling with that and
resolving that.
Um, number 2.
That that slide that's up there
right now, Mr. Chairman and
colleagues, is, is one of the
happiest things for me. Thank
you for um being a fiscal agent
for this program, and I just
want to educate my colleagues.
There's an amazing
Program called the News Fund,
which is made up of some of the
top journalists and foundations
in New Mexico, training
journalists and giving out
fellowships.
Um, to new journalists, and you
see him right there, which in my
opinion are the real democracy
warriors in our society, making
sure that we're being told
information.
Um,
and we have so many news deserts
in New Mexico where we don't
have any news.
Including
Sadly, in my community where
it's become.
Really consolidated the media
has been bought up by Gannett.
They literally took a newsroom
that used to have 20 people a
few years ago, Las Cruces, down
to like 2.
The biggest, it's unbelievable
and uh sorry to call that out,
but, uh, that's the truth of the
matter of that. We have, we do
have a weekly, we do have some
online, but it's a real problem
and as a result, citizens aren't
getting information, they're not
being told, plus, we live in an
environment where there's so
much disinformation that in fact
local news can be
If people really life saving
information, um, and so anyway,
the
This is a solution because
they're training journalists,
Senator Wirth.
Leader Worth has a bill to, I
think give it attracts credit or
some sort of a refundable tax
credit for newsrooms hiring
people, but I think it's such a
vital part of our democracy, um,
and it's a real problem and this
is a solution. So this was the
only thing LFC did not support.
Continued funding of I think
half a million dollars, and I'm
gonna fight for it cause this is
doing amazing work and thank you
for supporting it. I just wanted
to educate folks about it.
And uh
Yeah, hopefully we can get
funding for that, Mr. Chairman.
The news fund.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator uh Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome.
Great job.
Um, I just, I want to go back to
an employment a little bit.
Um, I work for a company.
Tale about
we run.
Our max is about 150 employees.
We're setting about a 148 right
now, so it's a, it's a small
business.
But I want to know, well, first,
you had a number of 35,000 if
the paid family paid family
leave act passes.
Yeah.
35 million, 35 million, I mean,
what did I say 35,000 and I'll
just clarify that appropriation
is was only included in the LFC
recommendation as a
contingency't included in the
executive.
So how many employees is that
taking on?
Um, so, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um,
Under the proposed uh paid
family medical leave.
uh bill that was introduced this
year, um, there are, there's
about a year and a half of
startup costs before the bill
would come into effect and so
that money would be associated
with startup costs, um.
In, in, uh, the next two years.
But, but when they and and you
may not know the answer when LFC
figured that out, what, what
number?
Of employees are they basing
that off of Mr. Chair, Senator,
if you give me just a minute, I
will pull up, oh, you know,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Lanier, am I pronouncing that
linear, uh, Senor Lanier, uh, we
estimated 219 employees for the
fully baked program when it's
all the way up and running, so
both the tax collection and the
benefit administration are
happening.
OK, thank you.
I, I was just curious. I'm
trying to foresee what we're
gonna go through.
Um, and then the other one is.
You
You said you were knocking on
doors, I mean, doing a survey,
let's just say a survey. What's
the top reason people aren't?
Going back to work.
Because obviously the jobs are
there. If we go to slide 3.
Or yes, page 3.
Thank you.
So
You know, my question is, why,
why aren't they?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lanier, we, that's why we're
asking for the money is to do
the study in the fiscal year to
come, but what we know so far
and part of the reason we want
to do this study is that when
the, in the national statistics,
um, there's about 10 to 15% that
say uh that they are uh
discouraged, so they've been
looking and they can't find the
right fit. There's about 10 to
15% that say that they're have
family obligations. There's
about 10 to 15% that say that
they are um.
Getting more education so that
they're getting ready to get a
job. And then the rest are some
other reason and so that's why
we really needed to do this to
do the knocking on door study is
because the federal data is just
when anytime you have a question
and the answer is other
overwhelmingly, you're not
asking the right question.
And Mr. Chair, pay payment.
Pay is not in there.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Lanier, it's not one of the
questions that they survey on at
the federal level, but it
certainly would be one that we
would ask, would be, you know,
whether there's um some kind of
mismatch between the household
need and what's available in the
community.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, so if
we go back to
150 employees.
I'm having the same problem, um,
we're almost fully staffed right
now.
Mm
Just all of a sudden, things
have, have kind of changed and
all of a sudden I'm saying in
the last 6 months. So we
increased their wages, um, you
know, we offered benefits, um,
we even give a Christmas bonus.
Now mind you, this is Taco Bell.
So we're one of the few.
Fast foods that that do that.
What we have found
And again, it's not a formal
survey, but one of the things we
have found is
FTEs.
is very hard for us.
Because they don't want to come
back.
Because then
They lose some of their.
Um
I don't, they're funding, yeah,
they're welfare funding.
Are you finding any of that with
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lanier, we tracked that um as
with specific specifically with
regard to pandemic benefits, and
I, I know Senator Woods and some
of the other folks um who are
used to be on the committee,
really wanted to, to see how
pandemic benefits correlated
with the increase in labor
market, labor force
participation rate. And we did
find that when those really
robust pandemic benefits like
the $600 bonus for uh.
The unemployment insurance, all
those federal programs, when
those went away, we did see a
slight uptick in labor force
participation rate. Um, but we
don't have any data yet, um, on
whether the benefit people are,
are able to not work because
they're receiving benefits, uh,
and we do know that we, we do
the TANF, the temporary
assistance for Needy Families,
Employment and training program,
and um sub subsidized wage
program and we're seeing those
roles at an on-time low, um, and
so the folks who were still on
those
rooms are, are really tough
cases to work and and that's
the, the work that we're engaged
in on the tandem side.
Mr. Chairman, so we're, we've
had to
We've had to revamp everything,
going to flex schedules, um, you
know, we've, we've really worked
hard to get our employment under
control.
I lived through that on the
other side, so I, I know what
you're talking about when there
was so much money out there that
they didn't want to work and
then we started coming back up
and then we just crashed again.
And I want I really want to
emphasize this.
For example, I have a married
couple.
They have 2 children.
We work in separate stores.
And both of them came and said,
can we go to part time?
So that we don't lose our
benefits. We are getting so
much.
Outside benefits we want, we
don't want to work full time.
And I don't think New Mexico is
unique in that, I think, I think
that's a nationwide issue, but I
think that's something we need
to look at.
My suggestion to you as I, I
wouldn't leave that out. I know
politically it's not a great
topic, but I, I really think we
need to not leave that out of
the discussion, because I, I, I
do think it's a big part.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lynn
you're, I mean, we agree and,
and I think the benefits cliff
is the term that that everybody
agrees is an issue and maybe the
underlying reasons, but beyond
the cliff, maybe uh up for
dispute, but, uh, we have been
engaged um in a working group on
um Benefit cliff issues since
January of 2024, and I, I think
hopefully, um, it's it's in the
queue in um back right now, but
there is a bill coming from um
the healthcare authority that
administers the benefit.
inside of the temporary need
temporary assistance for needy
families program that is really
aimed at addressing some of the
benefit cliff issues by, for
example, extending the
educational benefit to high
school equivalency, um, in, in
broadening that and then also
they do a great program that is
basically uh they I think they
call it the transition bonus,
which is if you, if you could
get, you know, maybe, I think
it's up to $3000 to say fix your
car or do something that would
then enable you to do that.
employment.
Normally that might disqualify
you from the benefits, but they
give you that bonus so that you
can sort of level up and get off
the benefit in those kinds of
programs, I think show a lot of
promise.
Um
I know Senator Byson was kind of
jumping at the bit, I think.
So I'm gonna have her
OK,
I'm, I just, no, no, no, I think
it's to that point in this
conversation, so I just wanna,
so yeah it is thank you, Mr.
Chair. So the cliff effect is
something that we talked about
with our clients as well and you
know, you've talked about the
challenge of going to where the
potential employee is going to
where the employee are meeting
them where they are, where they
live, where they work or don't
work, um, in that communication
seems to be a challenge in a lot
of departments actually.
in dealing with the general
public and
To his story,
I think part of the challenges
is that people don't get enough
help or know that the help is
there, especially when it comes
to that cliff effect because if
I'm, if I'm not highly educated
and I'm relying
Especially if I'm relying or for
maybe a long period of time, my
family has been relying on, on
New Mexico aid and some way,
shape or form or federal aid.
I just don't know how to get out
of that.
And so,
Just like what you said, that
couple, I, I can't imagine going
to an employer and saying, hey,
could you work me less so that I
can continue getting these
benefits. I would rather find a
way, hey, can you work me more
so I don't rely on these
benefits and I can maybe make
even more money and that's,
that's the gap that we have to
figure out as a state to bridge
for people because they don't
know what they don't know,
right? I'm, I'm probably
preaching to the choir and I
don't think it's a political
conversation at all. I think
it's a human conversation. Um,
why
I'm asking for a $10 million
appropriation for adult literacy
in this state where number one
in adult illiteracy, it's
unacceptable, and we aren't even
putting the effort towards it,
quite frankly. So until we
figure out, I think also as a
state and not just put it solely
on your agency to figure out how
do we reach these people, these
adults that are capable of
working that I guarantee you
would feel better about
themselves, and they'd actually
have some hope for their life
and for their future.
for their children, um, so it's
partly on, on, on your agency,
but I think it's on the state as
a whole to figure out how are we
bridging the gap to show them to
hold their hand and show them,
here's how you're going to do it
and we're gonna help you do it.
And I don't know. I'm just
preaching, but to your point,
because we have clients whose
employees have come to him and
said, I'm out, you know what,
you've given me one too many
raises and I'm a single mom and
I'm gonna go back. This is a
true story. I'm gonna go back
and live on the reservation
because I, I know there's some
se sense of security there
because I know what, what it
looks like. I don't have to
worry and I'm worried now that
I'm, I'm becoming too successful
and making too much money and I
don't know as a single mom how
I'm gonna do it.
That should never happen in
today's world, I think, but now
I'll get off my soapbox, but
just to your point, thank you
Mr. Senator Lanier, you still
have any other questions? No, I,
I'm just gonna close. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, I appreciate the
work you guys do, um, trust me,
I, I feel your pain. I, I know
how hard it is and how many
moving parts there are and and I
do appreciate it and if you can
give me any insight, I will
definitely take it. How's that
sound? Thank you, all three of
you. Thank you. Senator Woods.
Uh, I try to be pretty short,
Mr. Chairman.
I love these horses running
though.
I, uh,
What I was wondering,
Um, if you could tell me
What the medium wage is offered.
In this gap of unemployment.
To unemployed to employment gap.
At 17,0779 jobs.
Have you got any idea what the
medium wage offered in there
would be.
uh, Mr. Chair and Senator Woods,
we don't cause it's, I mean, I
guess we could, we could
probably look at, um, sort of
some wage data on the, on the
total on the 17, like you said,
the 17,000 and see what the
median wage is in there, but we
have not done that. Would you
run that sometimes in your spare
time. I would appreciate that
and, and, and Mr. Chair, one
other question, what's a medium
time off?
For those unemployees.
Um, Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Woods, so we don't really know
because out of the 43,000 who
are unemployed and looking only
about 8 9000 are actually on
unemployment benefits. Well, I,
I know, but I was just wondering
if there's any way to track how
long they're setting off work
between jobs.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator Woods,
we get from the federal
government the stats of it's, I
think it's more than 12.
12 months and more than 12
months and they're in my longer
version of the presentation so I
can certainly send those around.
OK, well, sometime give me that
information and uh
Last thing I'd like to know, uh,
We had a present well, we had a
floor.
Uh, bill on the floor today
about ERB wasn't that? ERB was
talking about today, and they, I
ask them what the solvency rate
of their fund was, and they said
it's about a 63% solva.
One time last summer, I asked
you what the solvency rate of
your unemployed.
Unemployment, uh, deal is.
And
told me what I'm trying to
remember now.
Chair and Senator Woods, um,
the, by the federal measure of
solvency we're sitting at about
0.6, much like ERB, um, and with
the goal being one, but I do, we
have done some really detailed
analysis of the uh solvency and
right now we're kind of just
steady, you know, as long as the
number of claims doesn't go up
and the number, the amount of
tax doesn't go down. We are just
sitting there.
what we're not right now is
recession ready and um we
haven't, we've looked at a
number of scenarios, um, all of
which would require some
legislative action. It will
probably be ready to bring to
you by the next session unless
people want to talk about it,
this session, but um it is a
concern for me. It's, you know,
I've got another year and a half
and you said about a 6
about 6, which is about a 60%.
OK.
And the reason I bring that up,
Mr. Chair, uh,
The reason I bring that up.
Is the ongoing liability that
the state has in front of them.
Uh
We're guaranteeing both of these
programs.
It's essentially we guarantee
this money to be paid if it
comes to it, if it's.
Something happens, we guarantee
it with our reserves, I guess,
because we don't have a line
item to guarantee it.
And
I was just trying to get a, a
handle on how much ongoing
liability we have out there
right now, you know, uh, uh,
I've said in here before about
the ongoing, uh,
So suit liability of $370
million so, um.
Uh, it's, it's very
Very interesting as to how much
we have out there.
That
We could possibly, hopefully it
all done come do the same day.
This year
Mr. Chair Senators, I, I agree
with you and, um, you know, the,
the magic around that 0.6, so,
you know, there's the general
solvency of like, can you pay
your debts as you come do? We're
fine from that perspective, but
the reason we care about the
federal more complicated
solvency calculation is if we
get up to a 1, then we're
eligible for an interest-free
loan from the Feds if we hit
that scenario you're talking
about right now, um, you know,
assuming the feds do what
they've done historically, we
would have to pay interest on
that loan, although we
would have that federal
recourse.
Yeah, in, in that particular
fund is uh
I uh
A tax on employers, and our
employees both.
They both pay into that fund.
So
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
else for questions, so uh thank
you.
And of CDFA,
thank you.
We'll move on to uh veteran
services department 670.
Yeah, go ahead. I will see and
we'll do DFA and then we'll go
do a better job of introduction.
I will note.
Um, my name is Rachel, but today
I'm Kelly because uh she's sick,
so usually you'll see Kelly, uh,
on behalf of the LFC and with me
at the table as Secretary
Herrera, uh, from the
Veteran Services Department, as
well as Laurie Sciacca from DFA.
Um
The overall uh the house
appropriations and Finance
Committee adopted the LFC
recommendation, uh, that
recommendation overall is about
2.2 million less than the
executive's recommendation, and
there are really two key
differences, um, between the
two, first, the LFC
recommendation did not include
about a million dollars for the
house, uh, cemetery. That was
primarily because it wasn't
included in the agencies.
request and so it wasn't
considered by LFC, so it's about
a million, and the rest uh of
the difference between the two
recommendations was was.
is for uh veteran service
officer A increases, uh, many of
which have already been
implemented, and the final
difference between the two
recommendations, the LFC
included 110,000 for an
additional ESO position as an
expansion, uh, while the uh
executive budget had it within
the base.
Um, but overall, those were the
two key differences, and I will
note for you the total LFC
appropriation recommendation for
FY 26 would be 10.4 million, um,
and 8.6 million from the general
fund.
I'll turn it over to Laurie.
Mr. Chair, senators, uh, thank
you, Rachel, uh, as Rachel said
she did a great job summarizing
the differences.
Um, it is a governor priority or
the Tao Cemetery, um, which is
why it was late and not included
in the LFC recommendation, we're
able to be considered, um,
That
$1 million.
Has contingency language tied to
it, um, contingent on the
federal government accepting the
cemetery as part of the US
National Cemetery System as of
July 1st, 2025.
It has become clear that the
federal government is not going
to consider it and Secretary
Herrera can speak more to that.
And then the 1 million, it was
just shy of $1.1 million in the
200 category is for VSO
reclassification that has
already been completed and there
are people in those positions
currently, it was an effort to
retain staff instead of letting
them or training them basically
and having
for the VA and other federal
agencies. And with that, I will
pass it over to Secretary
Herrera.
Thank you.
Good evening, Mr. Chair of the
committee members and thank you
for the opportunity to, to
discuss this, um, I'll jump
right into, um, our, our
presentation and, and the, the
difference is already being
discussed wholeheartedly in in
the 200 category, the
Pay and allowances piece that we
are, we are requesting is for
all funded um.
positioned on our OL so
obviously I know that seems like
a lot of money that that we are
asking for, but that is to fund
everything and I will, I'll I'll
bring.
that to light with.
A reversion for this year, so of
the reversions we had in in that
area.
323,000 of that were for exempt
positions.
And you would ask, well, why
wouldn't, why am I asking for
money if I'm reverting 200
series, well, last year when we
did the reclassification we have
the funding to start that, and
the reason I did not hire those
positions was because I knew I
couldn't write a check, I
couldn't cash this year with the
budget that I had on hand that
was already been, had been
appropriated and agreed upon. We
uh closed on the
reclassification and the and the
uh realignments of those
positions, our cemetery
positions, and several others
that have not been addressed for
last 5 to 7 years.
So I thought it was important
that that that that information
for the, the payroll is
important that we basically be
made whole so we can move
forward.
Um, uh, brought up earlier by
the, the chair of Senator Munoz,
you know, being able to move
some funds to take care of our,
our deficiencies in the 200
category is an option, but that
also takes services off the
table if I'm doing that within
our agency, and I don't believe
that's irresponsible uh way to
approach um how we're doing
business, but in order to make
our agency whole, that's the big
reason why that number is is so
large.
Um
Our vacancy rate, uh, currently,
um, in the, in the report you
have there in slide 5. I don't
know if we're.
You can go to slide 5, please.
OK, I didn't know if that was
for, for us the percentage there
for our
There we go.
There you go, it shows a 9.63%
in our uh classified positions
is actually a 5% as effective um
this next pay period because we
have 3 new positions starting in
two projected in the next pay
period as well. So we've managed
our, our, our vacancy rate very
well, so we don't have a lot of
savings to to lie on there and
I'm, I'm making sure that the
people we do have that we retain
them, that we train them, and
that they're paid for the the
the benefits that they provide
to our our veteran.
Um, the cemetery, if we go to
the next slide 6.
Is it OK,
due dueling cursors here.
Of the cemetery operations for
Taos, and uh I'll speak to that.
The federal government has
indicated that there is zero
interest at this point because
they, it does not meet the
criteria that they set forth
under the national cemetery
administration.
To allow for a federally funded
VA cemetery like the other ones
we have in our state. We have 3
other state veteran cemeteries
and we have an angel fire we
have Fort Staten and we have
Gallup.
And those were initiated and
funded by VA grants to, to start
them. They built those and then
they are operated by the state.
Um, this one will not be taken
into the same consideration and
the county of Taos has done an
excellent job of getting this
funded and they know they use
some state funds to accomplish
that, but they will not be able
to keep that solvent for past
about another year.
And that's why um in speaking
with the governor that we opted
to move to try to get this
included in our budget this
year. You have the state take
that over before we start with
interments there and we maintain
the, the, the standards and
regulations that we've helped
them to set forth to maintain it
as a as a federal based uh
Um
The criteria for, for interments
within the state for our
veterans.
And being able to bring on the
employees as the state.
Um, get them trained properly as
well as encumber that whole
cemetery operation. So that that
was the reason that this did
happen after we've initially
done our initial brief to the
LFC, um, in the fall. I stand
for questions.
Committee members, Senator
Woods.
OK, so Mr. Chair.
Secretary, this is uh
Million dollars on the cemetery
is a reoccurring.
Experience
No, the million dollars will
will be in an initial investment
and then operations cost
thereafter would be about
$700,000.
That that will include the 4.
Uh, FTE and the operations cost
to, to maintain it, uh.
But tell me, uh, and I know.
I know you've got a grand plan
somewhere.
I mean, you, you do.
Overall scope of the plan.
Uh, operations long term plan or
whatever the heck you call it.
Um
That's been in your plan for a
while.
This,
um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods, no, this, this, uh, we,
we consulted with the Taos
County on getting this built to
ensure that they met the
standards should the federal
government want to take it over
or make it a satellite of the
Santa Fe National Cemetery.
But we had not in in.
In
We had not entertained that we
were gonna take that over.
Um, as it has presented itself,
but because it's already been
encumbered, it's been utilized
with state funds.
Uh, we have the capabilities to
pull that into our agency and
can and ensure that the state
meets its requirements to be
able to bury our veterans with
the proper resources and uh you,
you've already told me that it
doesn't qualify.
There's no way that we can make
it qualify.
To do that, Mister Chair, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, um, no,
we've had several discussions,
um, I mean, the our, our
congressional delegation and
everybody has interjected to
assist and make.
The federal government know how
important this was, but it does
not mean there's essentially a
formula with concentric circles
of 75 miles from the current
existing
Uh, VA cemetery, so Taos within
that 75 mile radius there and
it's within 75 miles of the VA
grant of Angel Fire. So if you
overlap those, that cemetery
will not meet the requirements
uh for the VA to undertake the
funding for that.
do.
OK.
So it's more of a
Of the wish.
Yeah
Necessity is in the federalized.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods, yes, the, there, this
will not be entertained for.
OK, yeah.
I'm not going to step on that
line, I guarantee you.
his chair outsporter the death,
so.
The, the only other thing you've
got here is that you're
You're um.
Difference in your budget here.
Is, is that because of tests
that
Um, operating budget here and
um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Woods.
The 1 million of that is, is, is
the, the additional we would
have been a 1.4 apart and that
$1 million not been added.
OK.
All right, thank you very much.
OK.
Senator Steinborn.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, Mr. Secretary,
welcome and thank you to your
whole staff for all you do and
thank you for coming today and
patiently waiting here through
our process. Um, I, I have one
question for you, Mr. Secretary.
I actually
OK, I have 2 questions for you.
Um
Question one, what does your
department do to proactively
Reach out to veterans who are
out there who may not make the
call that.
Your services exist, but they
need your help.
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn, we
do outreach through physical
outreach events we do with part
of the the cabinet and the
communities that we've been
involved with throughout the
state. I also hold commanders
meetings and we travel
throughout the state to meet
with and and in our VFWs, our
American Legions. We also do
outreach and trainings. We do
our, our funeral honors
trainings in the North and the
South, which are hosted by some
of these, these events, the
Marine Corps League in Donana
County is, you know, in fact,
are reigning champion for the
military funeral honors
competition.
And we also use our newsletter,
we use Facebook, um, Instagram.
And those platforms to get words
out or our partner agencies as
well and any time the VA travels
out and about, we are also going
with them to ensure that people
know that one we're different
from the VA, uh, the federal VA,
and how we are liaisoning and,
and making sure that, that we're
collaborating with those
individuals to ensure they get
the services they need. It's,
it's been an undertaking and our
offices you know in Las Cruces
specifically, we have 3 VSOs
there and we'll do outreach
event.
where they will go with a
Department of Workforce
solutions, they go to their
outreach events, they'll go to
the VA, they'll go to local, uh,
other events for stand downs to
ensure that people are aware to
bring back the, the information
and, and get it out. Thank you,
Mr. uh Mr. Chair, I guess where
I'm coming from is
You know, some of the really sad
statistics about veteran suicide
in New Mexico leading.
Leading
The country in that, I feel like
there's people out there who
We'll never go to a t, maybe
we'll never hear about it, but
to me it's a marketing thing,
and we, I've brought this up at
a previous hearing. I think it's
the kind of thing where you need
to have a really sad in my
opinion, and I welcome your
feedback, we need to have invest
resources actually in your
marketing budget and have savvy.
You know, modern, um, marketing
person who's, we were talking
about TikTok in a previous
thing, but in all seriousness,
where we're on all platforms
talking about if you need help,
you need a chat line, boom. It's
just connecting them to those
resources so people can get help
where they're at because they
may not know about a stand down
or know about any of these other
things. Do we do any of that,
Mr. Secretary?
Mr. Chair, and uh Senator San,
yes we do, and I'm glad you
brought that up because we, uh,
last year at the end of the
legislative session, I don't
know if you were able to see our
988 campaign that we've pushed
out on TV, radio.
And uh we were, we used to New
Mexico Broadcasters Association,
we were uh we were statewide in
Spanish.
English and Navajo to all areas
and we were on, we had veterans
uh do their testimonials and we
had commercials as well as paid
uh advertisement there. That
was, and we're gonna continue
with that this year and I've
just hired a new uh public
relations coordinator who is
actually based out out of radio,
uh then, raise your hand.
Sam Newton
And, uh, you know,
He's got a voice for radio, I've
got a face for radio, so we're,
we're doing great, uh.
And uh
We are looking at doing
podcasts, we're looking at doing
some other things for outreach
to get people to tune in and
basically YouTube, some of those
things to to to be there, um.
So that we again we're passing
the word our, our newsletter has
been a, a huge boom for us and
every time we publish it, we
will get back 50 to 60, hey,
please add me to the distro. And
I don't know if any of you are
on it or have seen our
newsletter, um, you know, we do
a lot of this projected
information for our stand downs
and things of that nature to
ensure that people know that
it's coming into their
community right um and so, uh,
Sam, you're the new Ray Seva,
huh?
Ray.
Right
You don't have to answer that,
but uh anyway, um, well, Mr.
Chair and thank you for that,
Mr. Secretary. I hadn't seen the
988 campaign, which I think is a
great service. I guess what I
would love to encourage you to
do is if you're not doing it
already, is to actually be out
there on social media.
And, um, you know, like TikTok,
Instagram, all the platforms
that really are drawing the
eyeballs.
And uh create ads and, and, and
you know, develop, develop a
budget for that. I can't
underscore how important I
personally think that is, um,
It could literally double,
triple, maybe more of the impact
of the department.
Um, and then bring the LFC a
budget, you know, bring, bring
us the social media budget, but
invest in that, reco the
importance of that.
Um, it may mean someone never
shows up in your office, but
they, but they make a phone
call, you know, they could save
a life. So anyway, that's just
something I would love to see us
continue to invest in, and I
know you're doing a great job
with all, with all you've been
provided, Mr. Secretary.
Last thing I just want to ask is
a few years ago, I know that the
department used to give grants
to like the disabled American
veterans, like used to give some
support to some of the other
organizations out there and I
got to visit the state commander
of DAB's constituent.
And um
You know, they're driving
people, you know, of course,
driving people around in their
vans taking medical
appointments. They need that
assistance. Is that something
you would consider doing again
if we gave you the funding to do
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Steinborn, thank you for the
loaded question, um, because,
uh, that.
From what my understanding was
the years that those were
provided, there was an ability
for us to be a fiduciary as or a
passed through essentially to
get it to those community
events, and I know the
anti-donation clause in some of
the language has precluded that,
and the only way in our statute
that we are able to do that, and
I've talked to you uh the
commander several times on this.
We pay for services to be
provided and DAB is not willing
to make their a transportation
service and become one of our
vendors.
that. So that, that is a way I
could help them with
transportation services. I could
help them pay for that
transportation service as long
as they have stood up and they
want to be a vendor of the state
of New Mexico. So that, that's
an easy answer, but as far as
being a fiduciary for something
other than uh to provide
operating costs for the VFW, the
American Legion. I know all of
them have come to me and said,
you gotta give us our money
back. And I'm like, I never took
it away.
Um, there was, uh, uh, I believe
there was an appropriation
language that would change that
precluded that from happening
any further and um um that's
where I stand. I would love
nothing more than to be able to
have a budget to say provide
some community support to these
type of organizations to further
assist them to help veterans.
I'm all about it if you all can
find a way to get me those
funds. Thank you. Well, Mr.
Chair, we do it every day with
agencies, but you're right,
anti-donation has to be for
services and
You know, but certainly we could
do it. So anyway, I'd like to
try to work to see if we can
make that happen again and help
support those organizations and
further your reach of what you
do. And thank you again for all
your good work everybody. Mr.
Chair, Senator Sanor, uh, Kevin
Day is, he's, he's a phenomenal
commander. He's leaning far
forward and uh you know, and I
do appreciate his efforts in, in
trying to collaborate with us as
well. Thanks. Thanks for the
feedback too.
Thank you, uh, uh, question on,
on page 10.
Uh, the charts regarding the
field service operations.
I was just looking at these
charts and uh
But she was on the field service
interactions uh secretary, those
categories of above the, the
chart above.
Are those the interactions that
are part of these field service
interactions or, or, or what, or
is there something else that
constitutes those interactions.
Um,
Um, Mr. Vice Chair, Senator
Shando, um.
Those interactions
Our every touch point we have
with a veteran pursuant to when
they walk in the office and
every follow-on visit we have
with them or or to assist them
with their claims or any issues
that they have, um, working from
their initial claim, their
initial visit all the way
through appeals and final award.
Um, to include their survivor
benefits. We've had a huge
uptick since we've been doing
this outreach events to ensure
that we have no family members
coming in and understanding that
they're eligible for some of the
benefits to their veteran pass
and helping them through the the
paperwork there to to continue
to get the benefits that
they're, they're eligible for.
OK. Yeah, I'm just curious
because if you look at the
various regions and I'm just
thinking in my mind.
The eyes.
Uh, you know, what towns are in
these regions and uh uh in
Southeast region which I could
probably include Silver City, De
all that. You have 3400 plus
interaction for one, so forth
and the central region, I'm
assuming it includes Albuquerque
and the major micro area, I
would think that, that, that
would be more interaction, so
I'm just curious as to, you
know, and then the Northwest
region probably include Ship
Rock, Armington, Gallup, I know
there's a lot of Nabo uh
veterans, but the interaction.
You know, it, it's pretty low,
so I'm just kind of
Thinking what what's going on
with these regions and, you
know, I know that you have some
uh
VSOs assigned to various areas,
you have to informing, which is
one in Gala, which is 3.
I would think that, you know,
Northwest region would have more
interactions and I'm just.
Can you speak to that?
Um, you, uh, Senator Shindo,
yes, so.
What we do there is the outreach
through the Navajo Nation
specifically and and out in the
local chapter houses we've been
out to the chapter houses, we
work with the Eastern, the
eastern uh.
agency what we do, we work with
them pretty heavily to to ensure
that that they're aware of the
services we have there and we've
had uh limited uptake there and
a lot of them are saying that
well we can't get out to the
offices and stuff and that's
where their mobile unit is gonna
be very helpful for us in that
region is taking the services to
them, uh, cause I know some of
the people don't have
transportation and get out out
of the nation there and some of
the interactions we do have
there.
Some of the interactions we do
have there have have certainly
increased because of our
availability and their
willingness to work with us. I
think it's been a building of
trust environment now that they
won't try to drive into and a
lot of them just prefer to drive
to Albuquerque to handle their
business because I think there's
just more trust there with them.
So again, it's I haven't our our
our personnel there and building
that trust environment is is
gonna continue to increase those
number of visits and then
showing up um where they're at
rather than them coming to us
will be very.
helpful.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Mm
Anybody else, if not, I don't
have any bills listed on.
I want to thank you for your
presentation.
I thank you for support and
DFAir, could I, last comments,
please, if I wanted to, uh, just
because, you know, I, I know
this is near and dear to uh the
uh chair's heart on the next
page if we can go down to, it's
gonna be slide 11.
That is our actual mobile unit.
Under construction based on the
money you gave us last year,
Truth and lending, you gave it
to us for that. It's being
constructed. It's being uh put
together and uh we anticipate in
April or May time frame, uh,
unveiling once it's been
delivered to us and then we can
start our operations with the
starting that outreach towards
the end of this FY so we
appreciate the support that
you've given us up till this
point and we appreciate you and
again, I can't say enough that
we really need to uh be as close
as we can.
to the executive recommendation.
Um, with, uh.
to continue the mission that
we've been given.
And the, the house did recommend
the LFC with additions.
Um, they certainly once said
that they were we gonna be
looking at this, that was, uh,
I'm not speaking on their behalf
but just repeating what was said
and um I think that there's some
room for growth there.
And I thank you. Sometimes
they're a little sneaky over
there in the house
you remember last year we had to
back the veterans service and I
gave you my grow money for 2
years for yes and that's mental
health, and right now you can
see and there's another slide in
there that shows you that we've
already expended $200,000 this
year in suicide prevention
services, and I'm saving the
other 100,000 for next year
because it has got to last me 2
years. It should have been
200,000 for 2 years.
It was 200,000 over 2 years.
Yes, yes, yes, it should have
been 400,000 that's they that
was a miss. I'll check for you.
You can give me the other
200,000 this year, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, maybe we'll give you
more, yes, yes, maybe we'll give
you less. We don't know yet.
We'll see what the house does,
but we'll try to help you any
way we can. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and the committee for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you. Senator, what did you
want Danny Mison? Nobody's
around.
We can run through about 10 or
20 here real quick.
We can do a bunch of bills if
you want.
All right, I think we're
adjourned we're gonna try not to
meet tomorrow.
Or Saturday.
No,
cause
as the 24th they should be
crossing the budget, right?
And so until we know what
they're doing to agencies, it
really doesn't.
We're just kind of hearing the
issues and seeing if they're
saying the same story between
us, so.
Uh, tomorrow morning I think we
do have a meeting in the
morning, but no afternoon,
yeah.
Pardon?
9th in ECECD we may cancel EC
ECD because the LFC analyst has
COVID.
And so,
She was gonna be here today, but
I sent her home.
or is that?
OK
We're gonna meet tomorrow at
9:30. We have
Uh, early uh CYFD and then we
won't probably won't do that
bill tomorrow and then just kind
of get out of here, so.
Yeah
So just
see why.
I got to go to Safeway and get
my wife some flowers.
Or no fresh ones at the cemetery
this morning.
So.
