The the organizational meeting
so they'll be two or three
things that will undertake to
begin with the first of course
will be in privative
introductions then from there
what I'm going to do is to defer
to staff to work very closely
with us so that they can present
the outline in terms of the
issues and how we're going to
proceed with the subcommittee
and then if you will the
schedule of what that's going to
entail throughout the remainder
of the week
if I could with Senator Woods if
you've just to introduce
yourself and then that blue move
on down the line and then we'll
get started Senator Woods thank
you Mr chairman my name is Pat
Woods Representative group where
you a little piece of Harding
and
it's Senate district seven and
thank you for allowing me to be
here today Mr Chairman thank you
very much senator with senator
Dan please morning Mr chair
Senator Chris dina
representative Cadena dog.
Sierra County home to the black
fires had a lot of the
you know natural just much much
like up north a lot of fire
damage up there and so I'm happy
to sit down this morning and
discuss what we can do to help
our rural communities.
The thank you Mr chairman
Senator Michael Padilla
represent the southwest quadrant
Bernalillo county living here in
the Senate Senate majority whip
and when Senator Diamond started
speaking so they all the lights
came on it was beautiful as
wonderful so here we go thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much Senator for the and also
here with this on the
subcommittee would be Senator
Hemphill and I'm sure she'll be
coming in shortly if the staff
but also introduce themselves
and other Plainville rules of
course dealing directly with the
subcommittee and then of course
the full committee but if I
could we'll go ahead and start
with you Adrienne if you've just
helped guide me around the room
so that we make sure that we get
to introduce all the all the
staff it's going to be
supporting us here with the
subcommittee of course good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Adrian
Avila I am the chief of staff
percent finance
today I'm joined by.
Good morning Mr chair members
the committee on just check just
supplement analyst for the
finance committee and all the in
dealing with the subcommittee
specifically and we also have
our own legal counsel for Senate
finance who will be assisting in
this process she's currently
working on something else that
we need to get squared away for
this afternoon's hearing but her
name is Helen Bennett and she
will be at your disposal as well
so that also I know we have
analyst and for everyone else
will continue with those
introductions please.
Senator Campos I'm sonus Nader I
am the committee secretary for
the Senate finance committee and
I will also be assisting you
with the waters a committee we
really appreciate that thank you
very much.
Senator Campos and members of
the committee my name is showing
Baca Senator the majority Senate
and.
Good.
Morning Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Francisco
Vasquez power and I ask the soon
product then the frog has
operator for Senate finance
committee right and one of the
reasons why we want our staff to
be introduced because they're
all going to pay a very played a
very integral part in terms of
the process that we are going to
be dealing directly with with
this subcommittee so to begin
there's a few things that I
would like to indicate what
we're gonna be doing essentially
is reviewing the legislation
that has been introduced that
deals specifically with our
crisis water issues along with
that the committee again at the
discretion of the members will
be developing legislation that
will assist us to address the
the travesties the devastation
that have occurred if you will
dealing directly with our water
systems throughout the state and
then lastly as the staff
continues to take notes and to
deal with your concerns and the
issues that you bring forward
it's to provide if you will some
of the best practices as we move
this type of legislation forward
so to begin what I'd like to do
is to turn it over to Mr this
for the description in terms of
what our schedule is going to
look like members of the
subcommittee this is very
informal so if you do have a
question feel comfortable to go
ahead and stop us as we go
through that particular
component if you have any
thoughts ideas or if you will
direction that you would like to
inflect up please do that at
that time of when you have that
question so if I may Mister I
mean if you please begin.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee so an initial
proposal how this subcommittee
can look over the next two weeks
this week and next week is today
would be our organizational
meeting where we kind of go over
the schedule and establish kind
of a work plan develop the
process for how we would address
if your primary concerns in
relation to the water crisis
that is facing our state come up
with some objectives for your
staff to then be able to follow
through on
what are the anticipated
outcomes that you would like to
see as a result of what we can
accomplish and just have an
understanding of the obstacles
that the state as a whole is
facing and you know some of the
limitations that we might have
in being able to address this
crisis to Morrow morning we
would then have a meeting where
we bring in experts specifically
from the New Mexico environment
department from the office the
state engineer including the
inner Stream Commission and from
energy minerals and natural
resources department so they can
brief you all on the water task
force that was
Formed over the last few months
and they completed a report
recently I just got really so
that way you can kind of see
what the executives been up to
in regards to this and also to
give you an overview on the
litigation the various
litigation that's going on in
regards to the Rio Grande as
well as the Colorado River.
so this way you have a full
picture of you know the the real
nature of the crisis on Friday
we could then go over the
specific needs and deficiencies
focused on team so we would look
at for example domestic use
produced water the water that
needs to be going into
agricultural economic
development a safety as Dan levy
six center and we would have
those same experts from tomorrow
come back to be able to give you
more information in regards to
that next week we would then on
Tuesday happy informal review of
all of the Senate bills that
have been proposed to date in
regards to water so this way you
all get a good handle of what's
out there
how much money it's going to
take how they relate to each
other whether the you know build
on each other or standalone and
then we would do the same on
Thursday of next week for the
house bill's
and then on Friday of next week
we would then ask for further
direction from the subcommittee
of what you would like us to do
if you would like us to prepare
for example an omnibus package
of the bills you think really
address the issue if you want us
to draft something completely
different and you based on what
you've heard
how you'd like us to coordinate
for their the privatization and
then whatever you all decide
next Friday we would then take
the following week to the full
committee for consideration so
so if I may as we move forward
to the members of the committee
you have before you a list of
proposed legislation or
legislation that's already been
introduced and and since the the
cut off period is thirty days
into the session this may not
totally include all the the
legislation that would be
introduced but this is to start
to give us a head start in terms
of the information that will be
reviewing and so along with that
Mr as we.
Move forward with the proposed
schedule if you can tell us a
little bit in terms of the
process that you anticipate what
information is the presented to
the subcommittee because I know
you're fully immersed if you
will with our supplemental
appropriations act bill which is
referred to as the junior bill
you're continuing to go ahead
and deal directly with other
pieces of legislation they're
dealing with or what will make a
fiscal impact and then of course
when house bill two it all makes
its way to this chamber we'll be
reviewing that as well so you
may help us a little bit in
terms of
the work load the complexity and
how we really need to be as
impactful as possible with the
work that's been assigned to the
subcommittee.
Thank you Mr chair yes so in
terms of the workload the the
staff we specifically designated
as James as the point person for
the subcommittee is first
priority is the work of the
subcommittee I am here in a you
know support role in that regard
and will provide just need any
guidance any needs in case
there's something that he's not
able to do I can providing
guidance on how to be able to
manage that Helen of course will
who's our legal analyst for
Senate finance will provide the
legal component because water is
complex and there's
lots of.
Laws in you know that we have to
navigate and given the
litigation that's out there that
her legal expertise will be
pivotal so in terms of process
any ideas that you all come up
with please direct them directly
to us and he'll collect them and
start the process of getting
everything squared away
and then as we have our hearings
tomorrow and Thursday that's a
perfect opportunity to give
direction to the executive since
they will be here and you can
kind of let them know it's like
this is what you all think this
is what they need to prepare so
we will leverage the executive
staffing to be able to support
us in this so it's in essence a
collaboration between the
legislative branch and the
executive to come up with a
viable solution
and then on top of that this
subcommittee is also in charge
of oversight and just making
sure that during the next two
months after the legislative
session the plan that you all
decide to implement gets done
right so at that point in time
you'd be coordinated through me
and I'd be working with the
executive to gather the
information for you all to to
kinda insure that the time when
you all establish for this gets
implemented.
I appreciate that because as we
begin the work of the
subcommittee we want to have the
the informal process so there
can be the discussion and so
along with that Mr Joseph if you
will
help us to better understand
what your role in this process
is going to be so that the
members as they deal as an
example of the black fire and I
want to address these questions
as transparently as possible so
the public knows that as we deal
with our water initiatives the
issues that are dealing directly
with the crisis itself are going
to be addressed and working very
closely Senator by the on some
additional legislation that is
going to deal specifically to if
you will litigation and how
we're going to be dealing
directly with helping if you
will those people who have been
affected by the wildfires in the
course of eight here in New
Mexico so there there are other
complex pieces that are gonna
tied directly into this but the
only way for us to flesh this
out is going to be to hear from
the subcommittee members so
Mister Jessica if you will
please what is your role and how
can we best get information to
you in order for us to continue
with a better planning of the
better planning of our our
initiatives thank you Mr chair
and members of the committee as
agents said my role is to serve
you this in whatever ways you
need on my end that's going to
be classifying the different
types of water legislation that
are going through in terms of
like ground water well water
waste water at center to try to
like synthesize legislation that
can be brought together as agent
also said will be going over
more the similarities and
differences of the legislation
in the coming week and working
to as I said try to bring
together or eliminate any waste
or redundant expenditures in any
of the legislation
I'll be managing.
Ideas on my desk is actually
right there right in this
committee room so if anyone has
any ideas or suggestions for how
to move forward I'm available
I'm here every day and
yeah I'll also be kind of
keeping a tab on all of the
legislation and what bills are
similar how they differ in terms
of funding mechanisms locations
that center in order to provide
like the most comprehensive and
functional solution to the
crisis so if I may along with
that if a subcommittee member
has some thoughts ideas
can I meet outside of this
subcommittee with you in order
to take that information and
then of course our ultimate
outcome an objective is going to
going to be to have
consideration of the legislation
it'll be coming to Senate
finance the legislation that
would also be appropriate that
may be going to other committees
that doesn't necessarily have
an FIR that indicates there is
of a fiscal issue so with that
are you going to be dealing with
those bills that are on the
exterior this committee or is it
going to be just specific to the
financial components Mr chair
members of the committee
relating to your first question
I am available to meet outside
of this committee this is my
first priority so please at any
time if anyone has any questions
or suggestions like I said my
desk is in the committee room
and I am available to me
whenever it's convenient for the
Senators
as far as your second question
my job is kind of to make sure
that you the finance committee
as well as the water committee
are prepared for this
legislation so like I said I'll
be kind of keeping you up to
date on which bills are entering
the subcommittee specifically
and keeping tabs on that like
with summaries such as this but
I'll also be keeping tabs of all
the relevant legislation coming
through.
With the finance committee as a
whole so at my responsibilities
Under both economic and so if I
may as we move forward the
intent and not all of the
legislation will be here this
committee immediately but the
more that we become apprised of
what is out there the better our
decisions are going to be as we
consider that so as we do move
forward there will be those
presentations to veteran light
and all of us in terms of what
the intent of the different
pieces of legislation will be
the the next part of this
particularly organizational
meeting is going to be to listen
to each one of the members of
the subcommittee and within that
as we work on the objectives of
the outcomes if you can give us
some of the specifics so that we
can start to direct not only how
ultimately the omnibus
legislation would look like but
at the same time what some of
the initiatives and issues are
that that you have so we can
begin to address those concerns
and what I'd like to do is to go
ahead and start with Senator
Woods and then moved around the
table and then are completed if
you will some of those comments
so if I may please Senator
Woods.
Sure
The state out there.
And.
Share
I just wanted to.
So this people that have
contacted me the usual water
conservation.
The
Thank you so ciation for the
video conferences I've had with
them it seems like a lot of the
major problems is to get the
professionals that.
On site for these areas in order
to engineer
of the improvements are the
changes that need to be made
R. we need people out there that
can do the of our mail so we are
I just disabilities the.
All the studies done before any
work can start and we've got
the versions include that
deductions that are such that is
set for
the fans in the.
If we don't get something done
and I have you on this.
If.
Now if the if there's not
grounded.
Local events happening here so.
I've written to the the federal.
The Asian trying to.
See if they can not a single
soul Act.
To
Our projects get this move on
the ground get it going.
We have a roll from our media
don't have a on in the middle so
we need to provide financial aid
to them so that we can get money
to use
this money.
So those are
just the that our very first
before we can even spend money
over the problems are the money
on the ground we can allocate
funding for the state of.
We have to have all these other
things done and course it's
always amazed and maybe we need
an engineer when I did choose a
hundred years old and the guys
it does it was just that it with
a shovel and let the.
And you know it it it it to
make.
The amount of.
Very from place.
And this is.
Indigenous youth.
The activities of the action we
to get money out.
And.
Again these are not thank you
thank you very much Senator
Woods if I may and I'm gonna
defer again to our staff but it
sounds like organization and
implementation of the necessary
with this contractors to.
Address these issues not only
with with the wild fires and the
floods but also the issues that
have been occurring because of
the drought situation and it is
something that I believe is
going to be one of the
priorities of the legislation
that will review so if I may
again defer to our to our
experts our staff members as we
move forward and they'll be
these presentations throughout
the week as to how we're going
to be addressing those those
particular components but Adrian
maybe you can elaborate a little
bit in terms of what you've been
doing when it comes to the
organizational pieces for a
presentation before the
subcommittee.
Mr chair members of the
committee so in terms of
preparation anticipation of this
during the interim we did
compile at least some of the
federal money and what it can be
used for and we have that as a
resource we did provided to all
of your staff in the capital
outlay menu that's the last page
so that is out there so we do
have that as a foundation.
In response to Senator Woods is
concerns that you brought up we
have been in conversation
actually are analyst on
renewable because in the back
has been talking the state
auditor and that's something
that they've been looking at as
potentially helping not only the
small estate association system
Mitchell domestics Center become
audit compliance to then be able
to leverage the federal money
but they need I believe it's a
one million dollar appropriation
more less to be able to do that
and I believe you all received
kind of a print out of that
yesterday so we are in contact
with different entities
throughout the state to try to
get that information ready for
you all to be able to accomplish
these different things with the
the mobilization of federal
money we will reach out to DFA
As
federal grants bureau to get
more information as well to
expand upon the resources we've
already gathered and then in
regards to the professional
staff that's that's a difficult
one.
Which it comes down to
compensation and you all have
had the discussion with Phil
earlier this week and
Ideally if we do targeted raises
for those engineering critical
staff positions that might be a
temporary solution to regard to
the staffing issue until the
classification pay bands are
completely addressed and
reformed.
Share to that point
It would be helpful if we could
compile a list of professionals
that could do these different
survey sees different studies
that need to be done before we
can put any money on the ground
and list of engineering firms
that could get out there and
Re you know re engineer what
needs to be re engineer
as you know when a whole
hillside washes away and takes a
dish which it it's it's more
than just a little bit of re
direction of a ditch so there's
a pretty what we need list.
And may be some kind of help.
under the contract.
General contracted can pull from
the GSA type situation where
were.
A fixed fee are something that
that we can no no cost.
For these organizations to be
able to pull for professional
help
would be very helpful I think
but they said that was our main.
Not only the match.
Which would be huge also.
The mechanical part to get get
get the studies and and
everything done the engineering
done all all that kind of stuff
so how we can help with that
part would be huge Mr chair you.
If I may add to the members that
in itself as we talk about it
when they're the resource guides
that are available it definitely
is going to help with the
coordination so I really
appreciate that Senator was just
one question that I have
specifically not necessarily
caused by any of the wild fires
or floods but what are some of
the
Strong water issues that still
continue along the southeastern
side of New Mexico that you
would consider need to be dealt
with as we as we move forward
well we've got you know we're I
happen to live in an area where
the Ogallala
of formation.
And you know we had a lot of we
are making more water out then
the recharge.
And.
Studies have been done.
Photos from committee did.
From the New Mexico tech.
station.
So both of those studies need to
be looked at and we did put set
some money aside.
Work with your gated farmers to
Close wells.
I think you're.
not a permanent deal but to see
what kind of recharge would
happen if we with.
And if someone to do a lot of
everybody came in some state
money when it came in under the
deal will be part of the defense
with the economic airforce base
making sure that they had water
for their mission in the future
so the other issues is is the
arch Hurley the the the
conscious lake which is actually
in your district Mr chair but
the ditch is thirty five forty
miles loan and as usual there's
about a sixty percent loss and
water from one end to the other
and you know do we want to
actually
Actually want to to the do
something about that ditch you
know maybe some piping maybe of
the.
Senator do we want to make that
a priority we have
dams you know we have the damn
it at you lake that needs repair
the no doubt
we have that problem we have the
eastern New Mexico Water Thorgy
building a pipeline from you
lake of sap.
Hello this is Jerry.
Continue trying to to make sure
that you have.
Of federal money that means that
we do that if this program the
the clothes there for six years
there's a but to to pop a lot of
that water infiltration and use
this water so.
All of that is
Nine eight.
Review.
Mexico we also.
Up north and play you saying
mining of the offer of their in
New Hampshire restrictions of
future economic development you
have a wonderful community so
those are the things that have
the.
And and the importance of my
district so thank you Sir for
the opportunity well and again
thank you very much for the
insightful information of course
on the organization and then
some of the larger issues that
we definitely need to deal with
this definitely sends the
message out to the public that
we do have large water needs
throughout our state and this is
the intent of the subcommittee
to help to not only group what
those needs are but seat the
efficiencies and the resources
to move forward with it thank
you Senator Woods next we go to
Senator Diamond Senator Diamond
please thank you Mr chairman
I'll all kind of refer mostly to
the particular water needs that
I needed really that's of a
flooding as a result of the
black fire I think the concerns
coming out of Southern New
Mexico the frustrations were the
delay and we know the government
moves very slow but but in this
case both federal and state was
inexcusably slow in fact it took
it took
Senator Hemphill and I maybe two
weeks to just simply get a
declaration through through the
back and forth with homeland
security and what was needed the
bureaucracy just to get our
counties declared in a state of
New Mexico in the state of
emergency which is the first
step needing to even how fun
that conversations about
accessing funds there was a
delay in that the frustration
was is when the first mark went
up we knew there was going to be
flooding issues and the delay of
wanting to respond to that
wasn't until the flood started
coming where we felt like we'll
finally people wanted to address
the floods we could told was
gonna flood from the day the
first three one up so there's
still some frustration with the
process and I hope we've I hope
we've learned I hope we can sit
here and expedited process of
how we are going to get money
and resources on the ground much
quicker than we have in in our
in the case of the black fire
the immediate concern came out
was the anti donation clause
because a lot of the damage was
done to private property and so
it was blocking access is taking
out roads and it became a
slippery slope with the counties
not being able to do work that
was damage to two roads or
driveways or property as a
result of this fire and the anti
donation clause kept coming up I
I that doesn't seem to be
concerned now which is good but
the entire time we kept saying
if you work with your soil and
water conservation districts
that would not have been an
issue and I think for a long
time we should have gone
straight to them to step in but
we still need to remember that
our stormwater districts can
work on private property and can
work directly with the counties
and maybe a better liaison they
stand ready today and yet I feel
like there's still some
confusion on what money is out
there specifically I'll tell you
even today in which Senator
Hemphill can't join us this
morning what we look over the
proposed legislations and and
all the money available I do
want to notice the difference
between the for black fire down
south and that the permits for.
He's calf canyon is that the
federal government claimed
responsibility for the northern
fire which changes things when
it comes accessing some federal
dollars a little bit more it's
not the case on the black fire
still there's great damage over
three hundred thousand acres
were burned so when I look
through the legislation I still
can't tell my district and I'm
still confused myself where is
the funding relief for black
fire so can either of you answer
that question that the hundred
million dollars for the hermits
peak calf canyon fire as for the
northern is to respond to the
northern fire where can are set
in New Mexico counties access
funds as of today based on
proposed legislation.
Mr chair Senator Diamond based
on the proposed legislation the
only the piece that I can think
of for that which might help you
with the black fire is the
forest conservation act
amendments which is house bill
one ninety five that bill would
designate the and energy mineral
and natural resources department
and authorize them to respond to
forest fires and natural
disaster emergencies while
currently that is the department
of homeland security and
emergency that coordinates with
FEMA so that's kind of like the
result of the the land funding
that you experienced is that it
has to go through federal
agencies
as you're saying so
yes I you're saying governments
beginning to specifically listed
here but as far as proposed
legislation for what you're
saying the only one I can think
of that comes up is house bill
one ninety five so far because
it kind of takes the
responsibility away from the
fence and puts it more on like
local and state entities to
respond to those emergencies.
And Mr chair Senator Diamond
there is one other piece of
legislation which I don't think
is on this list and that is
Center mowing else's prosperity
and economic resiliency Act
which addresses some of the
concerns that you brought up in
terms of speeding up response
and making funding available
year round there is a eight in
essence a a bucket of money
dedicated entirely to climate
mitigation environmental impacts
of this type of stuff including
another bucket that address is
just water related
infrastructure planning
so if that bill were to pass
each book it would receive
twenty million that can then be
mobilized for any project or
proposal that comes through and
is approved and that would money
that's available year round and
then every year those buckets
get refilled automatically so
that could be a mechanism that.
individuals affected by the
black fire or entities such as
the soil in.
water conservation district
could leverage and propose a
project so that's one Avenue
that can exist for the Mr
chairman and if I may I guess I
still I'm frustrated that I feel
sometimes and we responded
things there's winners and
losers and clearly northern New
Mexico is the winner in this
southern New Mexico Black fire
does not have resources
allocated we have a state kias
and ditches and canyons that are
so full that when the rains come
we're going to have another
disaster it's waiting if they
are piled up in is waiting to
happen our county doesn't have
the resources to to to clear out
these these water ways to ensure
that we don't have additional
damage from flooding coming up
and and I still don't have an
answer from my local governments
it's still kind of unclear where
the money's going to come from
so we've earmarked a hundred
million dollars for one fire and
then maybe potential pots of
money in which they have to
compete with other entities to
respond to the other equally
damaging fire and so
I would like to visit offline of
how we're going to address the
southern New Mexico fire needs
because I can assure you that
this is not sufficient I think
that the next issue and this is
probably want to statewide level
is access we're going to we're
going to allocate all these
funding and I think we do this
in a number of different ways of
as appropriators and we assume
that they have they are aware of
the funding that there is a
there's a channel to access that
and what's happening is a lot of
times are funding in in our
intent is to get money on the
ground and stop making it there
and so I think we need to
identify not just how that money
will flow but to make sure that
our our people on the ground or
safety is our dish associations
our own water districts are
local municipalities know how to
access that fund that it's it's
bottle necking somewhere in
which the money sits there
because they're unaware that
they can even access the dollar
so it's not enough to just
allocate funds but we also need
to make sure that it's reaching
the people on the on the ground
to see it all the way through.
so I will visit with you
the answer is not sufficient for
me to just say somewhere in
these pots of money they may be
able to find a little bit of
relief is not going to be enough
for me the session so I will
visit with Senator Hemphill the
chairman has been very
responsive to our concerns will
visit offline about what we need
to do to make sure that that the
southern New Mexico counties are
also taking care of thank you
for thank you very much Senator
Diamond if you issues directly
related to that the first is how
can we direct and I don't know
what the total amount is going
to be and I ask Senator Diamond
to get the best not estimate but
amount that is going to be
necessary in order for first of
of course to address the issues
because that in itself is going
to be one of the urgent issues
as we go forward within that
there are few things that have
already been mentioned part of
it's going to going to be if you
will the flooding that may be
coming down the road this of
removal that's going to be
another issue there is another
bill that that I have introduced
and that basically is dealing
with the New Mexico DOT and on
going resources that they need
and this is just.
All we've done is identified the
the need for road repair
culverts bridges and other
things that were affected by the
fires in the north but that was
seventy eight million dollars
and I'm sure that you have in
the southern part some of those
road needs as well so we also
need to involve the department
of transportation in what we're
gonna be dealing with to help to
rectify if you will a lot of
these issues these are live
safety issues as we move forward
and the one thing that I have
that is I've talked to D. O. T.
is expressed the concern across
the state because of the
emergency situations.
The concern again as they
already have resources that are
earmarked for so many projects
so we need not new money but
additional resources in order
for us to address those concerns
so Senator Diamond if you would
work with the D. O. T. let's go
ahead and get a list of what
those needs are as well because
that's going to be another
urgent issue as we deal with it.
Get back to a couple of things
when it comes to the the
emergency declarations.
What were the declarations state
decorations or where their was
our federal dollars decoration
involved as well.
So so within that to our staff
members if you would assist us
to check into the federal debt
decorations what specifically
would be required for that
because when we're working with
both that definitely assists us
the anti donation issue is the
state issue with the federal
issued and can be how do we get
into directly assisting if you
will with with fencing with
other things including wells
that have been destroyed because
of a a lot of the flooding so
that would be another one of the
issues to help to bring some
clarification of the issues that
we're dealing with so if you
would if to get back to our to
our staff members.
What what the initial because
and and of course cost of of the
flood and and the fires in that
area have been and then secondly
with those declarations let's
look to see how we can find if
you will more of the resources
to the private sector component
without violating if you will
the anti donation clause but to
a system as well and again at
least in my estimation this
definitely is going to go ahead
and be one of these these bills
so we've put together with the
emergency clause otherwise we're
going to be here two years from
now still talking about it and I
know that's definitely what
you're not looking for you want
immediate relief and the
frustration is very evident in
terms of what you all have tried
to do that yet we still don't
have the relief that is
necessary to to bring back if
you will the not only the land
with the lives of the people is
they've they've lost so much
thank you Mr chairman and you
encouraging me to work with the
staff to
yes to your mark these funds are
too busy just about adding this
into existence legislation or.
So so if I made to the members
of the subcommittee the first
issue on something like this is
as we're gonna be working on and
omnibus piece of legislation it
would be specifically to address
these type of issues so within
that if as an example the cause
of damage and devastation
because of the black fire was
three million dollars and that's
been the estimate that those
would be the resources that we
need to address if we go ahead
and we say well what we'll do is
we'll go to the pots of money
and I'm I'm not disagreeing with
staff I've indicating because of
the urgency is how are we going
to be taking a look at this and
then how are we going to address
that so I'm.
Encouraging that a we get what
is what damages been done what
the costs are going to be and
how we can coordinate our
efforts with D. O. T. department
of environment and because state
parks have also been affected by
it and we work with the various
agencies so that within the
packages and this is the smart
move buyer chair as we deal with
resources in various parts and
we're dealing with that the
issue would be how we can
improve our parks how we're
going to take care were sick as
how are we going to continue to
improve if you will land that is
been destroyed how are we going
to address the we can roads that
that have occurred and if we do
that in in this type of fashion
then we'll know what resources
are available available quickly
what resources are going to be
available hopefully within the
next eighteen months and then
from there how we're going to
better work if you will with the
federal a delegation so in the
future if we do have any of the
declarations of emergency we
know what we need to do with the
federal and the state level this
is going back to Senator Woods
is point that in it we need to
help to prepare so that if these
things and when they do happen
again we're prepared to deal
with it and it's not going to be
one of these things but again
the frustration sets in and
lives are lost properties are
lost and most importantly then
our state takes a step backward
instead of moving forward with
the kind of initiatives that we.
Senator nine thank you Mr
chairman hi I appreciate that I
will visit with with Adrian and
just stay offline a visit with
you about how we can address
those needs it's my
understanding to the current
estimate right now is around
three million dollars and they
have document of of where those
numbers are based but we do need
to make sure that some of those
funds are able to cleanup
working damaged on on our on our
private lands as you mentioned
so I will visit offline and move
forward with this thank you
thank you for.
Senator Diamond a couple of
other things when I was going to
be as we deal directly with the
dams lakes and and other issues
within your area particularly
dealing with Water Rights as we
do move forward if you'll bring
that to our our attention as
well because I know those are
the three B. facets of what
we're gonna be dealing directly
with the next individual that I
like to go to is to Center by
the and within that I know he is
very interested in assisting of
the state with the issues that
permeate right around if you
will some of the reasons of the
recent travesties that have
occurred and hopefully to with
that information as we move
forward that this will be a part
of some of the proposed
legislation that that will
consider center for the please
thank you very much Mr chairman
and and thank you I don't want
to jump in with Senator Diamond
was speaking in in center which
but I do have a couple comments
there as well just three things
I want to mention today I know
we've already covered quite a
bit Mr chairman I just first of
all this is from the acequia
community and and we had this
discussion with the state
auditor was and and we've had a
couple of times since just what
we need to to come forward with
in terms of sizing for the
funding
Related to the the dollars
available for audits and other
legal services for volunteer
secular as in the you know
communities of that nature
mutual domestics a few others
what you know we hear a million
dollars two million dollars but
then we find out that some of
these organizations are ten
years behind on their audits and
and luckily I guess money is
still flowing to them so I'm not
quite sure if the audits are
going to hold them up or not but
I think we all want to make sure
that all that's being done
properly in that that are public
dollars are being utilized in in
a proper legal fashion so item
number one would like to know
more about what what we need to
size that how do we need to fund
that to help some of these
communities catch up and bring
themselves up to up to
requirements the second is
related to possibly and and the
chair you and I've talked about
this a little bit along the way
but this the water settlement
with the Texas the federal
government Mexico the lower Rio
Grande all these different
settlements that we're looking
that are facing us you know head
first I wish you know
some of the leaders in the state
that you that that the
executable maybe maybe they
should get on an airplane and
fly over to Texas and sit down
with the governor of Texas and
work it out Representative roll
up their sleeves and and work
the thing out before we spend
another hundred million dollars
on legal fees which we could
have used for maybe closing out
whatever expenses that we have
there so that's sort of like an
overall in my opinion global way
to look at kind of what's going
on between that entire you know
disaster that's that's facing us
we have these these surpluses
but all that could very easily
be eaten up with the lawsuit
settlement of some kind and and
and I hope it's not in the
billions of dollars but it could
easily be in the billions of
dollars so I hope that we would
put more attention on that now
before it turns into something
you know really catastrophic for
the state the state budget.
And then the third thing more
specifically on what center time
to time it was talking about.
So I I would like of Adrian in
your team if you can please take
a look at Senate bill two sixty
eight I just filed a couple of
days ago so it might not have
been on your radar when you put
this information together
Senator Campos is the is the co
sponsor we're gonna work this
together to try to get this done
but it's essentially going to
define all the different things
that and and methodologies but
that you come forward with when
you have these massive wildfires
in your areas what can you claim
how to how do you clean them how
quickly would you go to get this
done
I believe and maybe you can
answer this for me I I know it's
more of a legal opinion than
anything else but the age and
you seem to know how to do so
many things I love that about
you
you know FEMA is our FEMA
dollars available big big FEMA
dollars available to help in
areas like that the black for a
range of like fire the hermit's
peak all those things are are
those dollars available to the
state your to that type of a
fire do we know.
Mr chair Senator Padilla from my
understanding with FEMA dollars
when we were looking into it
over the interim
without a federal declaration
they're not accessible.
so I think Senator diamonds
point of figuring out what
triggers a federal declaration
will be really useful to know
because if it's something that
the state should of done like
taper work for example then it's
like we need to know what that
is and when you.
Activate that mechanism right so
we we will look into it yeah I'd
like to know more about that I
mean I don't know why we
wouldn't just that so if you
look it's SB two sixty eight I
guess if I have a couple of days
ago if we need to do something
to it to make that fire eligible
for for what we're trying to do
their I'd like to know that
right away so I can get that
amendment in there so as
possible so Senator if you want
Mr chairman and senator diamond
if you want to I know that we're
not supposed to talk to each
other during the committee
hearings we're all friends here
so Senator timing if you maybe
take a look at two sixty eight I
appreciate it and get get some
of your thoughts into their
think that be very helpful I
will take a look at Mister
chairman Senator Patel take a
look at that I'll connect with
Senator Hemphill as well the
hurdles in what she was going
back and forth of what they
needed in order for the state to
declare and what the state
needed to do for the feds to
declare should have been a
simple checklist so if we can
include something in your bill
the just clearly outlines how we
streamline that process it
should not have been such a
learning curve for two freshman
senators to figure out which
documents are needed in order so
yes we do expect that that
process want to help you as much
as I can Senator and then in in
to sixty eight there is a
discussion well there's there's
gonna be some real debate over
retroactivity and so and I've
already share this with senator
or chairman Campos we've already
written about had a brief
written on how to overcome
retroactivity as it relates to
things that have already
occurred and stuff in the state
so
and is it sounds like the firing
Center diamond Terry would put
fit directly in that brief that
we've written on how to it why
this this it would make
something like that eligible
that's already over so please
take a look that all all share
my my bill file with him happy
to do that if you want to jump
on to it Mr chairman and Senator
Diamond would love to have your
support you know and to get that
done thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Senator for the in
before I go back to staff just a
couple of things because it does
work for him we do have that
communication many years ago
when I served as mayor of a
small community and we had water
right issues dealing directly
with Carlsbad we loaded up of
and we basically developed a
group of ambassadors when
visited with the group in in
Carlsbad from there we worked
out if you will the arrangements
so that oh four Santa Rosa lake
in state park we would have a
permanent pool and and that is
continue to go ahead and be very
productive for us on the other
perspective as we deal with the
checklist and it's it's a great
idea I'm looking back to April
six and how quickly we started
to work on all of the emergency
declarations both at the federal
and the state level and then
from there if you will and
acting the other aspects of how
to deal with emergencies in the
life safety issues so I really
believe that this committee this
subcommittee is going to have a
great opportunity to go ahead
and lay this out for future
reference here in the state and
again that's because we're
communicating and that something
that essentially hope
Representative should happen a
long time ago when it comes to
these type of things because
each year we're dealing with
fires and floods but we're now
to an eminent level where if we
don't address this and take care
of these dire needs of people do
move out of our rural New Mexico
we're already seeing that in the
more up in Las Vegas area where
people have of relocated in in
some cases we've also seen
people decide to sell their
lands and to move on because of
the devastation and if you will
the true lack of restoration and
so there are some.
Definite issues that have to be
addressed going back to the
committee any other thoughts and
ideas if not I'm gonna go ahead
and defer back to the
support staff that we have and
then from there we'll get ready
to go ahead and recess the
subcommittee and to our our next
meeting Senator Woods please.
This point.
You know we talk about compact
issue on the real graph.
We have a.
Impact issues on the centre on
call at all it may be just just
pressing.
To us
Program seven state area there
that we are participating in the
upper and lower Colorado's
And so.
It's pretty complicated issues
That we have New Mexico one
little.
See issues with.
And the meeting of legislators
and state to talk about those
issues very informative
Maybe maybe sometime we should
as C. H. U. S. a.
Caller.
Mexico.
But
there.
We are the ultimate funders of
the any thank and seven in a
month or so.
And to stay abreast of all.
Is.
Our generation of their and
former Seri are now available
across the lease for ensuring
hello for such things as the
Senate on to help us keep our
contact obligations.
So I don't know how far out you
want to read through this
Water.
Nation.
Probably to the the scope to try
to bring an end.
Merges you.
Hi situation or problem.
This.
Hi this session.
But in the future.
Things that we need to so so if
I may with the crisis water
subcommittee the key will be
very specific with Senator Woods
brings up a very valid point
this is hopefully going to
continue for years to come in
addressing the issues that he's
talking about this would be a
great foot stool if you will to
begin that process and
ultimately when we deal directly
with drought as we see the
restrictions in terms of what
water and at the same time as we
deal with our water rights in
New Mexico we definitely aren't
going to have the wet water to
fill those particular rights
which is definitely going to
affect quality of the domestic
water use agricultural use our
wildlife and environmental use
and so we definitely have an
overall crisis that needs to be
addressed and hopefully staff as
we move forward we'll be able to
talk about some of these issues
we've just scratched the surface
today to begin that that whole
process so I appreciate the
future a request to the nation
eight.
Yeah.
Those are huge issues.
But she just ringing up more
then of.
Information that we need to.
Future and if I may a lot of
times people can say we're
dealing with specifics but the
specifics are how are we going
to ensure we have water for
future development here in New
Mexico and that is the over
arching piece that you're
talking about so I really
appreciate that any other
comments by members of the
subcommittee.
If not I'm gonna go back to
staff help us to understand what
your thought process is as we
move forward to our next
meeting.
Thank you Mr chair
so as we move into our next
meeting for tomorrow I think a
lot of the points that were
raised today we will have some
of the answers tomorrow with the
Environment Department S. C. and
EMNRD present this also puts
them on notice of.
Where we're at as a whole for
Friday based on the discussion
to date we will expand the
invitees to include the
department of transportation and
homeland security because they
are critical in order to be able
to streamline the process for
the future and to consider the
infrastructure needs related to
both the black fire half P.
canyon and you know any other
disaster that was that we
recently had so we will expand
both of those for Friday
and then in terms of the Senate
and house bills we will expand
this list is this initial list
was just specifically focused on
just water we didn't necessarily
address you know a larger scope
so I know that there's a bill
out there in regards to like
reforming the anti donation
clause like anything that can
relate to it will expand this
list to include those bills for
you all to be aware of
and then in terms of.
Creating kind of a database
that's accessible to everybody
that is we can actually start
that process today and we will
create a.
An addition to our capital
outlay manual at a little Q. R.
code and what not that'll link
up to a database that we create
which we can easily distribute
to have all the list of
professionals engineering firms
all that stuff accessible
through that mechanism
so we will start that process as
well today so it from a staff
perspective we will have by next
Friday.
Not a fully comprehensive list I
can't guarantee that but we will
have something to work off of we
will working collaborate with
homeland security to ensure we
had that streamlined checklist
process for not only state
decorations the federal
declarations of emergencies
right to go by next Friday and
and then we will collaborate
with you all regards to specific
legislation fixes
so this way we we can be
productive I started dressing
these critical needs of the
state thank you very much and
any other additional comments in
terms of what what you're your
thoughts are in terms of how we
can proceed I know this is an
enormous task you have a lot of
work that are is already been
done but now the coordination
definitely begins as we would
begin to grow and move forward
so the state do you have
anything in terms of
what what your thoughts are and
how we're proceeding and if you
wish to at.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
I don't believe I have anything
that again this was mostly the
kind of like ground work that I
did to lay the foundation give
like a more high level summary
of what's going on but obviously
now we're getting into the weeds
of things and I'm very happy to
do so and get into the details
of what funding mechanisms are
going where who's getting what
money what bills are overlapping
and like agents at a more
comprehensive list of
legislation relating to say the
anti donation clause so yeah
just ready to get in the weeds
and if anyone has any questions
again on right here I appreciate
that so tomorrow morning
whenever we meet will start at
nine we're gonna hit these
issues as quickly as we can and
so if if if you're running a bit
late and I'm here I'm just going
to get started we can always go
back to provide the information
to you but that way what you can
get on with your schedules
because I know that the the days
are going to be very busy this
afternoon whenever we here
Senate bill six I would hope
that the other issues that are
directly related let's say for
example to the black fire are
going to be brought forward we
want as much transparency in
this process as possible we want
people across the state to
understand and to realize what
we're dealing with because this
is not just one corner of the
state this is the entire state
as we move forward and there is
significant issues that have to
be addressed so this hopefully
would be an opportunity for us
to better explain and understand
how we dealt with the cat canyon
if you will hire its peak fire
and then from there the black
fire and of course we it does
over the years the issues that
have happened there all of the
issues across the state that
have eminently affected our
water use this is going to be
huge and I really applaud each
of you for undertaking this this
larger vision to to resolve some
