After Pat Woods great question
you counties district seven
thanks for.
Mr chairman those state
representative state senator
Robert phone Bobby J. Andrew
Saunders district six.
some Los Alamos very bein does
thank you.
Dollars thank you for
remembering you didn't get
demoted.
Western twenty six years it's
hard to break that have.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank I am
a Hemphill from Sam's from
Silver City Senate district
twenty eight and it's great to
be here this afternoon thank you
Mr chairman.
Senator Diamond you're next.
Mr Chairman crystal diamond from
the bills Vigil Senate district
thirty five.
I am trying to look as senator
share with this I don't see him.
Senator Steinborn are you with
us I don't see him either
Senator Candelaria is not with
us and Center combo so we do
have are on the edge of a quorum
so I know Senator Campos said he
had something in here be joining
us in a few minutes so Senator
well once you start off with
Senate bill seventy two and that
do we have an amendment or is it
already been amended this image
I think we're good on this one
Mr chairman.
We have an amendment in the last
committee as a result.
Mr Chairman last year we passed
a bill to authorize industrial
revenue bonds expansion process
that would help them with the.
Wind energy and and various
Renewable sources resources out
of the eastern side of the
state.
we had rented some issues if
you're building a factory or a.
A Facebook or something like
that and you have a a single
point and it hires lots of
people and all I need a lot of
benefits throughout the whole
county.
Unfortunate to doing a power
line across the county it may
not go exactly where you want
and it doesn't have a permanent
workforce and those kind of
things so we ran into some
issues the counties that wanted
to do this wanted to try to sure
the benefits of
Even in lieu funds from the
negotiated industrial revenue
bond.
And the they can negotiate
payment in lieu they wanted to
give those dollars to the
schools but if the power line
only traverse is one or two
school districts it may not
benefit the entire county.
Population this is would and and
in a Facebook situation or
something like that so what this
bill is relatively simple and
allows for proportionate.
Formula aware of payment in lieu
can be negotiated and that
payment in lieu instead of the
property tax can be dedicated to
the schools on a pro rata basis
based on their mill rate in
dollars dollars that they're
receiving and and no rates in
various sources from the state
as well as a local so anyway
it's a simple formula not a
simple formula but it's so it's
a formula that allows us to
distribute the the funds more of
fairly to the citizens to the
school districts within the
county and the counties that are
on the Senator aggression these
things want to be able to
benefit all school districts
within their county this allows
us to do that.
my experts Sir John Ryan former
senator and former
representative Robert PO and Mr
Burke I think you are the
attorney for one of the projects
and I would like to defer to
Mister Burke to make a comment
if you'd like to.
Okay here's.
Your muted.
Robert for your muted.
There are there you go okay
about that Mr Chairman
Senator huh I'm I'm a financial
adviser the number of counties
and what the attorney after work
will move on to turn
insure what we're doing is we're
using the state of New Mexico
property tax certificates that
are issued for every county in
the state of New Mexico
determined.
The the the the rate of sharing
between the county.
and municipalities and and the
school district in the past they
have been in the they've been
all over the place and they
create some hardship New Mexico
Association what have you we
thought it would be better used
based on actual fact as opposed
to just.
Whatever whatever formula
whatever back.
Maybe and so that's what this
formula is the that was worked
out with the we're the only
major bond of.
Counsel for the state of New
Mexico it helps towards County
it helps Roosevelt of Lincoln
Santa without this legislation
give me an example import county
their recent the one point four
billion dollar I. R. B..
Under the current legislation
the county would have had to
give a hundred percent of I
don't pay much to the school
district for the first eleven
year.
Plus another eight and a half
million dollars out of their
general.
Then the next eleven years they
would recoup what they lost so
that in effect the county would
only net money the last seven
years of a thirty year I are
very.
The case of for example plan of
all County they would have lost
hundreds of the bill payments
they got for the entire twenty
five years what come up with
another six seven point seven
thousand dollars out of their
own pocket as you can probably
realize most governments are not
going to.
One of them like that so that's
what we did with this the
legislature.
With us Jon Ryan has any
additional comments.
I just real quick thank senator
develop Mr chairman members of
the committee
We did our duty is a is a really
big deal especially in a number
of the counties in in central
New Mexico and on the east side
I'm here representing the sons
yet transmission project in wind
energy in general and and just
to say that when the counties
and the developers come together
which we usually don't you know
we we wind up negotiating these
these are bees when when the
county wants to do it but but
today we're we're both together
advocating and supporting a bill
that's really good for the
developers it offers some tools
for the counties to enter into
these I are bees and it's good
for the county.
And the and the funds trickle
down to the school districts
which is good for the school
district so all in all this is
really at a bill that fixes the
idea a problem that occurred
last year and you know the
industry in New Mexico is it is
it has a great deal of potential
it's just that you know it it's
such a competitive industry in
in wind energy and renewable
energy that if if we take away
one of these incentives and it
has a a as big a factor with
regard to limiting how many and
how much development we get in
the renewable energy throughout
New Mexico and so I thank
senator Neville for for
sponsoring this bill.
Thank you
Mr chairman I guess we're ready
for.
In.
Senator Rodriguez okay I'm sorry
I need to do we have anybody and
supporter and opposition.
At Mr chairman and members of
the committee we do have public
comment there is no opposition
indicated
at port the port we have Marco
Gonzales.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Marco Gonzales and I'm
the registered this for pattern
energy pattern is developing in
New Mexico close to four
thousand megawatts of wind and
solar which represents about a
seven billion dollar investment
in the state and we're very
supportive of this appreciate
the Sanchez.
New efforts this year to correct
the issue with this technical
amendment the last bill last
year passed unanimously thirty
eight zero from the Senate floor
it with other members not be
present or absent but for all
the reasons that were described
by the experts in the sponsor we
up we we support the bill and
appreciate the committees a
hearing get thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
So Mister chairman Senator share
if there is no opposition can I
make a do pass motion right now.
Mr chairman I just have a
question if I may Senator.
Mr Chairman.
Senator shared let us get
through public comment they they
have to sign up in a let me make
their public comment and and
Senators Rodriguez has a
question and then I'll tell you
when we're ready for a motion
but I still see the fence up so
you still got some work to do.
Miss present and I was late
because I was turned part of it
now.
Chairman members of the.
Members the committee we opt to
have Ashley Wagner with the New
Mexico chamber of commerce.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
this bill because it ensures
local financial support for
schools well ensuring we're able
to continue to build our
renewable energy infrastructure
thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to speak to you
today.
Chairman members of the
committee that concluded public
comment of this bill.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez you
have a question thank you Mr
chairman quick question here
thank you senator bill for
bringing this bill forward I do
remember in the finance
committee last year when it came
up we discussed it at least so
thank you very much for that I
wanted to the state that it
seems that the this is a and
industrial revenue bond bill as
we know and it it seems from all
an indication and correct me as
we're going to I don't
understand this but I I think I
pick it up what you're trying to
do is to distribute the payment
in lieu of taxes that are
actually effectuated through an
agreement that happens when a
power line is goes through and
you're trying to distribute the
funding that is derived from
this agreement in the payment in
lieu of taxes equality is really
the the word as equal as
possible to the three
entities I would say what the
government county government
municipalities and also of the
school districts is that correct
Senator.
Mr Chairman Senator I should
hedges one of my co sponsors
you've nailed it pretty close
that's a exactly what we're
trying to do we're trying to
make a fair distribution to all
the school districts that might
lie within the county my old
home counties Torrance and
there's what I think for school
districts to participate there
and if the power line doesn't
actually go through all of the
school districts and they don't
get to share this allows the
counties to come up with a
formula and the formula spelled
out in the bill that they can
distribute the dollars fairly
amongst the school districts
based on their millage bill
rates.
Thank you and I want to bring
that up because I think there's
I mean years and.
Out there is and the assumption
that perhaps are more is going
to be taken from the school
district and the counties also
may be hurting your this
arrangement here but from what I
do understanding you are now
Senator it is an effort to do
the opposite an effort to make
it is the policy possible so
that all the school districts
that fall within a particular
County benefit from it from the
actual agreement that happens
after the payment of taxes for
the power line easement and
acquisition background so
you know I I don't.
I don't see a problem with it
you know as it is Senator I
think it's a good way to
distribute the funding are you
mentioned the program that
basis of the school districts
would be getting the funding
that they they would get I did
you say Medical Center and then
really and this is all I have is
I I think this is probably a
better way to distribute all
that we had for that the program
basically your state was based
on their.
What is it there are there are.
Tell me what is it based on its
based on the mill rates millage
have the school district has in
place.
Putting the state no rates for
for debt and so forth and it
allows the the dollars to be a
and I can do it for one of my
experts if you'd like but it
allows the.
The dollars from the payment.
To be split up proportionate to
the school districts based on
their mill rates that in court
thank you and I know you
mentioned that a minute ago I
went blank here with my them and
I couldn't hear exactly it was a
mill rate that well that that
tells me that it's going to be a
fair distribution your outlook
two counties and municipalities
to.
Well municipality if there were
multiple Beverly happens yeah
okay all right well and but they
would all share people in this
under this scenario pretty much
right Senator that's correct
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator bill I don't have any
further questions.
Okay.
Thank you Senator sure I think
we're ready for motion I don't
see anybody else's hand raised
so Mister chair I move to pass
on Senate bill seventy two is
already amended.
Have a motion by Senator second
by Senator Diamond.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt is
excuse Senator Campos and
senator Candelaria are excused
Senator Diamond.
Yeah.
Senator Diamond your vote please
yes yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Yes Senator share.
Yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn is it yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Representative yes Senator Woods
yes Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes so we have
eight yes and three excuse.
Thank you committee I Mr
chairman also should I take care
yep Senator just run into you
Senate bill three forty one
three forty one should also be
fairly simple Mr chairman I have
my expertise Rachel gradual this
is a bill that.
Basically it's a one liner built
it to.
Says that the community for a
school funds will be subject to
appropriation by the legislature
and that's required are called
for under an appropriation bill
looking at the number but the
appropriation bill specifies
that this will happen this bill
that passed in the ten million
dollars that are part of that
the fund will revert and Rachel
if you are on allow you to
explain what community school is
and what the status.
Mr chairman the community school
act
in the is that sit inside the
community school funder used to
provide planning requests for
new community schools and then
implementation requests so
community schools are a holistic
way
of looking at both education and
non academic impacts to learning
so community schools may provide
health care to their students
they may help food banks they
may have clothing banks and so
they're they're really trying to
blend academic support such as
extended learning with those non
academic support sick kids need
to be
successful so that the language
is the senator noted it in house
bill two right now there are two
ten million dollar transfers
into the fund ten million
dollars from the general fund
and ten million dollars from the
public education reform Fund
right now the house bill two
says those two transfers are
contingent on language that
makes the fund subject to
appropriation by the legislature
so in addition to the transfers
and frontier right now they need
AE appropriates three million
dollars out of the funds to PED
for expenditure next year to
continue implementing to
continue implementation requests
for the community schools are
currently funded.
That Mr chairman I stand for
questions.
We were ready Mr chairman for
public comment thank you you can
we have any public comment.
Many members of the committee we
received a wind requests for
public comment from Daniel
McDonough but it did not appear
to be on the damn call with us.
I'm gonna tell.
Thank you questions from
committee members Senator
Rodriguez played yet Mr chairman
thank you senator bill for
bringing this bill forward and
and Rachel for explaining that
it seems like a very.
Very necessary thing to do
because this was by indicating
the language in here that we
need to provide for more
accountability more streamlining
of the distribution of funds so
I'm any questions Mr chairman
and I'll wait until the time is
right because there's others
to speak here before I make a
motion someone else thank you
thank you Senator share Mr
chairman I was just going to
make a do pass motion but I see
Senator Steinborn is on full
weight.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman so Senator
in the bill and Miss schedule so
this bill
It is the legislature providing
more funding for the community
schools I mean at this point and
house bill two.
Rachel replied Amanda believe
she'll know the historical
situation better than I do.
Mr chairman.
Senator right now house bill two
includes both the three million
dollar appropriations from the
fund to the Department that is
an educator actually it's
appropriation of education
reform Fund that would be
authorized to be spent by PED
next we care to continue
implementing to continue the
implementation they have funded
currently for existing
communities.
And then there is twenty million
dollars in additional funds that
are transferred to the community
school fund the purpose of the
language would be destroyed
ensure the public education
department doesn't use all of
those funds in single by would
set the appropriation amount
every year through the General
appropriation act
I is how much money you wanted
to be spent from the fund moving
forward.
Thank you Mr chairman Rachel so
with that have the it factor of
of slowing down the pace of
creation of new community
schools anyway.
Mr chairman Senator the language
and house to right now says the
transfer of money into the
community school fund that ten
million dollars in general fund
and ten million dollars in
public and reform Fund is
contingent on a bill you're free
to us here making the fund
subject to legislative I'm sorry
subject to legislative
appropriation so with our this
bill those dollars will be
transferred into the fund unless
unless that language in the GA
is
Is changed and so what I would
say is.
We awarded something like twenty
six in the schools
There's a level at which is
probably a reasonable level for
them to grow community schools
I've been working with the LFC
we recommended L. E. S. C. that
you appropriated
five million dollars next year
that would allow it to continue
to fund the programs that are
already funded and for a small
Small number of planning grants
to be issued next year so any I
don't think this would slow
implementation down it just lets
you guys figure out how many how
many new community schools you
want to fund each year and keep
in mind the first year is fifty
thousand dollars the second
through fourth year funding is a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars pursuant to the
community school act so you want
to make sure you're not funding
to many planning grants on the
front and yeah yeah.
He for implementation requests
later.
Okay thank you for explaining
that and I will say that in I
have the least one maybe two
community schools in my district
and I know how important they
are to serving communities in
need so I really like the
concept then it'll be
interesting to see kind of the
evaluation of their successes
and hopefully we can expand
them.
But that's all I have thank you
Mr.
Thank you Senator Steinborn I
think we're ready for a motion
Mr chair I move to pass on
Senate bill three forty one
seconds.
Either way there Gonzalez.
So we have a due pass motion
made by Senator second by
Senator Gonzales that we call
the roll.
Yes Mister chairman Senator Burt
wearing the house of the king of
high status has the right is a
yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
is accused and Senator come to
this excuse Senator Diamond yes
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
Yes.
Here yes Senator Steinborn yes
yeah Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Woods.
He can be as quick with that
senator this.
Long thanks senator once said
yes is that current okay the
lawsuit you would yes Senator
Rodriguez yeah.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator that house.
Yes.
Yes yes and excuse.
Thank you Seneal thank you
members of the committee
appreciate it.
Thank you Senator Kernan you
want to start with the Senate
bill seventy seven yes thank you
Mr chair Senate bill seventy
seven creates a regional two
plus two pilot program in
southeastern New Mexico.
And it hopes to on a smaller
scale complete what was
attempted and stall in a
statewide efforts specifically
the pilot program aims to
deliver on the track sector
concept which is intended to
improve student outcomes such as
graduation rates in time to
graduate properties and student
debt through less remediation
and transfer ability issues
additionally Senate bill seventy
seven sixty created direct
pathway to graduation for
students and their selected area
of study using the two plus two
model this program will run over
six years examining cohorts of
students to assess prime taking
graduate comparison of credit
accumulation pre and post I
would and with the more students
remaining in New Mexico in
transferring to eastern New
Mexico university as opposed to
Texas institutions and others
outside state if the pilot
program shows success the idea
will be free to expand to other
regions of the state or
potentially go statewide.
Schools have expressed interest
in the southeastern part of
program they can replicate
replicate modeling join it to
similar agreements and efforts
today I have with me three
experts at two of them will be
speaking at the end of the third
will be available questions I
have doctor general result with
New Mexico military institute
and Dr Caldwell with eastern New
Mexico university and at Dr
Sanderson with New Mexico junior
college so I think they should
be on our help at night if you
check and see if they're waiting
for.
Senator Kernan center grizzle is
on I did see in center grand
okay you know grizzle wants to
start and then we can check for
the other one thank you thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan at Mr
chairman thank you for this
opportunity but we do have a
very unique opportunity here in
southeast New Mexico to leverage
our close proximity with seven
schools six two year schools
surrounded by a four year school
to build this pathway that
Senator Kernan mentioned for our
students a statewide effort was
started but unfortunately was
not able to be able to complete
this work to ensure that our
students can move from the two
year community colleges to a
four year school without loss of
credit it'll be our intent to
create this pathway so that the
students setting in any of those
to your schools when they leave
it will be just as if they were
sitting in eastern New Mexico
classroom.
Making that a a work taking it
to where they can finish should
be a or B. test work just as if
they were sitting in that class
were no loss of credit no loss
of time the loss of money as
they complete that degree here
in the state of New Mexico we
have a great big red and black
competitor just a few miles over
the state line called Texas tech
they offer our students that
same opportunity no also credit
the loss of time if they will
move to Texas tech we want to be
able to create that same
opportunity for students to stay
in New Mexico no loss of time no
lost a credit to our efforts at
creating this pathway this also
allows our students to continue
to use the opportunity
scholarship the lottery
scholarship it's available to
them right here in the state and
not have to leave short close
proximity is what will make this
ever work we're no more than an
hour and a half apart from any
of the seven schools and with
your help with your allowing us
to make this ever work we be
able to create a model down here
in the southeast any of the
other school centered around the
other coverage you for your
schools will be able to pattern
their efforts after for Mr
chairman thank you for this
opportunity we appreciate the
opportunity to let this be the
model for the state in this
pathway for our students thank
you.
Senator new is your other expert
witness thank you Mr chair I
believe we have doctor called
well on the phone if thank you
we'll check and see if she is
on.
And she may not be on but we
could go to questions and then
if she becomes available maybe
she could say worked for before
we go to that.
Need and we have any public
comment.
I yes to add Mr chair members of
the committee and and question I
did be offended they are
building that Brianna Caldwell
she did not appear to be on
unfortunately.
Public comment in there is no
opposition indicated and
inferred port we have Jerry Cole
president and CEO of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is terrible
residents of your greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we are absolutely delighted to
stand for funds will today.
In the value of articulation
thanks for provisions for.
Transition from higher
education.
Thank you for asking less than.
Yes seventy seven smaller scale
pilot program result valuable
data and systems and cells
statewide implementation of our
state secondary schools so we
stand in support of the bill we
appreciate the opportunity to
say thank you.
Members of the committee we
ought to have JD bowling ten.
Eighty.
I think.
The call vote on the bill thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that concluded public
comment and I believe that
president Caldwell has joined
at.
Thank you Mr chair she could say
a few words with your
permission.
Sure go right ahead the
committee that the following
fan.
Hello Mr chair.
I know come from J. following.
All.
thank you.
And Dr combine with you have the
webcast at playing in the
background it may have to turn
it off all while doing that.
Thank you for your permission.
All right and.
Thank you.
One second somebody's got the
background and and we're getting
a back feed from time delay.
To whoever has on to computers
maybe you could.
You do that so we're not hearing
a time delay over over what.
But the speaker saying.
All.
Because we do have the webcast
at playing the back I'm sorry
may have the turn it off.
How's that.
Is that better.
We got yeah you had a plan on
the computer I think you're good
now Dr Cohen.
Well thank you thank you members
of the committee Mr chairman and
madam vice chair Senator Kernan
gas.
Should your hard work already
today and certainly yesterday
and throughout the session I'm
countries call transfer the in
in the system on behalf of our
three campuses represented by
Sean power rose well
frontrunners for grid also and
and myself at quartile as we
look forward to partnering with
our east side colleagues to
enhance transfer process and to
help students process to a four
year degree in New Mexico.
This is a modest initiative
created by partners with long
history of sharing students up
and down the side of the state
we have discussed how to form
this partnership and how to
build a framework that will
collect data report results work
out the Kinks and put together
solid plan that makes the next
phase of transfer tribulation
even more successful our New
Mexico students we now we do not
require legislation to do this
work and we are not asking for
money we welcome this
legislation to be accountable
for this work and to share its
results with our colleagues
across the state higher
education department and would
you you start is absolutely
committed to these partners this
collaborative our students and
this pilot project we think
Senator Kernan for her support
of this bill and I thank you for
the opportunity to address the
committee I am so pleased that
Major General crystals already
spoken I don't know if Dr
Sanderson is also available for
comment Senator permanent is
that your wish.
If there are questions Mister
chair I think you'll be
available to answer help us
answer those.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Steemit is hand raised Mr Mr
chairman I move do pass on
Senate bill seventy seven.
Well second.
We have a motion by Senator
second by Senator Byrd path we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos is excuse and
senator Candelaria Senator
Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes senator
Graham solace.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share yes Senator
sure yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes is that
correct yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
And senator Munoz yes.
Thank you yes yes I have nine
yes and to excuse.
Thank you Senator Kernan I was
yes you know I.
We are in a new next bill
Senator what is the meeting he
he promises of the
entertainments are less we're
going to your bill that other
bill next Senator Kernan Senator
launches are you with this for
Senate bill three sixty seven as
amended I have Mister chairman.
Okay Sir go ahead and proceed
with Sandel three sixty seven
thank you Mr chairman you tell
me three minutes is a bill this
committee is passed before it
relates to how we amend our
constitutional note for the
finance committee this year
there are thirty one
constitutional amendment before
the Senate and the legislature
this year since our statehood
with amended the constitution
three hundred six times within
three hundred six proposed
amendments we've amended hundred
seventy one times is referred to
as a piecemeal way of doing our
constitution and I think there's
a better way we have a better
way.
This bill recognizes the
constitutional revision
commission which is going to the
doctor used before the password
Commission meets and makes
recommendations to the
legislature we've amended our
constitution to allow this this
body constitution revision
commission to make
recommendations and that we
adopt them by one amendment on
the ballot as opposed to this
piecemeal process if the
legislature approves it.
This is the way Franklin.
For us as a state to look at
other states to see how they
conduct their business and re
evaluate the entire way we do
business doesn't make sense for
us to meet thirty and sixty days
and allow only the governor
issues our budget issues every
other year the the entire
process by which we legislate
New Mexico including whether we
have paid or non paid
legislators is over a hundred
years old requires a very
serious reevaluation given the
pace that society now changes so
rapidly Sherman with that I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you senator serve on this.
See any questions from committee
members I think Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman while I
agree that the the piecemeal a
portion of this does seem a
little frustrating I am
concerned that all of a sudden
we're gonna have a entirely new
constitution how do we know that
that's not going to happen just
because I.
All of a sudden we hear people's
talking about speech is violence
and we're going to remove free
speech or something like that
Mr.
So Senator first of all know
that this constitution revision
commission process has been
utilized before and and twice
before in the past well it's
been over twenty five years
since we last did so I realize
that all the constitution
revision commission can do is
make recommendations ultimately
the Legislature retains full
control of anything that we may
do with the constitution just as
we do today the only difference
is that instead of doing it
piecemeal and in other words the
set of changing article by
article by the constitution
revision process based on the
recommendation and if the
legislature approves it even
with amendments we can but one
issue on the ballot and a man of
services more than one article
of the constitution one time so
this is this is the most
effective way.
To make substantive and
meaningful changes to the
constitution rather than article
by article piecemeal.
All right thank you Mr chairman
Senator in center I'm sure that
ultimately of course low is the
decision the voters it'll still
be on the ballot it'll still be
a constitutional amendment so so
happy openly with the voters and
the legislature before that.
Mister chairman Senator I I
understand that but have they
ever voted no once it got out of
the legislature.
Well yes I I agree with the
statistics are been three
hundred six proposed amendments
I mean seventy one have been
adopted so there there's you
numbers
The voters have rejected it yes.
Mr chairman I.
It least in my time I don't
remember a of voters rejecting
anything yes we've rejected them
in the Senate we've rejected
them in the legislature but I
don't remember the the voters
have rejected one so that's
that's my concern is that all of
a sudden we put something out
there and and it dramatically
changes New Mexico.
In that troubles me so thank you
Mr chairman Mr chairman.
Mr chairman of MA Center I just
wanna make sure that you're
clear on the numbers I gave you
that is actually the the the
numbers of ballot initiatives
knows is that these are members
who have been on the ballot
three hundred six times been on
the ballot approved a hundred
seventy one times you're you're
thinking that the voters approve
them may reflect the fact that
in most years of recent times
the voters perhaps have been
more we're consistent about
approving the ballot issues but
historically since statehood
there been three hundred six
times on the ballot the page
hundred so we want to been
approved.
Okay thank you Mr Chairman and
Mr chairman.
Nine one.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
serve on to do we need this bill
to review the constitution.
Well it depends on which Memé
into questions there's someone
by we we don't need of the bill
to review the constitution I'm
however I'll note that the last
time the constitution revision
commission was assemble was
nineteen ninety six it included
people like the former justice
of the Supreme Court Richard
Boston included Gary king
included no don Salazar it is
included adjusted Baca I don
Regan Ramon Sanchez Tom Udall it
was staffed by professor from
UNM Law School of the Michael
Browde so.
Our point is Senator that of
course we don't need the this to
review the constitution it makes
sense to me that we would have
some mechanism in our state law
our or our process and this is
only for one year this is a one
year Commission presented
preparation only for one year
and report to be due within the
year I think it's a broker that
that we have somebody who goes
to look at what other states do.
and take a hard look at what we
do in comparison and center
someone right now we don't have
anything like that so in
business I would never think of
any my businesses without
looking about what my
competitors do either doing
something better than I'm doing
I'm gonna steal that good idea
we're adopted on my own in in we
don't have any mechanism at all
the interim committee standing
committee commission nothing
nobody looks at our process in
our constitution for how we
govern ourselves in New Mexico
so is the automated no but
without this law it's not being
done.
Mister chairman Senator he's
been overstated Commission.
Mister chairman Senator so the
composition of the commission is
set forth in the bill it's much
like some of the things you
worked on Senator Steinborn is
required to be by artisan or
essentially that there can be no
more than one member more one
party than the other the
appointments are all specified
in the bill and then the
commission will elect its own a
chair person there are ex
officio members including a
representative of the Attorney
General or the Attorney General
and of the Supreme Court or non
voting members.
That's all I have Mister
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator Byrd and then
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator I I want to I guess I'm
not clear on the numbers the
that you're sharing with the.
Senator share so of the three
hundred.
Attempt to changes in the
hundred seventy seven changes
that have been made to the
constitution all of those
changes come out of a conference
like you're proposing or are
there other mechanisms.
Piecemeal mechanisms that change
the constitution.
Well certainly we're all
familiar with the piecemeal
amendments we we just pass on
this last election of questions
so to answer your question yes
the the.
Consistent way we've done this
is been by a piecemeal amendment
of the constitution I'm
suggestion that that the that's
a pretty cumbersome process and
as a result of that we have
provisions of our constitution I
don't think any of us would
disagree should be eliminated we
have pro language in our
constitution that of defines the
role of women in the limitations
of what women can and cannot do
as careers in profession that's
in our constitution today we do
we don't take the time to go
back and take out things that
are constitution seems like
we're always putting things into
our constitution.
I just want to clarify that
there's there's more than one
process it didn't all come out
of a commission like this so.
The other question is
Well I guess just want to
comment I do any time we start
to.
Play with the work change the
constitution I get very
concerned it is is this
commission set up to be a one
time event to to well anyway to
commission include the
constitution and clean it up
with this being on going
the commission or or what do you
envision.
This commission.
The center.
So Senator Mr chairman I maybe
have been cleared the
constitution provides for this
commission and I was not really
coming up with something that's
a new idea the kind of the
constitutional revision
commission exists in our state
constitution the the the
presence of the existence of the
methodology is already in our
constitution we really can't
yeah what what this bill does
would be to convene it was
actually be we think it's time
for you all to me and we're
we've got an appropriation this
bill to give you the funding to
do it for one year and get us a
report.
So this it would not be a
standing committee that would
the you're not proposing this
commissions start up this year
and go every year and we make
recommendations on so forth it's
it's basically one time shot get
this done and then we decide
when down the road we want to
giving the commission again.
That's correct senator we look
at there's a sunset provision of
the bill okay all right yeah I
just I.
I appreciate what you're trying
to do I I like cleaning things
up and having a those who
process but in time you start
messing with the convention I
mean that the constitution of
the state or certainly the
United States I get very.
Concerned about that so I'm
gonna listen the rest of the
base here but I have some
concerns and thank you senator.
Thank you senator Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I can
certainly agree that the
stalemate minster accent I don't
think that's sort of backroom
closed door active mission was
billed rooms of the right
approach now let's that was just
provided to us.
All these great legal mind
thinkers all.
Very few people at a gay lawyer
point out you know it's
interesting I'll say you're
constantly told to look up to
all the straight cisgender then
as your betters and they know
more than you in the law but I
think you know the days of
minority P. E..
Both started thanks.
J..
Taking a step back.
Faster I think it's a terrible
and I would move to table.
Thank you senator Candelaria
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised their serve want this
meet my personal believe the
constitution should be a living
document in changing chamber
times
and so I agree at we see what
happens in other states where
citizen legislature.
We know how much time it takes
and and so I I agree with you I
hope the commission comes out
with some good recommendations I
do advise don't put too many
lawyers are judges on their.
No they can review the
constitution because that is the
people's documents so with that
do have a motion.
Mr Chairman maybe I
misunderstood did Senator
Candelaria move to table.
Yes I move to table.
Senator Candelaria you're kind
of cutting out so I'm so I
apologize for that Senator we do
have a tabling motion
So it's not debatable path we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator March yes.
Senator Senator Campos is excuse
senator Candelaria.
You need Senator.
Yes yes yes yes Senator
Cappelletti yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales little.
Senator Gonzales no.
Senator Hemphill no.
Senator Hemphill no Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
No.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods.
Do that Senator once.
Yes.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez note.
Senator Rodriguez no and senator
Munoz.
Senator manual snow and Senator
Campos says just has joined.
Senator Campos know where
there's a table in motion on
this bill right now.
Senator Campos no so that is six
now and I yes.
Mr chairman I look forward to
yes.
Rodriguez a second.
Actually both sides.
Since your call the roll.
Mr chair Senator Burt no.
Senator no Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
Diamond no.
Senator Diamond.
No.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
There was no Senator Woods.
No Senator Woods now.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes
yes that is yes and I know.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members you.
Thank you Senator Kernan you're
next with the.
Senate bill two thirty six.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and this one might take a little
bit longer but let me go ahead
and and began so I'm seventy
years ago in the fall of
nineteen fifty New Mexico's
first community college opened
its doors it was called the
Carlsbad instructional center
was created by the current
sport Carlsbad school board with
very strong support from the
community.
Some years later in the nineteen
sixties across bad instructional
center positions itself under
the umbrella of New Mexico State
University.
And the banding together was
done in order to create a
synergy between the two
institutions and we hope was
that they would work better
together.
New Mexico State University were
also hopeful and that that the
Carlsbad branch would become a
feeder school for the main
campus in Los crucis.
For a number of compelling
reasons which will be mentioned
shortly the time has come for
Carlsbad range to become an
independent community college
once again and this is the
reason for Senate bill two
thirty six.
So I'm in New Mexico we have
seven independent community
colleges and among them are
Santa Fe community college
central New Mexico later
community college San Juan
college Clovis Community College
New Mexico Alliance.
These are public two year
institutions that receive state
higher education funding and
offer courses leading to
associate degrees and
certificates.
Every New Mexico community
college whether a branch of an
independent is credited crosspad
branch college is accredited by
the north central association of
colleges and schools in this
regional accreditation would
continue if this bill passes.
So instead of being governed by
the regents of New Mexico State
University at the new college
would be elected it would elect
trustees from within the
community that would at that
point govern that the college.
So it's important to point out
here that Senate bill two thirty
six would not be adding college
and I think that's really
important because if your call
and number two years ago we
determined at the state
legislature determined that we
would not add additional
community colleges are branch
colleges in the state and so I
think it's really important to
realize that yes New Mexico
State University crosspad
separate from the main campus
that it would simply continue as
a community college but it would
certainly not at an additional
school.
So in section one of the bill
NMSU Carlsbad would be made into
an independent community college
known as southeast New Mexico
college.
The governing board of southeast
New Mexico college would be
created in a regular local
election call for about the
current state of New Mexico
school board to be held in
November of this year.
In section two of the bill all
functions person property
contracts pertaining to the
cross that branch would be
transferred date southeast New
Mexico college with the
exception of the crosspad
environmental monitoring and
research center in that building
and its program in person would
remain in the NM issue system.
So in section three of the bill
there are two executive
effective dates in the bill.
First the effective date for
section one proficiency still
rob one of twenty twenty one.
And essentially on that date
southeast New Mexico college
with existing law.
The effective date of section
two provisions is April tenth at
ten twenty twenty two.
Essentially this would be the
closing date for the transfer
documents and property and the
overall handout.
Want to mention at this point
that New Mexico State University
is conducting a study directed
by their regents and we
understand that this is all
going but we do not feel that
it's our.
It possible for the study to
continue and for the progress of
this bill.
Very important that we pass this
bill in this session as you know
next year it's a thirty day
session and we believe that we
can make this time line in
section three of the bill.
So the question might be why
independence and why now and I'm
gonna let the experts that I
have with me today explain many
of the issues that have.
Basically come to light that we
believe now is the time for in
an issue crosspad to become an
independent college again I want
to also mention that beginning
in the fall of last year a task
force consisting of forty
current and former students
staff faculty and public school
educators business leaders
elected officials and others
formed a task force and they
have been meeting weekly during
this time to make sure that they
have covered all the bases with
regard to this effort to become
independent.
So in December New Mexico State
University Carlsbad faculty and
staff voting on whether or not
the branch college to become
independent seventy six percent
voted in favor of separating
from NMSC system.
Following that the Carlsbad
higher education task force
itself was probably members
voted unanimously for
independence we know that the
citizens of Carlsbad have spoken
loudly through a number of
letters and resolutions and that
there's great support from the
community to met in this
direction.
When I spoke with that chancer
are these at in in the fall we
had this conversation and you're
sure to just that if that is
what the community wished that
he would
he would support that in and
agree with the well that that
that community I don't live in
crosspad eleven hops but I do
Representative Carlsbad area and
I appreciated his support at
that time I hope that one for
you to count on that support.
So we believe that one of the
reasons for separation we know
that our community colleges
actually.
You create a better situation
for the students and if you look
at your body one out takes one
twelfth you can read a report
from LFC that independent
community colleges showed the
strongest performance among the
two year college secretary the
difference between the
independent community colleges
and branch campuses campuses
maybe the level of local
communities financial support
and participation.
So I'm.
The thing that I would like to
do at this point is go ahead and
call on my expert witnesses and
today I have with me former
representative John Heaton I
have Wendy Austin with the city
of Carlstadt and Craig Stevens
with the he is the co chair of
the task force that is been
working over the last few months
and I would like for them to
explain what some of the
concerns are in the recent white
that you're interested in moving
to.
It to independent said this
contract COVID John Keating and
now we have talked about keeping
the conversation as brief as
possible to get plenty of time
for members of the committee to
ask questions thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan
members of the committee senator
Munoz.
I'm gonna keep my comments brief
but I want to make a few points
as I could the communities only
interest is to be able to
provide more opportunities for
our students and be able to
control our own destiny the
Carlsbad campus and all campuses
are independently accredited by
the higher learning commission
and that has nothing to do with
animation you campuses and
corporate and courses are all
twelve totally independent from
one another across the state the
campus has its own money through
a three mill levy state
appropriations and tuition the
vast majority comes from the
city itself which is more than
seventy five percent of our
budget.
Going independent will have no
impact on the state budget
whether we are branch or an
independent college the formula
is exactly the same.
We will not add to the number of
colleges in the state Senator
Kernan said we will be
converting from a branch to an
independent college.
Lastly Mr chairman.
There are no services.
We pay for and then make.
You.
John Martin we're losing want to
turn off your camera industry
our voice we believe that we can
easily make the conversion and
with the amount of money we have
the reserves thank you Mr
chairman committee.
Mr chair this time I'd like
windy Austin to.
Talk with the committee a little
bit about the financial side of
this thank you.
Chairman and distinguished
committee members thank you for
allowing me to speak with you
today and thank you Senator
Kernan for caring this important
bill for the community of
Carlsbad my name is Wendy Austin
and I am the deputy city
administrator for the city of
Carlsbad I was born and raised
in Carlsbad and I know this
community very well I have a
very strong accounting and
analytical background and have
provided financial leadership
for more than twenty years
through collaboration with other
committee members I prepared a
detailed pro forma income
statement for an independent
college in Carlsbad I'm pleased
to report to you that an
independent college in Carlsbad
has very strong financials
therefore I respectfully asking
for your support of Senate bill
two thirty six.
Unity of Carlsbad deserves to
have a look have local control
of our community college for the
benefit of local businesses and
local students there is a very
strong support for our community
for this transition the city of
Carlsbad has a three mill levy
to support the college in
Carlsbad by statute
Representative colleges are
required to have a one mill levy
and independent colleges are
required to have a two mill levy
three mill levy can be allocated
for operational costs or capital
projects there is no restriction
on these funds not only does
because I have a three mill levy
Carlsbad has a very strong task
Tax base related to property tax
because that's three mill levy
generated twelve million dollars
of revenue in fiscal year
nineteen and fourteen million
dollars in revenue fiscal year
twenty and chairman knows this
is very significant.
Because of Carlsbad strong tax
base associated three two the
three mile levee there will be
no additional cost to the state.
Chairman yes we realize an
independent college one Kurdish
no costs related to systems and
potentially additional staff and
we've included these additional
costs in the pro forma income
statement we are six support
staff positions we added cost
for insurance and we also
include a two hundred thousand
dollar contingency for any
recognized cost and as I
previously mentioned the
financials are very strong.
In addition to this the local
college will no longer be
required to pay an issue over a
million dollars a year our
granting insurance services
frankly chairman yes there is
the potential for our local
college to not only add jobs but
saving costs.
Currently the city of Carlsbad
has an approximate thirty six
million dollar reserve that
would be included in the
transition.
And frankly this reserve might
be closer to forty five million
we're just not sure we can get
accounting from the main campus
that being said this reserve can
be used for legal services
related to the transition and to
purchase any additional needed
systems for the independent
college again there would be no
additional cost to the state nor
to the main campus R. thirty six
million dollar reserve that
belong to this community could
be used for the transition.
I would also like to add that
the branch college in Carlsbad
has no debt only thirty six
million dollar plus Reese are
deposited with the main campus.
Today you might hear the
leadership team of the main
campus promote consolidation and
centralization as an efficiency
and cost savings call and that
because of this it's in the best
interest across back to stay in
the system well this cost saving
methods we doesn't seem to
translate to cost savings for
our local college Andrew over
the past two fiscal years amount
that are grants college has paid
the main campus for branding and
share cost has increased more
than forty eight percent.
Frankly consolidations
centralization of shared
services seems to be in the best
best interests of the main
campus.
Consolidation centralization has
not only increased our cost has
eliminated local jobs in our
community and increase jobs at
the main campus.
And senator Munoz that should be
about the main campus providing
some shared services that we can
certainly provide for ourselves
this should be and what's the
best interest of the students
served by the college in our
community.
Finally businesses in our
community cannot get the support
from the main campus in
evaluating and developing
vocational programs we need to
find both are traditional and
nontraditional students with the
training they need to have a
meaningful employment we have a
very dynamic economy in Carlsbad
we're not training for these
jobs we hear story after story
about the main campus not
considering the needs of this
community this is not fair to
the taxpayers of Carlsbad and
this is especially not fair to
our local businesses and
students that we serve.
Chairman yes Carlsbad local
college should not be forced to
stay in a system that does not
but it benefit the community or
the students that it starts.
Please consider the success of
Clovis Community College and San
Juan community college when you
go today.
Chairman yes this isn't anything
against NMSU and then she was a
great college my daughter is
attending an issue and she will
be graduating from MSU and I'm
very proud of my daughter and
I'm very proud that should be
graduate from MSU this is only
about what's doing in the what's
doing doing what's best for our
local community and our local
students chairman you know thank
you for allowing me to speak
with you today.
So Mister chairman we just have
one additional Craig Stevens is
the co chair of the task force
and I think he has very short
comment thank you.
Chairman you does members of the
committee thank you for hearing
our bill today Senator Kernan
thank you.
Why do we want our independence
we want our independence for
more control and direction from
a locally elected board and a
locally elected president we can
offer more competitive salaries
for our faculty and staff are
money can be brought to Carlsbad
banks in our interest in our
local college for our local
college we can do all the things
New Mexico state does for us for
less money we can create an
outreach program decide for
college we can offer to greet
programs in New Mexico state and
other colleges we can all we can
more effectively partner with
local industries and businesses
or more degrees and
certifications and finally
stability for our college by not
being dependent on New Mexico
state and their leadership
changes.
We ask that you pass this bill
is our journey has already begun
are Canadian citizens of
Carlsbad and the surrounding
communities are committed to
making this dream a reality
there's absolutely no reason
with the passage of this bill
that New Mexico state's study
cannot be completed and reviewed
by both by New Mexico state and
our task force our hope is that
by becoming independent our
college get you like San Juan
college community college a
Clovis Community College and the
successes they have become since
they have become in the bid.
We want our college to grow grow
degrees certifications spoons
and become the hub for higher
education in eastern New Mexico
we feel that by being
independent we can achieve these
goals thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair and we're
right for public comment.
Thank you I need to do and go to
public comment.
Reminding everybody needs and
has official stopwatch for ten
minutes.
Members of the committee that
crack at opposition in support
units have and then at in
opposition.
Chandler I beat them.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm Dan
RBZ chairman and and chief
executive at the at the New
Mexico State University system
New Mexico state university's
preferences for NMSU Carlsbad to
remain within the emission
system however we know that the
community feels the opposite as
you've just heard still we have
an obligation to the students in
the state we should thoroughly
review all aspects of with the
best interest of the students
and the taxpayer.
What we are asking for you today
is not to pick a winner or loser
in this legislation I believe we
can all agree that decision of
this magnitude should be
thoroughly reviewed in state to
ensure that the students are the
winners in this process.
That you're standing the NMSU
board of regents passed a
resolution asking us to perform
a detailed due diligence study
to be completed in the next
couple of months by an
independent third party in the
study is under way as you have
heard the study will include
input from the call back
community from our Carlsbad
campus employees from other
members of the making a point
And this system administration
and the study will be as I
mentioned completed in the next
couple of months the by the end
of the semester although the
Carlsbad task force has
completed this review we believe
that not all of the facts have
been thoroughly considered and
there are number of of
misstatements I think have been
continue to be repeated publicly
I believe that we should not
rush with the proposed
legislation but instead to allow
up or review and study of the
entire process for independence
potential cost financial aid
accreditation and many other
aspects of this complex system
so that we can make an informed
decision.
Also the independent study will
be shared with the call that
community the higher at
department.
In issued a strong advocate that
it integrated system consisting
of a top quality main research
campus with an agricultural
experiment station and
cooperative extension services
throughout the state and the
branch community colleges is
stronger more effective
efficient and then when these
all eight units are all acting
in operating independent.
However if at the end of this
process the merits of the case
dictate independence is in the
best interest of the students
administrative system the
community college Bennett
citizens then we will abide by
these findings I would also like
to address some of the comments
that I've heard from the
community all that is very
fortunate that has a community
that can support three mill levy
as a result as you've heard
calls that has accumulated
approximately thirty six million
dollars in reserves access funds
which are located in our plant.
This funding is Carlsbad
Carlsbad suspend and not the
main campus on the programs and
other items as long as it does
in federal procedures it can be
spent on capital projects for
the approval of the governing
board the higher education
department in fact Carlsbad
president when the president
Bratton was invited presented an
initial proposal for campus
housing dining facilities for
Carlsbad at that time of the
termination was made
professionally contracted
feasibility study and pro forma
we're needed to meet the produce
your responsibilities for the
proposed projects but as a
result of the court the current
virus pandemic and the project
in the in the conditions of the
day the project was delayed with
concurrence the former president
Representative.
In contrast our other our other
community colleges are branches
in particular going in at
community college has been able
to first with the same exact
performance rules and and
processes and then they have
flourished going their system
from over five hundred students
to approximately eight thousand
students today twenty new
instructional programs have been
developed and seventy million
dollars of capital has been
expanded through these Prague
programs and projects again all
local control workforce needs
are local and can be addressed
locally under an integrated
system if there's a specific
need within the community for
work certificate or associate
degree the local management can
create those awards using the
mail every general fund or other
revenue sources to make that
happen the process for creating
new work for certificates and
associate degrees is owned by
the branches themselves they
start ending internal process
and then it goes to the higher
education department and
approved and then ultimately to
the higher learning commission
the main campus does not own
these processes but again it is
locally controlled by the
branches and the local school
boards there had been a concern
also about what happens to
federal financial aid for our
students the application and
approval process is held by
emissions system not the
individual branches and as a
result of campus the does go
independent we'll have to apply
for federal financial aid
receive approval process that in
the past is taking between six
months in two years I've been in
this position for approximately
two years I'm working hard to
address many of the concerns of
the community has raised mainly
issues that go back for decades
in my review I'm making and and
changing processes for the
betterment of the system to
support our students and to make
the system more effective and
efficient and to eliminate the
roadblocks that have been
discussed here today with there
are some and I'm committed to do
that all in concert with the
local community and will and
will encourage changes that meet
those local meat.
Chairman and members of the
committee we understand the
importance of local control and
respect that work done by the
proponents of the bill we only
ask that we delay this decisions
we can take that two months
allow up to for this independent
analysis to be completed and
then we can move forward with
the fast bait with a fact based
decision making process so for
that thank you and I were turned
over the remainder of our time
two of Dr can van Winkle.
Thank you thank you chancellor
Chairman manuals committee
members my name is Ken van
Winkle and I am the branch
executive director for NMSU I
work with the grants Alamogordo
Carlsbad campuses thank you very
much for the opportunity to
speak today
in my opinion this issue boils
down to a lack of communication
responsibility and respect that
runs both ways this is led to
inconsistent information
operational processes and
procedures especially related to
our branch campus campuses I
know this because I've
experienced it myself the end
result is a lack of trust this
must improve there's no question
our branch campuses provide
important access points into the
NMAA you system that deliver
real opportunity for traditional
students underserved students
and training for technical work
force it is in this context that
are branch campuses operate with
the economy that supports
independent accreditation the
branches have the best of both
worlds they have support of a
highly regarded research
institution and the recognition
and value that accompanies a
degree or certificate in that
system and yet they have the
flexibility to serve the needs
of the local community.
NMSU is New Mexico's land grant
institution dedicated to serving
students across our state
including Carlsbad.
Even more focused is our eight
twenty twenty five plan for the
system this is the blueprint for
moving forward and envisioning
the future with metrics and
targets I believe for Carlsbad
to become an independent
community college there must be
a plan.
So far no one has described the
academic or business model for
the new college what with the
focus of the college be how will
progress be measured is the
vision for example to be like
New Mexico junior college is it
to have a a focus maybe in
science and health care which
makes sense to me because of the
outstanding nursing program
or is it to be a career
technical institute to to to
train workforce will it be oil
gas energy sector focused in
other words what is the plan.
When the Austin did a great job
of presenting financial
information that supports a
local campus my concern is that
even in good financial shape an
institution can fail without a
vision for both academic and
business model for the long term
that's what's missing today if
indeed the campus is going to
keep all current faculty staff
and administration but it does
not have a clear academic and
business model in place why
rename the campus.
Our current administration is
addressing many issues related
to the branches in an attempt to
emphasize the value that our
branches bring to the system
decisions are being made to turn
NMAA you into a more robust
system leaving in place the
unique characteristics of each
campus and community.
Chairman manos committee members
progress will depend upon clear
communication responsibility and
respect that runs both ways if
we can address challenges with
this is our motive conversation
there is a way forward it's
better for all.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that completed the
opposition to this bill we will
now turn to support.
More get more Dale Dan way.
Good afternoon Germany ocean
members of the Senate finance
committee I will be very.
My name is Dale G. and when I'm
the mayor of the city of
Carlsbad strongly support this
bill.
The call call.
Our community reach the decision
to pursue independent of our
college after months of research
and study it was not an easy
decision was only made after
speaking with current and former
faculty staff and students local
business leaders and other
stakeholders in with other
colleges and universities we
also carefully evaluated
it real consideration.
When we met with Jennifer our
vision several months ago he
also pledged he would support.
Whatever decisions are made by
our community for students Dr
van Winkle is also coalition
which what should we reach we
know everyone of you is
committed to improving
educational opportunities in New
Mexico we're prepared to take
bold actions such as this which
we believe will allow us more
opportunity to try and work for
our work.
Well the students of the top
priority we also want to do what
is right for faculty and staff.
Their struggle for many years to
get Los crucis to approve an
annual basic concert.
In the meantime about thirty six
million dollars money that loan
to this college sitting in banks
outside Carlsbad collecting
interest that overwhelmingly
isn't being used for this campus
is a clear case where local
governments is the right thing
to do thank you for your
consideration.
Next we had Rebecca well that
that that chair New Mexico
Carlsbad.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca so and I have been an
employee at NMSU Carlsbad for
about six and a half years I was
a student in the masters program
at NMSU so I want to iterate
that my aunt that NMSU is a
great university I have no
negative feelings about my
education my feelings for NMSU
Carlsbad going independent are
very strong prior to NMSU
Carlsbad I worked for eight
years at an independent college
in northern New Mexico and when
I came to NMSU Carlsbad I was
astounded at the many obstacles
we faced on a daily basis as an
independent college we will have
so much opportunity for our
students and staff some of the
difficulties we encounter at
NMSU Carlsbad including posting
our positions reclassifying our
current positions only to be
told that the position we are
requesting is for the dynamic
campus only or when the main
campus is on a hiring freeze and
they put a freeze on our hiring
as well even though we have the
money to cover our positions we
have to provide extreme
justification to spend our own
money consistently we struggle
to get our vendor set up in a
complex system that we are not
privy to a system that only main
campus employees are able to
help our vendors with
additionally some of our bills
have not been paid timely which
makes NMAA Carlsbad look poorly
I agree that there are some
benefits of being part of a
system but at this point in time
the benefits of going
independent outweigh those of
staying with NMAA you the issues
we face only increase the firing
me to fight for our independence
having the ability to make our
own decisions spend our own
money as we see fit higher own
faculty and staff without the
red tape pay our own bills and
streamline courses to pay our
communities needs are just a few
advantages we will have as an
independent college Mr chair and
members of the committee I urge
you to support Senate bill two
thirty six so we can build a
brighter future for our students
employees and community.
E. thank you for allowing me to
speak today.
Next we have Dr mark Brickell.
R. can you hear me.
Yes thank you a gentleman one US
and committee members thank you
for allowing me to speak in
support of bill two thirty six
I'm doctor mark buckles I speak
principally to you as a resident
of Eddy County and the tax payer
but I'm also a twenty five year
employee faculty and
administration and NMSU Carlsbad
and graduate school on this of
NMSU Los crucis from my
perspective the bill is not
about the complexity of the
process used for the powerful
intelligence of the Los crucis
campus which is impressive no
doubt NMSU will manage and
thrive without curls.
The issue is whether or not
those process season
intelligence's survey
aspirations and the will of the
Carlsbad community in regard to
its college it's important to
acknowledge it independence for
the college is a community
project hundreds of people
without any exaggeration have
contributed to this initiative
or voiced support hundreds of
people.
We aim to have the lost drive
bubbles and next we have J. dank
and president and CEO of the N.
B. bank.
Getting the Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Jake
Jake into president CEO CNB bank
here in Carlsbad a local
community involved in the local
community and and serve on the
committee
what this all boils down to is
poor management MSU is a great
college make no mistake but it's
simply poor management of our
local campus and quite frankly
we can do better as a
businessman learning about the
lack of internet service the
bookstore was closed down last
year teachers struggled with
notebook students struggle
that's just on unbelievable
they've had thirty six million
dollars of our money and surplus
which hadn't been spent locally
I think there's a fire outside
also we can't get answers on how
the interest is being spent on
the thirty six million it simply
boils down to poor management we
can do better locally thank you
for listening and we hope that
you'll support our bill thank
you.
Next we have doctor John
Grattan.
Thank you R. chairman you always
member of the committee it's
good to see you all again it's
been a while I am John grant
and past president of NMSU
Carlsbad I served as president
and right after years until I
reached my age of retirement in
July first of two thousand
twenty.
And opposition I proudly held
them and and loved short serving
in that capacity.
The the the people spoke in
favor of bills that within a
very good job I don't repeat
those those things I think my
main concern with with an issue
with some of these happen is
that the removal of the campus
president position in Carlsbad
and other campuses as definitely
home hamstrung the community
college in terms of serving the
mission it is imperative that
the campus president he she
whomever that might be has to
interact with the community that
person is the face of the
community college that is a
person's gonna serve on the
board interact with the the
advisory committee interact with
the community be trusted by the
community that's a person that
they the committee goes to if
they want things to happen and
that person's got to listen so
in removing this position in
Carlsbad that person is gone and
and now I I know there Dr Ben
week those and lost true in Los
crucis you can't serve Carlsbad
capacity I've talked about
sitting in Los crucis nobody can
do that property if you're not
in that community it's
imperative that the campus
present be part of the community
wherever the campus is and is
recognized as part of the
community so this action by a
cart by an issue yes definitely
handicapped to campus in terms
of serving as mission and for
that reason Mr chairman I
support and I hope you will
stand with me in passing Senate
bill two thirty six thank you
Sir.
We have Jerry banning.
We.
Please proceed.
Is there someone there.
At my apologies that medical
cannabis in the Canadian
judges we that we've read the.
Mr Chairman I'm here now
apologize that's not a problem
please banning it got one minute
thank you a gentleman many
others members of the committee
my name is Gerry fanning on the
public and government affairs
director for Eddy County Eddy
County believes the Senate bill
two thirty six will allow the
easy transition of New Mexico
college NMSU to the southeast
New Mexico college by doing this
it'll provide the citizens of
southeast New Mexico secure
region focused educational
opportunity and also provide a
great asset to the city of
Carlsbad and Eddy county for
these reasons and those
mentioned previously we ask for
your support and passage of
Senate bill two thirty six thank
you very much.
Thank you very much chair
members of the committee that
include public comment.
Thank you very much really
appreciate that we're going now
to the questions from the
committee.
And what I see are several hands
they're raised on first go to
Centers Siah Correa Hemphill and
then on from there Senator
Hemphill please.
Mr Chairman was it my turn to
speak.
I just stepped in and from there
what I'm doing is I'm a
going from the bottom up so I
went ahead and went to you but
I'll go ahead and work on those
adjustments in a minute please
proceed.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Senator Kernan can you
please explain why Carlsbad
isn't able to wait two months
for the study to be completed
the study that New Mexico State
University is paying for by an
independent third party thank
you Mr chairman yes thank you Mr
chairman and I can't answer that
and first of all we are in
session right now in the two
months we will not be and that's
why it's critical right now to
go ahead and pass this bill
while the study is under way it
wouldn't have an impact at.
On our decision going forward
the study we certainly want to
hear at I do want to mention
that the study was undertaken by
the regents of New Mexico State
University and and frankly they
did not reach out to the
prospect campus prior to
nineteen who would do that study
so in our view that is really
their study our New Mexico cross
State University crosspad they
have been studying this issue
since the fall of last year they
do have a plan in place that
plan has been submitted to the
higher education department we
welcome the study that we did
not want to hold at this
legislation because at it in two
months we will be here to be
able to to address the issue so
that administration.
Senator Kernan mac COVID.
yes the other.
Senator Hemphill we're well
aware of the time it takes to go
through the process we need to
go through if you look at the
bill there's an imprint there's
a implementation date of July
first and a consummation day
that is April tenth of twenty
twenty two we recognize fully
that to get through
accreditation it's going to take
us somewhere in the neighborhood
four months after the bill is is
in effect and four to six months
we also recognize that our
nursing program will also take
that month of time and then the
the other condition that is a
long.
In Poland the tat is the is the
the getting the title for grants
and loans put in place from the
federal government I don't think
a college can operate without
that being in place and we
believe that will take fully
around nine months to complete
so we are well aware of some of
the long term time frames and on
top of that we cannot elect a
board until November bye bye by
statute we cannot have a board
election until November so we
have A. L. enter the the states
and we hope that New Mexico
state will be cooperative with
us in continuing to support our
activities we really think that
the first time we will be able
to really convert bring into
class and is in the fall twenty
twenty two I hope that helps.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much more along
one moving up the.
letter there for the questions
are coming forward next I'm
going to Senator Diamond Senator
Diamond please.
Mr chairman and and thank you
Senator Kernan I want to begin
by reminding you that I am a
proud Aggie and I am very
supportive of the recently to
ship changes that we see in our
New Mexico state and really
because of that that's why I am
still interested in maybe a
little bit concerned about this
bill I believe that I mentioned
heard one of your expert
witnesses mentioned that this
has been done before in the past
what which branches have ever
broken away which other
community colleges has broken
away in the past and done this
Senator so thank you Mr chairman
thank you for the question and
so one San Juan community
college west at one time the
branch of New Mexico State
University and I think that that
we all recognize what a great
job same what college does
because they address the needs
of their local community another
one would be Clovis Community
College and at one time they
were part of the eastern system
and if
any of my experts would like to
to weigh in on that I would be
happy to to give to them.
Those are the two that that that
we know what's okay there was
also a statement may thank you
Mr chairman again there is also
a statement made the probably
the most concerning and when I
research kind of doing my
homework on this bill do I
understand that there is not an
on site president for the
college located in Carlsbad now
and and if not if so could you
please describe what the
leadership currently looks like.
So thank you Mr chair and
Senator Diamond
that decision was removed and
that that really is what
triggered the beginning of this
discussion last fall I received
a call from the chancellor
informing me that they were
going to.
Remove the presidents are at
least not re hard president in
Carlsbad after Dr grant retired
and if the other branches so
they have removed at that
position and
Mr van Winkle is the person on
the main campus now service all
three all of the branches from
that position so you're correct
and and I think that really is
what kind of trigger this this
whole issue because I believe
that each community or at least
for crosspad I'm speaking for
them they really believe that
they need to have leadership
representing the community so
yes you're correct there is no
precedent and crosspad at this
point.
Thank you senator and and Mr
chairman and how long ago was
that decision made how long have
you guys been without a
president in Carlsbad.
Mr chairman and I need to yield
to.
A John heat on that I believe
when.
Dr grant retired I believe it
was last summer and then the
call I received from the
chancellor was in the fall and
so that's when that transition
took place not just across that
that for the other branches as
well so each one now they report
to then we go Mr van Winkle it
at the main campus so that since
responsibility now and that no
no precedence at each of the
branches.
And that's correct we have not
had a president since July first
when.
President Bratton retired and
the other extraordinary thing
about this is we were never ever
consulted as a community or
campus that the president was
not going to be replaced in fact
we earnestly thought that there
was a search going on and then
that turned out to be false.
I I do want to clarify there are
no intentions of filling that
position before we move on
correct so I'm Mr chairman and
senator I received a copy of the
letter and it appears that that
after this effort by Carlsbad
that now the main campus they're
not calling it a president but I
believe they are circling back
around and I I think in an
effort to to change the minds of
the community they're not naming
a president I'm not quite sure I
don't recall what they're
calling it but I think they
recognize that that was probably
not a very good based on their
part I don't remember it's not a
president but they are naming
someone just maybe a lead person
that that that in my view that's
not that's not going to be
sufficient and I think that the
point I want to make right now
sometimes relationships get to
the point where there is no
turning back and no I'm not a
member of the community there
are certainly represent the
community from the very
beginning I told the chancellor
that I'm going to support the
decision of the community and I
think you've heard today very
clearly that this community is
ready to go when the pandemic
and I want to also say that that
I I believe that the chancellor
has done it has.
I have
no ill will against the
chancellor this is not a problem
that he created this is a
problem that has been ongoing
for many years and and I'm sorry
that that he's having to deal
with this because this is really
something that that is not new
and up and and I appreciate the
fact that he's making an effort
but I just believe that that the
time has come I don't think this
relaxed relationship can be
amended to the point to the
satisfaction of this community
that they will not be president
I'm not quite sure what they're
going to call it that they
circle back around and I think
recognize that that you do need
someone in in the community to
to report.
Thank you.
Senator Diamond please proceed.
It is almost like a divorce
isn't Senator and pistol Pete's
just kind of hang on there well
we probably discusses I have one
simple question for you only
because you've come before us
and finance is there
appropriation to this bill.
Mr chair there is absolutely no
cost to the state with regard to
this move to independence at
this community have an
independent college years ago in
fact it was the first
independent college community
college in the state I think
that that they certainly with
the three mill levy in place
they have proven that they have
the resources to continue as an
independent college and
certainly with the thirty six
million dollars that sitting in
a reserve fund that invests two
main campuses said is their
money and said that today I
believe they're in good standing
and certainly can can support
their effort as an independent
college so no cost to the state
at all.
Senator Kernan and if I may also
Senator Diamond they the the
formula that the state has for
funding requests colleges and
independent community colleges
is exactly the same so whether
we're independent or branch
there is no change in how that
formula operates.
Thank you both I appreciate your
time thank you you Mr chairman
thank you very much Senator
Diamond the next we're going to
go and go to Senator Woods yes
hand up and then after that
etcetera come then ID and
Senator share Senator Woods are
do you have questions.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
I can please please.
thank you very much I front
there's a very interesting
discussion I have.
Of several community colleges
and and small colleges in my
district as you know.
And would you would Carlsbad
came to me and tell me their
story and assured me that they
could stand on their own.
I would just Representative but
it to that so.
This is the part of the state
that there are four issues a lot
of money everybody.
In order to recognize the
element and wish them luck in
our I will vote for this bill
and thank you Mr chair I was
afraid that I wouldn't get to
talk to you at all today so they
were to do it thank you Sir what
what thank you very much Senator
Woods it's always great to our
visit with you we're moving
along going to senator
Candelaria and then Senator
share it was a lie thank you Mr
chairman
senator Senator Kernan.
I walked in the door my husband
was hearing this debate needs
that and I just want to me to
say Hey and I miss you it's not
you it's us
Because he is that sounds like a
bad break up and talking about
the divorce but you know the the
the the reason I I'm gonna
support your bill.
and insert it strongly because I
think you're community down
there has demonstrated the sort
of financial investment at a
local level to justify this sort
of independence
you know my understanding under
our current statutes is
basically branch campuses they
can get away with imposing about
one mill in property tax but as
a branch campus you of all
decided to tax yourselves three
mill rate so if there is any
question about this community's
commitment to supporting their
own resources that's what very
loudly to me because I will say
Senator Kernan as you remember
being on this committee the
proliferation of higher ed
infrastructure is always
concerning to me but I do think
we have to judge things on a one
by one you know case by case
fair basis and that enough for
me is reason alone to support
the bill I did want to ask you
Senator Kernan a quick question
because it was mentioned during
the various points of public
comment
with respect to the reserves
that are held by NMAA you for
the branch campus do those do
those funds earn interest or any
return and if so are those
interesting returns return to
the account of the branch campus
or does it go to the main
campus.
Mr chair out I would like to ask
Wendy Austin to responded that
she she has the numbers on there
thank you please.
Thank you chairman yes and
senator yes it any interest
earned on our reserve should
come back to this community what
the transfer up to at the
reserve funding the interesting
aren't right now is again
something that we're having a
hard time getting in accounting
from the from the main campus so
we we actually don't know how
much interest we've we've
learned but that interest would
definitely come back to this
community with the transfer.
Without the transfer though does
that interest in returns on
reserves of that just go and
flow up to the main campus so
from what sorry chairman Yeltsin
Senator from my understanding
the interest is but.
Into a plant and equipment Fund
that any of the campuses
including the main campus can
utilize so it's very ambiguous
and we're having a hard time
understanding why our interest
isn't accounted for separately.
Well maybe Mr chairman I I was
looking for where the money
explanation as and I think that
may be it.
It's not mine and belong to the
agency you launch the people
Carlsbad let them do what they
want with it I am proud as
possible thank you thank you
very much senator Candelaria we
long to Senator share.
Senator sure please thank you Mr
chair and senator so yes San
Juan college I may have been the
first of of.
Community college to break with
New Mexico state and I to Maggie
of the San Juan college is it is
really really focused our
efforts on on the right things
for the community now
and and I think that's been a
huge value to us San Juan
college focuses on the
industries that are in in San
Juan County and they also have
these of relationships with
other places for example
highlands
you so that you can you can
actually receive a degree from
highlands and I think for five
other of colleges or
universities in so I think
there's a great value in the
flexibility that happens there
and I just wanted to lend my
support to that thank you Mr
thank you very much Senator
share Senator Williams had to
step away for a moment but I'm
gonna see if he's available for
questions if not then I have
some Senator stand for you also
thank you thank you Senator
Steinborn if you would please
let me just check.
Senator Williams is on Senator
Williams.
Okay is not on now I'm going
into Senator Steinborn etcetera
etcetera thank you Mr chairman
and senator current
some not sure if I have any
questions that I may and I
welcome your comments but you
know I'm sure I have no doubt at
the end of the day what you want
is what's in the best interest
of the students and the
community.
And and I can definitely
understand the appeal of.
You know what you know what the
community wants to do and.
Why they want to do it.
In the spirit of doing what's
best for the students however.
And the community as well I
think it's super important that
we get this right.
That's where my concerns are as
I hear the fact pattern here of
this decision and where things
are long and as you say we're in
a session we need to get it done
and that probably is is a good a
data point this session of why
we would benefit from a full
time legislature because you
know we do have these deadlines
and yet we have a feasibility
study that's two months away
from being done.
And and as I read the F. I. R.
Mister chairman Senator there
are big implications here to the
community and to the students
one of which is the financial
absorption of the
responsibilities that NMAA you
currently pay for the college
and as I read the FY are almost
four point I believe around four
point eight million dollars
right now of the ministrations
support another supporter paid
for by an immense you.
So
so that's one one costs it's
going to be able to work but I'm
a little concerned about.
I'm also concerned about kind of
a truth in advertising issue a
little bit for your citizens of
Carlsbad.
And knowing that they passed a
mill levy was that language of
what they approved as a branch
campus it was as a branch of
NMSU and now.
Senator Kernan Mr Chairman.
First Mr chair and senator let
me just went back to the study
and that certainly that steady
can continue as is if this bill
passes and and the community can
continue to do the work that
they're doing to prepare and I
believe that was mentioned by
John Heaton with regard to that
the timeline that we feel
comfortable with that and
that actually are windy Austin
has done a pro forma she
mentioned that earlier I don't
know if you you heard that
presentation but very clearly
the community has done the
financial impact study that
their own to determine that they
are capable to support at the
cost of this and and a college
I'm so in the other thing that
concerns me and I don't know
that it was mentioned that just
want to make sure that everyone
realizes that the company that
was charged with doing the study
there is a connection between
that company and that the main
campus with regard to the
chancellor in we want an
independent study and we're not
quite sure that that that's a
direction of the study I think
it's more about what is good for
you and your for New Mexico
State University nine someone to
clear that up before going on.
And responding with regard to to
your question so is there
anything else I can answer for
you at this point thank you that
was the the.
Create appreciate that
you know well I think you kind
of answered the questions I'm
not sure the concern is you know
my concerns are are familiar
right by it
Let me ask you this Mr chair
Senator when you talk about the
community wants that the
community wants to right now
we're you know we're we're kind
of at odds on this all tech
proposal and what's good for New
Mexico and I know often times we
hear those words the community
once that referencing how a few
political leaders want to and I
would just like to know what
it's getting dark money I'll try
to turn the light on their Mr
chairman.
Our film industry friends would
not be impressed but
So I just what how how can you
quantify the support of the
community for this proposal what
what does that do.
I am glad you asked that
question and so I'm going to
turn now to either John he'd nor
to Wendy because they have.
They have tracked that very
carefully and I think they will
be able to report to you exactly
what that support looks like so
I don't know Mr Heaton or at
miss Austin which one of you
want to respond.
I think India's the current when
he has the correct number all
right thank you Mr chair go
ahead Wendy.
Sorry.
Welcome you here chairman and
senator thank you for the
question the community has
significant support we have hand
written an online petition that
is almost up to a thousand
signatures that continues to
grow daily and we also have over
thirty three letters of support
including resolutions from the
city of Carlsbad department of
development and other
organizations and their
significant support we we hear
it day in and day out and I
would be more than happy to
email you those support letters
in the petition.
Well that's good to hear and yet
having said that the devil's in
the details right as as we say
and you know signing a petition
it sounds good of course it
sounds good on a petition but
you have those bottom line
implications question we've
heard certain testimony Mr
chairman and and senator about
there not being a plan is there
a business plan of what the
college would do and what it
strategic mission one day
would be to find later yes Mr
chair Senator I know that to let
John he can talk about the plan
that has been submitted add to
the higher end at department and
also I would like for at Wendy
Austin to again if we need to go
through what she has done in
detail with regard to the
financial.
Thank you Mr to start first.
Mr chairman senator Senator
Steinborn we have submitted a
business plan that is.
Very detailed to the higher
education department and it also
has the financial details
included with that.
So.
When the.
Yes
yes thank you Senator chairman
we did prepare a very detailed
pro forma financial statement
that I would also be more happy
to to email to you and again
Carlsbad has a very strong local
tax base we're in fiscal year
nineteen we collected twelve
million dollars locally and in
fiscal year twenty fourteen
million dollars locally year
after year we have basically a
net income of seven million
dollars going into reserve eight
million dollars in fiscal year
twenty so the financials are
very strong
again in within our pro forma we
added positions for the shared
services that the main campuses
providing to us we had it what
property liability insurance and
we also have the two hundred
thousand dollar your contingency
for any sort of costs that we
we might have missed but on top
of that we get back of million
dollars plus from the main
campus because we will no longer
be paying them a branding fee
and for shared services I hope
that answers your question.
It it does in parts in it and I
sounds like you all done a lot
of good work to to plan out what
this future might look like I
would submit though you might
not be paying the million but it
sounds like we're gonna have to
make up the difference of the
other four million of the
services in the financial kind
of support that that NMSU
central provide so.
Are you coming to hatter you
gonna you having to make up some
ground there I'm I have a
question for the NMSU chancellor
because we heard about
The issue of the president and
it's obvious that that really
was upsetting to the community
and as thank Senator Kernan said
that was kind of a triggering
moments
The chancellor RBC started a
page on the spot but are you.
Are you planning or.
Are you open to hiring a
present and are someone along
those lines for prospect.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator Steinborn you just you
know very shortly after that
decision was made and and
primarily it was made on the on
the grounds that got three
branch campuses whose
enrollment.
last year was one third of what
it was ten years ago in other
words enrollment had dropped
sixty six percent across our
three branch campuses and that
was clearly alarming Committee
those three campuses together
are half of the size of the ACC
which was the reason that if it
made sense to consolidate the
governance of those three
campuses in that on based on
that financial condition now
that said once the community was
a spoke and they were very angry
that that they did not have a
champion I made it very clear to
the community and this was back
literally last fall that if you
want to have a chief executive
on your campus and you have the
money to pay for them absolutely
there is no there's no reason
why a champion offered local
community cannot be held in in
that regard I've made a
commitment that yes absolutely
you can you have that person and
in fact if you want to call them
a president you can do so I
think it you know as a as a
practical matter branch campuses
were established many years ago
under statute they were all
called directors now we have we
call them all presidents in some
cases I think the UNM branches
are called cancer but the title
doesn't matter I think it was
more of a of a of a concern
about how do you continue to
have the kind of overhead that
that those those in positions
require when in fact of the
enrollment is so so low
obviously we've got to do a lot
of things differently and that
was what was behind rationale
thank you for the economy into
that question yes thank you for
that.
And finally I just want to make
I won't belabor it any more I
want to point out something Mr
chair I think kind of
substantive with the bill that I
was current educational to me on
another bill I work on I was
proposing to change that the
name of the department similar
what we're proposing here which
is that our constitution
actually prohibits.
Prohibits changing what they
call.
Bear with one moment.
Well it's amended by reference
is basically the shorthand for
what it's refer to which means
that you can not in a bill like
that state everywhere something
appears in law usual change to
that and if I work at in what we
do here is if you go to.
Our page.
Folks we go to the end of the
bill.
On page three line nine that's
exactly what we do here all
references in lot of New Mexico
State University shopping
construed references to this
college that is kind of a
serious issue in the drafting of
this and I think intent on what
it's in the constitution is so
that you can have transparency
on everywhere we were changing
something implications of that
so I'll point that out to you
Senator Kernan
because that's exactly what
Legislative Council.
Going to stop me in my tracks on
the bill that I did that I was
hoping would have been about
five pages and then said it
became a two hundred and fifty
page bill and you know and of
course that the size and
concerns people but that's the
reality of it I'll just because
Mr chairman by saying I I I
totally appreciate where this is
coming from and then it may be
beneficial I just think that the
it's not quite ready for prime
time as far as the evaluation of
the study and looking at the
financials having higher
education department involved
and so for that I I can't
support the bill at this time
but I'm open to the idea down
the road thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much it is time
we really appreciate the insight
programs westerns are bringing
up the enabling legislation of
course whenever we start with
name changes in essence but that
definitely has to happen as we
go I go across our our statutes
I'm gonna be going out to
senator Byrd you are back in
Senator Hemphill Senator Burt
please thank you Mr chairman and
and to.
You know as a proud Aggie this
is a difficult go for me
especially having one of the
other branches in my backyard in
Alamogordo and and I appreciate
chancellor our our visa and and
can van Winkle can was our.
There's no word our branch
a before this new position.
Yeah and and and I am like
so many people have talked this
is not really the problem this
is an ongoing problem that just
developed over many many years
depending on who was sitting in
the seat either increases or the
one in in Alamogordo for us and
I assume for the person in the
seat in in Carlsbad.
So the bottom line is.
I have over the years I know
John Heaton I know people in
Carlsbad I have great respect
for them.
They have weather the storms the
oil and gas industry they've
done some real creative economic
development to process is down
there
Even though it's not my district
he I keep in touch with the
folks in Carlsbad impressed with
the knowledge of people who who
don't make these decisions
lightly you could tell from from
is Austin's evaluation that she
has done her homework this is a
in.
There's been a lot of thought
into this and so I think if this
is what the people of Carlsbad
once again I think it is only
fair that the people Carlsbad
should get what they want
knowing full well that they also
take on the responsibility of
their actions and and what may
happen from there
is will also have to be in the
decision making process so I'm
going to support this bill but
it is very difficult for me
because I'm again I'm I'm.
Thank you I'm gonna go toe to
toe with Mark Moores any day of
the week I actually have been
that the.
I don't care how big he is I'll
I'll always stand up for New
Mexico state point being though
that
things are changing.
Thanks change all the time
there's an evolution going on
this is the will of the people
of across bad and I think that
we have to respect that and so
I'm gonna have to respect that
as well again it certainly no
reflection on current leadership
over there this is a build up of
of many years in the past and so
with that Mr Chairman I don't
have a question but I just
wanted to make that comment in
in I appreciate everybody's come
into this is been a very good to
Beijing and operations going
forth here with this a very
difficult decision thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Senator Burt with the remarks in
pursuits are not separated by
heartstrings budget we're gonna
have to make this move forward
with a long Senator have built.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you again Senator for bringing
this bill forward I appreciate
this conversation I was just
wondering if there is a reason
why this is being done through
legislation is this something
that could be accomplished
without the bill.
So thank you for the question Mr
chair and senator and that has
been mentioned before I think
the community feels that this is
the correct direction to go but
certainly at the end of the day
I think that they would do a
move in another direction if
necessary they don't want to
have to do that that I agree
with you that that potentially
it could that we just feel like
this is the better way to
our and to bring this before the
legislature and and let this
decision be made.
In in going forward that's
that's what we're going to get.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator for that answer.
Mister chair Mister chairman
Senator Kernan if I may Senator
Hemphill if you'll notice in the
bill
major part of that bill is the
movie and allocations of axe
assets requirements a quick
moment and records and all of
that sort of thing are really
critical in the process and I
think getting that in law makes
it very clear that there are no
exceptions to that that there's
there should be no battle
between ourselves and New Mexico
state we have I have great
respect for New Mexico state
there are great research
institution but I I think that
it is time for and we we would
expect to continue to interact
with them and a informative way
and I hope they will accept us
being able to do that but I
think that having this in in
legislation I think really makes
the process go much more
smoothly thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for that answer I appreciate
that response.
Thank you all very much I do
have a few questions and I'm
still waiting based on we also
does Senator I'm I'm not okay
thank you very much anyone else
what is your next.
Thank you Mr chairman you know
it I've seen this happen before
because Gallup we tried it and
the problem is you send all your
money to university and then
never comes back in and then
they never give you they never
listened to the community in the
community's needs.
They transfer what they want
they do what they want it's my
understanding that they cut jobs
in lost in Carlsbad in the avid
those FTEs into Los crucis.
they limited the president's
position but I think they did
that all over and restructure.
There's no accounting of the
funds
I think is is our provost on is
he still on.
Dr yes you are you still there.
I am.
Yeah can you tell us what what
I'm how much of Carlsbad fund
you have in your bank account.
Yes introducing us to Mr
chairman and senator mark I mean
it was I think there's roughly
thirty six million dollars in a
plant fund according to the
state requirements is typically
invested in.
Government security.
All in generates on the order of
a two and a half million dollars
of interest it's also in the
same on
that has not been spent all of.
Is available to Carlsbad to use
for whatever purposes they like.
So how much does Carlsbad
sitting you on an annual basis
ten AM issue.
Mr chairman I think all one on
annual basis I think there is a
five percent.
Tax that we collect for all
shared services and that roughly
is about seven hundred I think
seven hundred and in a few
dollars seven or twelve thousand
I think is what it is overall in
terms of a the the annual so
allocation come back to the main
campus for services rendered
those are shared services I
think to create those
conversely of those who knows
costs would go up as.
A significant.
So how much did they send you an
e-mail money to.
We get no mail not at all it's
all COVID.
Senator Kernan might let me ask
you how much money it comes
directly out of the community to
NMSU for NMSU Carlsbad or that
is transferred on an annual
basis to two point the machine.
Our illustrious Wendy Austin to
respond to that.
So on a yearly basis the amount
of money to spend that's being
sent to NMSU from our local
taxes in fiscal year nineteen
was twelve million point two and
fiscal year twenty was fourteen
million dollars in addition to
this they do in fiscal year
twenty one they budgeted almost
a million dollars nine hundred
thousand and we get additional
cost for sure services that
drive you can use it was
referring to so this year's
budget is almost a million
dollars in shares Services.
So Dr recent out of the last two
years that twenty six million
that's been sent directly to NM
issue.
And your overhead costs were one
million.
What other things have you done
for the university so we get and
up in the situation that we are
today the imagine this is not
the first time that we've heard
this and it's something lead up
to this.
A new issue is not responsive in
some way shape or form
And so do you know why this what
what led up to this.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure I
understand the question of what
I think I on.
It is thank you one day that
they wanted to leave NMAA you
something let him in that
direction.
And it was led by into mischief
I don't I don't know the time
frame if you were there when
they started or not but
something led them to to want to
depart for settlement issue
whether it's lack of services
lack of communication.
something let him in this
direction and what was the start
conversation that led.
Started this.
Or chairman I I think the answer
to your question is that there
there has been no number of
attempts to go independent or at
least discussions to go
independent all over many years
I have not had any of those kind
of conversations until obviously
this particular case so I'm not
aware of of what precipitated
the previous.
And motivations to try to go
independent
but I do know that many of the
issues that have been brought up
for systemic issues that in some
cases I think need serious
attention on the part of the
main campus things like god
human resources and and and some
of our financial processes and
structures they are essentially
at things that need to be fixed
and we're working on those at
the main campus and for the
other branches and so that's all
part of a public over hold we're
are presently under way you know
in in the context of a both the
budget reductions and digests
changing the trajectory of what
we're going to set targets and
be accountable for the outcomes
that we're talking about so it's
all part of a system perspective
that we that we've taken on this
it's not unique to Carlsbad in
Carlsbad resources again if not
unspent by the main campus is
not about the money this is
about processes and and in
integration that I think needs
to be improved and we take
responsibility over the years or
maybe not having been in
strategic partner with Carlsbad
that is something we are on one
districts.
You haven't spent their
resources but you all cut their
resources Senator Kernan what
led to to you introducing this
legislation center eliminate
positions at the university and
you had additional FTEs to call
I'm sorry a doctor resource
center kind what led led us to
the situation.
So Mister chair and I believe
the initial trigger as was
mentioned earlier was the
determination not to fill the
position of president and then
once the task force learned of
that decision which quite
frankly was several weeks after
I learned of it
thank you again to do their
due diligence in trying to
determine if now's the time to
go independent and as I
mentioned before the task force
which is made up of over forty
members of the community have
been meeting on a weekly basis
and they have done their due
diligence I have put together a
plan many of the issues were
raised during public testimony
from I cannot remember her name
that I thought she did a great
job I think her name is showing
and she talked about specific
issues that the Carlsbad I'm in
a mess here has had just in
operations with regard to the
main campus so again as a chance
to mention this is been going on
for many years but I believe
that was the fact that it would
be no president line item that
they felt like
that was sent to me that was a
trigger but maybe Mr he would.
Like to weigh in on that because
at some and member of the
community I think you could
share maybe there P. I was not
part yes folks thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Maybe in my on.
Am I on mute.
Mister chairman Senator Mineros.
Did I can go back as far as
thirty years ago.
And and that thirty year period
we have had ten different
chancellors so when you no
reflection on the current
challenge answer by the way but
in that thirty year period the
average is a new administration
every three years and so the
consequence of that is that.
On.
The sisters made to us by an
administration and the new
one coming in those promises are
forgot and it new policies are
put in place and we're trying to
you know constantly deal with
the change that's being
implemented for us.
Specifically I can tell you as
an example with the nursing
program in our at our Google
page which was by the way
designated performance on the on
the net collects exam.
And our our we are working at
fifty percent of the
instructional staff and.
Carlsbad has a higher cost of
living then this Los crucis and
yet we have not been able to
raise the offerings for.
A nursing instruction instructor
to be able to live and and eat.
They basic basics.
The provisions of life
they're unable to meet it
frankly with the salary and so
it's been very difficult for us
for not only we we we're short
for instructional nurses and we
have been unable to offer an
additional amount of money for
them to entice them to our
community and I think those of
you that live in smaller rural
communities I understand how
difficult it is in the first
place and then when you're under
paying you're you're certainly
not going to be able to track
anybody and it's very
frustrating to them and for
other positions that we have I
can I can tell you that the the
way the positions are are are
put in place by the main campus
frankly don't match our
positions as an example in the
business office we have people
that in on the main campus have
one categorical level of payment
they may be a category four and
and and our campus category for
me it is probably doing for five
different jobs may range from
four to six or forty seven and
yet they're being paid at the
lowest lowest level so there I
mean those are just basic
fundamental.
The problems that we have on the
campus we we try to get
communications from our our
business office is simple to the
main campus you get information
back and there are delays we've
been waiting for it to a court
your computer system for two
years I mean those are the kind
of thing kind of neglect that
has occurred and the people in
charge know what those things
are but it's in our you know we
can't function efficiently and I
can tell you that.
As an independent college it
gives us the opportunity to
refocus our college on the
community and develop that kind
of a spree to court around that
campus that that can't exist in
the present environment and
there's no leadership there and
there's there's no
accountability from the main
campus so I I don't want to go
on and on but I'm just telling
you that we believe that by
being independent we can do what
we needed for our community and
our students and and fulfil the
they the the needs of the
college and and and this and the
students in particular that's
our sole focus so I hope that
helps senator Munoz.
Thank you.
Chancellor.
The border regions I think order
need to to get a study is what
I'm understanding right and and
they were told you told you to
let Carlsbad help select.
The contract.
It was Carlsbad allowed to
participate in that contract
selection.
Senator Molinos
Carles bad is involved in the
study because this is an
independent group of consultants
are coming from the National.
Association of business
University University business
leaders across the entire nation
this is an this is a highly
regarded independent firm that
does those things and and that
was we contracted with them to
to do it the study as quickly as
we possibly could with an
understanding that they would
need to connect with the
The community of Carlsbad which
they have done R. and in impact
are starting those interviews
now so they'll they'll continue
to do that we did not
participate in the Carlsbad due
diligence of theirs I've not
seen that study at all so it
does make sense for us to
understand what it is that.
Needs to be evaluated and then
to to maybe Mary these two
studies once we can get all the
facts together on the same table
then it will be I I think it's
appropriate to look at that and
make it make the judgment again
if the judgment based on all of
the facts that are sitting there
from the Carlsbad community as
well as from this independent
study which again we didn't
these are not people that are
loyal to NMSU and and we'll pass
just for the time to do the
evaluation if at the end of the
day that independent study says
that that you know based on
where we are with all of the
concerns that have been brought
up to in this particular
discussion that that it just
looks like it's a bridge too far
to try to repair this
relationship and that this
community needs to have their
own independent college we will
abide by hi I have absolutely no
issue with that in in in fact we
would we would continue to do
what I believe is our charter
which is to serve the people of
New Mexico entirely including
all the communities in which we
reside so this is not about it
my mind no picking winner and
loser are are deciding what that
needs to look like frankly I
have not seen all the
information I don't know how I
could make a judgment I
understand frustration and I
understand that the community
independent of what this what
this study says wants to go and
make make the decision to go
independent I just think it just
makes sense to get all the facts
are we are in in conversation
with the pirate Department
together with Carlsbad so I I
don't know why we can't wait but
and understand that the nature
of the of this bill.
So again my question is
Or the region's told you that
Carlsbad would be able to
participate in the selection.
You guys independently chose to
you're going to do and now I'm
learning that.
The vice chancellor serves on on
the board of the company that's
doing the study.
Are
yes.
To that but I'm and I'm looking
at information on that that says
he does your that's not put in
the the fox in the chicken coop
I don't know what is.
And you may not know the answer
to that you may not want to
comment because
had me I mean that's very unfair
to them after the region's told
you.
To help that to let them help
select and you didn't try to get
to put a bridge at you just said
I'm gonna do what I want and
they're not gonna get to
participate.
And then if this if this comes
to be true and I'm gonna have
the LFC and and Senate finance
staff researchers then we may
have an ethics issue.
And when we have appointees on
the board that are doing an
independent study on the college
that that's a it's a problem for
me.
Through this exercise before
with you I've done the dance I
know the denture doing
you know if you can't service
the community then just cut ties
but don't say you want to agree
and have meetings and and you'll
do this and you'll do that and
we get to a point say that we
changed our mind.
Don't make people do a dance
when they don't need to and then
when the region's order somebody
to do something show we follow
through with that.
And.
So.
You know.
We got forty million dollars
their money you spend that you
collect another million and
overhead costs.
I haven't heard you guys say oh
we we try to to help them we
tried or it to get the teachers
ever tried the nursing program I
haven't heard any of that the
same thing I hear you get out
here's a little step child is
long as we're collecting money
in regaining Revenue and we can
keep putting off and that's not
all and you this is this is the
time line of over time but it
just frustrates me to death when
the community knows what they
want and I would love to do this
in Gallup
and nobody listens because they
say well we don't really care I
mean we have a director I don't
even know if he's been on campus
since COVID started
you know it's over and over
again and I can give you
incident by incident we got a.
Sure that is study for.
I mean at some point there's
gotta be some complete count
ability in these universities to
the small schools into the small
districts are grants may be in
the same place to but lord knows
it grants can support it because
they don't have the capital to
support it because of their
economy.
I would really like an
accounting of the funds and I'm
almost tempted to roll this bill
over till we get it and keep it
is that counting of the funds we
find out if that if that member
that chancellor is actually on
the board that's doing the
study.
And then we may have some some
big issues.
But I guess I really.
You should let people do what
they want do not try to hold on
the dollars if you wanted to try
to fix and I understand what
only been there for years I
understand you have a lot of
branch campuses and I know
everyone's got their own little
needs in their own little wheels
in their own little wants
but at some point when when they
go to this level and
Representative Lundstrom and I
have been to this level before
with you.
We all get sloughed off by you
know the university I don't have
anything against any misuse I
will tell you that in a shoe has
everything that Cal Poly has to
offer because my son had a
chance to go to Cal Poly it's
it's not against.
What information this is about
the services in that community
for those kids.
For their whatever program they
want nursing welding whatever it
is
that are not being met and
that's what led us here today.
So Senator Campos Mr chairman I
I'll listen for a few more
minutes at I don't see anybody
else's hand up some thank you Mr
chairman Mr chairman if I may as
I do have some questions and
I'll try to keep it brief I and
if I.
Appreciate that.
Thank you for.
This gentleman yield.
No go ahead you're the chair
Senator Campos I was another
meetings here the chair thank
you very much chairman Yasser as
we go forward and and all that I
I work on whenever it comes to
education's the focus on our
students and so chancellor
resolve the questions I want to
start with are directly related
to the higher learning
commission and what
communication you all have
already had with them in regards
to this particular issue and I
go back many years going to
Carlsbad taking a look at the
campus visiting with of their
faculty and staff and what I've
heard throughout the years has
been of something very similar
which is we wonder independence
we want to grow we want to
develop but it's been very
difficult to do because of the
lack of cooperation lack of
communication so chance the so
if you could help me a little
bit what communications have you
have with the Chelsea are
regarding the possibility of
having this become an
independent the community
college.
Yes thank you senator Akaka was
we have had no conversations at
all with the with the higher
learning commission as has been
mentioned earlier Carlsbad is is
independently accredited so the
accreditation is not an issue
for us other than the
accreditation on the main campus
accreditation on the main campus
actually does have requirements
that we that we visit that they
deserve a satellite campuses
that's the only context in which
we had conversations about that
this branch campus with the
higher learning commission but
it has to do with the
accreditation main campus not
with the accreditation at the
branch campus that is done
separately and that we've had no
conversations with that separate
predictions so I I really
appreciate that because that
starts to lead to the question
of accreditation and so within
that as you move forward
particularly with an independent
college and they come and he
will agency comes and then
review everything from the
academic through the
programmatic all the way to the
fixed assets and in doing that
then who is responsible which
entity is responsible then for
acceptance of the findings of
NHL see there's a.
So Mister chair you asking me
transmitters.
Okay and I have well with me
document regal who is the
executive director of the school
for a small branch campuses.
So the accreditation
responsibility at the policy
level outcomes to to drive but
the local
First person on the ones that
actually deal with the with the
local accreditation so
governmental I think and
probably about yes chairman
Campos the HSE is aware of the
the proposal for Carlsbad to
come independent community
college and the so so they
understand that this process is
in play the responsibility for
the campus to become accredited
as southeast New Mexico college
would would be the
responsibility of the of the
independent community college
that would take as John Heaton
as pointed out probably four to
six months to go through that
process.
Mr Chairman they are they are
good response to that yes please
proceed thank you very much
Senator.
Mr chair I'm looking at my notes
and I'm reading that the
Carlsbad branch college is
accredited by the north central
association of colleges and
schools in this regional
accreditation would continue if
this bill passes and I don't
know if Mr he would like to
respond as well.
I thank you Senator Kernan
Senator Campos we have been in
contact with the higher learning
commission and explain to them
that this is going on that
there's strong movement to move
to independence and this from
their perspective is a change of
ownership the staff does not
change the curriculum the
courses at the moment no change
and the only thing that changes
is the leadership we'll have our
separate board of directors our
board of trustees or regents
whatever they end up being
called and we will then have
that that board will then choose
a president which will be the
leader for the campus the three
vice presidents that served
under the president what are are
the same there in in place right
now and they will continue so
there is really very little that
will change in the
organizational chart so that the
main point with HLC is to know
that we have a definitive
decision by the legislature and
then they will entertain the can
they the the the change of
ownership and go through the
credit ation process with us and
as I said before it probably
will take somewhere between four
and six months to get that done
they will decide this it and so
they have explained the whole
process.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course in the street and I
really appreciate that because
that's the point that I was
trying to get to whenever you're
working with HLC and there is a
move that is of this this
gravity in terms of of what is
occurring and it's going to go
out in the the visitation is
going to be the assessment of
there's quite a bit that's
involved and people may say well
that doesn't deal directly with
the financial fees but in
reality it is the financial
these and the reason I say that
because it's not only about
academics it's also about
financial aid it's about the
budget it's about all the other
issues that deal directly with
this so if I may Mister chairman
Senator Kernan R. as an
independent community college
are there going to be attempts
to work in the area of athletics
and go to the legislature try to
secure resources for the
athletic program and then is it
be a multitude of questions here
and then secondly as we deal
with the general obligation
bonds will there be requested
the state legislature to also
have if you will funding
improvements for our capital
assets to improve of the
facility as we go on and then
thirdly and this is the most
important one community as we
deal directly with accessibility
for our students is there going
to be in need or has that
already been assessment of
tuition and what the cost of
tuition per credit hour will be
so the three of them do try and
for one reason because they're
all tied into the financial well
being of the institution and
these are important pieces if
you were to move forward as an
independent community college so
all are going to read differs.
Those two Senator Kernan and
then from there she can indicate
to our mission to help answer.
So.
Thank you Mr chair and with
regard to athletics I'll have to
let Mr he can answer that with
regard to the geo bond I know
just from personal experience in
my own community with New Mexico
junior college I know that think
from time to time to apply just
as all other independent
colleges do and that that would
be considered along with that
other request from that that.
With regard to that so in the
final would be with regard to
that student cost an outlet to.
Mr Heaton responded to the two
questions that I do not answer.
Senator Campos there is been
absolutely zero discussion about
anything related to athletics I
we are not in that business at
the community college and I
don't think would be in that
business
we don't have on campus housing
and typically if they're even
interview not Meryl sports I
doubt that they are
you know they could possibly be
organized but as far as as
athletics outside that require
support to that would not occur
we have discussed the idea of
the the tuition that we have
which is approximately forty
seven dollars an hour which is
very inexpensive and may be one
of the least expensive.
The charges in the state of New
Mexico but after assessing our
financial position there's no
reason to think that we would
need to increase tuition and so
there is plenty of money in
reserves and the the tuition
that's being paid now.
The services the budget quite
well.
So it in terms of I may with the
general obligation bonds is
there hasn't been an assessment
and is there a need for those
resources to continue to
rehabilitate make sure that if
there is going to be new
construction that you do have a
C. over Mr Chairman please
to see it Mister chairman
Senator Campos we haven't talked
about that and we realized as an
independent college.
That we would be able to address
the legislators Legislature
directly related to our needs if
there's a capital expenditure
that was needed but at this time
there was nobody that had we we
address the campus itself and
there was nothing.
That was needed at the moment
other than and improve that
parking lot needed to be needed
to be re done so that's that's
the only thing that was on the.
And on the deck and I think
that's already in motion.
So it doesn't situation thank
you Senator Kernan thank you
very much a mystery man I could
go on but I'm gonna just stop
with this one when we start
talking about access to housing
for for our students with the
revenue streams in terms of the
three males
are the resources directly
coming from the three males are
they fully obligated or would
there be some capacity in order
to possibly create
some form of revenue stream for
housing or for some other
purposes that definitely are
going to be related to improving
the independent college if it
was to become.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll let
them Mr he can answer that.
Representative Mister chairman
Senator Campos.
At at this time.
There is no debt no long term
debt no bonded indebtedness at
the campus and the the last
thing we did was to have a
health sciences center built for
our nursing program and the
other health training programs
that needed to be done and Eddy
County and whoever else wanted
to avail themselves of it but
there's no there's no long term
indebtedness period.
And the.
And I think the community if
they needed to step up and pass
a bond for a building or for
additional assets
I think that the community has
been very strongly supportive of
anything to do with education
and it would probably be the
same with college especially if
it was a communities own college
and the they were involved in it
with their own board and their
their own
outreach state we would expect
to have a a group that would
support they the president that
would be maybe fifteen people
that would be part of a of an
advisory board that would give
them ideas about how to improve
things in the community
educationally have outreach and
I think that some of those kind
of things will make a huge
difference in the acceptance and
of the college and become it
will become the hub of the
community frankly.
Thank you very much and I have
several questions but I'm gonna
stop there so I just want to go
back Senator sure do you have
any other questions Mr president
or Mr chairman I moved to pass.
Thank you very much I was
looking to see if there was
anyone else so I questions I
don't see any other questions so
we're moving on and we do have a
motion for it to pass by Senator
share is there a second all
second Senator Campos it would
have a second by center when you
notice any other discussion
scene and then we're going to
the vote.
Guess Mr chair Senator Burt yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzalez fifty years left it is
excused Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Steinborn no Senator Woods yes
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes and explain my love Mr
turned thank you very much
Patricia plays an ounce of
I yes Senator that Mr Chairman
there's nine yes one no and one
excuse.
Thank you very much Senator
Kernan you have a do pass on
your bill will be along to
explain their vote senator Munoz
please.
Thank you Mr chairman do you
know I want.
Chancellor to go back and I want
him to look because real quickly
we did just Google that stuff in
in New here here vice chancellor
does sit on the board
for the company that was
initiated the study.
And I will call the region's
tomorrow and get a copy of the
board minutes and if that is
correct that they did tell you
to include because of that it in
that contracts election and we
did just pick someone that
inside the university that had a
relationship with the company
with no input from Carlsbad
we're gonna take a real hard
look at house bill two.
And and universities and make
sure that she's not a board paid
member well we're gonna make
sure there's nothing that on
ethical that was done to
Carlsbad
and what they want to do.
And I will watch this bill it as
we track it through.
And
if we find out more instances of
of hiding or misleading conduct
will probably look to make that
transfer in house bill two that
thirty six million dollars from
an issue to some and a team and
Carlsbad to manage their own
money so I don't appreciate when
boards are a.
Regions are given told
selections and choices and
they're not followed through.
And then I really have the issue
where the vice chancellor sits
on the board of this the.
People that were hired to do the
study so thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much the
gentleman yield just imposing
going back to Senator Kernan and
then from there I'm going back
to what you're moving house
Senator thank you thank you very
much Mr chairman I want to think
about the committee and
I also want to reiterate that
the this is an issue that has
gone on for many years and
certainly should not rest on the
shoulders of the current
chancellor alone and just wanted
to mention that the
conversations that that I've had
with him just hopefully going
forward we can can all do what's
best for the students and and so
thank you very much committee
and thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Senator Kernan thank
you very much members of the
Senate finance committee going
back to chairman of the house to
close it out gentleman yes thank
you in.
I don't know if we can Senator
pope years I see you're saying
there how long do you think it's
going to take us to be here your
bill real quick Center pope Mr
chair my my bill should be real
quick presentation is like five
minutes.
Okay etcetera but when we just
wrap up with you and we'll we'll
give here five minutes and try
to get you off our list.
Mr chairman if he doesn't agree
on moving to pass.
I will I will move fast I'll get
it done as fast as I can.
My apologies.
Senator pope Senate bill two
seventy one.
Center my apologies I'm sorry
just having to have.
Very hard to tell me to myself
or somebody else's we couldn't
provide
it in my apologies Senate bill
two seventy one is a purple star
school program it's a state
sponsor recognition program
designed to emphasize the
importance of assisting military
children with school transition
and developing programs that
recognize the value of military
service and civic responsibility
the average military connected
child can from six to nine.
from six to nine different
schools during their K. through
twelve education experience with
one point one million such
students attending schools issue
surrounding squadrons Isshin
have become a top ready for
families and our schools
military children face issues
such as gaps and overlaps in
curriculum different graduation
requirements and course
placement disruption as well as
difficulties related to socially
and emotionally connecting with
new school and community.
The purpose our program is
designed this is just schools as
military friendly once they
demonstrate a major commitment
to students and families
connected to our nation's
military states such as Ohio
Texas Virginia already
recognized schools and they do
this by designating school staff
as a point of contact for
military students and families
they require professional
development for staff to sign as
a yield C. for the military and
they designate a page on the
website featuring resources and
information for military
families.
You and one other feature of
this is there's actually a
purple star program that
recognizes schools with few
military families emphasizing
the military service and
recognizing that veterans and
active duty members of the
National Guard and reserves in
their community they do this by
recognizing accomplishments of
the veterans and active duty
members they sponsor special
events recognizing military
service and they celebrate class
members who commit to serving in
the military Mr Chairman also
like to recognize my co sponsor
senator create Hemphill was
online I want to get a permit if
you would like to add.
Senator I don't think you want
to let me know she's a member of
the committee.
Centers that wrap you up do you
have any expert witness cells or
I I I do not have any experiment
witnesses Senator I I guess I
would just like to close and say
the primary goal of this bill is
to help our military kids that
relocate to our military bases
throughout the state but also
the parents of our National
Guard reserves and also add that
the secondary effect of this is
like it **** romance it makes
our state more competitive for
military missions that we're
trying to you know bring into
our state so thank you Mr
chairman open to any questions.
Thank you I don't see any hand
raised center I I appreciate
your commitment to these
families sometimes people don't
know the struggles they go
through I appreciate your
commitment and your service to
us in the military I think it's
very important that that not
only that the person be under
but the families also give a lot
to when they move around in it
and it's a struggle and so I
appreciate you recognizing that
and so Senator with that I don't
see anybody's hand raised so
could I have a motion for
discussed Mr chair one.
You sambar enter and raised I
was just going to make the
motion this is the right thing
for the state to do for the
military family so I I'm going
to pass second year term.
So we have a motion project for
two passed by senator Byrd
second by centers here
path we call the roll quickly
just chair Senator Burt well
yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Progress what Senator
Cappelletti well yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes time and yes Senator
Gonzales excuse.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes that is ten
yes and one excuse.
Senator pope.
Congratulations you got a bill
out of Senate finance it took me
quite a few years.
Binance even get heard and
finance.
The freshmen are actually
accomplishing something they
haven't seen before.
Appreciate your time in and
thank you and have a good
evening thank you for your thank
you thank you committee members
out I was thinking the same
thing I heard all the stories
and I appreciate it I'm sure to
be a lot tougher next thank you.
Senator pope up
as long as you don't bring
anything of money here are.
With a do pass but live and
learn Center vote.
you can send the message that
they're passing bills and Senate
finance.
Members I appreciate your time I
appreciate you staying late I
know that we we got a long list
of stuff to do.
And we can shorten it up tonight
tomorrow I will I will we will
hear Senate bill eight Senate
bill seven ands and Senator
cardinals Bill in probably in
that order some order so Senate
bill eight Senate bill seven and
Senate bill two thirty four will
be on the top of our list and
then and we'll move down to try
to fix no Sir this is that a
low.
What.
Senator Byrd wants.
Will move down and when we do
have tired I'm tired Mr chair.
Some new bills I want to make
sure that you know on your
agenda that I deliver to your to
your desk today will hand
deliver those again maybe we'll
we'll clean them up a little bit
so everybody's understanding
more on the same page and and
I'll chat with you a little bit.
House Bill to
it we should have a draft of
amendments for language in stuff
we didn't reach an agreement
with the governor on STBs so
people now we're gonna put one
hundred thirty three million in
broadband which if used
correctly we should get to
billion a broadband money
infrastructure if we make the
matches correctly
there is no change to our
capital for members.
Your capital is number is good
and so we will have a review of
the statewide tomorrow
maybe we can we'll review the
governor's statewide comparison
to the LFC is rex we can see the
difference and we can see the
changes and the
We'll need to start thinking
about tomorrow maybe I can call
you to buy two or one by one so
we can chat in the morning
democratic members and
Republican members on house bill
two in the languages and and
where we're headed so thank you
sorry for keeping you late it is
a process I appreciate the
lively debate about everything
and I was trying to double zoom
and answer phones and and so
I need to grow another arm like
an octopus or has Senator Byrd
at my side so.
Thank you guys I appreciate each
and everyone and thank you to
our staff to the interestingly
thank you to everyone else thank
you thank you members of the
Senate finance committee.
Thank you.
