For the public to watch.
Well we're not broadcasting so I
guess.
You better hold up just a few
minutes because I've seen female
consumer broadcasting another
committee.
Over the weekend to make sure
we're broadcast.
We are on.
Senator what we're good.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I've got a couple of things to
ask.
Of one thing I'd like to ask is
about your contract services.
And I notice you have of.
What a bit of contract services
I'll get to that page here just
a second.
What I would like to have is a.
List of those contractors.
And I'd like to have a the
amount of the contract.
And I would like to have the
services provide if you could
send me a spreadsheet like that
I would appreciate it madam
secretary.
Absolutely thank you Sir and
also I noticed that you have.
I quite a bit of a revisions
last year so a hundred and
twenty one.
Thousand dollars.
The revisions that you sent back
in to the state.
Would you like to comment on
those.
In.
Mr chair Representative yes
Senator I'm sorry yes we we
address that in the latter of
the sentence to you all later
last week it was issues that
need more last
week or so ago we had a much
larger than normal waivers
stations for FY
twenty one do you see the
federal Corona virus
funding relief funds that TV
into the state US CYFD reverted
FY ninety seven million of
federal rotavirus we funds as
those funds were essentially
just a pass through to the
agency and we're not news for
services the coronavirus and
really have a direct impact on
CYFD in our ability to provide
services and expand resources
for those purposes so
additionally other factors
several other factors impacted
behavioral health services
divisions reversion funds such
as salary and benefits category
hold on hi very during a Corona
virus so
that is all laid out in the memo
issues just late Friday.
Further explanation are in the
amounts reverted for each of the
funded programs that you see on
the screen before you and I'm
happy to go into it in greater
detail and I did see that
particularly important I did get
that in the office.
I.
And I am concerned.
Of.
That we over funded in a lot of
that is COVID relief funds I
understand that.
And the reason I'm over really
concerned about it is because.
Every time I turn around in this
round house we're talking about
behavior health again.
And a lot of talk.
The I wonder what is your plan
of action to had a of a have you
actually got a.
A plan of action that we need
you've got a funding request you
got a budget.
And and you know I I understand
budgets will lead to understand
budgets but I understand I can
look at it and see a budget.
But have you got a
organizational chart.
Of the people that you're going
to designate.
To carry out to improve this
behavior health.
Service that we're providing.
Mr chair Representative yes of
the answers your questions yes
we have a plan of action and
that action requires Aston's
in programs for which she's flat
right now that we're asking for
additional resources in order to
provide the necessary support to
our four divisions which is
protective services if you are
yes this is a low house on there
is a need to build out the
roadhouse Services in New
Mexico.
And we have a a in our budget
request you're asking for
additional resources to provide
what we would consider this
money to the communities to
spelled out the multi systemic
therapy therapy work as well as
the functional manager there to
work around New Mexico so that's
very very important to us
we also just.
I.
Representative is no more
audible way but the agency is
quite large and needs at all
levels but particularly in those
areas that would enable us to
support our protective services
Hey your house so that we can do
the work necessary of some of
that also leaves workforce
development our data management
oversight of the agencies were
being responsive to our tribal
communities and serving our
native families so it's really
just mentioned last time the the
the fundamental plan if you will
is really set forth in our
feminine side.
And that requires and in real
life of our were in many areas
to ensure that we comply with
the commitments in the cabin
announcements.
Madam provides us with that.
Basically last four in which to
make improvements across New
Mexico and yes Sir I'm happy to
sit down with you one on one and
discuss all of these needs to do
be made in the realligned that
is important to to meet those
commitments and move our
children youth and families
forward in a positive direction
and and are relying or once one
second madam secretary you just
referenced a memo that you said
we had we didn't have that memo
in our package so you can have
somebody send that to pass and
they did send it to us we'll
we'll have that memo but we
currently don't have that number
that you're making reference to.
There would.
And and.
Yes I would like very much to to
carry on this conversation
offline and know that we're
we're busy here but with what
you're telling me.
Madam secretary with you telling
me that that you need increases
and you've got this huge
agency that you're trying to
manage and now you're telling me
that that you need to start up
the EMT EMS.
Led to this agency.
Please explain that to me is to
why this is critical to the
operation of your agency.
Mr chair Senator the EMS program
is a program that
offers the opportunity of young
adults who have either been
through our foster care system
our juvenile justice system to
have the opportunity to learn
how to become an emergency
medical technician it is a
program that is a beautifully
run program that we are already
doing it is supplemented by
Representative funding is
partnership with the university
of New Mexico as well as the
City of Albuquerque it's the
type of investment and
collaborative support that that
would serve young adults older
older reviews young adults
coming really
medical conditions going back to
their communities from Mexico so
I'm a huge fan of this program
we're not starting up in
operation and in the sea
private resources from the
Kellogg foundation what we're
asking New Mexico to help
continue that program and
expanded to well so
There it is on your screen it's
I would love to have a
conversation with you about this
and really give you an
opportunity to see the wonderful
work that it is still so we're
asking for the for the resources
to continue that program it's
beautifully run in collaboration
and that is our job is to really
provide opportunities to help
may our kids are healthy
activities and and and
contributing citizens in New
Mexico so it's it's what we do
and and I'm really excited about
this program and hope that you
consider a continuing to fund it
at the level that for and and
with that madam secretary I'm
getting real long in the in the
chairman is get real upset with
me so I I'm gonna cut this up
but I I I would leave you with
this comment I hope that you're
put in so much effort.
And to get these foster kids
into two schools to public
schools.
so that they can get their high
school education.
As as we are on everything else
so you don't need to comment on
that I've been around a lot of
foster parents and they've got a
heart as big as gold and they
try to do the best they can for
those kids but I I a you know
sometimes sitting up here on
these panels we we wonder where
the money is going and I I
appreciate your interest today
and and would be happy to have
more offline chats with you
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you here the.
The service and then the more we
had something and you have your.
Still.
Yes.
committee members so I just
wanted to hold where I a little
bit about that reversion I don't
want to spend too much time on
anything one hundred and and
Was it a hundred and five I
don't have the number in front
of me the the large number that
was related to the Corona virus
relief fund so I just want to.
To refresh everyone's memory
that several hundred million
dollars was actually pointing to
HSD projects during not her
special session
after you know after Corona
virus kind of headaches and that
was to take the coronavirus
funds and replace general fund
in agency budget so when we see
large amounts of the general
fund I'm going back here that
one oh seven and a half million
that's exactly what was intended
to happen we were very low on
general finance and so the in
the legislature's in time what
to freeze General Fund and and
then when and revert back so I
just wanted to clarify that not
as good received nine hundred
and seventy million dollars it's
it's exactly what the the
legislature committees you so
thank you very much for giving
me the opportunity there are.
Thank you.
Other questions Senator Diamond.
Thank you
thank you very.
Follow up on on that statement
right there.
And seven million dollars in
federal funds was reported last
year.
Eric is that lasted.
It was reverted correct.
Madam chair so that's the yes
the fund I Mr chairman that's
sort of the Mister chairman
Senator yeah that's the correct
number but I would say within
that there is the fourteen
million that was the general
fund amount.
So there's fourteen point any
the the table they had up on the
screen there was correct there's
the fourteen point three million
that was general fund the
reverted back to the general
fund.
There is another hundred seven
million in federal funds that
were infused into the
department's budget and those
funds reverted back and that was
you know I I I wouldn't hold
that hundred and seven million
against the department that was
that was amounts that were used
because we're right about.
Our revenue into the general
fund and you know all the all
those types of concerns and so
the offset some of their regular
spending with those federal
funds the fourteen point three
though that is
that amounts that is.
From the general fund going back
to our you know the statewide
general fund.
The amount of money that you
reported last year I hope that
that fourteen million in general
fund what
the Senate's position correct.
You may have to repeat that I
don't know she heard you I'm not
sure what you're very well Mr
chan we just heard a statement
saying that it was the intent to
reverse all of those funds
initially but included impose
reversions for fourteen million
dollars of general fund revenues
I would hope that that wasn't
the department's intent to
revert to the general fund
monies at all and and with that
being said do you want to
introduce are there are there
any possibilities that you'll be
reverting money this year.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm not
sure Representative.
Who who was speaking at that
moment yes the answer to the
question is is clear
no we do not intend to remember
that level of resources back to
the general fund this year and I
would just ask you to consider
the fact that CYFD as all state
agencies really helped state
government open and going and
serving our communities in a
pandemic in a worldwide pandemic
and so it's a bit of a.
Unusual time in our in our lives
and in the in our operations
that said
had every intention of ensuring
all the resources that you
authorize its for expenditure by
our agency argues for the
purposes for which they are
committed and that's going to
take as well mention and believe
a proper planning management and
I have every intention of
leading an outstanding team of
professional and committed of
social workers and probation
office two officers to ensure
that we are doing everything we
can build a workforce to serve
our communities and to use these
resources for the purposes for
which they are allocated but I
would ask for some
consideration of the fact that
services were disrupted in in
some ways just I realigning are
working our way of doing
business last year and so fully
expect to manage as well
minimize reversions and do
what's necessary to improve our
child welfare system thank you
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
chairman
track.
Individual expenses expenditures
for each child that you're
responsible for.
Question I don't have the
answers to Representative Mr
chair Representative maybe
someone on my team can help with
that
I'm not sure how it's done
specifically within the agency
but I'm sure it is something
that we can explain further to
you I don't I don't know that in
the incidence of how that is
done I surely we have a system
in place the committee that can
Try that.
I do have them Emily Martin R.
acting protective services
director on do we need the the
hearing and she can perhaps
answers about in the line Mr
Chairman representative.
I'm sorry Senator I excuse me.
I'm saying Representative you're
all senators I know it's that
I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr I would like a
little more information on that
I also understand that into the
question we see that yet if you
want to answer the question
just.
I'm secretary when you have
someone in your department the
need to answer a question just
have them.
Jump in when you quit.
Mr.
Mr chair Senator Diamond members
of the committee on the short
the short answer system
undergarments question is not
all payments are tracked through
our
our fax system which is our time
welfare
case management system that also
talks to the financial share
system and that's helping
payments are tracked I'm more
than happy to provide you with
more details accounting of how
that works that's the short
version.
Thank you that that is helpful I
understand the right now you
guys have done away at CYFD is
done away with clothing vouchers
for foster children that's
disappointing session when we
had a reversion of funds can you
explain why there is a reduction
in the amount of resources I
guess getting down to individual
children and how we can make
sure that each child is
receiving the necessary
resources.
Mr chair Senator
the I'm actually in this last
fiscal year we change the
structure of our
our clothing vouchers so that it
is built into that monthly
reimbursement payments to our to
our foster parents so that we're
not having foster parents and
children operating having to
wait for the department to issue
that
that doctor we still have the
ability to utilize vouchers it
is built into that monthly
reimbursement payments.
Thank you Mr chairman so what
about you through are not and
foster homes like maybe RTC or
convert Care.
Mr chair Senator by members of
the committee that also builds
within to order structure and
again clothing vouchers are able
to be to be able to be utilized
if if needed for any you in
those situations I guess we can
absolutely still do bouncers but
we did build that into the
current payment structure.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
dress just some general
questions you can help with with
general child well being how
many youth are in foster care
today.
Mr chair and members of the
community there is
approximately eighteen hundred
children and youth in foster
care I can get appear a specific
number for you later today
that's are approximate number.
Thank you very much and how many
youth under eighteen have died
in the past year.
Mr chair and senator of dying
and are you talking in general
or you're talking on children
who have had some contact with
CYFD children had prior
involvement with CYFD.
Okay.
The number is depends on I want
to be really clear that were
consistent with our federal
reporting that number will come
out shortly I think by the end
of January we want to make sure
that our reporting is accurate
that we are not overstating or
understating what we consider to
be trial so technologies
children who have contacted CYFD
will be getting that information
as soon as we can verify it.
Thank you I appreciate that
information Mr chairman I was
reading a staggering statistic
you hear that said for every
child killed as a result of
child maltreatment a total
lifetime economic burden stands
at sixteen point six million
dollars which means not only is
the loss of a child like strip
the spirit in the heart of our
state offices great financial
burden with this too
you know our greatest resources
in New Mexico our our youth are
children of New Mexico and I
wish sometimes we would see as
much energy going to protecting
these kids as we do saving the
planet
I know that there's in and
realize your new and I commend
you on the work that you're
doing I'm optimistic that maybe
there can be a turn around here
but in this department there
seems to be a culture of of
believe on house and and it's
probably led to the alarming
failure rates and the failure to
New Mexico's kids I know that
foster parents often complain of
a hostile relationships with
CYFD these these are heroes and
angel to come in to protect for
our most vulnerable children and
yet they're met with opposition
increased resistance from this
agency R. AG in our legal
defenders have often expressed
expressed great frustration when
they're trying to bring these
criminals to justice for what
they've done to our children and
yet they're met with resistance
from this agency and not
providing information that can
send these people away and I
myself last year in this exact
committee experience blowing
when the deputy director of pot
of of protective services was
taking to Twitter making
personal attacks to me for
simply asking questions about
the agency's budget I do hope
that we can see a drastic change
in the culture of this agency I
want to thank you in the short
time we've been here for the
work that you've done but just
know that this legislators on
both sides is committed to
saving our children before we
save anything at all costs thank
you for your time and thank you
for your is Mr chairman.
Thank you there if you have some
that and then Senator Padilla
you'll be next yes on the child
fatality question the the data
is actually out the federal
report issue that the secretary
was mentioning and there was ten
fatalities in the in the child
of the child file and then there
was three in the agency file so
that was a total of thirteen
fatalities so that that gives
you an idea of that there.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman.
But I'm going to ask the
question.
I just wanted to thank you Mr
chairman the cabinet secretary
accuracy some of the information
with regard to caseloads
and other information that
request the last time we met Mr
chairman and madam secretary but
but I guess I do have one other
question we're talking a little
while ago versions the
fostering connections act which
I know you were a huge part of
helping us to accomplish when
you were still on the bench and
then even after is is an expert
we've been talking about this
so we've drawn down sort of sort
of talking about this last time
and secretary any of the
changing funds and have we
reverted any of the dollars with
regard to what's available to
those individuals and then you
know yes Sir review the second
part of the question is how act
with if we have any stats
available tell us that the
children currently in the in the
foster system of it what
percentage of our being notified
this is available to them the
moment they Trinity.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Padilla
family on the specifics of the
fostering connections money's
and certainly we are committed
to ensuring that we are doing
everything you can to drop down
any of those resources for for
our our kids in fostering
connections program so Emily if
you could address the Senators
questions please absolutely Mr
chair Senator Padilla thank you
for your questions of the
fostering connections program
overall but I also believe to
your last question first and
build up to your first question
is we we have our practice model
includes insuring that when we
start engaging with the young
with the use when they're
fourteen years old start talking
to them about transition
planning and ask the kids were
to the age of eighteen very much
cramped up
those discussions in
conversations and bait they are
very much well aware of what the
faster connections program is to
provide be able to provide
support to pass the transition
into adulthood we have an entry
right currently of the ninety
two percent that are two hundred
eighteen voluntary continuing
with uh Senator foster care
foster connections program it's
one of the highest in the
country
we we absolutely have started
to to drop down to forty dollars
which wicks Act thank you for
for bringing this legislation
the state is is fully in swing
we have our current this year
drawn down about three hundred
fifty thousand dollars in
federal title forty and you
have.
A projection of being able to
draw down roughly seven hundred
thousand in federal dollars
which we have never been able to
access the for for older.
We also have not reverted our
chief funding which is federal
Occuring
or is not a block grants so that
is not
So for the that really supports
housing support supports us
support services and other just
wrapped work with thirty and so
we have very much utilized order
program in this Oct to its
fullest potential would like to
continue to increase our housing
supporters across the state in
every community with our budget
request for FY twenty three.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary while thank you I'm so
happy to hear all of that data
you know I'm really really moved
and touched by the fact that
this is happening the most
important way to reduce repeat
the the various ways to do these
H. ow Oster you for the state to
call them we came up with the
term of art are affected madam
secretary helped us develop that
term aging out youth or
something like that for young
adults aging out some of that I
can remember what it was but I
was quite a list to get this
thing done so I want to make
sure that we're taking full
advantage of this because if we
can do this that I think we're
going to see a reduction in the
repeat of children going and
having their own children
in foster care and things of
that nature so I'm really happy
about this that's number one
it's just full stop on the same
subject.
Is there a way to retroactively
take a use.
Into this program and I'm
dealing with a particular for
him for related reasons and I
just reasons I won't tell you
too much about it but I sort of
the central repository for the
legislature on this topic
because of the work that I've
done this I think and also
myself being a former militant
foster care for the time I was
to the time I graduated high
school in different at different
times so I I get a lot of this
these cases of these these
things come to me but is way to
retroactively move the trial
them or maybe a family just
hopping on percent.
Did you go to there were
documents filed with the courts
and what have you but the work
this is really going to see what
the tracking system along the
way.
Is there a way to retroactively
get.
You know just now going to the
aging out into this program.
Mister chairman Senator the
every single this is still a
work in progress fostering
connections we have three years
to implement and so they're
there are different
possibilities that we can are
there are any so every situation
is different so I would be happy
to talk to you offline about the
specific case we do have the
ability for that have been
adopted or inner guardianship
after a certain age to enter
into the fostering connections
program and then in addition to
just the fostering connections
program which goes up to the age
of twenty one we still support
provide support through our
community based providers and
through our internal staffing
for you all the way up to the
age of twenty six and so it
doesn't we don't have a cliff
twenty one there's different
types of support we can provide
only to twenty six.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Secretary minimally increase in
the initial start up of the
program.
Leave us a about one point two
million to get this thing
rolling I know that that money
is there
But by comparison the dollars
bringing down from the federal
standpoint between reduced long
term court related costs and
hole number of other things I
really hope you're taking full
advantage of all of it it sounds
like you are
but this is my last question is
how many connect you with a
family that really need some
help in this particular area
and only if that's alright with
you if you would like to know
when your your best contact
information on to connect with
them that's number one number
two is
is automatically triggered or or
switch to goes on fourteen it is
in the foster care system does
that processes are designing
already kicking off to make sure
that the trouncing advised
everything instantly able to
them on the internet.
Mr chair and Senator Padilla yes
the answer to that is yes and we
think that we have a fairly
robust process that advises
these young teens there
additional rights once they turn
fourteen what their retirements
the answer to your question is
yes absolutely.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam speaker that's beautiful
it really warms my heart to know
that that we're on top of this
thing when I know what it is.
Maximum in the internet thanks
for the floor drops out from
under the sink yourself when you
were eighteen you know everybody
knows everything eighteen with
impacted much eighteen so this
is really thank you Mr chairman
thank you for the work with the
department store.
A lot of work ahead of you and
this is one of those I just
don't think he ever quite get to
that one hundred percent but I
know that you're fighting for
that thank you.
Thank you at I don't see anybody
else's hand or questions and
secretary I do want to talk to a
little bit in in let me first
say you have one of the toughest
agencies to run that's really
and
with some people that that run
the show in so as you begin to
make that change it's going to
be a long battle in that agency
I want to referred to the
juvenile justice facilities you
currently have eight hundred six
FTEs you requested seven hundred
and fourteen and that's what LFC
budgeted you for so one juvenile
justice so those those FTEs you
made that the chain you
requested a reduction in that's
what LFC recommended your total
overall employees are about
twenty one hundred
with about ninety vacancies
overall want to ask you you're
requesting eight point five
million for a building.
in in where is that building in
and why do we need another
building after we just spent.
What twenty five million in
Albuquerque maybe thirty five
million after after remodeling
where is that building to be
located and why do we need to
another building.
Mr chair and members of the
committee can you be more
specific about where that
request is R. eight I'm I'm not
the million the million and a
half million is a request to
the HSD bees from the agency for
a new building.
If you have somebody else Eric
do you have the answer to that
or somebody else within the
agency.
Let me turn my team on that
Michael one yes thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee yes there is a capital
outlay requests to see what
purchases over three point five
million hearing center and
that's a House our State Street
help students prepare about
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars on and so we would be
able to draw down federal funds
on the way it would work is you
a lease for the building is in
the top five General Services
department and they would charge
slide you'll be new CLEC and we
would be able to drop down
federal funds for that
expenditures and so we actually
did a cost analysis the federal
funds would actually pay for it
and I was twenty years and then
we would own the building we
would have to I choose seven
thousand.
Mr chair.
Okay and so currently are to
paying the least with federal
funds.
Yeah yeah we are drawing down
the civil plans on that seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
these expenditures we don't get
it off for now
I think the let's see that we
get it a total forty at eighteen
reimburses on that we got about
one hundred ninety thousand.
some Senator ones.
And so of the hundred ninety
eight you're currently paying
with federal funds that that
same rate will continue over
that period correct.
Yes.
Roughly yes yes we do there is
escalation clauses in insist on
so it would probably won't go up
slightly with the escalation
expenditures Mr Chairman.
Okay.
And then madam secretary talked
about A. D. M. P. program is
that a statewide program that
any kid can go to or is that
just solely in Bernalillo
county.
Mr chair and members of the
committee it's a statewide
program is actually recruits use
from all over New Mexico
particularly rural communities
and it's just one of the most
moving the programs that I've
observed Madam I CYFD and
enables these young adults many
of them are native Americans to
come in and learn medical
technician work and then go back
to their communities and
contribute to their families and
their villages Pablo's this
service yes it's available to
all New Mexicans throughout the
state.
And currently how many houses
structure who pays for what how
many and how many people from
across the state bartending that
and what's the current
enrollment and who runs the
program.
Chair Mister chairman the house
my team maybe Dale can focus or
bass Gilyard deputy cabinet
secretary announces those
specific questions for you Mr
chairman.
Secretary.
For each of those points on the
program.
Mr chair of the former deputy
cabinet secretaries really
intimately involved with this
program and he has left the
agency so we are in many ways
earning all of the ins and outs
of the program but I miss ace
it's well run
out of the university of New
Mexico with the City of
Albuquerque as a partner in CYFD
at the table as well the details
of it I don't have at my
fingertips I let me try again W.
secretary.
Secretary of state that office
of my head I first quarter
graduated the eighteen young
people into the New Mexico for
and I think we are currently
currently classes about eighteen
I will as soon as we're gonna
drop about the numbers and make
sure that the actor for I.
Start with the twenty students
and that support the House
transportation to arrange some.
this graph.
somewhere.
And so my next question would be
are they using any the
opportunity scholarship money
that's been available last year
are they using the lottery if
they're continuing student at
UNM what what statewide it and
you still haven't give me a
break down of what the actual
dollar cost or and where the
funding is received from
so I maybe you can get that to
me later but that's that's gonna
be for something that you really
love we think we would know a
lot more about it
I guess my next question goes in
and I think Center pipe Padilla
kind hit on and Senator Diamond
it I've served on the help art
gallery board for I don't know
maybe twenty years for foster
youth and so it it troubles me
that kids are receiving that
their clothing stipend
because we know what happens in
the in if you're in in the world
in your youth can you go to
school and and other kids have
nice clothes and you don't have
nice clothes we know what
happens in so number one I want
to know why does foster kids to
exact E. why they're not getting
their clothes and stuff like
that.
Who fell through the cracks why
didn't happen and why they're
not getting that treatment.
And in everything that's due to
a the second thing that Senator
Padilla kinda hit on was where
they are when they come out of
foster.
Foster care because that's very
critical
for person because all the
sudden one day they turn
eighteen and they may have
struggled to high school and be
pushing the upper limits
eighteen and they're on their
own.
In the state is no longer do any
much form or anything in there
out of the foster home and
they're pretty much on their own
if we don't get those
continuing help for those kids
we know where they end up
they're just you know a crack on
the street and nobody's paying
attention to him and that's not
why that program is set up so I
want a full accountability of
that foster care program why
they're not receiving the
services that there we budget
for in that the agency should be
taken care of.
In and that's very critical
Madam.
Secretary you have a tough so.
You really have a tough job and
you're gonna have to to to
really in trencher self in this
agency if you want to run it
correctly
we I've seen CYFD C. secretaries
come and go I think Mister
Blaylock was there maybe what
one and a half years and left in
some surrounding around them do
we know where you are with that
whistle blower lawsuit in and
what happened there and in.
Why there is a certain turnover
because I mean CF CYFD should be
one of the agencies that we
really want stability and.
Thank you for your confidence in
me I am developing a strong team
committed professionals to
address all of these issues and
it's a lot granted and and I
think you might need to the
biggest challenges that we have
to make a culture change in the
department in many ways and to
work smarter and better for the
people we serve and for all New
Mexicans for that matter I must
say with respect to the
whistleblower litigation it's
something that I do.
I think it would be best for me
to comment on its leading
pending litigation it's being
well managed and and really we
are looking forward Sir in how
we can stabilize maybe New
Mexico's child welfare system
the best in the nation will it
come easy now well it takes time
yes but we're committed to doing
that and we've got a lot of
right activities going on
throughout New Mexico yes
there's areas that need
attention but we need to develop
our workforce pay our employees
give them a positive support to
do this hard work you know they
confront emergency situations
tragedies are sometimes and it's
not easy but we're committed all
of us and see where you're
communities needing doing things
better for for New Mexico thank
you for your confidence I will
do everything in my power to do
what's necessary to bring this
agency
to improvement and to serve the
needs of New Mexico.
Yeah and I think you get it
correctly I mean you have to
change the culture and want to
change our culture than the
agency will change around that I
I ask you about the whistle
blower lawsuit because that was
a cost to the state in in to the
tune of about fourteen million
and so it's it's a very
interesting to me that that we
just want to let that slide by.
In the in in not keep an eye on
it Kevin this lawsuit I know you
guys left hearings early and
and.
We understand that that goes but
we'll start looking at that
pretty hard on what you're
actually going to need in the
settlement
and try to budget that if you
need anything this year but we
will we'll begin to look that
for D. O. H. and the department
of health and and everybody
across the board on that Kevin
has lost the
I just want to remind you of
something on tribal stuff
because I see it quite a bit and
and I live in that air area
three everybody says they want
to work and coordinate with
tribes but then when it comes
down to the actual boots on the
ground inside that the agency
that to get to the reservations
or the pueblos okay it's a
different culture and it's a
different type of work so so you
want to liaison is not boots on
the ground loops on the ground
is having a person that goes in
there understand their religious
and cultural beliefs and and
what's happening inside the
community not only with them but
with other P. other issues and
so liaisons are great for the
governmental affairs but it's
actually we need people on the
ground that actually deal with
the children that can go talk to
those people.
So they're not came in when they
have that cultural change when
they go there it's a different
little bit different cultures so
you need to make sure that not
only liaisons but we need people
that understand what's happening
inside tribes and pueblos I
don't see any questions from
committee members anymore
questions committee members so
madam secretary thank you we
will chat with you a little bit
about the Kevin ask offline in
Preciado time here today thank
you very much Mr chairman and
senators on the committee thank
you very much again I apologize.
Refers representatives thank you
for all your work for New Mexico
as well thank you.
If they pay us then we went
money being Representative as if
we got paid.
We'll probably get paid equally
even though we do much more work
us so members of the committee
at this week's going to kind of
wrap up our agencies out there
something you think that we're
missing or somebody that we need
to hear from or talk to I think
it's going to be very important
that we try to get them on the
agenda
because we're now we're going to
sprint towards a budget.
the end of the month the twenty
twenty ninth is when we we think
they'll be wrapped up on the
house side in the bill try
moving over to us we don't know
of any changes yet in some of
the house is still going through
it but we'll have to get on top
of that game into this these
these bills start coming I did
see some bills in committee
today and public affairs as I
list of them and I think
referred to finance after that
though there's only so much
money and and the.
I think the governor's math and
my math a little bit off because
I think she may have spent over
three million already on
programming so we'll need to
make sure we tracked as we go
forward so.
Thank you their questions or
anything that anybody thinks
they need to.
Senator.
No I did go through this and I
don't have any other questions
and you said it correctly Mr
chairman that a secretary who
the hell has a an enormous job
and and we do understand that
acknowledge the severity of the
situation now especially with
the pandemic and so on so thank
you very much so the the other
thing we needed to get a handle
on is the junior bill do be here
this evening members should have
their stuff wrapped up I know
that that junior is a little bit
difficult but those of you that
we're in here doing Senate
amendments it's a much better
process is it gives the members
ability to add money to agencies
and not sit there Megan Megan
Baynes that one a little bit
more here little bit more there
were different budgeting
situation.
So we're gonna try to get those
gather tonight staff is going to
go through them and we're gonna
try to look at probably on
Wednesday for that committee to
start looking at him and make
sure that everything's correct
on Tuesday if if members have to
make some changes what we're for
those back in so we can see we
can start that capital is going
to have to get drafted pretty
quick I think there will be some
meetings about capital so we'll
start on Capitol next in
figure out how we're gonna get
that done in a short time but
you realize we only have a three
and a half weeks and so when we
gonna spend this amount of money
in three and a half weeks there
may be a lot of questions
and so I want everybody go home
confident that they did the
right thing
so we're gonna have spoke I
think tomorrow.
in so when we're talking about
the fifteen dollar minimum wage.
CPO is gonna be very interesting
to listen to as how they
structure that and how the how
it changes the entire system and
so
Will be a very important piece
of this budget expects we're
talking is seven percent raises
and fifteen dollar minimum wage
and how we structure that so
employees are treated fairly and
equally so I think that's kind
it.
I think we'll see at one thirty
depends when we come off the
floor.
Thank you.
You Mr chairman.
