Morning sinister you want to
start with us in the bill
seventy two we do have an
amendment amendment is wrong we
can do a verbal amendment
so when presented on the non.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This bill Senate bill seventy
two a set set up a fund for
funding for wildlife quarters we
have the chance to get money
from the federal government
they're looking for state match
there is five million in the
budget as it's come over for
this project so
you know we in twenty nineteen
was fully pass while of Porter's
Act we spent about twenty
million a year in damages to
vehicles health care issues for
people getting hurt that doesn't
count the cost of losing our
wildlife but if you see from
this.
Red state department of
transportation engagement
session I think just did an
incredible job of a spent five
hundred thousand dollars they
looked at this for two almost
three years met with landowners
met with the tribal governments
and they have come up with
eleven priority projects
if we could get fifteen million
and to those fund we could get
the rest of the money for the
very first project which is five
fifty.
Overpasses and underpasses a
cost of forty five million
dollars this is an expensive up.
Program project and problem
so it's going to take us a while
to do this I think it's more
important
the longer the time passes for
us to do this to stop the
killing of wildlife and to stop
people getting killed damaged or
ruined vehicles.
So that's the program and I'm
happy to stand for questions if
you look at the bottom here
because your time change I don't
really have any supporters here
but here's who is supporting the
bill thank you Mr chairman thank
you.
Anybody in the audience in
support.
At one support anybody on zoom.
In the affirmative.
Instability audience you want to
speak quickly and.
Thank you Mr Chairman got to
come to the Mike and stable John
right John I at right.
Yep to questions about.
There we go thank you very much
for your patience Mr chairman
members of the committee John
crunch of the New Mexico
wildlife federation very briefly
we strongly support this bill in
the interest of public safety
the property damage and of
course for the wildlife my
personal experience
on the highway five fifty with
for both LFC in the middle of
the night with my grand babies
in the backseat of really
brought home because I kind of
thought we were going to have
them in my lap that didn't
happen that it could have so
personally and professionally
support this thank you for your
time thank you.
We do have a man.
Thompson speaking.
I don't want him to speak.
Madam chair Mister chairman
members of the committee sorry
for my present up the stairs but
two thousand and Representative
CD and we stand in support of
bill we think the sponsor for
work on this thank you you turn
off that my casually.
Thank you.
You have an amendment
making strong so we're gonna do
the so Mr chair I have a a
verbal amendment that's written
here to write it but I would
just like to read it to you so I
move of the Senate finance
committee amendment number one
to Senate bill seventy two.
And so what I would say is on
line one.
On page one line twelve strike
Sen Michael and insert period on
page one line thirteen strike in
its entirety that's the word to
say making appropriation.
online for on page four lines
five through ten strike section
three in its entirety which is
where the money is and then
finally re number the succeeding
sections accordingly so that's
that's what it says.
Discussion Mr chairman finally
amendment Mr chairman I know
that's what we have to do with
these bills.
Thank you questions on the
amendment.
Any objection to the men.
So then you have amended bill
questions from committee members
of the bill.
I have no questions at chairman
movie pass as amended.
But I do have one comment right
yeah I I agree with in certain
areas because my wife in a
dinner one night right and
broker broker the does back
right but this we call the state
police and I think you've been
to my house its way down the
roll roller and she was laying
there on the ground and we said
we're gonna go back in sheeter
player out of our misery right
he was gonna charges with
poaching.
In
then my but ever.
So no I I do agree some of this
it is I mean there's a kid in
trauma that was driving down the
road that the directors
windshield and killed him high
school kids.
But and so there is some Sir
some issues but I mean there's
always been there and a lot of
money spent but.
For public safety I think you
can make sense so there are a
new patient.
By Senator Rodriguez seconded by
Senator Padilla.
Any objection to the motion.
Thanks thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee Rodriguez.
Thank you very much Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman this bill
basically does what we do with a
capital outlay bill
we require the Legislative
Council Service to post a list
on the website of all
allocations from the do what we
call a junior bill it's also
Clemente probation bills that we
have and we we are doing it we
did it last year we're going to
do it this year on the bill
itself requiring disclosure that
this meaning the list would be
published thirty days after the
legislature approves this and
the governor signs that and
that's merely what it's going to
do nothing more than that we
have and like I said in the bill
now but this will put it in is a
requirement on going so we don't
have to be doing it every year
and it ensures disclosure and
transparency.
Thank you anybody in the
audience and support anybody in.
Income talk of.
Are you from okay from fog your.
Yep to push the button.
Discussion.
Yes yes thank you.
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on Hannah
Burling speaking for the league
of women voters of New Mexico.
And we believe that in order to
have open and accessible
governments the government
website should be easy to use
and searchable.
And that the information posted
on it should be up to date.
So we stand strong support of
this thank you.
Thank you.
Nobody in opposition.
We'll try it never try this and
see if that works.
Hey.
Any questions from committee
members and.
The motion by Senator Hemphill
second by Senator Gonzales.
Any objection to the impasse
motion.
Bank robberies.
A request thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
That.
It's.
Secretary of state police here.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair currently
under the under law state police
officers are treated differently
in Paris on retirement benefits
based upon their hiring dates
even though all officers painted
period based on the same formula
offers are before hired after
six third after twenty thirteen
get credit of one point two
years for everyone here that
work in officers hired.
Before then get one here and
what's in the bill one forty
five allows officers to all get
the same factor
New Mexico implications that
makes a short term effect to the
fund in the fund comes back this
is part of the policy that came
out of the task force that was
done by Representative Herndon
Fund recruitment and retention
with that I'll go to the
secretary any other comments.
Thank you.
One madam chair members of the
committee that's exactly right
and we have concerns and that
currently a major step the
cheese and cheese are not
included in the same methadone
fortunately plan as as everyone
else are certainly paying into
it or not receive the benefit
and so the concern for us is
what would make someone want to
promote further to the rank of
of major W. for chief if they're
not receiving the same benefits
as anyone else and so with that
was that.
Thank you thank you very much
for that do we have any any
comments questions continueing.
That supporting this bill the
audience raise your hand.
And if anybody opposing this
bill raise your hand.
Thank you anybody else.
To the committee.
All right thank you so much
anyone from the committee have
any questions comments with our
kids.
That you're committee your
question thank you yes I yes.
Thank okay this motion on the
floor in the second that we the
favor signify by saying aye.
A post passed thank you senator
thank you very.
All right we are.
And with the bills for this
morning is good.
So are we going to proceed with
the agencies are not anymore not
to this afternoon thank you so
we're finished for this morning
Mr chairman or DJ
just so you guys know we're
gonna go to caucuses afternoon
you guys are **** that's true.
So depending on how long the.
Our goal of we may not committed
finance.
Right.
We may not come into finance
depending on how long the ****.
