I was just one of what would.
Well from the brace little what
little to hear exactly I think a
hundred thousand straight down
is that from the amendment or
from the changed the original
change to the bill.
Interview looking at what the
fact that that proposed
amendments we're not gonna do
that the bill okay thank you.
Rangel brought us a bill and
then amendment to put the
amendment on and then then then
added general fund costs.
We need to strip that amendment
and send it on its way Mr
chairman and and centering where
we where we transferring money
up somewhere or okay so is that
why you don't want to have the
general fund portion to.
Following this correctly.
The original of the amendment
the amendment for the gone
through they came from the oil
and gas proceeds and pass
through entities with holding
their distributions that go to
the various provided funds it
reinstated the Legislative
retired distribution that had
otherwise been pause until
twenty twenty five right so the
reinstatement of that
distribution to the retirement
fund hi General Fund cost
because it would otherwise be
going into the general the
reinstating it currently.
That was fun because it's still
stick around til twenty twenty
five or we taking that off so
that it goes into this fund so I
removing the amendment to keep
statute the way that it is in
statute says that provided
distributions for the
legislative retirement do not
start again until twenty twenty
five.
Leaving I know amendment that
conviction stays current
statutes and current statutes of
funds on the legislative
distributions from that proceeds
until twenty twenty and and just
for what what about the the
transfer and we're transferring
money over to some other.
Okay your commitment it's not on
the bill okay and and and that's
where I got confused and I
clarify something here and
correct me if I may add just
require vocation the cause of
that deposit exists there it
doesn't change anything to the
funds going to retirement to rid
legislators retirement or
anything it's just merrily
merrily keeping the the word in
the ways of the statute another
two years because the fund has
sufficient funding in there
there's no problem with the
original.
Yes yeah and then so Mister
chairman to Senator Ingle agree
with everything we just talked
about.
Lettering
what we have here the
legislative retirement is
official results of the bill of
passed years ago that put a way
we could get production to
production tax which is already
in law from out of state
producers which we were not
getting it has brought into the
state of New Mexico general fund
of billion over a billion
dollars when we did this bill we
took two million out of that for
a year for the legislative
retirement basically what this
our our chairman is over funded
but there was some question when
we were going to start this that
we would have a cost a one time
contribution to cover the cost
of the change from fourteen
percent from eleven percent to
fourteen percent we don't need
to do that if we don't want to
but everything in this thing.
The general fund is the river is
the receipt of all this money we
take it out ahead of time before
it gets there we have with the
judges are magistrature somebody
phoned up their retirements and
charges over fund and that will
come back in twenty twenty five
to our return to our retirement
sure our retirement will be
funded above what it needs to be
to stay stable and be over a
hundred percent it's about a
hundred thirty percent now if we
pass this bill hundred twenty
eight something like that now
then it would go down a little
more if they take the general
fund cost off but it's okay the
fund will be stable.
And will always be funded above
what we need we will not be
short like most of our
retirement chart earning of the
amendment you drugs made a
general fund appropriations so
we're stripping that amended
minutes fine I don't have a
problem with that that's what
the poor folks indicated would
be a good idea we don't have to
do it he didn't say it was that
was my idea to put it indicates
to fund Shawna this possibly can
you we don't have to have it so
taken off it's fine with me
thank you Mr I just want to make
sure that we're voting on here.
Questions on stripping the
amendment.
I want to determine I I want to
be sure that we understand this
because I know Senator Ingle has
worked really hard on this and
has done a lot of work going to
be hearing back Senator we want
to do the right thing and we we
don't want to mess around with
any language that you have the
individual came in the first
place but let me just ask Miss
PR I usually they're very good
when they make these
recommendations what was the
rationale behind it so I can
understand why they wanted to
send if it's something that's
necessary that we may be missing
somewhere let us Mr right now
all right he can certainly yeah.
I want to make even more.
Right hi great thank you.
Hello this is necessary for what
rationale behind it Mr chairman
and madam vice chair the the
recommendation of the
appropriation was to keep the
fund get a revenue neutral
since the the.
Benefit would increase a bit
that that's going to be a cost
and because the contributions
were deferred a couple years ago
temporarily there is no money
coming did but you'd like of
Senator Ingle said into the
chair said once those
contributions are reinstated
which I believe is in twenty
twenty five of the some of the
funding is back where it needs
to be yes Mr chairman and Greg
but what happens between now and
twenty twenty five if there's no
money coming in how do people
retire and get paid.
Currently madam chair the
minimized the fund is a hundred
forty percent funded by doing
this it's going to drop that
funded ratio to about a hundred
twenty eight percent so it's
still over funded it's going to
be a little bit less there is
still some surplus funds in
there that are going to be
paying benefits of the ones that
that contribution is reinstated
we expect those funded ratios
ago back.
Senator Rodriguez at some point
I member what here we did that
we diverted funds to the J. R.
A. and the magistrates and
that's the purpose of the twenty
twenty five cents that going on
on that so Karia came in and
said oh we need to replace that
with general fund we really
don't in fact we just need to
let the sunset go way any other
questions Senator no questions
you've clarified that yeah so.
Any so we're on a motion to
remove the amendment.
Have a motion by Senator share
the second by Senator Padilla.
Any objection to removing the
amendment.
We're back on the bill that we
the way it was originally came
in Mr Chairman just just to make
the committee certain of where
they're going with this and
twenty twenty five when our
phone start coming back in there
to the chairman funded will be
seventy five thousand dollar
macht addition to the fund.
Returns we will never be in the
red.
Okay back on the bill Charlie
from out of state sources close
to the people of New Mexico
absolutely nothing very.
Third time in the job questions.
a motion by Senator Diamond arm
Center verse I'm sorry.
And the second by Senator
Hemphill.
Any objection impact call the
roll.
Somebody go get either Senator
want this or Senator Lopez.
Okay Mr chair for Senate bill
one fifty nine Senator Burt yes
Senator yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes.
That just Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yeah Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator share yes
after share yes Senator
Steinborn is excuse.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and Senator yes.
Yes yes thank you centering on
us thank you.
Okay we'll do it again.
from this year over there who's
gonna be your expert witness.
Mr speaker associate justice
Senator.
For work because.
Just.
I I know Senator month issue the
Supreme Court justices here
waiting you walk by and then
came back will.
Mr chairman he knows no
disrespect intended didn't hear
quite ready for me and I had to
squeeze every bit of ten seconds
of and I don't want to Senate
bills to thank you Mr chairman
members the committee said seven
three this bill before you is an
effort to try and begin to
change the face and shape of New
Mexicos Judiciary.
Are increasing the opportunity
for the broader a greater
diversity of attorneys who can
become judges in New Mexico.
Principally let me just give you
an example the.
Dona ana county right now we
have a vacancy that occurred at
the end of the year by the
retirement of judge just prior.
To fill that vacancy there were
three applicants.
from Dona Ana County out of
about three hundred and fifty
lawyers three applicants that
was part of the process they go
before a review committee the
review committee makes
recommendations to the governor
out of three applicants are you
committee recommended only
wanting to the governor and
understandably the governor felt
that there wasn't much of a
choice for her.
So keep that in mind three
hundred forty lawyers three
applicants one by the very
process one of the governor.
For that in contrast to the last
time there was a federal judge
vacancy in New Mexico still in
New Mexico still New Mexico
courts but the federal courts
there were over eighty
applicants to the federal
position for that one single
position this group is built
principally intended to try and
bring the salaries of New
Mexico's highest judges at the
Supreme Court level.
In comparison to the lowest
levels of the federal judiciary
so we could be in to get some
good compared to the and and the
across the judges you we have a
couple things before I turn over
the chief justice's spring court
is the that we're we're we're
seeing increasingly in the
applications are people coming
out of the public sector in
order to be working for the DA's
office the PED's office
important qualifications and
experience but it's possible for
them to give up their practice
in applying and trying to be
part of the judiciary if your
private practice like I am if
you're you go through that
process and you try to be
appointed and so forth you have
to give up your law practice you
have to give your clients you
have to give up making but maybe
a book of business that took you
twenty or thirty years to
accumulate lego your staff get
ready furniture and everything
your your position on to doing
the judiciary we're we're just
not getting those people
applying to the the position
because the salaries are not
there so we're doing that as you
all know the committee on our
state presume is that the
salaries of judges we get from
the Supreme Court on downward
every judge is a percentage of
that position from that we're
we're changing a little bit
because right now the state
measure judges are also in that
spare staff for level of of
salaries the differences of your
statement that you're not
required to be a lawyer not
required law lottery estimation
got it so Richard override.
Expert witness the Chief Justice
Mexico Supreme Court justice we
have thank you senator savant is
Mr chairman members of the
committee already addressed this
committee on January the
seventeenth regarding the pay
part of this bill and I'm not I
don't tend to repeat any of that
here today justice banking came
with me to address the
retirement portions of the bill
I did bring with me Mister mark
Baker.
Who is the chair of the federal
magistrate selection committee.
And he will I will turn it over
to him to give you some very
sharp permanent and I think
compelling testimony so with
that Mr chair I may have Mister
Baker it is.
Thank you very much members of
the committee so as I've been
chair of the federal magistrate
judge merit selection panel
since twenty ten
so seen on a raft of the
turnover within that and have
overseen the process modestly
here individually but the court
knows that I'm sharing with you
all statistics from that process
The federal magistrate judges
are the blue
Level of the federal judiciary
which is still high but they do
preliminary proceedings they can
only try cases on the civil side
civil disputes if the parties
agree
and they take like initial court
appearances in criminal cases
and help mediate cases but there
at their current salaries which
have been adjusted substantially
in the ten years that I've been
on the committee have seen pools
of applicants the way that my
committee works as we take all
the applicant's Nero down to a
group of about ten to fifteen a
very highly qualified people
that are interviewed cut that
down to five and refer them on
to the appointed federal judges
the article three judges to
select and so I went back
when I learned that this bill
was at issue in in the session
and locked and Senator Cervantes
previewed the high point of
applications that I've seen
during my tenure as chair as
eighty four applicants for
federal magistrate judge
position the lowest I've seen
typically because Los crucis
smaller community I think you
get fewer but you're still at
over twenty five applicants for
those positions and in terms of
what the pool looks like it's a
complete cross section of the
bar everything from senior
partners at firms that you all
would probably recognize to
public defenders prosecutors
members of the plan a spa are
state court judges often state
court judges apply in large
numbers
In part because the the increase
in pay can be substantial I've
been told by applicants so I
don't want to I know you are
busy and want to take much of
your time but I think that that
may give you a snapshot of what
the pool looks like for the
federal magistrate judge
positions.
And also an FBI.
What we're gonna go them yet
when they do the federal that
would go to the audience and how
do we have on zoom.
In support.
This is for the.
As more and more.
One person on zoom in support
Warren are you there.
Yes the thank you Mr chair and
senators magistrate judge Warren
Walton present master
association we stand in support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
We'll go to the audience is only
have one person listed those in
support.
Just stand up and.
Committee members motives
bottles will provide the
president of the New Mexico
trial lawyers association
registered this from New
Mexico thrown Association we
stand in strong support of this
bill.
Reason respond were Senators of
altars I'm a civil practitioner
of a little risen to over the
top on backroom this bill makes
it easier for more experienced
attachments to transition from a
civil private practice.
Considering junction the
retirement the payroll these
things that we would consider in
making that.
Thank you anybody else in the
audience and support.
General fund great.
Right Gregory with their of
their borders support this bill
and will be available for any
questions thank you.
Anybody else in support anybody
in opposition.
I see none Senator want this and
I in that in the the judges and
met a little bit earlier in
talked about some amendments in
need to happen Senator want this
using the equipment to spring
court judges seeming amendments
correct
Adrian don who's gonna explain
that amendment.
We have an amendment so I can
have that command the motion to
move the amendment for
instructional purposes.
The motion by Senator media
second by Senator share.
Right where.
Just so everybody can hear.
Okay.
For our House Bill.
Million dollars additional
retirement fund.
And it came out of the house.
It removes the retirement
multiplier increases.
It firefighters the legislature
establishes the salaries of the
matters the council service
brought to our attention that it
became unclear what that the
problem happens who exactly
provide for us
salaries would simply so to be
clear Education but we have.
Revisions that say that
magistrates
additional pay with packaging
federal magistrate thank you
find for that to be done on a
biennial basis so every other
year instead of every year so
that would be done by New
Orleans finally the only and
then it move Huger magistrate
that have not been fully yet so
in the future for those
magistrates will be moving to
the state general retirement
plans but all legislative
members and their retirement
plan within the magistrate
retirement fund will remain
unchanged.
The state.
Questions on the amendment.
Mr chairman I I do have a
question that good afternoon
Senator make can I go now or did
you want others to the table for
discussion program okay I
thought it was.
We did that I'm not Senator
share
both in for the a move the
motion if we have the motion of
politics north brook and just I
just had a quick question for
clarification good afternoon
senator so Montez and Justice
the help of does the question
maybe Dawn you can clarify which
you mentioned just wanna make
sure we're on the same page tell
me what happens to the
magistrates in this you
mentioned that the couple in but
you mentioned that it would be
every every other years are they
just a couple from the from the
percentage that you're tied now
every other year to for that or
is it permanent or how is it
working those right so Senator
Rodriguez it's important that
we're we're talking about
magistrates that we keep
stricter to kinds of medicines
were talk about this discussion
there the federal magistrates in
the federal system that's the
lowest level judges you heard
that we have our state
magistrate judges who were all
familiar with are the ones from
our communities and what happens
under existing law is the
salaries of all the judges are a
percentage of the judges of the
level above them so by the time
you get down through the state
judiciary the magistrate judges
have a percentage of the judges
above them and so forth the
judges above them so what we're
trying to do is we're with
reason we're do Google we're
taking the state magistrate
judges offer that stair step
process that's one thing we're
doing and then the other issue
was the matter of the retirement
of the state minister judges and
we're putting those into PR
rated the general a retirement
plan
that will apply to future
measures that will not apply to
the managers who are now in
office or who are already vested
so the the existing measures are
all protected but in the future
the chairman of future measures
to maybe elected or appointed
will what will come in the
regular
Mr chairman okay now what was
the every other year or every
two years the explained that
little bit for me please yes
thank you center so but this
we're we're setting the state
Supreme Court judges salaries
tied to a federal magistrate
position the federal management
salaries are set by assume
Congress or somebody certainly
the federal level.
And the concern was that we were
trying to always chase the
federal level of salary we would
find ourselves kind of an open
challenge for you all every year
to be constantly trying to keep
track of that so we thought that
doing it once every other year
and bring that equivalency would
achieve both our goal was to
have state sellers comparable to
the federal salaries we don't
get too far behind but we might
be at most a year or two behind
the federal so as well so we
close at the same time we will
find ourselves at the state
level kind of constantly having
to readjust our budget on a very
regular basis so this was a this
is a compromise the discussion
between the chairman myself in
the in the Chief Justice and we
thought it was reasonable for
your staff and the chairman to
not have to have you are
constantly trying to re evaluate
each and chase the federal
sellers.
Thank you for the explanation
now and thank you god for the
have Mr chairman any other
questions on the amendment.
I'm sorry Center producing.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator about this and Mister
Chief Justice so then does that
leave the salary the same for
two years.
Or does it just itself and then
we come back to have one more
time I was at work you Mr
chairman are going right now is
we're we're going to in this
session we're going to match the
justices of the Supreme Court
with the federal matters and
then that would be adjusted
again for two years so for
example next year the federal
salaries might go up we will try
and match it next year but we
will try and match it or we will
by statute match at the
following year.
Mr chairman I just was asking
because the current salary for
the federal ministry has gone up
by four thousand dollars it
since the last time we saw you
on this or someone on this I'm
sorry when the judiciary was in
presenting so then all that'll
just get taken into
consideration by the legislature
two years now Mister chairman
Senator thank you.
Senator.
Thank you Mr.
It makes.
We're going to do is do this in
the thirty day cycle of the
legislature every year or.
Point is going to be a sixty day
cycle change.
I'm I'm confused so we do it now
renewable to two years from now
which puts us back in the thirty
day cycle which means that were.
More likely to not get it done.
Mister chairman Senator Singh
this committee every one of the
thirty day sessions put together
budget so I I don't know that
you will get it done you always
manage to do it always amaze you
do what you do so your that your
question is right we be
reevaluating and and making the
modifications to the budget two
years now to match once again
match the federal budget hours
the the bill quite simply the
mandates requires we match that
salary with again with our chief
justices of the Supreme Court
March for our justices required.
Okay so.
I don't know if the next
question Mr chair so.
Well.
This is eleven pages long single
phase which makes it more works
than the bill itself.
So I'm not sure if I'm asking a
bill question or a
the amendment question but it's
about the state magistrate
judges coming out of this is
that part of this amendment with
that part of this bill is part
of the bill that's sometimes
where the amendment the only
thing that relates to state
magistrates in the amendment is
again the retirement plan.
Let's Mr that's what I want to
ask why did why did we take them
out of the.
Out of the.
General.
The judge retirement program so
let me let me have the chief
explained that the way the
measures are presently if you
can answer the the the with the
chairman present about all this
is really the right frankly
Senator solvency hello this is
to try to get we have a we have
a insolvency both the judicial
retirement and the measure
chairman and the answer your
question quite simply is trying
to achieve solvency but with the
chief added into the Mr Chairman
Senator if it's okay have
ostracized they can do just that
she's she's much smarter than I
am on is this printer's
personally on matters of
retirement these are these are
pretty complicated matters.
Mr chair Senator as I understand
your question is why is the J.
R. A. the judge's retirement and
the MRA separate.
that's a historic fact they were
set up that way originally we in
these funds were first created
and so they've always been in in
separate bundles are on separate
tracks.
So.
Mr Chairman.
And
Excuse me but I ready for
collection last name to make
everything's better with bacon
okay.
We apologize.
So on page three the the fifth
bullet damage remember smoking
levels law that's added in there
that that implies to me.
That this is a change in what
we're doing with magistrates
just because it's under line
New.
language.
And so may be missing something
here but doesn't that doesn't
that mean that they were part of
this retirement plan until now
when we defined them
differently.
I know so they've always been
separately the J. R. NSPCC Mr
chair Senator they've always
been separate Emory in the
generated never been of joint
plan of any kind of they have
paralleled each other in certain
respects.
But even the way service credit
is a crude and the solvency are
all distinct when you're looking
at the magistrate retirement
fund in the J. and the judge
retirement fund and the
magistrate Fund is the smallest
of of the two funds it's it's
it's a little bit harder to
bring it to solvency although
generously as Senator Ingle was
talking about earlier in the in
the chair you all agreed to
share a little bit of your
revenue stream to help the
retirement funds it helps to the
MRA.
Point seven percent.
so move the needle a little bit
but it's still very small and
and insolvent by the actuarial
definition.
Since your let me help you kind
of understand that so we just
take the magistrate judge's Fund
it's been installed ever since I
got here I'm probably since
you've been here.
And so such a small pool of
people correct me if I'm wrong
gray got like a hundred thirty
five it's really a small pool of
people they can't keep that
funds all the so now we have an
opportunity state okay
magistrates we're gonna keep you
solvent inside state general
fund if you get hired in those
in the MRA Fund continue with
the same benefits and everything
on the path that they are will
have to add money maybe later on
to make that solvency but at
some point that thing's going to
go away.
Thank you Mr chair here we're
raising salaries what is that
due to the to the judicial
retirement them versus the
magistrate.
Because doesn't that make it
even more insolvent because you
got it then match The New.
The new salaries
Mr chair Senator it it doesn't
change the equation on solvency
because our part the pip
percentage of that a judge will
be contributing hasn't been
altered we put in ten point five
percent annually and what the
state matches will stay the same
so the amount we're putting in
will become larger based on the
increase in salary so that's one
of the reasons that I think P.
R. A. was able to endorse this
bill is because all roads lead
to some level of of solvency.
And we are back filling with
another twenty million right
what does that do to the pair a
fund for J. R. A. winning back
the with the twenty million
increase for your employee.
Mr chairman members I believe
the shortfall in G. R. A. right
now is of about eighty million
dollars so that twenty million
you know could to ensure public
twenty five percent and I
believe puts us on the path to
of fully funding the J. are a
within twenty five years.
The question for the bill itself
thank you any more questions on
the amendment.
For more short here so I don't
leave your just wondering about
this but thank you just as bacon
for that also
on on the I'm a little bit vague
and I want to make sure I
understand about the decoupling
of the magistrates do they get
an increase at all in in their
salary increase formula this
year like other state employees
are has it going to work if
we're going to do Google on we
want to make sure they're not
just left there hang with
painting without a raise so
Senator Rodriguez they will get
the same seven percent that
everybody else is getting in the
state we have to the next
billion Mr but the magic yes
will be right in line with the
seven percent yes and Mr
chairman that is why I asked is
it going to be where they like
everyone else or is it something
else different that we're
working on or something okay all
right and and one last question
here just as we go I think you
and I have talked about this in
the Senate in the conference
room you recall thank you for
that great meeting we had lots
of good information but I left a
little bit vague there not
knowing did you communicate with
the with the magistrates there
are four aware that this the
couple is going to happen and
and communication to place an
art is not a test so yes two
point we had a meeting with the
magistrates
over a year ago I think it's a
year ago
in person and by zoom explain to
them what we intended to do but
it would require this to
complete his first the salary
goes they do have a
constitutional protection that
their salaries cannot be reduced
during their term
in the New Mexican The New
Mexico constitution.
They were very they with the
expressed at the time that they
were happy with their salaries
that were not unhappy with their
salaries and that put that they
were concerned about the the
decoupling because of they
didn't unforeseen certain
circumstances unforeseen
consequences
but they didn't they don't know
what those might be or could be
the second part is that we we
did ask originally for ten
million dollars to put into the.
I just retirement fund this
takes that out it and our
request is that if you.
Don't go with this amendment
that you consider putting the
ten million under their fund
because it does require solvency
but as I understand it
the the shift to the P. R. right
gives them solvency to those
members that are moved over into
there so
if this past the ten million
dollar request would become moot
basically it would have no
purpose.
Thank you very much for that
explanation I have Mister
chairman thank you anything else
on the amendment.
Okay oh sorry center with.
Was it is Mr chair is a ten
million dollars.
Not in the budget is it in the
budget is in in the bill.
For the pension this the as I
understand it that that's been
stripped out.
And the it's it's great this
puts this the tendons District
up at this point.
This only pertains to the rays
of not the pension Mr chair
Senator Woods what this does is
we had twenty million dollars
for the jet G. R. E. which is a
judicial retirement yet ten
million for the MRA municipal
retirement so when we change the
municipal retirement.
And move them in the state
general fund those employees we
can change our budget so those
employees and that limited
number of a hundred thirty five
are only funded at forty eight
percent currently Senator Ingle
on the legislative plan we
divert money to J. R. right in
MRA and I don't know the dollar
amount to help with that
solvency for the last forty five
years and so we'll have to come
back and visit the MRA as that
pool shrinks but that'll be a
declining number as it moves
forward.
And so in this ammendment it it
takes that municipal retirement
and moves the future employees
in the state general fund so
they're not hanging out there at
forty percent.
Funded and current magistrate
retirees remain in the same.
Full of them Mr Chairman posted
about.
Not.
The.
Mr Mr use word meniscal you
should be.
Legislative.
Legislative I'm sorry.
But but from what I understand
and maybe we lost.
Department.
Is that we have.
We have a request here.
Thirty five million dollars.
For judicial return.
The road
is this FOR real.
Senator Woods that was in the
original bill
we're seeing don't have that
phone from this now the only
change in the F. R. A..
At thirty five million will go
to twenty million into the
general.
Well the Chief Justice was
talking about ten million just a
minute ago so tell me where the
ten million fits in this deal.
Enter and amendment we stripped
the ten million from from.
So there's only twenty million
that's going to go into the
judicial retirement which is
everybody above and magistrates.
And magistrates had their own
poll.
In that that does not fully fund
it but that are that does fully
funded.
The J. R. right will still not
be fully funded according to
where to go Griggs testimony
they'll be on a path to solvency
for twenty five years and bring
the solvency up about.
Great tell me the number again
and forgot really.
Yes yes so the Mr chair Senator
Woods so there's a eighty
million dollar shortfall in jail
right right now so that'll be
reduced by twenty five percent
and that puts us on a path to
fully funding the phone within
twenty five years.
The.
Did I hear twenty five years
yes.
These guys are like twenty five
years.
You never know.
This is a tough Committee I
thought we were on phones
addition furnace Senator month
this are.
Chief Justice of the.
What what I'm getting at.
You know we've we've got this
bike.
raises.
In.
Then we've got a deficit in the
retirement.
So whoever retires well it's in
deficit.
Of.
We will not be you know have
paid in their share of the
retirement or we haven't paid
their share of retirement have
you will look at it.
For twenty five years.
Center the way pensions work.
They take time to build immense
amount of people in the poll so
as new judges come on at a
higher rate contributions
increase and hopefully the
return increases at the same
rate or higher and so that fund
will be changes solvency over
the path of of ten to twenty
five years all pension funds are
based on twenty five years of
solvency when they go out and
say what is the term of the
solvency of the fund so that's a
normal pathway.
What were you worried is where
funds get to forty eight percent
like the MRA that are
unsustainable because either the
but the pool is too small and
the benefits are too high and so
that's why we need to move them
into state during the I
understand what you're saying
it's a it's the normal way but.
And I'm sure there's an actuary
chart the show me all of that in
its normal that these guys
retire new guys come in and and
funds are being pulled out one
of the funds are being brought
in.
And we're adding twenty million
into that fund to kickstart this
is what we're state.
We're adding twenty million
dollars to reduce this to reduce
the increase the solvency of the
JRA Fund.
Which is eighty million dollars
in deficit which would bring a
deficit to two sixteen sixty
million and puts it on a twenty
five year path to solve.
Sure that that we've looked at
adding.
More than that are less than
that this is the this is the
ideal number that we've come up
with to do this.
Correct.
This is officer looking at him
and I'm asking me so.
Thank you I thank you Mr.
Mr chair Senator that this is
through a lot of negotiation and
discussion between the sponsor
of the Supreme Court and the
chair here and the twenty
million with the increases in
salaries and additional
contributions by the judges
should meet the definite
actuarial definition of the
solvency I think I got that
right.
Whole lot of words in there but
it should it should it should
help us accomplish the goal of
solvency the actuarial
definition to my mind is is is a
long road.
But I'm not an actuary
and this will take a major step
in the right direction for the
judicial retirement without
question.
Okay within the moment question
is this is you know quite a bit
of the amendments here and it
if.
I think.
You Mr chairman more dress I
just briefly Sir would you
express simple services sure to
I hope that when you're looking
through what looks like a long
amendment you realize that if
you look at it's almost all
existing language so if you look
at page one really we get to
session one a page to all of
this is existing language
section or page three we're just
adding the one definition of a
management member page for as
all existing language page five
is all existing language.
H. six is almost all existing
language the section two is not
new language of those that
section two is not new except
and mentioned members that one
definition it's two words right
in all of section two of section
three again all existing
language focusing definitions
were simply adding or making a
change on the date on page seven
subsection J. so centers I hope
in some context of you realize
this I would like to link the
amendment but you needn't be
concerned unnecessarily this is
almost all existing language or
just adding a couple of
definitions to that in a that
continues really always your
pages eight and nine.
You'll see that with the just
with the date on page nine
section four and then when you
get to session I on page nine is
a retired the the salaries to
the federal system and and then
if you look I think importantly
on page eleven subsection the
this this address the question I
think by Senator Rodriguez
subsection ages as the annual
salary for magistrates shall be
established by the legislature
in the appropriations acts of
this gives this committee and
the Legislature full authority
every year to set the state
magistrate level sellers.
Thank you thank you any other
questions.
Hello a motion on the amendment.
Our motion from Senator Hemphill
on the amendment second by.
Share any objection to them and.
Where are back on the bill.
Senator sure did you have a
question of the bill.
The thank you Mr I move this out
of my way now the.
Hopeful places in here it talks
about occupying that office.
in the bill itself.
And so then the question is.
If you move from one.
If you move from a District
Court judge of Supreme Court
justice are you occupying that
office for more than ten years.
Because you are only six and one
in your only six in the other.
In a good that's just a question
wording here because it says
occupied that office now I'm
looking for.
The question to the question Sir
could you please try again the
question of a I'm not
understanding and I'm looking at
it just feel free just a.
Of page eight this is that it's
in your federal funds rate eight
starting online ten for service
credit earned on or after July
one twenty twenty two provided
that the judges justices
occupied that office for less
than ten years.
And so that's the the question
if you could be.
The judge.
But not in that office.
Thank you answer your should
look at Mr chair Senator I think
I follow the questions so I
think it's really a matter of
title so whether you're a
justice or judge you're paying
in the ten point five percent
based on what your salary is so
those titles don't matter so I'm
not sure that that definition
really
The
to any kind of real this
distinction because if you're a
I think part of your question
was if you're judging you become
a justice that that change
something and it would not but
I'm not sure I'm following
completely.
Mr chair that's exactly right
because I've I've learned from
too many attorneys.
In this room.
Four or and make a difference
million shall make a difference
and console here it says it's in
war so ten years.
Less than ten years and one in
less than ten years and the
other that's why.
If for some certain fine I don't
care but somebody might care at
some point if it's if it's just
a changing of work there.
The first also like to remark
that because you understand the
difference between and in a war
and may and shout choose
yourself through the law school
and tens of thousands of dollars
and graduation
but the judiciary deals with
that issue of time that that
what seems like an
inconsequential word to most
people in the meeting a great
deal to the to the system so let
them address the merits the one
thing that I would point out to
you to Senator before they
address the specifics is if you
look at the amendment you just
adopted.
of three.
The amendment the strikes.
Ages one through seventeen
sections one through seven so
we're gonna go your question was
referring to the original
billing your question and
effectively but up to the minute
you've now struck all of that
years so if you have a question
I would probably have you
referred to the amendment rather
the original bill that being
struck down.
Will Mr.
Sure that might not be in here I
don't know.
Please read here specially when
I looked it up online and I
could just work for now that I
have to read like a few
different.
Making sense but it Senator look
at your amendment program three.
Yes if you were meeting with you
struck pages one through
seventeen which is effectively
the regional billion largely
struck the regional bill.
Okay so
If if we're all happy with
and it'll work fine so we.
This does add twenty million
dollars still to the retired
from the general fund.
And that doesn't include
whatever flow through from the
legislative report that the
legislative go away.
Which rural Strickler
ThinkCentre unfairness Mister
chairman Senator this bill does
really doesn't do that put that
twenty million dollars into the
J. on R. A. you already got that
built in your budget that's
that's already in there and back
to the question of Senator Woods
earlier is that enough well I'm
sure the judiciary committee
it's my job to make sure you
have a solid the solvent invesco
fight individuals in addition I
would tell you no it's not but
it is a compromise against all
the other competing demands of
this committee has before you.
Okay in the end so I and I
understand that these are.
Two different but highly related
issue here because if you raise
the the salary in the the the
the retirement also has to go
and that would include
Right I think we would call a
spiking so all of a sudden now
I've paid in down here but now
my salaries up here for the last
three years or five years will
take and so now I'm going to
draw for this higher salary even
though I paid in on this lower
salary.
Then that would certainly have a
have an effect on the J. already
in order to want to make sure
that the.
House Bill to where we are I
want to put it
can account for.
That.
So is that a problem in what
we're doing.
Senator I think we have to have
great tribulation that question.
Yes the Mister chairman Senator
so with that I believe the J. R.
A. benefit is is based on the
value sixty months of salary for
for me crease you know in July
he retires next July the twelve
of those months are going to
increase of the budget but
they're also paying you know for
ten point five percent on a
higher salary and the the courts
are chipping in an additional
fifteen percent still like you
said the legislative
appropriation that was deferred
is continuing to come in as well
as we get a percentage of the
docket fees so so there are.
Well that rhetorically we'll see
a little bit of a bomb but over
time of those higher
contributions to work for
themselves.
Sure I understand some of these
are are not.
This is about getting the most
qualified judges and justices
and I'm all in favor that not a
problem but I also know that
this is going to have an effect
elsewhere and for longer term on
our budget then this bill the
state so just trying to get that
clarified in my mind so we can
work on.
And how we pay for this in
purpose to.
you Mr chairman of the near
twenty years everyone of twenty
years I've been here we've had a
judicial studies commissions
panels task forces everyone to
twenty years everyone was
recognize where those were the
lowest paid judges in the
country we have been we've
always said we're going to
change that and the you have a
chance this year to do it.
Yes Mr we have the chance to do
it and I'm support doing it I
just want to make sure that
we're not.
We're not creating the
unintended consequences that I
talked about.
Thank you Mr thank you questions
on the bill.
There would.
Hello this is a real simple
question and I think I know the
answer but you never you never
chance to set up.
Sure.
Stay up with you Senator.
Age eight that still in the bill
rate you could do the amendment
etcetera eight it eight on the
original.
That's been struck.
Seventeen.
Word.
This is the this is the bills
I'm I'm gonna get squared away
here and and and I apologize
for.
Because I was getting.
Hang up the same way when I
start welcome service credits
and all this kind of stuff.
Question I was going to ask was
how do you establish a service
credit.
And I think that can pertain to
what Senator sure was talking
about.
And it.
You know how you do that if you
Sir.
Five years.
This.
One judge in.
Lane here on how you do that
really mostly gone Senator of
America's Senator Senate right
this is about trying to get the
best qualified judges we stand
in our state most experienced my
original idea in the original
bill allow for an earlier
opportunity to acquire investing
the retirement system so the
lawyer I'm sixty one years old
I'm not going to join the
judiciary Bisher that's
absolutely no chance of that
happening but but in my my
believe attorney who's fifty
five fifty years old here she
fifty fifty five sixty years old
may bring a wealth of experience
to the the bench but they don't
have enough time twelve to
really build up retirement so
we're discouraging those
experienced lawyers from joining
the bench I want to correct that
by adjusting some of the formula
to make it easier to vest sooner
as as a judge encourage the more
seasoned lawyers to join the
bench I I lost that the debate
and discussion with your tight
fisted chairman.
We'll be back.
Thank you have a both ways.
So I've learned so with that.
Sorry Mr chair.
With that.
So how do you establish.
That.
Years of service that credit.
How is that is that.
Thank you one answer that
question for.
Mister chairman Senator could
you repeat it please repeat the.
Out of the status of that their
vesting period in the system if
the judge comes in at fifty five
the scenario that Senator for
Bottas said judge comes in at
fifty five and he he wants to
build up his service credit from
fifty five forward.
I know that this this
legislative.
Tension it was you have to have
five years six years in.
Before you head standing in the
system.
Explain that port to meal on how
it works for the judges as do
they have to have so many years
even before their vested in the
system.
Mister chairman Senator occur
under current law the judge of.
In order to.
Be entitled to retirement
benefits would have to be age
sixty five with at least eight
years of service as a judge
that's the first time that they
would be able to get a budget so
wait eight years as a vesting
period then I believe it's six
fifteen and then I'll be at
least age sixty with fifteen
years of service.
So those are the two
requirements so so I we were
eight years would be the minimum
testing before somebody could
start getting benefit as a judge
but they would also have to be
at least sixty five years old.
So it is it is time served but
it is a a minimum before you can
start growing up.
The benefit.
Yes.
The maybe it's in there who.
Center it may not be in this
amendment in this bill but it's
in statute in the retirement
fund no other questions on the
bill
let me just say you know we've
been here long enough to watch
governors that for the exact
lacked the judicial system and
try to manage him with money.
And in order to have the three
branches of government equal
and.
Not have to go through the
political process and
this is might be the best way to
do that.
In order to keep them on track
and on their own and not have to
come back and play the political
game because somebody wander
lost in court we should probably
never do that with the judicial
branch of the amendment helps
the bill quite a bit you can't
have a rate increases and
increasing benefit and not have
consequences to the funds that
are very important for me as a
friend to many years and I
popped learning.
All the things.
but center I think this is as
good as we're going to get it in
here and in this case I think
it's going to go through the
legislature and so with that can
have emotional the defense
motion from the past from Santo
share second by Senator I mean
it from the past motion by
Senator Padilla second by
Senator share that we call the
roll.
From the cares for yes Senator
Burt yes Campos yes Campos yes
thank you for yes Senator that
is yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill with you Senator
Padilla yes.
Yes yes Senator here yes Senator
sure yes Senator Steinborn is
excuse Senator Woods yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes if you give.
Nine yes to excuse.
Thank you Senator one just
remember that we can make
changes to the generators
pension in order to keep the
more solvent.
And maybe even to keep rate in
in line if we need to do that so
that may happen in the future
maybe because.
The card is for the for rural
part of sport and the house move
in the governor we've heard
hearings after hearings in our
committee of the judiciary is an
essential component to trying to
address crime in our state among
many other issues thank you
thank you for your time in your
thank you thank you so much.
Enter Stewart.
As Senator comes up we talk
about pension reform and cuts or
changes to pension the ERP is
one page and that you cannot
make changes in to make it
solvent the only way to make
this fund come to solvency is
basically to put more money into
that Senator Stewart
Thank you Mr chairman.
Assoc Senate bill thirty six
does two things it raises the
employer contribution one
percent more for this year.
And one percent more for FY
twenty four.
So the amount that's in the
budget for this includes the one
percent that we put in place
last year and the one percent
that's in this bill for this
year also so the idea is to
raise two percentage points this
year which is in the budget it's
about forty million dollars just
for K. twelve there's another
twelve and a half for higher at
and the next year another one
percent on a stand for questions
thank you we're gonna go to
zoom.
And those in support John Kurds
are you there John.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee joggers
with A. F. T. New Mexico and
we're here to show our support
for Senator Stewart and Senate
bill thirty six and urged
committee to vote yes on this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Kim at the box.
Yes yes I'm current president of
the UNM retiree Association
we have six hundred twelve
active members in the
association and we to support
legislation that requires a
state employer contribution
increased Senate bill forty two
and twenty twenty one was only
partially funded we only
received two percent of the four
percent requests and we need to
receive the additional two
percent over the next two years
thank you very much for your
consideration on.
Thank you I don't have anybody
else in that zoom in support
have anybody on zoom against.
Is
there anybody we're gonna go to
the audience of those in the
audience in support.
However it's just not right
here.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the White is the
executive director of the
educational work on behalf of
the board of trustees.
For.
The.
Thank you congratulations on the
job.
Thank you Mr chair getting the
members of the committee my name
is mark several of the New
Mexico State University
president's want to think about
pro temperance legislation for
two or very close to the
stakeholders group with the RB
with higher education and public
education so with that we stand
strong support Mr chair members
command thank you.
Thank you Mr around.
Thank you Mr chairman Stan
rounds of the executive director
of the state school
superintendents association we
stand strong supporters we
appreciate your consideration we
supports Senators up for
interpretation bring oreo three
to to health.
Thank you.
Mr chair making question
interview several agents officer
with the University of New
Mexico we stayed strong for the
bill we thank the good sponsored
ring the idea for thank you.
Thank you last one.
One more member of the committee
claim maybe because the
university we do stand is thank
you.
Dr wells.
Your committee members thank you
very much we stand is they have
all the employees in Mexico tech
we stand strong support for
state senators the so thank you
very.
Questions from committee
members.
what.
Your what is the rules we do.
There's.
Mr Chairman educators have been
paying ten point seven percent.
Ten.
Ten point seven percent for many
years one of the highest in the
country.
What is.
We are.
So Mister chairman right now the
employer contribution.
Is sixteen point one five this
bill would increase that this
year to seventeen point one
five.
And next year to eighteen point
one five.
Sure would participate.
Mr Chairman not at this point
now.
They've been raising their rates
for years they don't get a cost
of living adjustment because the
cost of living adjustment is
tied to the solvency of the fund
since I believe it was twenty
twelve so a new teachers that
come in have a lower multiplier
they have to work longer the
benefits have been rained and
significantly over the past
fifteen years at this point the
E. R. B. members would like a
little parity with para right
now para contributes eighteen
point two four two up para
employees from the employer and
next year will be nineteen point
two four percent.
The employer pays under the
current system.
Senator.
Right now nine point ninety two
percent.
Now they're you know the the
periplasm server really
confusing and multiple you just
heard one of them the basic
state plan for state workers is
nine point nine two nine point
nine two now if you get to the
police or municipal issues that
also contribute to pair the
those rates are just all over
the map so but the basic plan
for state employees employees
pay nine point nine two percent
now in the state pays eighteen
point two for this year and
they'll pay nineteen point two
for next year.
Here for.
Orders were in some.
Mr chairman if I had the answer
to that I wouldn't be here.
I would be somewhere reserves
wealthier something our new you
are be directory we have any
history on this I Y. E. a R. B.
is where it's at.
Mr chairman members the
committee sentiment will only
that it has to do with the.
Now and as the user is.
The program allows for.
Erase Education.
The budget not as good.
And so when you have a not
putting into the fund in a group
coming out of the fund in the
benefit is been decreased and
the cap on on inflation then the
fund can never really manage it
and the only way to fix this
fund is to put money in.
Thank you.
Senator.
Sure I know.
Nobody ever wants to talk about
this but these these are huge
numbers up thank you twice
they're going in here.
Our weather team of.
B. R. A. R. E. R..
The.
so thirty percent in rounded
numbers of the pay is going from
either player employee to the
pension fund yet they're still
unsolved not solve both of.
In the judiciary and everywhere
else.
And I know that this is a
difficult political.
conversation but at some point
Mr chair we have to change how
we do business completely not
just put more more money into it
because we're never going to
catch up.
Even if we put a billion dollars
into this fund right now it's
still doesn't catch up.
So we need to figure out how to
change.
From defined distribution to
defined contribution which I
know maybe everybody out there
just just faint.
That's what works.
Right I put money in.
It's time to get out given what.
Given what comes out.
That that makes it so often.
Eventually the quickly.
I do know there's a generation
in there that we've got to deal
with
But I think that's the only
solution because every year we
come here we hear the same
stories focuses not enough in
here it's not funded we have to
put more money in it the
taxpayers have put more money
into it.
Of the employees have put more
money into it everybody has to
deal with it and yet the the
solution.
We don't address.
And
In I don't even know how to get
there Mr chair of but that's
something that the all the
people that are out there
supporting this right now are
going to have to consider
eventually.
Of course some change if that's
not the one some real honest
systematic change as opposed to
just put more money in.
So.
I don't know what I'm gonna do
with this one because hello
we're not gonna make that change
this year.
And then rarely do we speak of
this outloud anywhere.
But that's the problem.
We'll never catch up.
Eventually the taxpayers should
be put in a hundred percent and
it still will be caught up.
So.
The question but it's certainly
something that I need people out
there and out there to think
about.
We're not fixing it would put
another band aid on it and it's
not very good that day.
Thank you.
Thank you they're running is
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Stewart for this
bill I guess one of the things
that crosses my mind immediately
when I think about ten point
seven percent contribution for
example from the educators
themselves is that ten point
seven percent may not seem like
a lot to some people but that
amount times the little salary
they get is a lot they get so
little truly as we know that's
been the discussion all along is
how under paid they are and and
how much work they do and how
much more demands we put on them
but then we take ten point seven
percent of that for their
retirement that leaves them with
very little because the amount
they currently get starting at
forty thousand until now this
change
is gross pay that's before they
take before we take insurance
and I go and other Medicare
taxes and other taxes that we
take
withholding or whatever it may
be they hardly take anything
home and so while I think the
yeah we shouldn't ask them to
contribute anymore because any
little increase they get now is
going to disappear again
if we ask them to contribute
more to their retirement self I
think we're doing the right
thing Senator in doing this but
that's my opinion thank you Mr
chairman Senator Gonzales thank
you Mr chairman the record to
pass thank you Senator Gonzales.
Let me just explain one thing I
mean.
Having learned this when.
Eight years ago when the gas
became in and said you gotta do
get as we roll and bring here
your deficits to the front of
the board from your time in the
front of your financial
statement that's when we had to
really start making functional
changes in para and so when we
did that and
David correct me wrong there is
currently unfunded liability is
eight point six billion.
That correct Mr chairman.
is our I'm sorry your I'm sorry
your.
So over seven billion lower your
returns issue.
To return this year.
Fiscal year twenty one or eighty
plus percent the owner.
And what was that in dollars.
We had a three million dollar
game this year on investment
returns which still then move
quite down from eight point six
we still have no matter what
happens when matter what changes
you make when you go to defined
benefit plan or you go to any
other plan you still have eight
point six million of liability
until everyone be paid out of
the funds so the only way is to
put cash and try to invest our
way out of it and so with that
we have a due pass motion by
Senator Gonzales have a second
by Senator Hemphill.
path we call the roll.
We should never been and I
popped.
If Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yeah
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes thank you continue
yes Senator share.
Hello.
Senator share now Senator
Steinborn is excuse Senator
Woods.
What two hundred tax
yeah the last one.
That's not the case Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes senator Munoz yes Senate
committee us yes Senator was
working.
The one center Burke.
St Louis.
The.
The
public that's inclusive
influential Center bird Senator
Woods yes Senator.
vertex plane is about.
Senator Burt yes and pass I mean
yes sorry so I have nine yes one
no and one excuse.
Number two when I I.
You know want to help and and I
voted yes but but I have really
indigestion and I appreciate.
Some of
Senator shares comments and and
it's hard for me is just a
business person to seem like I'm
attitude that.
When.
When it when the program is it
is in trouble it's not so and
yet we're adding to the woes of
that program it's.
It just is kind of incongruence
of what we're doing I understand
this is government it's a little
bit different.
But
I'm gonna support
the teachers but.
it is with great reservation
that I do this.
Thank you very there you have to
pass thank you thank you
conversation I don't see any
other sponsors in the room so I
guess we'll adjourned for the
day
She's not here.
We have a.
We do have the language for
junior.
So you want to pass up to the
members.
The junior bill language.
Thanks to this.
Several weeks matter through
that money here than my the last
year and both want to clean it
up.
Adrian who is a staffer for
Senate finance.
explained engineer and they're
gonna pass up the the junior
language and then.
Well about the junior language
and then.
Bring the ability committee
tomorrow or do we need to do it
tonight that's the bill.
This finance.
Right when you want to start
with.
Regions.
Our so Mister chairman members
of the committee what we have
what you have in front of you is
both the language and that's the
Supplemental projects.
From Legislative Council Service
document and then you have the
bill rate aside it the language
itself was just a heads up
printed yesterday so it doesn't
have one minor change that we
added after proving came by
Fund everything else is
reflected from that language in
the bill so some high level
things to know the on the
language which is the.
Supplemental projects list right
the fiscal year FY twenty two
refers to all the nonrecurring.
appropriations that are in the
bill those are for expenditure
in FY twenty two and FY twenty
three.
On page twelve you'll see all FY
twenty three which is our
recurring appropriations
in total we are allocating
twelve point six million in
recurring and twelve point six
million in non recurring so the
bill as a whole contains twenty
five point two million some
highlights.
There is a total of three point
six five million in non
recurring for local projects
around the state there's four
point seven five
In recurring four hundred and
seventy five thousand and
recurring so in total local
projects are going to get about
four point one two five million.
PED is receiving an
appropriation of one point two
million CYFD seven hundred
thousand D. O. H. one point
eight five Indian Affairs seven
hundred and some other
highlights animus you is getting
two point eight five million
without largest appropriation
going to the and at age eight
program with a total of five
hundred million I'm sorry five
hundred thousand hello I know
right Hey we're spending a lot
of money and then you NM is
getting two point two five
million
with that Mr chair I'm open for
any questions you may have a
drink clarify something on the
order you said there was a
language issue and.
Yes just some minor technical
issue that senator Byrd brought
to my attention yesterday which
I took up to Legislative Council
Service and they fixed it but we
got this list their list before
they made the change so it'll
it's reflected in the bill but
it's not reflective upon the
list.
What is that so we know.
It will be basically a change to
one of his allocation one of his
projects in a terrible townie
going to a museum now it would
be going to a museum and set up
the previous allocation.
That a technical issue on the
land.
From my first request and so we
have to shifted to the museum
which was my next request.
Questioned from committee center
for the.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
subcommittee chair once the same
thing but I just want to say
that this was an interesting
process and all the folks that
were outside of the guidelines
were notified as well as what
the staff told us but but some
of them just chose this to still
leave it that way
as it is do you happen to know
how many instances where that
occurred.
In tonal unfortunately I don't
have that tabulated Senator more
than ten less than the.
Roughly right around there.
So I just Mr chairman I just
want you to be aware that you
know they took every effort and
I was you know I think that was
great the staff tried to work
with people but they chose to
leave it the way it was outside
of the guidelines to set forth
the.
So that should be sent an open
meetings so that there's no
confusion later if your money
doesn't go to where it was
intended to go.
Organ donor.
I just want to mention though so
a lot of technical call the.
Yes it was very technical next
year reduce junior is going to
go directly to the agency and
directly to state government and
not to.
The thing with rainbows
butterflies and space shuttles
and launch pads and.
Everything else under the sun
that we can imagine.
Any other questions on the
substitute bill.
Hello.
See I need to.
Remove the subs to bill for
discussion.
I don't think we.
We need a motion to I'm sorry I
apologize.
I have a motion to move the
substitute bill for discussion
purposes so I'll move it do not
pass on Senate finance committee
so sorry on Senate bill forty
eight and a do pass of Senate
finance committee says two
percent of a forty eight port
Act such decisions.
Thank you I get that right one
second on that makes it a motion
made by Senator DS second by
Senator Gonzales we discussed
the substitute.
You want to look for a few
seconds or.
Have a motion by their compost
review pass.
And the second by Senator Woods.
We call the roll.
Senator Burt yes Senator yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes senator Dodd.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Yes Senator Padilla yes.
If you yes senator here.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn is excuse Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
if you have ten yes and one
excuse.
Thank you.
we're good.
Thank you thank you to you and
Dawn and everybody that scrub
the list LFC and everything that
had to get every little word
exactly right because it was a
chore.
Senator Lopez you're next I'm
gonna run to.
Was room
you have seen amendment fund
correct right I have a heavy
equipment right in front of me
here to bring it with them and
right except for one provision.
Center that we sent to that
amendment so we are not in
agreement on the amendment the
last roll over the bill.
The provision that I'm a that I
have a concern with is a
provision that would make that
fifteen dollars an hour go into
effect prior to prior to any
other races that are passed
during the session that is
subsection C. on the regional
bills.
From
the Santo I mean.
A different amendment was going
to be drafted.
On that does not that does not
include section C..
To give the committee a choice I
just want to be clear on them
in before the start of the bill
we do not have
Senator Sedillo this is change
to ours and we have our
amendment for the Senate finance
committee amendment in front of
you all right now we do not have
any additional amendment issue
that it's been on a rush and
it's not.
Senator if you want to propose
an amendment after all over the.
I think we could just slightly
amend the amendment Center were
not lawyer possible committee
and so we've had an amendment
issue before in order to avoid
that amendment issue.
Make sure that we got to correct
I would rather make sure we have
the two amendments they can
score equally next to each other
and then we to make of of.
I just want to make sure that
we're correct on that.
It's easier for us we're just we
don't have the lawyers and the
comprehension we have an
amendment issue and and I don't
want to go down that road so it
is it is a simple issue of of
retaining subsection C..
That's it.
If so in what incentive strike
subsection B. center we don't do
amendments on the fly in here we
just don't have the expertise we
will make sure they're correct
so we'll just roll over or get
your amendment you'll be first
on the on the calendar tomorrow.
Tomorrow would.
Soon as we come off the floor.
It's better for us to do it that
way that way I don't have an
amendment issue Santo Domingo
brought an amendment in that at
the general fund and then so
they didn't have general fund
and it did and then got into the
and then of course I just wanna
make sure we're correct so okay
very first tomorrow thank you
thank you thank you Mr president
thank you members of the
committee are you get the
amendment to us to nine so we
have it and members can see that
and we can get a post.
More maps for the your staff
will completed or should I go up
to the legislature that is your
amendment that you want us to
look at and needs to be brought
down to you need to do that our
amendment we've you send it to
you you saw the down before the
floor if you want to copy them
and then again we can give
I have it it's just I understood
the staff is going to make an
alternative that would include
my.
If.
Drafting itself okay thank you
Mr thank you members of the
thank you senator.
We are adjourned
Let me let me just say quickly
let me say quickly.
The language that we have for
house bill two and because the
exact is making trying to make
changes every single minute that
we're breathing air we're trying
to get all those wrapped up and
then we can get those two
subcommittees for language in
funding in their I was just
taking a little bit more longer
the exact did agree on
statewide.
And so we have that we do not
have the exacts rex for their
one thirty in the capitol.
So that still another hang up
the capital bill I hopefully
somebody from that exact and
monetary that bill takes four
days to draft.
And if we do not have that
language by I'm just gonna say
tomorrow I we're gonna run that
capital bill out here without
the exact numbers because
there's no way it can happen the
house present there's enough
hours we're doing Friday they'll
have the house in the Senate's
in their you know we don't have
things that exact we're in a
time crunch words that capital
bill could fail in the house
because of time limits in and
what they need to get
accomplished over there so that
is the jeopardy of the capitol
bill right now.
The committee the.
We don't know because we were.
The census or whatever.
Will be at the call the chair in
the palm is today is the day we
told execs to get this every
piece of language that you
wanted us to review and see and
that will have can walk in
tomorrow saying
pretty please may I and and and
so that the the problem is we're
trying to wrap the language get
numbers correct and everything
because House Bill two does need
to get adjusted and in the
center right yes thank Mister
chairman I I just want to add a
little bit here that I know for
a fact the staff does need more
time they're trying to reconcile
what's already in the bill and
the LFC racks and on and on and
for the governor wants added to
what may already be in there's
duplications and so on because
they've been working on several
other bills so that's the
purpose for them needing more
time so the most time we can
give them the better but I
understand the deadlines as you
said Senator Steinborn.
Fifty percent.
Waiting to go up by a hundred
thirty millions of young that
was Alfa I don't really and
would make that recommendation.
Thank you I think we're we're
done so we're trying to masters.
