Thank you Mr Chairman name is
Pat Woods a.
Representative district seven
curry quay can you get thank you
thank you.
Good morning senator crystal
diamond a representative of Dona
ana county Luna Hidalgo in
Sierra County thank you guys.
A bill share Senate district one
San Juan but mostly Farmington.
Good morning Mister chairman
Senator Michael Padilla
represent the southwest portion
of our Lee County.
Morning Mr chairman Senator side
but I have hello I'm from
Silvercity I represent Senate
district twenty eight which is
Grant County catching County
most disapprove County.
We're.
Good morning The again though
senator dole but Bobby J. once
on this.
Senate district six which covers
as part of of Los Alamos Rio
Arriba Santa Fe and Taos and we
just have an introduction to the
thank you Mr chairman we didn't
have a problems with the
internet back there so as having
to work with I. T. if some of
your systems go down to snow
that's what it is we're still
working on it I'm Nancy good
morning to everyone senator
Nancy Rodriguez I'm from Santa
Fe district twenty four thank
you okay then we will go ahead
and started will have Mister
content.
Use our presentation for today
the council of governments
capital outlay collaboration
approach presentation.
Good morning and welcome and
just give us your name for the
record.
Morning chairman members of the
Senate finance committee I am
here working Donna and I am the
former director of the
southeastern New Mexico economic
development district.
I did that for about eighteen
years and currently consulted.
Capital outlay and economic
development ministration
projects for the economic
development district down in
rural.
Thank you for inviting.
But one of all the Mike a little
closer to the boards.
They're not helping yes okay.
As I mentioned I'm with the
southeastern New Mexico economic
development district and we love
in the just call it the the
district it's too much trouble
the state all the other words
that go with it.
It's easy just to say the
district at the district we like
to say that capital outlay is a
community effort.
And we consider ourselves to be
part of every community in our
five county region.
The region is made up of Chavis
eighty the Lincoln and Otero
counties.
And not only do we have the five
counties but we also have the
twenty seven municipalities and
the her twenty six
municipalities and and one
Indian tribe or nation the
Mescalero Apaches are part of
our district and have been since
the beginning.
But we also assist.
The local school districts he is
sick yes the hospital districts.
Usual domestic water
associations and others and in
some cases we even provide
service to some of the state
agencies that service our
region.
When asked about the district
and how we help with the role
that we play.
We assisted project planning and
development and we're also
service fiscal agents and not
get more than a minute.
Project management and
administration.
And the district aids in moving
the projects for from the idea
stage to completion.
In fact the district we we could
we request that all of our
communities start the process
with the infrastructure capital
improvement program.
plan and that's the ICAP and in
fact we make it a requirement if
for some reason a project comes
to us.
As a way of getting to the
legislature for funding.
We requested that the project
would be on the cap on the ICAP
list that is submitted to the
state if for some reason
somebody brings a project to us
and it's not on the I. C. I.
people list we request that they
take that that project back to
the governing board whether it
be the school district are the
municipality or county an asset
that they have a real meeting at
their next meeting that that in
that government adopt a
resolution adding that project.
the ICAP to ensure that it is
properly planned and something
that the local government is
aware of and wants to do.
The district like at the the
only other cogs in the state do
have a process with with the
ICAP that begins in April that's
when the ICAP process starts
statewide and just to make sure
that all local governments are
compliant with DFA and the
requirement for submitting and I
C. I. P. that is then put
together for the state and
provided to the legislature so
that you have an idea of what
projects are out there that may
need capital funding assistance.
The district it was able in the
past to assist many communities.
From our very smallest members
that lacked the organizational
or administrative capacity.
to come up with and all would to
some of our largest communities
and so we're able to help the
little guys the lake Arthur's
hopes the loving those types of
communities with the part of the
planning process in actual
development and administration
of the projects and one of the
things that we find is the
greatest challenge for our local
governments is the requirement
to be current with the executive
order twenty thirteen zero zero
six which is the audit.
And so we we assist there and
what we do is yes since they're
not only do we try to help them
with the the audit process but
we also like to say that we
find.
Them with fiscal agent services
so if some local government for
whatever reason can not meet the
requirements of an audit.
The district notifies the FAA
and.
State board of finance that we
are willing to step in and be
the fiscal agent for that entity
so that they can take advantage
of the money that comes or is
available throughout the capital
outlay process and that has
helped a tremendous amount not
just add when.
Initially when the twenty
thirteen zero zero six went into
effect we were notified by DFA.
Between one day and the next our
fiscal agent responsibility grew
from us two sixty three projects
and they range from small
communities to counties and so
we were able to step in and
provide that assistance to make
sure that we were able to help.
In the distribute it encourages
our local governments to begin
looking at their eyes C. I. P.
for projects that could be
eligible for capital outlay in
April and may so that they have
plenty of time to develop the
project can develop the idea of
the project and and bring it
forward.
we think that's really really
important and what we like to
tell our local government
centers on your script but I
would like to tell our local
governments is please do not ask
for.
Projects that are into the
millions of dollars legislators
in years past I've not had that
kind of money and given the
examples is just part of money
is divided three ways and then
is divided in the Senate is
divided in the house you can see
if you ask for three million
dollars for one project it's not
gonna happen so come with
projects between a half a
million.
And in ten twenty five thousand
dollars those are reasonable
size projects to consider under
cap capital outlay.
And then with for submittal of
projects.
We kind of press our local
governments and so the two weeks
after the Legislative Council
Service LCS after they close
their online portal like it did
this year two weeks after they
close at portal.
Open that programs are after
after the open the portal in in
October we require our local
governments to have all of your
capital outlay projects to us.
And the reason for that is that
we develop books for each of our
legislators and we break them up
by county county by county and
all the projects that are in one
county that belong to the
district of a legislator
provided to him or her and and
it goes all the way from the
house and the Senate and the
reason we do that is that in
November and December we have a
vetting process and all the
projects that have been
submitted for capital outlay
funding are vetted through our
legislators in November and
December and legislators in the
past I had to have attended in
person and then we had COVID so
we had to do it by
by zoom or on you know
virtually.
And now we're very well we have
a very good participation from
our legislators and that process
and and they
Ask a lot of questions and make
recommendations if they think a
project is way too big don't
tell on the project is too big
or the project needs to be
changed the project is changed
so it fits into the scheme of
what might be available.
We've been doing that particular
type process now for about ten
years.
In in in the state it worked
very well for us the district
has developed a matrix as well
Kannan matrix lists all the
projects.
in each county by a priority so
that the number one project from
each community is at the top and
then a works down to number
five.
And then across the the matrix
in the opposite direction is the
names of all the legislators
that can assist to participate
in the funding of the project.
And then the we distribute that
matrix so that they can begin
the legislators can begin to put
numbers in the some of the
squares in in the grid so that
they have an idea of how they
can spend their money and and
and what have you then right
before those numbers or do we
have a large gathering of all
our legislators and they come
together and and the the the
talk about all the projects and
how much money they can afford
to put in and they can't do this
from the maybe they can help
with that one over there.
And as it turns out it's a
really good process and a really
good way of doing it because a
lot of the number one projects
that come through the district
get funded and funded fully.
and then other money goes to the
other product programs or
projects that gets submitted and
so hopefully we can get a lot of
projects funded and the projects
are then done they they get they
get accomplished because they
have the money to get him done.
After that process you know with
each of you get reports from
legislative finance council and
gives you an idea of what the
projects are and where these
projects are in in terms of
their progress.
And many there are many of our
legislators provide me with
those forms and so that I can go
back and check on each
particular project on its
progress and if we have program
projects that are coming up to
the reversion date say it's
September and the reversion date
is June.
Then we contact the local
governments to Hey how come this
project is a moving.
Are you gonna be able to spend
all your money before June June
thirtieth and if not why not and
are you going to need to get a
re authorization for that
project.
And so if a project isn't needs
to be re authorized we asked the
local government to get together
with us and get those re
authorization forms completed
and submitted in October and no
later than November so that
we're sure that we can address
the needs of whatever that
project has.
This ensures the project gets
done it keeps us aware of the
progress and each project is
making
and and in the first year the
project is up there very little
of anything is done we have
contracts to get together with
the state or we have bidding
processes we have all kinds of
other initialed kit get on the
ground to get your feet going
but by the year two or three we
want to see those projects
moving and making progress and
the dollar spent.
And.
It works very well we are
abreast of what's going on we
keep in touch with their
legislators as well to let him
know that we know what's going
on and maybe K. K. contact us
and have good confidence in us
that we are maintaining our
responsibility and keeping up
with
each project to ensure that the
money is getting spent and the
and the project is moving
forward our products are ideas
that if a project is is asking
for money the only way it's
going to be successful is if it
spends the money and gets the
project completed.
And I'd be happy to stand for
any questions.
Well thank you Mr king from the.
This time the members will start
with the.
Senator Byrd and we'll go to ask
Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you.
Army.
And for the committee I just
want to tell yet
Hubert.
It it does so much of the
organizational work for us we
really would be lost in
southeast New Mexico without you
right now to say that because
you're sitting there but but
it's a it's a process that he
and we as legislators have
worked on for like say ten years
or better and it works really
well and you train quite frankly
your municipalities and your
counties to do it this process
and so they get into the routine
of doing it on an annual basis
and they not only have their
list of projects but the
prioritize and one two three
four five so when we go to the
book and it's time to
disseminate the money.
I will sit down and and my
current distribution of of
percentages
Otero County fifty percent so
trying to apply fifty percent of
my capital in Otero county
twenty six twenty eight percent
is leaking County and so I meet
with those legislators and we
distribute about twenty percent
of my money there and then we go
to Chavis was about twenty two
percent of trying distribute
twenty two percent there I'm not
saying that is the the exact way
to do it but it works really
well for us.
In in in in.
One hour we can sit with
legislators hopefully one hour
and and apply the proper money
for the priorities to get their
and then again we turned the the
paperwork in and then Hubert
dogs and after that he'll go
back to make sure that the
processes are sent to the
counties are to the
municipalities and then that it
he'll he'll go back to all of
those folks and ask them if they
have questions or is there
something he can do to help them
to move the project along and I
will tell you at least out of my
district every single community
in every county works very very
well except I have I have one
entity that when they become
overwhelmed that slows the
process down and so money
doesn't quite flow as quickly as
it needs to flow so for again we
as legislators it's always good
to know the people the actual
people who are working these
issues in the counties in in the
cities so that if it's slower
you get the reports back that
the money's not be used yet or
has been appropriated
then you can go to that person
in the city or the county and FY
that does two things it it kind
of motivates them to move that
along and also you have an
answer for the state or for a
Huberdeau whoever your person is
your particular area to help you
with that to move that money
along so there's a lot of
processes within the system to
make this work but again I gotta
tell you and the way that we've
set up in southeastern Mexico
the I'm not saying is the best
but it works really well and
rarely I think if you look at
that projects around the state
that
are
in in it looking to be reverted
or just the money has not been
used I think our district is
probably the smallest of of the
entire state so
It takes some involvement but it
pays off in the long run and if
if if you're like me I hate to
see our our taxpayer dollars go
back to the state I'd really
rather use them then our
particular districts to make
sure that that money supplied
and used for the projects that
are needed so just a comment and
chair and making sure that
people understand there are good
processes in place but takes a
little little bit to get them
set up and quite frankly to
nineties the term train but the
kind of work with your counties
and your cities to to see if
they will do this preparatory
you the process of applying that
money should go a lot smoother
and you shouldn't have money
three and four years out of and
then you're you know you may
need to have to have that money
revert need you just to want to
do that so thank you madam chair
for the time.
Thank you senator all right we
have Senator share that we have
Senator Woods.
thank you madam chair.
One of the things that I was
told was the cost to the the
deuce for ACOG.
We're too much for some of the
smaller safety is in the ditches
and things like that what are
the do's.
Madam chair Senator sure.
The very each to each one of the
cogs is an independent entity
and so
in our particular.
region it's based on census and
the very smallest of our
communities at lake Arthur's now
hopes and what have you the B.
two hundred fifty dollars a year
and that includes all the
services we provide
for them
anything from planning to
running meetings to.
administering a project or
program important all the way up
to about fifteen thousand
dollars for the city of Ross.
And in each of the counties pays
about about seven I think it's
close to seven thousand dollars.
And they put in that seven
thousand dollars covers the cost
of the unincorporated.
Programs and in the
unincorporated communities
colonias the water associations
and those things that do not
belong to the Kong and and the
way our call to set up his that
other cogs have differently but
our Congress set up is that you
must be a local government to be
a to have a voting position on
the **** so is this reason I
said were made up of the twenty
six cities the five counties and
one and the Mescalero Apache
tribe.
but so they're all a little
different and I don't know what
to do structures are for
everybody else I apologize okay
that's all right madam chair I
was just that was one of the we
we look at this list that we got
and there's a whole heap of the
state cues and ditches on other
things too but that was that
just when I asked why so we
can't afford to do is to have
somebody else look at this they
also can't afford the audit
which is the big problem that
most of them have or they asked
for a hundred thousand dollars
me really needed two hundred
fifty.
So that's why you know the
called may be a useful
We call yourself.
A useful tool in this
but it's only useful if people
can can partake so anyway COVID
think
Mr Mrs Madam chair of the center
we don't turn anybody down if if
they can't afford to pay we
still provide the service like
this water so ciation sent me a
second they're not members but
we still provide assistance to
when we're helping several
seconds now and and we put
together capital under requests
for I think seven different
water associations they're not
members but we provided the
service because like I say they
there are there are residents
and their associations are part
of the county and so the
counties seven thousand dollar
fee covers the cost of providing
services for them so nobody is
left out in in in terms of the
associates Water associations we
just started a new program EDA
that's economic development
administration came to us and
asked us to put together a list.
of the water.
companies in the statement some
and I say companies because some
of our.
Incorporated some hot summer
full water associations and
summer just cooperatives and so
what they asked us to do is put
a list together and provide
assistance to them to see how
many of those if they had the
proper technical assistance and
could become water associations
and be eligible to get state and
federal dollars to help in their
infrastructure development.
then we provided assistance to
them who is quickly as we can so
we're in we're in the process of
working now with the environment
department the state Water
construction bureau to get that
information so madam chair you
look different now.
I hope so.
Thank you you say you can help
private ditch companies become
of association so that they can
participate in capital outlay
and things like that if they
want to be if they want the yes
Sir.
Interesting all right thank you
Mr chair.
Well we have all Senator Woods
thank you Mr chair.
You were not and I'm on a
brag on you little you've always
help me and and I'm a long ways
north of of your organization
but you've you've taken your
time with me and I I do
appreciate that and and he's
laid eyes on a lot of my stuff
in and tell me you know this is
not quite right you need to do a
little different so Mister chair
I want to brag on in the minute
but also have a couple of
questions.
We are talking a lot about
audits and how may need
different organizations don't
have current audits.
Can you.
Tell me the chairman and you
were why.
In your eyes we have so many
places that don't have under
current audits.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
it it's a needs your question
answer when you look at water
associations.
Because most of them don't
collect enough dues to pay for
the audit and one of the things
that the state auditor did
several years ago is that the
quit asking for full fledged
audit.
To be done on some of these
really really small
organizations I mean.
Some of these ditch associations
are for five people maybe the
minimum three this required by
state law to be a the state kia.
And so you know they don't have
the money in their dues are
usually just enough to take care
of whatever maintenance.
It so they don't have the
funding to do the audit.
And and I don't know how we're
going to get around that issue I
mean that's a that's a tough one
and one that we face all the
time of the the question I have
been.
Those people are getting state
money.
Have qualified and they receive
state money is that right or or
is it if you're just a.
Local government entity that you
have to do an audit where the
you get state money or not what
what is the rule on that Mr.
Mr chairman and members Senator
Woods
is as I said in my comments we
also act as fiscal agents and so
if an agency is got audit issues
and they can't.
They don't have an auditor
current on it.
The district will step in.
And we will be that the fiscal
agent and the administrator for
that money so the money comes to
us and we do all the paperwork
and then we send off and we pay
the bills for that project so
the project can get done that we
would there is accountability
for the for the dollars that are
that are granted and in the in
many many cases they can't they
can't afford to pay just a
fiscal agent fee and in many
cases like colonias and even in
capital outlay we don't get any
administration money because
there's no administration money
that can be spent on and so we
just ate the cost as part of the
service that we provide
but what I'm asking is.
If they receive no state money.
Are they still required to turn
in an audit to the state.
If they're a public entity.
Are they required to.
Turn into audit to the state
whether they receive state money
or not.
Mr Mr
Is it is that makes sense what
I'm asking Mister chair Mister
chairman Senator Woods yes they
are required to turn in an audit
because they are receiving
public dollars for this from
their members or whatever's and
they have to account for those
dollars and and they're paying
bills on behalf of that it to do
and so they have to account can
be a good and and
Keep record of where those
dollars have gone to the to be
improperly spent so.
So you're pretty sure that they
have.
A set of books.
It's not the problem of the set
of books it's a problem of
hiring someone to do it or is it
a problem of both.
Mr chair Mr shooter.
Which is a problem both I mean
we we have gone in and we just
said can you show us our blokes.
For the last year and they give
us a shoe box and say there ARE
this is the receipts for the
money we took in a bills with
rate and so then we got to sit
down and go through it and sort
of piecing learn January sixth
February and until we can begin
to make sense of what was up and
that takes a lot of our time to
do that.
But.
It still has to be done.
Well that's that's kind of what
I was getting at
Essentially.
They may have.
Receipts they may have.
The checks they wrote they may
have the.
Bank statements that came in.
But to put it in any kind of
important.
Usable form and determine.
Whether that money came out of
this account.
Are came out of this account.
Is a tricky for part of
government County.
it the way I remember that.
So with that being said.
Do you get a list.
See in your districts that chose
who doesn't have a current
audit.
Mr chair.
Senator Woods I think we have
from DFA someone wants to weigh
in.
Mr Chairman
Yeah so we do we do track all of
the issues that they're not
having audits we don't that
necessarily share that with any
of the local governing bodies on
with the they know if they have
an audit and when they don't
have an audit and but we have
that information available if
you ever needed to contact my
office we can have it we also
possibly to put that up on our
website up for everyone to have
that but we do have a list of
the ones who are non compliant
and if typically part of the
eighty you list which is the
authorized but unissued last
part of finance Patel I'm so
they have those included in
there as well and I think I was
a in a previous session last
week we stated that we're gonna
start to the provide those and
that you know which ones are not
compliant or not I'm so we do we
do have that information and
just to clarify on so if you
were to answer just to make sure
everyone's understanding
standing so they all they all
are required to do the audit on
there's different stages of this
it is the agreed upon procedures
which is like a one page form
that they have to fill out all
the way up to four knots
depending on how much state
money they do receive.
Thank you.
And I think Mr chair of.
They agreed to send us a list of
those that were not compliant
with audits.
Also.
Mister chairman Senator ones we
can do that so Wesley I just got
a note that they can hear some
isn't the only stepped to the
microphone and give us our name
to.
Go ahead and a microphone set
up.
In the state your name in the
record.
Thank you Mr chairman Wesley
Billingsley DFA capital outlay
bureau chief as far as the list
goes that list is updated
periodically so it's not just a
list of one time entities that
are not compliance on we
actually go through that process
throughout the year so we can do
it every single time there is a
bond sale or before we do the
budgets for general fund we can
have a list available but like I
said it does get updated
throughout the year.
In Mr chair Senator Diamond it
showed me that if I look in the
nineteen mail but I.
So apologize for for thinking
that you were doing your job so.
I see that you're a lot more
efficient than I.
the last question I have and I
think I know the answer but I'd
like to to know a little bit
better.
When when
Capital outlay goes out.
Who determines the funding
agency or who is the agency
because we understand it Mr
chair.
We designate capital outlay.
It goes to DFA.
And they does it also goes
through another agency before it
goes to the.
The local entity.
The.
I think I'm advocating that
recognition share your comment
with Mister chairman Senator
Woods so when the project is
funded the money goes into the
bill the Legislative Council
services then chooses which
agency the project goes to
depending on what type of
project is once that there's
once I go through the agency
depending on the language then
they can go to either a county
or municipality depending on the
length and what we do with our
beer is we try to get all that
information once the bill has
been actually what's been
dropped so that we can try to
determine that right away and so
once we determine that we have a
list of those entities and our
spreadsheet and then we try to
get them as accurate as possible
but that is updated a little bit
with the questionnaire process
I'm gonna go through the
questionnaire process that's
when we get help on determining
who the who the entity is a
should actually receive those
funds because sometimes it's not
clear in the language itself and
so we do that question there to
to help answer those questions I
I hope that kind of help so as
it goes through depends on the
agency the agency depend on the
project type only certain ones
go through DFA local government
division others go through
environments state engineers
office Indian Affairs and the
reason I asked that question
because you know it takes
through testimony of Hubert they
made the statement that it takes
about a year.
For those contracts to come out.
So that the local government can
even start thinking about
drawing that money.
And I was wondering that's why I
was asking about the different
agencies.
So that.
You know we could see if one
agency.
Was a better clearing house that
in the next HSD that's what I
was getting it Mr chairman and.
But that's really all I have
thank you Sir.
We're just on the second point
on the on just for clarification
if you can refer from members
you can I used to have what they
need your money to pay for.
Is that correct.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Burt no you cannot use.
That money for paying the cost
of the audit for for the
administration of the project.
State clarification.
It was are are years ago
but I didn't want anyone to have
a wrong person the state.
The.
Thank you Mr.
Well is there any other
questions members I was just
going to ask you Mr Clinton a of
so it's greatly part of that
area.
Right.
Mr chairman Grady is not in my
area it's in North.
Zoom in the in the cog that
covers Clovis.
Right very well future eastern
plains some sorry Mr place
counselor.
Senator couples thank you very
much Mr chairman and Hubert gosh
we go back over forty years
dealing with so many of these
issues and I want to bring it up
again as we deal directly with
the coordinated efforts when it
comes to the audits and I really
appreciate DFA and the on going
work that is that is occurring
there but it in order for us to
move forward how how can we
better coordinate all these
efforts what we deal with this
sick as the mutual domestics all
these other agencies and
entities that frankly don't have
artists for their fully behind
in terms of that
in eighty two when I was working
with the auditor's office we did
our best to try to coordinate
again these these these issues
and and going back to DFA and
and our our former
representative of the late like
you I don't know is there and I
was in the auditor's office we
consistently had if you will
these disagreements because I
felt this had to be coordinated
across the state with everything
that we're doing so we all knew
what we were doing when it came
to the transparency aspect of
it.
Again we continue to have
these weaknesses and so with
that Hubert maybe you can help
me a little bit in your areas
you deal with this you've done
so well over the years what what
would be at least one of the
remedies to help us so that we
can become better at not only
the audits but this entire
accountability process.
Mr chairman Senator Campos.
What would help us tremendously
is of we could have.
We're staff two million nor
these asking for money but
you know there's four people in
our office and currently we've
got.
It is like thirteen CBGB's there
were ministering about thirty.
Capital outlay projects that
we're administrative and for
various reasons mostly because
this the smaller group local
governments don't have the
capacity to administer that and
then we're trying to also trying
to keep up with the audit
requirements for everybody that
may be requesting capital outlay
money or has received capital
outlay money and we want to make
sure that you know there audit
information is okay.
So it would help us if we would
have.
Some money to help with that.
I think the the staff that we
have is very capable.
But we've gotten to the point
where we've kind of research
limitations on how far everybody
can be stretched.
to get everything done.
We think it's a great idea and I
think it was a great idea when
we went for the full blown on it
down to the tiered audit system
that help tremendously
especially with the smaller
local governments.
The lake Arthur's and not in the
hopes in the.
The timberlands and folks like
that
and so I'm not sure that we can.
Take that even further down but.
just having that requirement
there they have to be
accountable for the money
communis public monies over to
has to be some accountability
for how that money is spent and
and what have you so.
other other than that I mean I I
really don't don't have an
answer maybe Wesley does I I
really appreciate that and thank
you Mr chairman and so Wesley as
we're dealing with this maybe
you can help a little bit more
in terms of some of the
initiatives that you're working
on on the whole issue is how are
we going to centralize and have
a better handle in terms of not
only the expenditure of our
public dollars but that full
accountability because we still
have that boards it's out there
where we're not getting that
full accountability and it's in
most cases no fault of the
individuals that are there
because they don't have the
expertise they don't have as you
enter the FTEs and others that
are going to be dealing with it
but if if I could Mr chair just
very quickly Wesley is there
something that you're doing
maybe that's going to going to
help us through this process at
least through the next next
fiscal year.
Mr Chairman Senator Campos I
think in relation to the audits
I think one of the biggest
factors is the cost of the on it
I think they can't get the
audits because that they're
costly and I think we did have
funding in the past where that
there is a some funding that
went to just a synopsis office
for for that and and I think
they have to apply for it but
there was funding there for them
to receive that assistance and
so maybe that's one one thing
that we could do we we could
also try to do our best to
making sure that they're aware
that they need not and I think
sometimes entities might not be
aware that they need to have
done on it in a timely in order
to receive these funds so I
think either to two factors and
I know our office can definitely
help with the second one we're
trying to get the word out there
that they need their audits and
in order to receive the funding
and then hopefully there's some
funding available in the future
for offices in order to to maybe
get some help with the costs of
Mister chair if I may and it it
just triggers another point as
we deal with it particularly
with the IPA's the issue then
becomes how these IPA's gonna go
and take on a very minuscule
budget for two or three thousand
when they're going to have to do
the traveling will just say from
Albuquerque to to maybe one of
the smaller communities and I
know that that's the other side
of the coin as we deal with it
and so Mister chairman just to
quickly here what I think you
had maybe a another comment on.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
yes you don't one of the things
that would help is if.
We could open up.
Who is allowed to do the audits
that would help a lot I mean if
you could get a local CPA or
somebody that can.
The has a background in the
ability and they do this for all
you know private companies would
have you all the time.
If if they had the ability to to
do this instead of having just a
very small pool and that decree
also creates a problem for local
governments because you know if
you're a very small government
in you know you find an auditor
they're going to put you at the
end of their list and so the
bigger guys Albuquerque's in
Santa Fe and Los crucis get a
lot of time on our audits in in
at the end you have the little
guy and that has to
be begging them to get their
audit done and submitted so they
can be done in a timely manner
because there aren't enough
qualified in the in approved
auditors on the state auditor's
list to conduct these public
audits.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the comments from
both of you that's all thank you
for all the other questions.
Thank you and thank you.
