Listen Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I do
like Senator Campos have a bill
over tax that so I may have to
go back and forth here so I
apologize for that but bill Burt
the Senate district thirty three
that's Terrel we get in Chavis
counties and the glad to be here
looking forward to the
presentation today.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
let go my colleagues I also have
a bill impacts that can move the
committee there on.
All state representative will
left all Bobby J. one Senator
districts six representing some
Fe Los Alamos Rio Arriba and
Taos thank you.
Nancy Senator Nancy Rodriguez
and it district twenty four
Santa Fe hi to everyone.
Senator Woods and senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Pat Woods Representative
and the rest in northeast New
Mexico was senator Campos always
a pleasure to associate with
them and and learn from him
I just a.
I do want to wish travel mercies
on everyone the travelers we've
got a lot of people that.
Suffering a lot from this go
with.
Mr chairman thank you very much
all and by the way I would stay
with you today my bill is.
My bills already took care thank
you.
Thank you senator Candelaria.
Get.
Mister chairman Senator Jacob R.
Candelaria representing the west
side of the.
Thank you I didn't see Senator
Steinborn on the call and I
missing anyone just in case.
You know and Center Georgia yes
I'm from Gallup and
Representative can the San Juan
Boller are counties in with that
we'll get rolling Senator
Stewart are you ready for a
Senate bill forty two.
I am Mr chairman.
Okay.
Tell us about the bill we do
have some amendments yes to yes
so thank you so much for
listening to me this afternoon
this to Senate bill forty two.
The original bill.
Increases the state's
contribution into the A. R. B.
fund.
A one percent a year for the
next four years the state
contributions the employer
contribution is currently at
fourteen point one five percent.
Compare that with he are eight
we passed a bill I believe this
yours Mr Chairman a to increase
their state contribution up to
nineteen point two five over the
next few years that's really all
the bill does your
the staff has worked with me on
an amendment to this bill us to
take it from one percent a year
for four years to half a percent
a year for four years that was
the amendment we did to P. E. R.
A. two years ago so Mister
chairman I'm fairly certain that
Jan good one the director of the
ear B. is on of the zoom and I
would like for to make just a
couple of comments if that's
alright.
Yeah Jan go ahead.
Sorry my master's been acting up
this morning thank you very much
Mr chairs Senator Stewart
this bill is a long time in
coming here be for the last ten
years as bring working on
reducing its budget.
whether they're increasing the
retirement eligibility
requirements or reducing the
Cola or increasing member
contributions now it's time for
the state to come forward
increase the employer
contribution rate and I would
like to think Senator Stewart
for her leadership on this
important activity.
The so Mister chairman I'll just
finish up by saying.
The the educators and this
program has been paying a
significant amount into this
they pay ten point seven percent
now of their salary and they've
been at that level I believe for
eight years
they have been paying almost
that for many more than the last
eight years we have reduced our
budget our cost of living
adjustment is tied to the funds
San.
Over the last several years cost
of living adjustment has been
hovering a little over one
percent and it fluctuates with
that solvency of the fund so we
have
we don't receive the call up
until or sixty five and we do
not really have the early
retirement that that many other
systems in the state do in
addition for new members of the
multiplier is smaller when you
start teaching and you have to
teach longer before you can
retire so we've trend budget
considerably over the years
analysts Gen good ones said we
do believe that it's time for
the state to treat the E. R. B.
E. at least as close to P. E. R.
A. as we're doing there's a huge
gap now in the state
contribution between the two so
that's the purpose of the bill
and as I said the amendment that
your committee has suggested is
to cut that down to have a
percent for four years and when
you're ready I can do that
amendment.
Okay so can I have a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Hello Mr chairman.
Second round.
The motion by Senator Rodriguez
and the second by Senator
Gonzales Senator you want to
explain the amendment or yes so
Mr chairman this is there's two
amendments this is the one from
your committee it's nine to
eight point one and
it looks like it it's hard to
really understand what it's
doing but with you read it with
the bill it essentially cuts the
one percent a year for four
years down to a half a percent a
year for four years so that at
the end of the four years that
the state contribution would be
sixteen point one five percent.
Thank you any questions on the
amendment.
Seeing is raised up Center
Gonzales you're going to Justin
chamar.
All Mr chairman of I I just have
one million.
One thought it phone.
All Senator Stewart will.
Certainly.
so the original was that one
percent.
We're gonna to the four percent
now it's set for years but
limited to two percent.
This is just the fault but what
if would have been done to.
Instead of four years in the
eighty years to ensure we
accomplish the.
The four percent.
Well Mr chairman this this
ammendment came from your
committee and I want to accept
your committee segment so up
both in good one and I are going
to be doing this year after year
until we feel the state is
paying their fair share so don't
worry we'll be back in the
future to change this if we need
to.
All right very well thank you.
Mr Chairman Senator repairing is
here I do have a another follow
up quick question if I may.
Center and Reese thank you Mr
chairman into Senator Stewart
thank you for this bill that
would be Senator Stewart that if
we cut it in half basically two
point zero I think it would be
half of the amount generated
that for if we do it at one
percent it would generate
approximately one hundred and
thirty six million per year for
the four year now is that not
what it says or tell me that if
we cut back to from one percent
to have that would be to have
when you're clear that to me
Senator okay so Mister chairman
and senator Rodriguez if you
leave it at one percent it's
roughly thirty million a year so
I know for over four years would
be a hunt after four years it
would be a hundred twenty
million a year so the half
percent has been scored around
sixteen or seventeen million so
essentially it will be a roughly
sixty plus million over after
four years I see okay.
Yeah I think that's in the FIR
indicated in have you explain
that because I wanted to be
after it so that we and we come
back we know that we really
haven't implemented legislation
and funding that is adequate
enough we need to do more in the
future and so with the FIR says
that when the provisions of this
bill are fully implemented in
the four percent increase will
increase the fund revenue by
over a hundred forty six million
that's why I asked that because
it is in the FIR so.
Now we know it isn't because
you're you're breaking in half
right thank you thank you that's
all I have Mister chairman thank
you senator.
Thank you Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
our Senator Stewart.
What percent does the state pay
right now.
Senator Woods right now the
state pays for ten point one
five percent.
And what percent does the lawyer
the rest of it.
Fourteen percent from a hundred
is what the employees thank.
Well Mr chairman of the Senator
Woods state employees pay a ten
point seven percent of their
salary every year into the fund.
It's about I think I was reading
the FIR of the total amount each
year going into this fund is
over three hundred million and
that comes from all the school
districts and charters about
ninety percent of that is
actually generated.
from the state.
So and.
Go ahead.
I'm.
Miss my math here somewhere.
Mr chairman and Senator Stewart
ninety percent comes from the
state is what you're saying.
But fourteen percent of the
salary you said was what the
state plate.
So.
Explain the difference between
the two I guess what I'm asking.
Mr chairman if I can have John
good one answer the Senators
question yeah go go right engine
which.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Woods I just like to place
things in that little different
contracts that for fiscal year
nineteen twenty four fiscal year
twenty twenty the total employer
contributions for five hundred
and fifty one million dollars
and the total member
contributions or three hundred
and twenty eight million dollars
the employee the member or the
employee contribution rate was
ten point seven percent the
employer contribution rate was.
Fourteen point one five percent
so it was a total of.
Twenty four point eight seven
percent of payroll going into
the fund.
It might helping response your
question Sir.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay now.
This all goes through the local
school budget is it Mr chairman
and and and Joanne.
Does it all go through this the
local school budget these
salaries.
And at and payments when we say
the state alright is that the
local school buses District that
pays that out of their budget
how do their budgeted amount.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Woods it's
actually a little bit more
complicated than that E. R. B.
covers all of the public
education employees in the
states so that everyone that's
working for the public schools
as well as the public colleges
and universities so that's.
What gives rise to that comment
about what portion of the
general fund pays yes you are
very well aware the general fund
covers all the costs of.
Public the vast majority of
public schools for the cater
twelve in contrast for higher ed
there's a lot of the funding
comes from
things such as tuition local
property taxes so for the public
schools as is shown on page two
of the FIR approximately eighty
percent of the cost for public
schools alone is eighty percent
in contrast higher ed fifty two
point eight percent of the total
cost of the payroll and the
other expenses come from the
general fund is that your
question Sir.
Yes.
Yes I guess what I was getting
at.
When we if we pass this bill.
That reduces.
The other.
If we increase the budget a
public schools I guess that's
what I'm trying to say Mr
Chairman are we going to
increase the budget a public
schools to pay for this increase
our is just just being taken out
of their budget.
The increase to their budget.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
this would be from the state
the the seventeen sixty to
seventeen million a year for the
half half the percent would be
part of the school district's
budget doesn't come out of there
I if you would we step paper
this part from the state.
The state contribution would go
up not the schools budgets.
So so Mister chairman how does
that work I don't I don't quite
get that so so we give
hypothetical we get a a a school
Hey say a million dollar budget.
And salaries is approximately
eighty percent of that.
So are we going to increase the
million dollar budget.
To allow for more money to come
out for benefit.
I guess is my question if that.
Is a great Mister chairman
Senator Woods we are not
increasing any benefits this is
going into the E. R. B. fund
which is right now has some
liability that we are trying to
close the gap this funding is
for the ERP fund so that it's
more solvent.
Okay there's two ways to look at
that.
Way that you're saying is we
don't give them ploys anymore
benefit.
But when you look at in a bid in
the stands we are paying a
benefit for the employ.
So I'm maybe I used the wrong
terminology but in my eyes I see
but increase and a cost benefit
and I'm advocating are we now
increasing the school budget to
pay the increased cost of
benefits.
So Mister.
Senator Woods this.
I I agree with you that this is
a benefit to educators to have a
solvent fund for retirement and
retirees I completely agree with
that so I agree this is a
benefit to the employees and to
the school districts you have a
retirement fund that solvent.
So I agree with that but it's
not the school budget that's
impacted this funding will go
into the E. R. B. fund to make
that fund more solvent Mr
Chairman perhaps you can that
way in.
Senator Woods this has no effect
on the school district's budget
this is the transfer from our
state general funds annually at
half a percent about seventeen
million so it doesn't change
anything we are just sending
money directly to the fund to
fix that.
Okay that was that was my
question thank you Sir.
Let you answer all the time Mr
chairman.
No.
Hold on Senator share.
thank you Mr chair and senator
so.
Do I first saw the four percent
in here I thought okay where is
that going to come from what's
gonna cost which what's the cost
to the general fund but then we
backed it down to the two
percent which just means we're
gonna talk about this again two
years from now or maybe even
next year.
But.
Because we have one team
decillion dollars or something
like that coming from the feds.
Of.
Would not a better amendment to
be moved let the federal money
just bring this thing to two of
the solvency bring it out of its
bankruptcy.
Right now.
so Mister chairman and senator
share of first we're not
bankrupt we're a little over
sixty percent funded and
secondly that money from the
federal government is not
recurring the purpose of this is
to have recurring dollars going
into the ERP fund.
Yes Mr chair incident senator I
I understand that but if all of
a sudden you put in I'm not sure
what the dollar amount is but
you put in a hundred million
dollars today instead and and
again I'm not sure what that
dollar amount is you put that in
there today.
Are you you've called a lot of
problems now it doesn't have to
have that perpetual recurring
amount because we fixed.
Of the whole we filled the whole
and if we just fill that hole
then is the amount that's
flowing.
To date with that continue to
maintain it or.
What would that amount of money
not still not make any
difference.
Mr chairman if I could ask you
to yourself rejected one to
answer the Senators question.
Jan you want to start yes Mr
chair members of the committee
senator share as beneficial as a
would be for one hundred million
dollars to be added immediately
to the fund that does not fix or
fill the entire whole with our
most recent set of action
actuarial valuation our under
funded liability is now nine
billion dollars nine million
district did you really say nine
billion I'm sorry.
Yes Sir I did it's nine million
dollars.
And because the so.
Eight million dollars is a step
in the right direction but.
We would need a much larger
infusion of money immediately to
improve the situation and just
give a bit more context to what
Senator Stewart was saying we
are not insolvent hello we
anticipate being able to pay
benefits however for a long time
into the future but a hundred
years out from now we will have
exhausted the trust fund balance
so that's a long time from now
but the sooner we start to put
money in and have it investment
income the better off that year
the fund will be.
I I agree Mr chairman.
And miss good one I.
So but the nine billion that
would be if you had to pay
everything right now which we
don't have to do.
So.
Under our if if we just stayed
exactly where we were.
When would we run out of money
is that ten years for five years
for a hundred years.
Miss you know you've got a nine
billion dollar liability a lot
of that is way out in the
future.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator share that is
correct currently are eight we
have fourteen billion dollars in
assets.
But we are expected to run out
of money in one hundred years
live five years or ten years one
hundred years from now okay.
Okay.
So.
Will run out of oil and gas
before that I'm sure specially
it what we're doing now but
so if we have a if we if we can
if we can.
If we can pay the teachers their
retirement their full retirement
for a hundred years.
Why do we need this bill now.
Mr chair members of the
committee sent Senator share we
need this money now because.
We will be hiring new teachers
and future and they also deserve
our retirement and the sooner
that our funding is one hundred
percent funded then we will be
able to improve their credit
rating for all the employers
that are part of the E. R. B.
because they each day as well as
the state have to pick up a
share of the Arby's unfunded
liability on their balance
sheets yes we are I I get that
is good one
I know that this is been an
issue for a while so I've not
been on on education for a while
and
but I know that we've been
talking about this for awhile
we've also been talking about
reform.
A real reform and and I know
that this puts more money in and
I understand the power of
compound interest I get that we
want to get that fund up there
so that it strong.
Are in perpetual
But have we talked about any any
serious reforms other than
making the state pay more money.
Mr your.
Mister chairman Senator share we
have been reforming the benefits
from by T. two teachers for many
years.
This we teachers pay and ten
point seven percent that's one
of the highest amounts in the
country to pay in our educators
don't get to a get a call up
until they're sixty five they
have to work much longer new
educators come in and have to
work longer than current
educators their multiplier is
lower and the cost of living
adjustments that come with
retirement are tied to the
solvency of the fund and they
are around at one point a few
percentage points hardly
anything all of those are
considerably
higher than and P. E. R. A. the
benefits of for E. R. B. have
been cut back over the years we
have been working in
in workshop and work groups of
for several years on this and so
it's really the only thing that
hasn't changed over the years is
the contribution from the state
which is why we're before you.
Mr chair and senator I I get
that I guess.
I'm looking at what private
sector companies do even even
large private sector companies
In for them it's mostly a
defined contribution system so
you're going to put in a hundred
dollars and that hundred dollars
is invested in hopefully it
grows and you know the power of
compound interest and all of
that
But ours is a defined benefit
you're going to get your hundred
dollars no matter what the fund
says you can get.
so I'm talking about reform in
that maybe that's the wrong
reform for what we're doing but
that's I'm talking about how do
we make this so that.
Next year or two years from now
you're not coming back said okay
well we we we we moved from four
to two and now we need to go
ahead and move it back up
and perpetually doing this.
So for me reformist.
How do we fix it not how we
piecemeal.
Mr Chairman a Senator chair
that's a different bill than you
have before you yeah oh god I
and I I understand the Mr chair
to different bill I just.
I I do think that for as long as
I've been here I've been hearing
this argument so that means for
a long time was not fixed it and
so I'm just using this
opportunity to throwing a pitch.
I'm I'm I'm good I want to fix.
But we're not.
So we're gonna have to go
through this again next year or
two years for probably next year
and two years and this year
after that
In so.
Anyway that's that's where I am
I think that we would we would
be better off if we if we could
find the fix and if the fix is
throwing some federal money and
if the fix is.
Defined contribution if the fix
is something else or a
combination of all will
something else's then then we
ought to do it to me this is
just another piecemeal effort.
Not that it's not valuable not
that it's not needed.
But it's still not to fix so so
Mister chairman I would just ask
that
That we seriously think about
how the hell the fixes
especially because we're gonna
have a lot of federal money now
so if we have it that gives us
an opportunity to do things.
That we've not been able to do
Although in the future I think
our our revenue potentially goes
down significantly
but we have money now let's do
it now if we can't thank you Mr
chairman Senator.
Thank you senator Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman questions
probably a best Mr Goodwin
insisted Senator Stewart
what wouldn't mind that what I'm
interested in is Jan I miss good
when based upon E. R. bees call
our the funds that we typically
compare ourselves to.
Where does the state's current
share fall the current
contribution of fourteen point
one two five I guess OR one five
where the other compatible funds
that.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator condylar yup.
Thirteen point nine is a little
bit on the low side compared to
many other funds many funds
especially the well funded
pension plans out there have an
actuarially.
Determine contribution rates so
that the contribution rate will
be what it needs to be in order
to get the pension fund one
hundred percent funded within a
certain amount of time.
And.
I'm just trying to put that our
contribution rate in context
with a very different I were
fixed statutory contribution
right in contrast with how many
other well funded states fund
their pension plans.
I'm as good when I I guess
that's the I I agree with you
and I think what what I'm
hearing is and what I understand
is is you know basically we are
at the low end of states that
choose to do it defined
contribution scheme.
and and then there's other
states of course as you've
indicated who instead of doing
that
you know kind of appropriate
money commute actuarial need to
meet otherwise clickable
investment standards and returns
and I I certainly support the
bill the reason I support this
bill Mr chairman part is you
know as a private business owner
I fund a simple IRA and under
federal law I can contribute up
to twenty five percent of my
employees salary you know and so
that's kind of my metric you now
under under most federal.
The income tax you sort of
provisions you know you stop
getting your incentive after
twenty five percent which to me
is a pretty clear indicator from
the federal government of where
we want private industry to be
in terms of making those
contributions
and and so I think that the
where this bill ends up is is is
reasonable John could you could
you just may be the last
question miss good one could you
address for for for for for FY
twenty twenty what were your
bees investment returns relative
to para.
For FY twenty twenty our
investment return was negative.
Zero point nine seven.
So all but Paris was about half
a percent to three quarters of a
percent lower than E. R. beats.
Okay.
can you just maybe address for
us briefly just as a brief
follow up Mr Chairman on that.
You know the the the stock
market writ large is sort of is
sort of very very very hot.
at yeah it's a lot of concern
right that equity pricing is
just becoming so more more far
removed from market fundamentals
in light of the of the stock
market doing so well why did our
investment funds.
The R. B. in particular you can
just be T. R. B. why did we not
see the same returns
as you know an individual
investor who made like me who
saw thank twenty twenty and it
was like nineteen point five
percent return on my portfolio
just blended.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Candelaria it
all depends on what you're
you're you're measuring I
thought you were asking me about
fiscal year two twenty twenty
that's what I responded to
calendar year twenty twenty was
a completely different kettle of
fish okay what did that look
what it what does this look like
Mr chair.
This.
I I I you're absolutely right is
good with your absolutely right
about the about we need to make
clear about the the time frames
for compact.
Yes for calendar year for the
for calendar year twenty twenty.
Find that running right now I
want to say.
Six point eight percent.
Okay.
And do you do you know all and
for the first six months of this
fiscal year we're at thirteen
percent.
Yeah okay that makes a lot more
sense Mr chairman that makes a
lot more sense I I definitely
support the bill
I I I I'm not a big fan of the
amendment be honest I'd rather
stay at the one percent.
but I I appreciate this this
third debate thank you all.
Thank you senator Candelaria I
don't see anybody else on the
amendment so it can have a
motion.
Mr Chairman.
Second.
The motion by Senator Rodriguez
and seconded by Senator Gonzales
any objection to the motion I
object.
Mr chair also want to vote no on
the man.
So why don't we just call the
roll so we make sure we got it
right.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Burt.
No.
Senator Campos is not here
Senator Candelaria.
Now.
Senator come not and no Senator
Diamond.
No.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill is.
He has to commend she's not here
Senator sure.
No Senator chairman I'll know if
okay Senator Steinborn.
Sorry yes.
Senator Steinborn yes yes okay.
Senator Woods.
I know.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator manuals yes.
That is for.
Yes.
This no.
No.
I know and one six no and one
Mr.
Sorry I know and to excuse.
So the motion the amendment does
not carry.
Thank you.
Senator Stewart you want to move
on to the next amendment.
Yes if I could district chairman
so.
The superintendents and the
administrative leaders around
the state are concerned that at
the end of this school year in
particularly we are going to
have a the exodus of our
teaching staff I will say that
New Mexico has the force of
all this class the teachers in
the country as so they have
requested that we extend it just
for two years what is the E. R.
B. a return to work so this
section is just that E. R. B.
return to work section with the
only change from twenty twenty
two when it's scheduled to
sunset now to twenty twenty
four.
Adding two years and and I will
remind you that for the teachers
to return to work and keep their
retirement benefits they must
first wait out an entire year
and secondly they must
contribute ten point seven
percent and yet that does not
translate into higher retirement
so this is definitely a stopgap
measure that some districts are
anticipating they may need to do
if we have a huge loss of
teachers.
I stand for questions.
Questions on the cell and.
I don't see in our.
Senator Gonzales go ahead.
I move the amendment for the
discussion purpose I'm sorry.
M. S. second to amend percent
special purpose and average it.
So we have a motion that and so
the minutes for discussion
purposes Senator Woods here and
right.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I think I understand what we're
trying to do here right now.
You're not allowed to teach if
you decide to retire.
Mr chairman if you decide
retired from teaching.
Market collecting your.
You're a retirement benefit.
You have to set up one year.
Before you can return to
teaching.
And when you return to teaching.
You pay the ten point seven but
don't gain any.
More retirement years is is that
how it is right now.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
that is exactly how it is with
one exception and that is if you
retire and you want to return to
work you can give up your
retirement benefits and go back
to work and get ten point and
pay in ten point seven but then
you would increase your
retirement so this is a special
provision to try to enable a
districts to have a little
flexibility when we have a lot
of teachers retire to lure them
back and they keep their
retirement and they get a salary
but they don't increase their
retirement by paying into the
temp what the ten point seven
percent.
Change eight.
Mr Chairman.
How is that different from what
I said.
Maybe I missed something here so
Mister chairman I just added in
I mean when you when you begin
to ask me a teacher can can it
want that wants to come back to
teach weights how to here then
continues to get his or her
retirement and pays and ten
point seven percent that's what
this says but that's not the
only way to return to work that
that's all I set.
You can return to work can give
up to retirement and get Hey Hey
in and then you can increase
your retirement that's not what
this is this is you you continue
to get your retirement you pay
ten point seven into the
retirement fund but you don't
increase your retirement so we
have what's called the return to
work it sunsets in twenty twenty
two and all this does is it
allows that to continue for two
more years into twenty twenty
four.
Okay.
So you can immediately you can
start on your time Mr chairman
you could start growing your
retirement.
And immediately come back to
work.
Is what the amendment says no so
I'm just like I said you have to
set out a year yes.
But you then can draw your
retirement and come back to work
although you still have to pay
the ten point seven yes and
we're extended at two more years
perfect exactly right thank you
thank you thank you madam chair
Mr chairman and madam protiv.
Thank you Senator Woods I don't
see anybody else's.
And raise any objection to the
amendment.
And then you have an amended
bill Senator Stewart.
We're back on the bill and we do
have some public comment Nate
then we want to start us off.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
On the damn call with that today
we have we have a.
No one speaking in opposition.
In support of the bell.
First we have marked the data
executive director of the
council of university president.
Is it up to the members of the
committee and.
March St on the second drive the
Mexico councilmembers presidents
Representative the seven four
years universities in New Mexico
I also point participate in
stakeholders group which saw the
sponsor mention that we work
very closely with yet director
good when and and also with the
public schools and also with our
community colleges and to come
up with this legislation we
stand for in terms of increase
the employer contribution as a
sponsor mentioned it's been a
long time coming and then also
the amendment on extending the
return to work that also does
address shortages in teachers as
well members of the committee
minutes higher than it has been
limited at about a quarter time
so I'm it does help support
actually to teacher so we wanted
to sponsor we also think the
sponsors for the funding forty
four hundred mission and with
that we stand for that Mr
chairman of the committee thank
you so much.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have.
Ashley long.
With the A. F. P. N. M..
Good morning Mr I'm sorry good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee again my name
is actually long with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico we just want to thank
the sponsor for her work on this
bill and find a couple of quick
comments eight a well funded
defined retirement system will
help to attract new educators in
New Mexico public schools and
keep veteran educators in our
places of learning Senate bill
forty two will help ensure the
funds long term security and
growth reaching for funding is
critical for New Mexico's credit
rating helps the protect helps
protect the fund for marketing
market during two downturns and
will help and retiree colored
actions and is good public
policy with that we stand in
strong support of Senate bill
forty two thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have Roger
career.
State president for a a RP in
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Dr
Terry Kerr I'm sorry Mr there
was called away to another
meeting
I am the a a RP New Mexico co
chair of the consumer team I'm
speaking today in support of
Senate bill forty two on behalf
the twenty at two thousand four
hundred.
About twenty four hundred
thousand Mexico A. A. R. P.
members.
It was founded by retired school
educator and so we are firm in
our stand said it is important
to make sure that our teachers
and educational support staff
I'm a retirement that is filled
with dignity and financial
security and we think Senator
Stewart very much for bringing
this bill forward thank you.
Chair members of the committee
next we have Kerry dot than with
a a RP.
Mr chairman and you also and
members of the committee my name
is three dots and and I am a
member of a a RP but I'm
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico association of
educational retirees today after
thirty one years as a school
nurse I retired enjoyed NMAG are
and as a former employee of
public schools my co workers and
I contributed to this program
with the expectation that we
would receive our pensions when
we retired and we hope to
preserve the program for future
education retirees we appreciate
the efforts of gendered when and
her board of directors I had
Mr B. as a continued these of
pensions and and we hope that it
will go on for more than one
hundred years.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak in support of Senate bill
forty two.
Mr chair members of the
committee I also believe that we
have on the call with that Steve
Bannon government relations and
communications director for any
a New Mexico.
Thank you can you hear me I'm
sorry just from yes my audio
here.
Yes we can go ahead.
Thank you.
Your chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to share my comments today on
Steve's Yang is the government
relations director for any New
Mexico on behalf of our members
we stand in support of this bill
retirement credit is earned
compensation for educators our
state should guarantee that all
education employees receive the
full benefits of retirement
through fully funded defined
benefit plan.
I'm sorry the legislation would
help offset the plans unfunded
liability provide the financial
security of stakeholder groups
compromising the R. B.
membership for this reason and
the reason already echoed in
public comment we support this
bill thank the sponsor for
bringing forth this bill and ask
for a favorable vote thank you.
Members of the committee we also
have at received a request to
speak Graham due back on the DFA
with the U. N. M. retiree at
that the H. N. but I believe
you're then able to join us on
the call today.
We received at no more request
to speak in purported that
still.
Thank you mate then we're back
on the bill any questions on the
bill.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales are you there.
Maybe he left his handout.
Chairman Senator.
if it's appropriate I make a
motion for due process of ended.
Our FAQ and that Mister chairman
Senator Rodriguez.
We have a motion for do pass in
the second by Senator Rodriguez
that we you call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator.
Yes.
Key Senator Burt pass Senator
Campos is excused Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond.
Senator.
Senator Diamond pass.
Okay Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill is excuse.
Senator share.
Know what I would like to
explain my vote.
Senator sure no Senator Diamond
I mean Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
No.
Senator Woods now Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
You can go back to the the
people that passed okay.
Senator Burt.
I'm gonna vote no.
And Senator Diamond no.
Okay and senator Munoz and.
Yes.
Okay so that is I yes.
For no and to excuse.
So it does pass.
Thank you Senator Stewart thank
you so much.
Thank you very much appreciate.
Mr chair can explain my vote
okay sorry about that Senator.
So I I want to make it clear
that this is not a vote against
the teachers or teachers
retirement.
I really want.
To fix it.
And make it right for ever in.
In so I I know what the
propaganda is going to be out
there that I hate teachers but
but I think it's important we
fix it because I know that we're
just gonna keep coming back and
asking for money of forever
which.
Fine but I would like is to find
a way to actually fix it so that
runs right forever and we don't
have to perpetually do what we
just it so thank you Mr.
Sure.
Senator Candelaria this to
Senate bill eighty eight as
quickly as we can.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senate
bill eighty eight comes to you
upon the endorsement and
recommendation of the New Mexico
financed Authority oversight
committee this legislation
authorizes the New Mexico
finance authority to accept
application for loans to the
public project revolving fund
over the next three years for
from the local governments and
public agencies listed in the
bill we do have an amendment Mr
chairman as is typical given the
timing of NMFA's process and our
legislative session the bill is
typically amended at least once
in the Senate to add additional
projects to the authorization
list and so I would move that
amendment for discussion
purposes my expert witness today
Mister chairman is Marquita
Russel of the New Mexico finance
authority.
Senator a.
Can you say it again I'm sorry
somebody walked in on me no
worries no worries Mr chairman
we have an amendment for this
bill to add additional products
The up projects the
authorization list I would move
that amendment for purposes of
discussion and our expert
witness today's Marquita Russel
the executive director of the
New Mexico finance authority.
And for the amendment thank you.
So we are on the amendment for
discussion purposes Senator
Candelaria explain.
I thank you Mr Mr Chairman as I
was mentioning during my
original presentation
Typically this bill is amended
at least once in each chamber to
add additional projects that
come before NMFA for
authorization the amendment
simply adds additional larger.
for our new members Senator
Candelaria yes we do not have a
copy of that amendment in the
Senate finance that's what we.
I I I asked Tom cry kaffir LCS
Representative.
If that wasn't that Mr Chairman
then I have a government face
and we'll do it as a floor
amendment if we get out of this
committee so the PPRF before you
with no amendment is the project
authorization list for the PPRF.
We here on the bill questions
from committee members on the
bill since then it has been
rescinded.
Israeli Mr Mr Chairman I move do
pass.
And I've shared your past is
there any questions on the
balance anybody's hand raised
throughout motion Purdue Paschim
we have a second.
Senator Diamond second any we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
as excuse Senator Candelaria yes
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
dot diamond yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Gonzales.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Is excuse Senator share.
I'm trying to say yes but I can
get but yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manual.
Yes.
Chairman yes yes it is nine yes
into excuse.
Motion passes.
Thank you Senator Gonzales are
you still with us.
Yes Mr chairman you want to do
Senate bill twenty.
Mr chairman if I may interject
for a moment I have been asked
whenever you're ready after
Senator Gonzalez to carry us
Senate bill one eighty one
percent or survive this there
are present that for him when
that the.
Mr chairman bill if there's
someone that could go before
then by that time I'll be ready
and you to get my other I think.
Senator the are you with us yes
Mr chairman under.
Want to go ahead and present
your Senate bill seventy thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee this is a New Mexico
finance Authority oversight
committee endorsed bill
Senate bill seventy essentially
takes eleven point three million
dollars and appropriates it to
the public project revolving
fund to to immense and diverse
that out to four different funds
we typically consider this these
four items separately but this
is an omnibus bill based on an
endorsement by the committee and
the chairman kind of idea that
committee is is here today as
well I do have an expert witness
Marquita Russel the chief
executive officer of the New
Mexico finance authority just
raced through this very quickly
it's two million dollars to
local government planning fund
two point five mil to the
drinking water state revolving
loan fund one point eight
million to the wastewater
facility construction loan fund
and five million dollars to the
cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund does not
affect the state general fund
but again it's it's a funding
bill so it comes here and again
these are usually considered
separately I've carried one or
two of these at different times
over the years I've been here
but this is a another way to do
it and that went and was
endorsed by the interim
committee.
And I don't know if we need to
have this Brussels say anything
but she's more than welcome to.
Mr chairman I think of the
Senator care of of covered it
very well thank you doctor
Austin for questions.
Thank you any questions from
committee members.
Mr chair if there's no public
comment I move to pass.
But I don't get somebody else on
on this bill.
And so Center would you have a
question before we.
The second that is the.
So we have a due pass motion a
second
that we call the roll.
Yes Mister chairman Senator Burt
yes Senator Burt yes Senator
Campos is excuse sinister kind
of idea yes Senator Candelaria
yes Senator Diamond.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senate tour Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill is
excused Senator sure yes Senator
sure yes Senator Steinborn.
Yes yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Woods.
Yes.
Woods yes Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes senator Munoz yes that is
nine yes and to excuse the
motion passes for Senate bill
seventy.
Mr chairman I'm ready now if
it's.
With your permission.
You got it two passed motion so
thank you at.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm on
your afternoon panel I'm gonna
run back over to S. T. B. T. C.
R. S. P. CG and I will if you
have your chief of staff or or
grenades and get a hold of me to
get me back over here I will
join you when you want thank you
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you.
Senator Gonzales will have the
Senate bill twenty.
very well Mr chairman of thank
you.
Well with the Senate bill twenty
it changes the distribution of
the eighteen point seven five
percent of the motor vehicle
excise tax revenue collection
from the local government will
fund to the transportation
project on the bill does not
make any other changes to the
amount of distribution of the
motor vehicle excise tax
chairman of the members so this
was brought to us by
the department of transportation
and the it's more of.
Doing the more efficient and
being able to distribute the
funds so with the more
efficiency to the municipalities
also have all.
Well secretary Michael Sandoval
as an expert witness that I
would like to ask do sure a few
comments with the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee really
all this bill does is move the
forty million dollars from the
motor vehicle excise tax that's
supposed to go into the local
government transportation fund
which is the older fund it's a
seventy five twenty five match a
lot of the local communities
can't meet that twenty five
percent match it's very
restrictive in what that fund
can be used for and that fund is
basically been funded through
gas tax so we're not necessarily
changed anything in that fund
but the new forty million
dollars from the motor vehicle
excise tax is scheduled to go
into that fund and we're asking
from this bill to have that
forty million go into the new
project transportation Fund
which is a ninety five five
match it's much more flexible
for the committees to use
they've shown that over the last
couple years and this will give
that funded reoccurring funding
source so it doesn't change the
bottom line as to any revenue
it's just moving it from one
fund to the other so that
communities can have a less
match in an easier way to spend
the money Mr chairman so I'd be
happy to answer questions I
really appreciate Senator
Gonzales was a bit at a big
advocate of the department for
sponsoring this bill on our
behalf so thank you Senator
Gonzales thank you Mr chairman.
We also have a Mr George Dodge
of.
The much does a lot of work
statewide in the if you wants to
sure some of these comments with
the the committee I I'm I'm I'm
good Mr Mister chairman and
Representative Senator Gonzales
I I still remember our days a
days in the house but you know
what does this is a great bill
that'll help out our our local
governments and that's what I do
across the state working with
our local government so we do
appreciate you Senator Gonzales
and and members of the committee
and and helping us with this
bill.
Thank you Senator Gonzales and
good to see you again George
Any questions from committee
members I don't see anybody's
hand raised.
Mr Chairman.
The
grant.
Mr chair representative of my
feelings were a little over that
form Representative Dodge didn't
also.
Senate is good to see me to.
That may.
That may just have to do it
squirrels are checking Sir.
Three dogs were.
It's good.
It's good to see it Mr chairman
and and Senator Steinborn good
to see you also it's a it's been
a while but just remember you
left the house and you went to
the Senate so well that's true
that's true
question.
I'm not Pollock
well with sentiments out I
apologize Mister chair I I don't
have a question I appreciate the
secretary being here to explain
the bill to thank you Mr thank
you.
I don't see anybody hand raised
so they have a motion please
hello Mr chairman the past thank
you Judy.
We have a second.
So we have to pass a motion by
Senator Rodriguez second by
cinnamon knows that we is there
anybody in objection to this
bill.
There is a little time back home
role.
I think it's unanimous path so I
think we're all good except for
those are excuse.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you members.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez how
long do you think this bill will
take I have Mr chairman.
Take very long I have a debit
card or hear from the sentencing
commission and Monica all can
cases any questions but actually
I was looking at it seems like a
pretty straightforward bill you
want to try it I think we can
get it get it done we I can go
for it.
Okay Senator Gonzales is gonna
do Senator want to says Senate
bill one eighty one is quickly
as possible you Senator
Rodriguez not etcetera I mean
certain Rodriguez I'm sorry
thank you that's okay yeah it's
almost that time of the day
thank you all righty thank you
Mr chairman Senate bill one
eighty one I will ensure that no
time or taxpayer dollars are
wasted collecting money from
people without funds and this is
a bill that was endorsed by the
New Mexico ascendancy Commission
it was unanimously endorsed also
by the courts corrections and
justice interim committee in
December
and by reforming clarifying New
Mexico's ability to pay court to
pay court rules it will reduce
court dockets maximize
efficiency of our justice system
and sure the state is not
spending more money on
collection than it collects
that's really what this bill is
about and instead of going on
and on with all the additional
information I'm going to defer
to Douglas Carbery case here any
other comments since it's late
in the day so Douglas are you
here in Monica.
Senator Mr chair thank you very
much.
Mr chair members of the Senate
finance committee my name is
Douglas carver deputy director
of the New Mexico.
To let the committee know who
the sensing Commission is I'll
be very brief as I know you're
pressed for time it's a
committee made up of a cross
section of actors in the
criminal justice system in the
state we don't come before
Senate finance very often
those actors include the
administrative office of the
courts the district attorneys
public defenders department of
public safety corrections
department victims advocate
magistrate judge members
appointed by the governor and
both chambers and both parties
so it is a very broad cross
section of the criminal justice
system this bill was came out of
our reform committee was
unanimously endorsed their and
then unanimously endorsed by the
commission itself and in light
of the FIR one of five that the
administrative office of the
courts did vote in support of
this bill.
I would miss all also over some
of the technical parts of the
bill one thing I will flag for
the committee's attention is
that in a rather rest hearing in
the Senate Judiciary they
dropped they removed section
eight from the bill that was a
bill involving ended indigenous.
Where a person determined to be
a needy person under the
indigent defense act
wouldn't have to pay the
fines and fees and costs the
reason for that section was that
it again great administrative
cost savings to the court so
they didn't have to go through a
whole second determination of
whether a person was able to pay
fines fees or costs so
it would be wonderful of the
committee would consider on the
basis of cost savings a striking
that one and then then from
Senate Judiciary otherwise the
other amendments and judiciary
we were quite fine with and I
miss all talk a little bit about
the specific specifics about
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Mike
Altman Attorney and the state
director of the fines and fees
justice center we provide
technical support to the
sentencing commission on this
bill
state and I'll be extremely
brief basically the the bill
incorporates principles for New
Mexico's court rules of on
ability to pay expands the scope
of community service activities
increases convert conversion
rates for community service in
jail creates an engine indigence
the presumption for traffic
offenses when is the assessment
of fees to once per case and
requires credit for presentence
confinement and of the the
purpose of this is really to
ensure that the state is not
spending more money on
collection and it actually
collects and and with that I
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
will stand for questions.
Thank you Monica.
Thank you center this is that
thank you that is that Mr
chairman I'd I'll make my final
comment that I think this is a
very long overdue bills truly
into it if the person can't pay
in U. keep assessing and
assessing more more fees and
putting them in jail it's just
costing the state more money
than it would to well to do to
build that so I I really applaud
Senator Brandt is and the
presenters here thank you.
Thank you.
We didn't have any comment on
this bill correct.
The committee now we do not.
Okay thank you Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman so I'm I
was hoping Douglas would money
restating the amendment issue
they would like us to just
consider just so I can hear that
again.
Yes I'd be happy to Mr chair
Senator Steinborn in Senate
judiciary made a number of
amendments if you look at the
this year they're amendments or
ten total listed most of them
are streamlining some of the
language and don't pose any
particular problems to the bill
of the one that we didn't have
time to discuss and Senate
Judiciary it was a fairly rushed
hearing there was a senator who
was had to go to another hearing
and that they would have lost
their quorum was when they
commended section eight out of
the bill and section new
language that stated a person
determined to be a needy person
under the indigent defense act
and that's the act that
determines if you're needing
qualify for public defender who
is convicted of a criminal
offense shall not be assessed
court costs fees or fines and
the reason that was put in and
why the sentencing commission
actually like that provision
because no controversy or debate
in the at the commission level
was because it would be
Representative a significant
administrative costs cost
savings to the courts as bill
stands now the courts would have
to repeat and indigenous CSS
meant that the public defender
already goes through
to assess whether someone's
indigent we're trying to take
that extra step away from the
courts to provide administrative
cost savings to the courts and
if you need more particulars on
how that might work a missile
could speak and that she's to
practice
in this area of law.
Okay let me let me ask you this
is a follow up since that and
here if you had conversations
with members of the committee
who maybe didn't have time to
consider this the ramifications
of this.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I
haven't but I know I haven't
personally but I know there have
been conversations about that
I don't know if any formal pole
or anything has been taken.
But I know that there had there
there have been some discussions
about possibly restoring that.
And that that was the original
reason I mention it is that was
the original concept that the
sentencing commission endorsed
and so our that was the version
of the bill that we prefer.
Okay if you want to add to that
storm them so.
the the did you.
On this.
I'm sorry miss all you want to
ask that sorry you can hear me.
Mr chairman and senator
Steinborn I have nothing to add
I think that Mr thank you
explain it quite well.
Okay okay thanks.
I'm having some tech issues this
afternoon that's all I have to
ask you to explain to me Douglas
okay thank you.
Thank you Mr chair estimate of
what the lost revenues would be
by waiving these fees.
Mr chair Senator Diamond
There isn't a good estimate is
the probably the best way to put
it that was something that was
of great concern to the
commission throughout this.
Process there are two things I
mentioned and I'll also point
members to the fiscal impact
report is that what we're trying
to do with this bill is from on
the fiscal level is trying to
prevent using good money chasing
after bad for example the
Brennan center did a report
looking at nine different
counties around the country
three of them were in New Mexico
and Bernalillo county which is
of course by far and away our
largest county spent more money
trying to collect fees than it
actually brought in so it's
actually a net loss.
The state
or to the county.
Fiscal impact report noted that
although the AOC claims a
certain number it was rather
broad for fifteen million
dollars that intentionally could
be lost that despite that number
that they gave the fund that
they discussed Representative
never had anything approaching
that amount of money in it and
again most of these fees that
this bill address this is an
eliminating fines and fees at
all this bill address fines and
fees there yes to people who
have no money so the state
spends a fair bit of money or
he's jurisdictions spend a lot
of money chasing after money
that's not there.
And so we think it would in the
end actually probably be in that
game but it was interesting to
us throughout this process that
no one could give us a firm
figure and we work with the the
HSD is on both reform committee
and the full commission they
couldn't track the number nobody
really knows how much money is
coming in or out a lot of these
funds and fees get intermingled
it's not a really clear
accounting but it is pretty
clear that he's jurisdictions
are spending a lot of money
chasing after funds that don't
actually exist now if we ever
got to the question of
eliminating fines and fees
that's a different debate this
is a much smaller and more
targeted issue and I don't know
if miss all would like to
address that more this is Frank
area of expertise.
I specifically.
Mr chairman and senator diamond
if I may I think the one our
major problem this bill is
trying to correct is is we
amount of money that spent on
collections by a variety of
different agencies within the
current criminal legal system so
for example Bernalillo county
Bernalillo county support county
Santa Fe County they were all
studied we're we for example the
SS in one year four point one
million dollars in fines and
fees of that two point two
million was converted to jail
and community service credits
meeting that none of that money
the state actually recruits on
that we we actually doubled down
and we spend money to
incarcerate people after that
conversion credit is is it the
state doubles out and he's
additional funds in order to
incarcerate people to recruit.
To sort of sort of false
recruitment for that money
and in that same year find the
minds of these are actually
collected were one point nine
million yes there is two point
one seven eight million in
collection court and jail costs
so Bernalillo county experienced
a net loss of three hundred and
sixteen thousand dollars
so what we're trying to do is
correct that support county in
Santa Fe County fared a little
bit better but still as they
have had a small that came on as
a group County for example had a
net gain of twenty four thousand
but it was only eleven percent
of what was originally assessed
Santa Fe County added in net
gain of four hundred and thirty
thousand dollars or thirty eight
percent of what was originally
assessed but we're trying to
stop is that it is sort of the
the cost shifting in the cost
burden happens occur across our
state you all of these different
criminal justice actors.
Thank you.
Financial dilemma by all means
but I feel like if they can't
afford to provide then they
can't afford to crime I mean in
in a case like this rather than
make them maybe kind of serve
jail time in lieu of paying
fines could we consider that
they would have to maybe perform
community service or something
in lieu of paying fines but I
feel like giving a criminal a
free pass because they can't
afford it then they can't afford
a life of crime.
I'm a interject for that for
just a moment and then we go to
Douglas if I may that this bill
of Senator Diamond does expand
the scope of community service
activities and in fact it's
actually a way to streamline the
ways the different ways that a
person who has been a staff they
a penalty can pay is given I'm
options if at all possible it
limits the assessment give me a
second requires payment plans a
thirty day installment for
example and it sets limits on
payments amounts to two percent
of a person's monthly net income
or ten dollars whichever is
greater so if it's not
purporting to make it possible
to all different ways that we
can to see if we can collect the
the funds
but it does not limit in any way
does not limited judges
discretion
to impose conditions of the
conviction such affirmation jail
another punitive and
rehabilitation activities that
it's merely cutting and
streamlining the system in place
to help us collect whatever we
can in those ways that we can
you know it's of course more
expensive to keep people in jail
S. has been indicated but it
doesn't change any conviction
possibilities or anything like
that but I just thought I'd
weigh in and that was you may
want to act thank you Senator
Diamond for your questions thank
you Senator Rodriguez sure.
So so I still understand that
it's still reducing its still
reducing financial fees but I
feel like we're there's there's
we're kind of limiting recovered
consequences of of of what
happens when you commit the
initial crime so I I guess I
don't see in here if you could
point out where if they can't
pay the fees where they can't
serve community service in time
which doesn't have a large cost
to the state it's not like us
incarcerating them so where does
the community service part in
this bill come into play as a
substitute in lieu of paying
those fees.
Mr Chairman Senator Rodriguez
here and that was can you
elaborate a little bit on the
part of the bill right expands
the scope of community service
activities activities that
judges you require thank you.
I will of course Senator
Rodriguez Mr chair Senator
Diamond and also might but is
also jumping as well
Part of the bill does is it
expanded me try to find the
exact date
Sexed and
Community service option and it
also increases and New Mexico
counties appreciate this they
were involved in early
discussions on this bill
increase the conversion rate
because
on the one hand I fully
sympathize with what you're
saying that if they can't pay
them perhaps they should spend
sometime going their heels and
County but that's actually a big
loss for the counties they are
the money as I'm sure you know
on their jails and they were
actually in support of
increasing conversion rate for
jail time in New eight mins the
community service options it's
on page two of the bill get
expanded to look around lines
nineteen to twenty one to create
a greater universe of what might
be considered consider community
service options really with the
money to.
Helping people on the road to
recovery so that they can break
the cycles of recidivism rate
the cycles of crime and again
this was supported completely
non controversial if the
commission level and that
includes dust department of
public safety corrections
everyone was on board with this
and I don't know miss out if you
want to jump in with some more
details Senator Diamond.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman Senator Diamond Mr
Carter explained it quite well
and just for Senator Diamond
sort sort of how this works is
that at the point of sentencing
community service can be ordered
and that can be can you know
whatever whatever the financing
total is can be converted into a
particular range so that's
existing law this isn't
necessarily changing it just
increases the conversion rates
in order people to have of the
to be able to sort of work this
down in a quicker way same for
jail conversion rates because
right now we have a large amount
of people and it's really
expensive for them to be
committed to jail and you know
and they're sort of there's
different estimates that sort of
the average estimates daily cost
for somebody to be in custody is
about ninety five dollars a day
it's a little bit more in DC and
it's just so expensive and it's
a huge tax on in the state and
county systems.
Thank you guys thank you all
thank you Mr chairman I
understand the situation where
and it's hard for me to I feel
like we're almost giving a past
to those who shouldn't but I
understand the financial
predicament that this poses
anyway thank you guys for your
time appreciate it.
Thank you senator.
Thank you I don't see anybody
else on the list some have a
motion please.
Chairman.
Thank you can.
The motion by Senator Steinborn
and the second by Senator
Rodriguez
Any objection.
To that.
Call the roll meant based.
Yes.
German you Senator just minutes
yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
is excuse senator Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senator Diamond no.
Senator Diamond knows Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manos.
Senator Munoz no that is four no
six yes and one excuse it does
pass.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
Senator how long do you think
your bill's gonna take because I
understand there are some staff
at six o'clock in in this want
to try to get to this broadband
steps we can get a grant.
We were very short Mr chairman.
Okay Cimber let's roll through
this one.
Thank you Mr chairman chairman I
move to pass.
We might have some public
comment center Cheryl all right
okay.
This is Senate bill one forty
five every year the legislative
finance council puts together a
special committee to look
inwards and commissions in the
state that are going to sunset
within the next year and a half.
This is the result of that
meeting and
there are twelve boards and
commissions that have been
recommended to extend the sunset
date to twenty twenty seven and
it's just about that simple Mr
chairman I stand for questions.
Do we have anybody in support
online.
Senator members of the committee
yes we deal with us on the team
call today we have Mike McMillan
chair of the New Mexico athletic
trainer practice board.
My.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Mike
picked on the chair of the New
Mexico athletic trainers
practice board.
Appreciate your time to speak to
you today and as chair of the
board we up.
Fully support passage of this
bill to extend sunset for the
New Mexico athletic trainer.
Practice board thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee we also received
indication of point prime day
than Tom fan with the New Mexico
athletic trainers association
David unable to join us on the
call that the bank and that is
it for public comment on that
piece of legislation.
Thank you for your question I do
you Mister chairman Senator Burt
so question is this the
official.
You know recommended.
Less from the LFC or is it
originally there were ten boards
and commissions that were
recommended and endorsed by the
LFC due to some technical issues
and some catching boards
commissions in between their
scheduled meetings
they were ready to boards the
athletic trainers and
chiropractors did not submit in
time since that time they have
submitted and we had a amended
the and the.
The bill and Health and public
affairs to include those other
to boards and commissions so
everyone is for what.
Right people on board they're
doing everything correctly and
so this this bill does include
all twelve of those boards and
commissions.
Okay and are there boards or
commissions that are some
setting that the bill doesn't
include that are to be going
away okay not not to my
knowledge this is all from
legislative finance council they
tracked this all the time you
know the have analysts that the.
No follow up each and every
board and commission so these
were the only ones coming up I
believe in twenty two.
Okay so they're given they're
all being given a reprieve and
eleven the CNO Act he will be
extended through twenty twenty
seven.
Okay thank you for explaining
that thank you Mr so.
Thank you I don't see any other
questions Senator Burt how many
of these boards are actually
functional and how many.
That are waiting for governor
appointee salaries of of these
right here they're all
completely full all of committee
members as to my understanding
and from I believe from the
governor's office.
Told us that they are all
current commission members there
are some members on these boards
that have been appointed but
have not been confirmed as yet
but they are all current members
of of these commissions imports.
Thank you senator Byrd a
question is that it.
Members of somebody else's hand
removed do pass again Mr chair
thank.
We have a motion by Senator
share and a second by Senator
Diamond any objection to the
motion.
Hearing center but you have your
have a due pass on your bill
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
Thank you.
Going to move into our broadband
section and I just think this is
an important topic for Senate
finance.
Because there's so much
broadband money out there and
how we're going to figure out
how we're going to use it in
which broadband bills and
legislation they're the right
ones so I want to get the
committee some information I I
don't know a lot about I just
know there's a lot of money out
there.
And so will start a presentation
with our newly confirmed
secretary I think as of
yesterday John Salazar.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you so much this is John Salazar
cabinet secretary for department
of information technology I've
been asked to by Nate and to
prepare some bullet points on
the state of broadband from the
do it perspective and I want to
walk through some of the issues
and challenges as well as
accomplishments that we've of
encountered over the last year
that I've been here so recent
accomplishments of the first and
probably the most important
thing in my opinion is we
completed a statewide rural
broadband assessment and
strategic plan the the plan
identified.
That between a hundred ninety
seven thousand.
R. four hundred twenty six
thousand depending on how you
look at it our under served or
un served in the state of New
Mexico a hundred and twenty six
thousand are on serve meaning
they do not have services at all
hundred ninety six thousand
I was a combination of unserved
and underserved so brought about
seventy thousand individuals did
not have the appropriate speeds
as identified by the federal
government.
John let me interrupt you are
you trying to share your
presentation with us on the
screen yes you could not to
unite.
It says.
I'm it says I'm sharing my
screen.
Can the rest of you guys see it.
Now we can see it just says
you're sharing your screen but
we don't have your presentation
just for the members of the.
Public.
Let me try doing it again Mr
Chairman.
How about their.
We we still don't have.
It's it's like it's loading up
saying it started screen sharing
with the little wheel spinning.
But it's not completely.
I apologize I'm not sure I have
it up on my screen and that's
highlighted like when you your
screen Brian secretary Salazar
you would need.
Click than on the actual power
point presentation instead of
just the window and then it
could step.
Okay that's not that's not mine
though.
Can you see it now.
Now.
I apologize I'm not sure what
the technical difficulties are
here
Anyways I I can just talk to the
points I I apologize unless
someone else wants to go first
and I will try to figure out
what's going on with my
connective itty.
When we get your cat yeah
because you can be keep this
hearing.
Secretary keys are you with us.
We have the division director
for economic development
apartments at and that is mark
Roper.
Want to go and proceed.
Chair Mister chairman members of
the committee
My comments are are going to be
fairly brief I I think it's
pretty obvious that
connectivity and broadband are
need to Education and need the
economic development without a
at it's going to be hard for
businesses as we found
throughout COVID do need to
continue to compete at the as
I'm sure.
The secretary Salazar will point
out connectivity in rural New
Mexico is poor to nonexistent
and that the majority of our
state this past year of the
state of New Mexico as the
economic development department
is made to very important.
The steps towards a broadband
development and rural New
Mexico.
One is we issued an RFP to do a
study of the providing broadband
to all areas of New Mexico as
well as being able to provide
connectivity and monitor and
throughout all of New Mexico
from altitude meaning areas
above sixty five thousand feet
and we have a company that has.
Proving this technology of the
manufacturing and providing this
technology in New Mexico so will
be first on the list to receive
the technology as well as the
this company is committed to
making their headquarters and
hold New Mexico which means we
will also receive the economic
benefits of the construction of
of their mechanisms to deliver
this connectivity we believe
it's going to be a cost savings
to the state of New Mexico as
I'm sure secretary Salazar will
point out the cost to provide a
traditional fiber to all of New
Mexico is in the billions of
dollars and I even if oil and
gas were to stay forever at two
hundred dollars a barrel I don't
think we can ever get that to
all spots of New Mexicos to I I
think it's it's a big step we're
very excited to see the outcome
of the R. F. P. the study and we
believe in it is going to be one
one of the key answers to
developing broadband across New
Mexico to all areas.
I leave my my comments there I
will mention that that are iffy
at is at a cost of three point
two million dollars for this
study to prove this technology
al be happy to answer any
additional questions thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you John
Can we go to Jeremy locked up
from.
Thank you all.
Thank you Mr chair committee my
name is German of auto I am the
chief information officer for
the New Mexico department of
transportation it is an exciting
time hearing more talk about
that initiative what we have
going on at N. M. D. O. T. I
think certainly contributes what
I'm gonna do today to take a
brief moment to touch on the
roll.
And the functions that NMDOT has
in regard to broadband across
the state of New Mexico.
Maybe give me a moment I will
share my screen.
So hopefully you're able to see
my screen now if you can
confirm.
Perfect thank you.
So I'm sure there's a lot of
this knowns and some unknowns to
what and you'll two dozen regard
to broadband infrastructure
obviously we are in
infrastructure agency we oversee
the highways in the rules that
go out to New Mexico that
transport physical traffic I
believe we also could should and
do play a large role in digital
traffic that routes throughout
New Mexico.
We do get to many different
permit request to install
broadband infrastructure within
the right of way of New Mexico
and since I've joined the team
last year and working under
sections of all we've been a lot
of emphasis on how we can
enhance our services continues
the quality of continuous
improvement of our services and
what we can do to be a true and
valuable player for the state
for the industry and helping
this expansion that support the
state needs of broadband build
out so what we do have inside
the New Mexico department
transportation of the
telecommunications
infrastructure operation.
Starkly we would get our permits
who we would find the permits
and we had a very isolated
process in doing so two recent
efforts we have been looking to
mature that process to make it
more efficient for users across
the state so I'm a touch a bit
on the telecommunications
infrastructure operations within
an M. D. O. T. I'm going to some
examples of what it is we have
for for for some of the request
Senator the mission of what we
do under the IT infrastructure
operations to support the
expansion of right away
broadband infrastructure to
industry collaboration and
partnerships or protecting the
interest of the state and its
assets that is the are the R. O.
W. of course and the the soil
that that to R. O. W. with is is
is composed of the operation
that functions of the
telecommunications
infrastructure operation within
the NMDOT are composed of the
logistics of logistics
collaboration right of way and
permitting and I'll briefly
touch on each one of these as we
get into this O. permitting so
this is a new initiative that we
kick off last year we are in the
process of implementation we
want to modernize and digitize
how we manage permits across the
state this is an investment we
are making the NM deal team and
this will do several things
provide transparency and
accountability for the
permitting process but it's
designed to give the permits
requests across the state that
the telcos the internet service
providers a portal to log into
estimate the permit application
allow them to track where that
permit application is allow
dashboard reporting on our end
to be able to quickly and
identify where they are set up
some service level agreements to
make sure that we are quickly
and efficiently turning round
these permits to the industry
but a partners and and and of
and just to the industry the
throughout the state and so
we're looking to have this
complete what do by September
twenty twenty one.
There's gonna be some
integration and collaboration
would do it on this as well as
sectors cells are we'll talk
about perhaps I believe some of
his initiative we're looking to
see how we can use this system
and this modernization to to
accommodate the needs across the
state for our our partnering
agencies so right of way so with
in regard to right away of
course the functions their
regulation rulemaking right now
we are under the process of
repealing replace of enemy C.
seventeen point four point two
we are looking to incorporate
public utility inside of this
NMAC the public hearing on that
is going to be able twenty third
and what we also do enlighten a
with second by the valuation of
the right of way in regard to to
the infrastructure and utilities
and we also work too many tribal
agreements on this right away so
I emphasize these points because
I think at least in my time here
it's clear that NMDOT are expert
at this we do this very well and
I'm excited to see this process
which are the major continue
take place and how we continue
to to of find great value to the
state of New Mexico the other
part on there I wanted to just
briefly touch on it
collaboration undersecretary
Santa we realized assets that we
have and we realize the amount
of requests that we get for
broadband infrastructure we
realize the impact it has to the
state to the to the industry of
the state and so we don't want
to be side loaded our decisions
in our were away we move forward
because we do get large a
request someone without getting
into detail there is a couple of
permit requests are I'm sorry
installation for fiber
infrastructure request that
would be going to border to
border across the state these
are major capacity and highly
capable
band with infrastructure that is
that could
basically find out what the
state needs in regard to its
future and scalable needs for
infrastructure and our role is
to work with these companies.
Make it attractive for them
economically but also the for
the interest of New Mexico again
we don't want to do that alone
so we do collaborate would do it
economic development division
Indian Affairs and again I think
we do certainly have the
competency of and the expertise
to work to the negotiations try
to get to what is the best
outcome for New Mexico while
we're also looking out for the
interests of the ones that want
to put the infrastructure within
the ground and I think we're
making a lot of good progress in
those specific negotiations in
getting infrastructure out to
rural areas getting high
capacity bandwidth within the
state of New Mexico and many
other positive attributes are
going to come with that that be
happy to talk about any other
time with any of you.
And then lastly logistics so
what you have on the screen here
is we are also GIS experts you
could imagine within NM deal
team what we're looking to do in
this is something that we're
launching over excited for this
to happen is is where we are
bringing in the you step which
is the construction projects
the New Mexico department
transportation has planned and
we are integrating broadband
infrastructure into these
projects so this is conduit
we're doing an analysis on how
much quantity we want if we want
to put in each of these routes
to each of these projects based
on the population based on
discussions with industry and
the goal here is to have this
available publicly so that
internet service providers
across the state the telco
companies are aware of where our
projects are and so our goal
here is to make efficient cost
effective for our partners
across the state to be able to
utilize its infrastructure so
they can easily and efficiently
get their interests are there's
there fiber whatever may be
within these within this
infrastructure we're installing
reducing soil disturbance
reducing traffic disturbance
reducing cost of tearing up the
ground again looking at did want
to practice it is really what
our goal is here and so we're
building this out I and I'm just
going to jump on over to this
this is a map that we do have
available internally we are
maturing get we got interested
routes the internet service
providers are talked or
transport companies are wanting
to install across the state we
are able to easily identify the
overlap of where our
construction projects are and
where we can potentially put in
fiber infrastructure in support
that complementary to what
they're doing and so there's
many many other things here
including the existing ITS
infrastructure which is
intelligent transportation
systems so the message board and
cameras so we already doing a
lot of good work we are aware
that a lot of the broadband
infrastructure is child and and
and we are conduit on how to get
into the ground and so we want
to be a strong partner with the
state with the industry and and
let him know that that we have
expertise or.
Where we're ready to collaborate
ready to work on this and really
help get New Mexico to where can
be by utilizing the right of way
and infrastructure expertise
that New Mexico has and so with
that Mr chair that's really all
I wanted to present on and just
really want to say thank you all
for your efforts to have been
following the bills it is an
exciting moment I think in my
opinion for a New Mexico to see
all this up progress in to see
this movie and I cannot wait to
see how we tied together to be
one of the leading states and
comes to infrastructure thank
you very much.
And of course opt out for any
questions if there are any.
I think you're talking about.
This year the question I'm sorry
myself I'm sorry.
John cells are did you get your
your screen share issue fixed.
I've logged off and came back in
hopefully this will work this
time around okay let me try it
again can you guys see it now.
Okay great.
so going back to accomplishments
the first thing that we did with
the strategic plan as I
mentioned earlier that there's a
population of individuals that
are unserved or underserved
we've been working with PD on
emergency COVID procurement
price be services we've been
able to leverage about twenty
two million in funding for fiber
projects with seventy percent of
that funding coming from the
federal and private
investments in about twenty nine
percent from the state current
challenges as I mentioned that
the study identified that we
have a gap in New Mexico of one
billion to five billion to fix
the rural broadband issues the
five billion is way in the sky I
think the what one billion is
closer to what we're trying to
get to the second item with the
challenges is poor economics for
rural broadband connectivity
projects the ISP providers have
really.
Picked the state areas in the
state where they can make a
profit we're gonna need to help
them out in an investment with
the state money and as far as
far as federal money as well to
move things forward
We need.
Of more expansive ruled our
broadband infrastructure funding
mechanism going forward twenty
nineteen do it receives ten
million dollars for all rural
broadband.
that's not quite enough creative
we've got that one billion
dollar gap and then the other
thing that were high
encountering there's two other
additional things that we need
to work on it is improving right
away process sees across the
state we've got tribal entities
we've got the department of
transportation we've got
municipalities county
governments that have their own
process sees for right away we
need to somehow come up with
some kind of process to improve
that permitting and approval
process and then this the last
issue we face is anti donation
issues we can't just give money
to the Comcast and CenturyLink
is of the world we have to get
something in return so we need
to a good grant award process
and we need to be able to get
around the anti donation issues
I'm gonna move on to the next
slide we're we just talk a
little bit about our vision of
the statewide strategic plan
going forward we we need to
develop an operational framework
of how we will broadband in New
Mexico we need to establish a
governance structure to identify
some kind of up by re committee
to take a look at the different
projects that we have throughout
the state how we use the funding
that's available from the
federal government from the
state as well as private
investment how's that going to
work we are in within that
framework we identify or
prioritize projects will look at
any legislative requirements
that we need going forward to
address anything that we see in
real world practices.
the second item within our
strategic plan is to develop an
infrastructure grant program
utilizing industry best
practices we have other states
that have done really well and
rolling out broadband and part
of their this practice is is
really bringing in federal
funding to match what the eyes
P. providers are doing and to
match state award funding as
well so we need to have that
process clearly defined how
that's gonna work and how we
roll it out.
we need to develop and provide
technical planning and grant
writing assistance to support
the development of competitive
applications to federal rule
brand grants or loan programs
are out there
there's a lot of money at the
federal level but we've got to
get our ducks in a row we have
to have a good process for
Applying for those grants and
bringing that money into New
Mexico.
And then the the of the second
to last item here is that the
strategic plan identified two
models that we can go forward
with model one is laying fiber
everywhere that's not really a
good a good thing for the state
of New Mexico because of our
to rang we're the fifth largest
state in the nation it's is
going to be impossible to lay
fiber every were but the model
to is is a combination of laying
fiber in areas were we have
neighborhoods and homes are
clustered closely together the
second technology we want to
take a look at is fixed wireless
deploying that technology into
areas where we have you know
homes that are scattered further
apart but still can be hit with
the a satellite that not a
satellite a tower.
And then the last item would be
to look at bringing in satellite
there's new technology that's
being rolled out out there right
now starlink is one of the up
products and companies that is
being developed that has a lot
of potentials and as economic
development mentioned as well
they have up project that
they're currently working one on
that looks promising it hasn't
been proven but it looks
promising.
Then the last thing that we need
to do is really grow our our
broadband mapping resources to
accommodate all the data that we
have out there I think we have
one of the best mapping programs
in New Mexico as far as
broadband as started in New
Mexico and twenty ten we have a
lot of information but they'll
information as self reporting
information from the federal
government as well as the ISP
providers we need to make sure
that that information is
accurate so with that Mr
chairman I stand for any
questions that you may have and
thank you for your time.
Thank you your next.
Thank you Mr chairman members so
it's good to see you all again
manage Jonathan trembling and
the director of the public
school facilities authority.
will share my screen the in the
second with you as well I also
have a would you be Rica our of
broadband program manager with
me on the phone as well then
we'll be answering your
questions have a very short
presentation here to talk about
the successes that we've had
over the last five years.
And what we think will be some
steps forward to help school
districts because that's who we
serve.
And help of all their networks
in the future as well make a
more sustainable.
So can you all see the screen.
Yes we can good thank you so.
Just to start bring the topic
here this is statewide map of
school districts in New Mexico
eighty nine school districts
this is who we work with to
connect to high speed internet
through our broadband program.
as you see here a few key points
about New Mexico that won't
change anytime soon the remote
rural nature of the state of
small populations that poses
challenges for IT and broadband
infrastructure build out.
Looting for school districts and
students expertise manpower will
throughout our state is going to
continue to be an issue in the
future as well challenge that
we're gonna have to address and
I think part of our strategy
that will talk about the minutes
will help deal with both of
those underlying challenges for
New Mexico into the future.
So what we've done for the last
five years to our broadband
program is we've leveraged a lot
of federal money the right money
as it's called we help to
districts apply for and get that
federal funding and as a result
of the two types of projects
that are funded by that federal
program eligible for schools.
our fiber optic build out the
basic backbone to connect the
school site to high speed
internet as well as the major a
quick meant that the school has
to install the district has to
install to operate that high
speed internet connectivity so
that's that's what we've been
hoping districts with over the
last five years.
This slide is a short summary of
the successes we've had now with
the.
Funding through the council the
PSC OC bosses as well as you see
here.
One hundred percent of the cost
and school sites in New Mexico
are now connected to high speed
internet or they will be very
soon their projects on currently
under way for the last handful
of schools around the state.
So that's good news since two
thousand sixteen in less five
years the state funding has been
about three million dollars a
year.
Well as you see there the the
math for you right funding is
nine dollars for every dollar of
state bonding nine dollars of
federal funding for every dollar
of state funding.
That.
Federal funding is what is
allowed us to get school sites
connected within the last five
years to high speed internet
with our small group of.
Program managers and our agency
helping facilitate this whole
process and helping develop
projects so couple other key
points here New Mexico for
schools now is number three in
the nation for fiber upgrade
projects were very heavy
participants relative to other
states in the right program
through our mechanism and we're
number five for a quick.
Upgrades couple quick slides
here that show the progress so
the cost is come down
consistently that's good news
since when we started five years
ago.
This very simple graph the speed
the band with the power of the
connectivity has gone up that's
again good news basically good
news for schools.
For the near term future.
A model that we think will be
successful to help districts
mature their networks.
If you go back to that original
map it's unrealistic to think
that every small district in New
Mexico is going to be able to
own and operate and maintain
involved it's network on its own
with its own expertise that kind
of IT expertise doesn't exist in
small districts throughout New
Mexico.
but we are now in a but a five
year replacement cycle for
instance for the major equipment
they had was install has been
installed in the last five years
school districts will need to
keep up with that cycle of work
and replacement cycle so we
think that a successful model
for districts as a regional
consortia model.
Where we've been encouraging
districts to partner up with
their neighboring districts.
And band together and go in with
the group purchases for service
equipment support.
So that at a regional level a
group of districts can get the
kind of expertise that they
might not have independently
each one of the and also benefit
from the kind of cost conscious
airing that can be leveraged if
you're doing group purchases
rather than one offs for small
districts one at a time so all
of that is I think some basic
underlying reasons why you
regional model for school
districts is proving successful
already and will continue to be
in the future.
Mentioned there the last point
on the slide we're talking with
higher ed and specially the
conversations in the last month
really have renewed with higher
and there's some interest on the
part of higher ed institutions
of to be the host.
For some of the regional hub
infrastructure and expertise
that school districts might be
able to connect back to so as
you all know the higher it has a
presence throughout the state
and they could serve as a hub
for expertise in potential
equipment locations
infrastructure the future for
groups of districts so this is
the last map shows.
Statewide map again school
districts the districts in dark
blue these are the regional
consortia that have been
developed and are a contracted
or in process the work is in
process as a result of the
shared agreements and they're
each unique but we have other
west central there the seat
covers can mother when reserve
mega millions of coral again
those districts especially
further out west would have a
hard time owning and operating
and maintaining involving
networks on their own so they're
benefiting from partnering with
their neighbors for group
purchases.
The north central you see
they're the ones from the border
down to Cuba is another one that
is maturing and up and running
has some contracts.
The others that are generally
bubbles in the red circles there
on the maps are groups of
districts that we're working
with now this year to develop
new regional consortia.
For those groups of districts in
those geographic areas around
the state to partner up again
with their neighboring districts
to improve their ability to own
and maintain and operate their
to their networks one thing that
we are seeing a major benefit
from this model is improve
security
control of content and security
for the network within districts
as you all know from the news
last year many of the major
districts in New Mexico or hit
with cyberattacks and it shut
down their district wide
networks for today's in some
cases and that meant that no
learning could occur basically.
That's the state of things these
days for schools if they lose
their internet from a cyber
attacks.
They potentially get shut down
taken offline and kids can do
their homework among other
things so we think this this
regional model again will
provide.
A feasible path for small groups
of districts around the state to
improve their security for their
network infrastructure and some
of those cyber attacks end up
resulting in major capital
losses to.
Damages equipment control and
that has to be replaced and
that's another cost that can be
avoided if districts are more
able to have better security
control we think of if the
partnership with higher ed for
instances successful I read has
the kind of experts that could
help districts manage the
security of their networks into
the future at a regional level
was well so.
That's the that's what we're
working on so for for our for
our sake for districts we think
this is a fruitful model a
little transition from the
initial build out where
everybody every school site got
connected that was good that was
just job one now job two is to
figure out how to make every
districts network sustainable
secure with good content
filtering good band with that
will cost you some of the
overall goals so.
I'll represent their and take
any questions we have thank you
Mr.
Your next.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you for arranging this
hearing and biting me to speak
immaculate Fisher in the program
evaluation manager for the
legislative finance committee
our office is been looking at
broadband since two thousand
nineteen and we released a
pretty comprehensive evaluation
in November of that year is even
then our staff is recognizing
the need New Mexico a second to
last in the nation when it came
to the percent of homes that
have internet subscriptions you
know since then the comment
pandemic is laid bare the
replications of not having a
well connected populace so as a
result we don't need all of us
have been beefing up on finding
out where we have access caps
and all the different types of
technology that might help fill
those gaps Ms which covered by
the previous presenters so
instead of rehashing that just
want to some considerations for
you numbers of the Senate
finance committee that are have
resulted from our staff work
over the past.
Your.
The first is it's just a
reminder for legislators of when
you have a big proposals in
front of you the session to
commit large amounts of state
funding for broadband not
reminder is that you're likely
really gonna need to push to
understand with those approach
this potential probation might
be buying you know secretary
Salazar mentioned we do have a
statewide broadband plan it's
it's a gap analysis that do it
commission this year that
identifies all the businesses
and residents in the state
currently do not have broadband
access in the analysis also
estimates the cost to build out
broadband services to all of
those locations and that's where
that one to five billion dollar
cost estimate for building out
broadband keeps coming up.
Report was a really good initial
detailing of our needs but what
we don't have is the next steps
from that yet secretary Salazar
secretary Salazar just mention
this in his slides that we don't
have an operational framework
yet you know we don't have a
plan that tells us in the next
year which communities we should
prioritize with what types of
infrastructure who's going to
own that infrastructure.
Other kinds of important details
that you really want to know
about any side decent size
capital investment.
Prioritized list of projects
doesn't exist yet you know you
don't have a good incremental
cost estimate of how much what
type of funding is needed within
of just over the next few years
this not really an ideal
situation.
You know we have of that really
large amount of uncertainty
about how any broadband
appropriations might be spent
over the short term you know I I
I'd put it out there that it
might be worth considering how
the legislature might tie back
any sort of larger
appropriations for broadband to
other types of transparency
measures a compelling the
creation of that list of you
know one to three year projects
as well as you know we're
requiring reporting on
expenditures back to the
legislature.
So do its noted that they're
going to need more resources and
employees if they're going to be
responsible for you know
prioritizing coordinating those
broadband projects and you know
what our staff look to other
states that have had better
success in promoting broadband
build out in the rural areas we
saw that those states have
centralized state broadband
offices that you know not always
but often had a direct line of
reporting to the governor's
office as well as coordinating
authority for all other state
agencies that had a hand in
broadband developments.
No our staff is recommended in
our evaluations that New Mexico
build out a similar office and
for this year.
We think it might be worth
considering building out that
office with one year pilot
funding.
Because it depending on what
state and federal funding
materializes the role that
broadband office might look
quite different and we think it
should today rather than try to
prognosticated with that office
may need to look like and how
your is it might be more prudent
to instead grant the
administrator of any new
broadband office first year
pilot funding so we can really
figure out what the technical
and administrative needs are
going to be in that office and
then come back to the
legislature with a more tailored
recurring funding request in the
fall.
Finally you know
as most of you know by now it
but it's worth reiterating that
the federal government has
already poured a good chunk of
money into the state for
broadband expansion at least
half a billion since the
beginning of the pandemic not to
mention all of that you right
funding that Jonathan just
talked about his slides the
state police received
significant amounts of really
brought federal funding as soon
as early March as part of the
next annulus package.
Optional estimates that came out
this week said show that the
state's going to get one point
six billion with a B. dollars
for general support and that's
in addition to another billion
that'll be headed to our school
districts and other eight
hundred forty million that's
headed toward county and
municipal governments so if
you're considering you know yes
and how to best use state
resources for broadband
expansion you know I just know
in the back your mind that there
are soon to be really
significant federal resources
available that might be used for
the same purpose.
So I have lots of other type
things to talk about Mr chair in
the.
To be respectful of time I just
a.
Stop here and be happy to answer
any questions that you might
have.
Thank you what
thank you for your presentation
for the all the information you
gave us we're gonna go on next
to John but all John where are
you I don't see you up there C..
There we go hi John.
The next let let me get the the
visual on here.
Thank you thank you the
chairman the chairman you know
so the members of the Senate
finance committee I didn't know
that I was going to have to give
a presentation the weather but I
thought I was here just to
answer some questions with the
we just described my my
perspective and and our
experience during COVID with
them are a broadband expansion.
And the and how we have worked
with the department education
and at and that was it
department transportation as
well as part of information
technology all
on the same subject of of of of
expanding broadband in rural
areas of New Mexico.
We are the newest rural
telephone company in the state
of New Mexico and we had as the
receive actually national
attention for the use of of
innovative technologies a mix of
innovative innovative
technologies to deliver a
broadband is some of the poorest
areas entire country and some of
the most geographically
challenging areas of the of the
entire country.
We have an office they are are
operational headquarters is in
your the New Mexico just
McKinley County just a few miles
north of Gallup.
We have the central office there
we have a a twin central office
in in Bloomfield with.
Other the.
Technologies how how's the.
Next to a
An outside plant technicians the
state of of in the Bloomfield
New Mexico we have also have a
fiber hub in another the
technician of the field
technician of office and
warehouse in requests The New
Mexico.
And that we have offices in
Albuquerque and we're we're
newly establishing an office and
in the tier C. in Sierra County.
We will have by the end of this
year will have spent over a
hundred million dollars in
broadband infrastructures in New
Mexico.
Our service territories three
thousand two hundred square
miles of this is a regulated
service territory in McKinley he
and San Juan county's mainly but
we also provide service in
Bernalillo county in in
Tennessee to or to actually
Bernalillo county and we also
operate in in a
in the sliver of of the
Superbowl county and in Rio
Arriba county.
But beyond the three thousand
two hundred square miles we we
are operating building
infrastructure using federal E.
rate monies using the FCC calf
to auction of funding using the
FCC Authority UF art off the
auction funding using USDA
reconnect and and having used in
the past USD eighty CCG
Committee connect and broadband
grants all told we we will have
spent over a hundred million
dollars.
Over a total.
The land mass of about eight
thousand square miles our three
thousand two hundred square
miles regulated territory plus.
Other areas of the state where
we have use federal monies to
express spend broadband.
If you were to.
Calculate.
The using that makes to the
technologies we have.
Over five hundred miles of fiber
fiber optic cable we'll have
another four hundred miles
another year in a few months.
And and we have the largest
fixed wireless network in the
state of New Mexico one of the
largest fixed wireless networks
in the entire country.
If you if you consider the the
the these next to technologies
fiber and
And the fixed wireless we have
some of the legacy copper that
we acquired as well.
And compared these eight that
we're miles more or less we're
we're we're expanding broadband
to.
With the the total square
mileage of the state in which I
think is about a hundred and
twenty two hundred twenty three
thousand square miles.
The mobile what.
Our land masses well let's say
the state's land mass about
fifteen times the size of the
area that that we're covering it
with broadband so you multiply
fifteen in times of the hundred
million and that's just a
ballpark but and and the very
much in concert with do it's of
a report about the is a ballpark
figure what would.
He could to get broadband using
a mix of fiber for backhaul and
fixed wireless for the harder to
reach a rural areas.
And I think it's been the
attitude and I don't mean to be.
Negative at all and saying this
I think it's been the attitude
of New Mexico because we don't
have a centralized office
controlling and prioritizing is
Micaela sets you know build out
a plan that actually lays out
what's going to be done in
twenty twenty one twenty twenty
two twenty three what are the
priority areas
of how do we capitalize in the
current infrastructure in place
to immediately build out of
broadband.
I think this is been the sort of
the the proof prevailing
attitude now in New Mexico but
all the other places in the
country where money is tight
that we'll get to it when we get
to it.
You know will will you know
it'll take us time to build out
of broadband network to reach
every home in the state of New
Mexico or at least ninety eight
percent of all the homes in the
state of New Mexico.
That is going to cost us a lot
and and and and it'll cost us a
lot more to do begin to to
accelerate that so we'll get to
it when we get to it is makayla
said the pandemic has has shined
a light on a problem that that
exist today.
Of the and and shine a light on
on how broadband is is necessary
as water and electricity and
emergency.
And we have an emergency now and
so whatever we do as a larger
community the providers to
working with other state
agencies working with the state
legislature.
Whatever we do we we have got to
be smart about it we have to be
focused about it.
And we have to get real about it
we did are going to have to put
more attention dedicate more our
time and and and you're more
actual dollars to to get this
broadband plan established and
rolling.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
If appreciate that and now we're
going to have I know senator
Munoz had to step out for a
little bit so the cherry but
we've got the Baca where are you
the I saw you earlier thanks.
Right here madam chair a little
walk up with CenturyLink
What a good conversation about
broadband today and I really
appreciate the secretary Salazar
and his efforts at the
department of information
technology I really look forward
to working with them because I
think he's on the right track to
work with the industry in
addressing the broadband issues
because you know I've I've done
these types of presentations
before and I gotta tell you
there's a lot of broadband out
there a lot of broadband in
rural New Mexico you know we've
a at my company alone has put
broadband in many rural areas
over the past few years the job
but Allen stated when has done a
great job in their area and all
the small rural phone companies
have really done a great job the
point broadband in their areas
throughout the state but the
problem is is that there's
continues to be gaps and that
you know with the pandemic and
the need for folks to work at
home and be educated at home and
telemedicine it's really it has
emphasized those gaps to our
companies I know me personally
I've been involved with the with
working with some of the schools
and educators and people trying
to work from home throughout the
state and that the gaps are out
there and that's what we need to
really focus on is addressing
those gaps as we all still have
gaps we the phone company
industry who are broadband
providers in the state and
What I would like to emphasize
here though is that once those
gaps are identified in order to
best utilize the limited
resources that we have and any
kind of funding help that we
could get from either the state
or federal government in high
cost areas we want to make sure
that we use that money
efficiently and effectively and
that's why I believe it as super
simple Sapporo New Mexico
Socorro New Mexico is a specific
situation where we know there
are areas in Sapporo that do not
have broadband or have very
limited broadband.
What we could do there is do a
specific engineering design for
Sapporo at a specific cost and
once you get this specific
design specific cost then you
look at the funding to do it and
then you go out and build it and
then afterward you follow up and
make sure you did what you said
you were gonna do and you spent
the money you said you were
going to spend and that way
you're you're very effective
with how you spend the money
otherwise if you just throw a
lot of money at areas without
the specific engineering design
then you stand a chance of
potentially wasting money and
again with the limited resources
that we have in the state I
think we really need to target
areas and work with the phone
providers providers like
CenturyLink like sacred wind
like Tularosa basin telephone
company like western New Mexico
telephone company the specific
companies who know where they
need to get infrastructure built
to build out their broadband and
One other note I would like to
make is is on the regulatory
front.
Companies in New Mexico and
again I'm gonna point to a
sacred went again there are
companies in New Mexico that are
treated differently than other
companies.
You know what my company is
treated differently regulation
and I'm working with Senator
Padilla on a bill to help level
the playing field on regulation
of basic phone service so that
we can focus on broadband and so
there's a lot of things that we
can do on the regulatory front
as well to help promote more
broadband in New Mexico I thank
you very much and members of
committee thank you for
listening to me.
Thank you very much Leo for your
nice presentation and you're
also always bringing up some
ideas as to how to collaborate
more thank you we appreciate you
all righty we're gonna move on
to Catherine where are you can
after and one day we'll see each
other like real people in real
persons and not only I'm trying
to find Cathrynn here so let's
see here there you go yeah you
want to come up no need to
register lobbyist breaking T.
and dell technologies.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members
Thank you so much for having at
eighteen T. present today I do
have a very my presentation is
very brief I'd like to share it
with you
thank you.
Sh so it's not letting me.
Get to my.
That's top.
Why is that.
Do
you try to share your
presentation.
Maybe.
Do you find is everything okay
there we go there's something
coming up this is broadband on
the screen but it went black so
let's see kind Matt madam chair
members of the committee at
probably should be able to to
share and I I apologize I'm not
sure what might be keeping you
from at.
Accessing your.
I think I got it did that work
can you see this yes okay great
No sorry about that I'm glad I'm
not the only one that today that
had issues with this.
Okay I'm just going to go let me
see I need to go to.
Is that okay.
So I just briefly want to go
through what eighteen T. is
working on in New Mexico date
they have spent on an average of
new capital investment of fifty
million dollars per year over
the last four years on a
wireless broadband network in
many many areas far exceeding
that federal benchmark of twenty
five three and in twenty twenty
alone AT&T added more radio
equipment at three hundred tower
locations in New Mexico to add
capacity and coverage for
wireless customers AT&T added
twenty five plus new wireless
service towers in the last two
years and then also of interest
to all of you the wireless
network at the roundhouse house
has been upgraded in the last
thirty days and that does
include adding FirstNet
capability to the roundhouse and
there will be an additional
upgrade to the roundhouse in mid
twenty twenty one expected.
Just briefly about FirstNet AT&T
continues to expand FirstNet and
this is a special wireless
network this decade dedicated to
first responders in New Mexico
and across the nation more than
sixty New Mexico state agencies
and local county police and fire
departments use this dedicated
network and more are being added
all the time as they upgrade
that network and then I just
wanted to touch on and we we've
talked about it today certainly
and definitely the pandemic has
you know shined a big light on
our digital divide when it comes
to learning in New Mexico and
eighteen T. has been working to
no help get hot spots to
School districts throughout the
state you can see here so far to
date they've provided six
hundred and thirteen hot spots
to New Mexico school districts
and you can see the school
districts there in the number of
hot spots that were provided.
And I just want to add here that
you know eighteen T. is is very
grateful to secretary Salazar
he's been fantastic to work with
through the throughout the
pandemic whether it's talking
about digital divide issues
or you know looking at ways we
can fix this as well as
discussing you know the the
legislation and I know he's been
working on on house bill ten and
we also want to thank you
Senator Padilla and the
representatives who are the
sponsors of the house bill
legislation for working with us
on that legislation there is one
other slide that I wanted to
share if that so Kate because I
do think it's pertinent to this
conversation
and I'm gonna try to share it
and it's about federal funding
And I don't know if it's gonna
let me.
Pull it up I'm gonna try.
Good job keep trying I think
we're going to do it.
I just think that this is really
important because we have talked
about federal funding in the
amount of federal funding that's
coming
You know if into well that's
been dedicated to broadband and.
Really wish I don't know why
this is so different because
when I go to share my screen it
gives me various options but
it's not letting me select the
file from my desktop which is
what I'm accustomed to and so I
don't understand.
what's going on here.
They send you can you help me.
Okay it's open the file open
it's open chair of European.
Okay.
Did that work.
Okay
I just I think this is a great
slide because it shows you know
the the funding that's coming
from the census being dedicated
to broadband now while this
isn't New Mexico specific and
I'm certainly happy to share
this Senator around the entire
committee I think that this is
great information so that you
can get an idea
of you know what's happening at
the federal level and I think
that those points about you know
keeping that in mind when we
talk about you know creating a
funding putting putting money
into broadband just know that
there is there's a lot of money
being dedicated at the federal
level and I can scroll down here
just so you can see the sort of
is a break down of the funding
and and what's being dedicated
and like I said I'm happy to
email this information out to
the entire committee so that you
can have it and I just want to
add into this that the SEC
receive sixty five million
dollars to work on from through
the broadband data act to finish
their granular mapping and I
know that secretary secretary
Salazar touched on this but I
think moving forward it will be
really important that New Mexico
is in line with that effort I'm
in and I can certainly provide a
link to the committee as well
but when I say granular they
they are down to the address you
can put an address in and they
tell you the speeds that are
available this the providers
that are available and the type
of services available at that
specific address so I think
that's something to keep in mind
we talk about napping in New
Mexico and
I think that being consistent
with the efforts that the FCC
will be important moving forward
and that's all I have thank you
thank you afterlife certainly
would like to give you great you
email this presentation to the
committee I like how you broke
down the funding from the
federal government.
That very simple to understand
and very comprehensible so thank
you.
Your work your Jim glad you were
able to do our well we're gonna
move on she is weak at that rate
it more here so thank you
captain and aren't sure
regardless Senator Padilla
Senator Michael Padilla R. I see
you in the background there can
you come in.
Thank you senator for for your
hard work always my goodness you
have initiated the original
discussion in original work from
years ago having to do with
broadband and you have them
actually the successful in
accomplishing quite a bit for
broadband for the people in New
Mexico so I'd like to hear from
you now.
You thank thank you madam chair
for that the introduction I also
have a couple slides to maximize
your time madam chair funds
going to try to share this now.
And I don't know if you can see
this can you see my screen now
it says New Mexico broadband as
parallel challenges yes we can
do it right to maximize and okay
well thank you madam chair and
and what a great panel you have
put together here I'm just
really glad that we were able to
speak now because
it really did demonstrate
there's a ton of work being done
and and really a lot of what I'm
coming forward with this year
madam chair and members of the
committee and and those that
occur presenting is this to
hopefully begin to try to tie
all that together because we've
heard all the reasons why we
need to do a few very large
things but we can bring all the
money in the world we want to to
New Mexico but if we don't have
a plan if we don't have a
financial plan if we don't have
governance we don't have a
number of other things and they
were really in trouble so I've
been working on this for nine
years now and I will tell you
this I've come to find out that
really it is two major
challenges here in New Mexico
one of them is is definitely a
we heard a ton about that today
on the infrastructure for
delivering broadband here in
Mexico the second I really on
infrastructure I I see is
planning on ability the cost to
to our state we're we're the
fifth largest land masses we
heard during Mr bell's comments
and a few others
you know but and we need some we
need consistency to be able to
cover that area and then of
course because we're a any large
land mass with a few people we
need to kind of ease of scale to
maximize those dollars that we
are able to raise ourselves
enables leverage with other
money since the state and then
the second major challenge I
believe really is regulatory in
nature here in New Mexico and
that is the modernization of our
statutes because you know until
two thousand seventeen I had a
pretty big here that you're got
three of those very large built
in madam chair you help you get
a lot of that that worked and
that your in a few of the
members of this committee
you know we have not modernized
our telecommunication losses
before the internet came along
and so.
I think that we work sort of you
know we're really holding
ourselves back and made some
huge moves that year and then of
course on regulatory we do need
to really reform our public
regulation commission you know
what we do cost a lot of darts
their way we do talk about the
public regulation commission and
a number of ways but what I will
say is we never proper the staff
of the budget development and
and required that they have
these this office and that
office and and been able to to
to budget them to help them to
do their work so I think that's
very important of course they do
need the expertise in a number
of areas but primarily now as we
see and broadband so I just want
to mention these two things
madam chair that are huge
challenges for us so if you take
a look at what we've already
done up to this point and a lot
of the people that you heard
from to date from industry to
various.
Parchments to whoever helped us
get a lot of this work done
so from fourteen to seventeen we
did place broadband I was able
to place broadband local
infrastructure act so you know
it is a water line it's a site
Walker wrote a freeway exit the
lighting system that you name it
and so we're able to to to to
take broadband place the local
infrastructure and we we did
have to go to court with the
previous government three times
on that but we are able to get
that set solid you know in into
our current statutes are we also
reform the universal service
fund we were putting a lot of
our dollars that we raise NEC
are built we're putting that
into dying technologies and
things that really work and sing
our our state and so we could
flip that script were able to to
to redirect those funds to new
technologies or broadband the
third thing was we re wrote the
New Mexico telecommunications
act again which had not been
modernized look at rebuilt since
before the internet and so much
had happened in the ensuing
fifteen years as the internet
was coming online and and so
that that's another huge issue
there in in fourteen fifteen
were able to bring in cafe FCC
cap one and have to monies of
the state and Josh wow a hundred
million dollars you know ten ten
million one year ninety million
the other might have those flip
but
But you know that that you heard
from secretary so as you know
the to do except the secretary
Seneal said that really the need
to somewhere between one and one
point five billion dollars so
that seems like a lot of money
madam chair but that is really
just touch touching the the
iceberg there with the drop and
then of course we did put in
place which was mentioned by a
few the presenters here today
how we can utilize of the state.
Broadband networks and and the
hub and spoke model we heard a
little bit about that a little
while ago but we never quite
funded it never quite action to
it so I think that you know
having all this and so we're
gonna be able to see more about
so I put together and this is
one of the more important slides
last two that I want to share
with you Madam because I know
you have some house members are
gonna present behind me here and
they're doing a wonderful job
they're working very hard on the
planet they put together in a
bill that they put together that
I think is similar to one of
mine but but I I'll talk about
Senate bill ninety three but the
full side you're just well and
and that is to create the up so
so we have a calling the
broadband for all plans it's
really a comprehensive plan what
I just talked about which is
infrastructure related as well
as regulatory super important
that we tie everything together
with some governance as we heard
before by view the other
speakers
and I'll talk about the Senate
bill ninety three with the whole
slide here just a moment the
second thing is we heard from
from sacred wind regulatory
issue here Senate Bill to all
for what you know what a
difference a day makes the day
that they were created they just
really kind of were floating out
there working their **** off
working and innovating and doing
all the wonderful things that
they're doing but what we punch
in the gut every opportunity we
get because we don't really
regulate that like any other
business and your company state
so we want to clarify that this
is a bill that died level in the
last fifteen seconds of the two
thousand nineteen session and
believe that there weren't very
good shape to get this year
Senate bill twenty four you also
heard from industry go back over
them and formal the CenturyLink
to further clarify the bill that
I talked about here which was
item number three which is re
writing the telecom act of two
thousand seventeen all of our
telecommunication laws we throw
up in the air we it took us
about three years to get this
work done a lot of the people
that you're from today Catherine
and Leo and a few others really
worked hard to help you get that
one that we need to clarify that
for the public regulation
commission because they have
just.
It's almost as though they
implemented madam chair that.
Implemented the ally the
complete opposite of what we're
intending and so we're gonna
clarify that for them this year
we have a great piece of
legislation that is headed
toward all of us on the Senate
floor the third item is Senate
bill three sixty this year which
is to allow utilities to share
their easements and other
facilities to to enable
broadband transmission we have
transmission capability in a
really big way madam chair but
unfortunately we're not
utilizing it secure here's an
opportunity for New Mexico to
leave the country and and and I
think that we're gonna be able
to do that with that piece of
legislation that Senate bill
three sixty one again reforming
the are you SS funded to allow
for broadband only loops today
that funding is again toward a
dying technology what we really
need to do is focus on broadband
access as a telecommunications
vehicle as an option as well
circle twenty six we have a lot
of credits we all feel like our
credit is the best one madam
chair this one is directly
directed at data centers tax
credit so we continue to bring
that assessed in New Mexico
which are huge economic growth
for the state because the
secondary and tertiary
businesses pop up around the we
also the last two items they are
not going to just talk I just
mention them but you know we
were trying to put our toe in
the water and public private
partnerships I do have
widespread agreement on
broadband all the projects to
get on the books and then we
talked about the broadband fund
which is very important and of
course the PRC reform so then
travel to take the last winning
couple of my seconds here just
talk about Senate bill ninety
three which is the creation of
the New Mexico office of
broadband access and expansion
this is sort of tying everything
together that I've been working
on for about you know almost
nine years now.
And what it does is it has
really six major functions this
office first is that we will
have a documented top to bottom
left to right east south north
are swept up broadband plan for
New Mexico the pip will be tying
all of our data together all of
the various offices within state
government putting it all in one
place with a financial plan and
then the utilizing that plan to
to set our goals in our sights
on where we want to go with all
of these dollars that we can
bring it to the state leveraging
our dollars with a lot of the
dollars that you heard during
the LESC presentation on to go
this is just a huge effort that
we we need to get our hands
around if we don't have a
broadband plan a financial plan
it's like starting a business
madam chair going into the bank
asking for a loan at without a
plan and you get left out of the
bank and so it's very difficult
to bring these large dollars
into New Mexico about plans
that's the first thing this this
will all the second thing is it
documented New Mexico broadband
map which we heard about we
we're we're we're sort of
pioneers and and secretary
service I talked a little bit
about this but this office will
hold that broadband plan to link
up to federal FCC standards USDA
standards and all those other
items that require that and
those requirements that help us
to to to to demonstrate you know
that we know everything about
our state of broadband in New
Mexico we go after those other
dollars the third item is to
negotiate rights of way and
easement access is another thing
that this office alone they're
gonna have a repository of all
of these rights of way easement.
Items and so instead of being a
more intense house or down in
Columbus you're not paying an
attorney to go to all this work
for you you're going to partner
with this office to get all that
done pretty quickly for yourself
and for your community the
fourth item is reporting and
analysis.
The state of broadband in New
Mexico again where is it where
is it what are the speeds how do
we connected or compared to the
rest of the country it's that'll
be reported to the people of New
Mexico the legislature the
governor etcetera so we can
continue to develop legislation
that helps us to move the state
forward in this area.
Item that this office will have
is a set of specialists that
will work with other political
subdivisions within the state to
design develop fund and
implement their broadband
networks so again I use the
example of the more Columbus
wonderful human being thanks up
every day and those that they
need broadband down in Columbus
but just like you and me Madam
chairman members of this
committee that response here
pretty much also so they don't
necessarily have the staff or
maybe they don't have the the
the the the school etcetera
whatever to do this this office
will partner with that political
subdivisions match out that
county that are sick yes ciation
that whoever to put these plants
together design develop
implement provide the funding
and implement them for
themselves and then that the six
item is that this office will
have a specialist that will be
charged with leveraging our New
Mexico investment dollars in
putting together these plants
and in implementing that bring
additional dollars into New
Mexico I do ask for an
appropriation with this piece of
legislation which is a nine
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars appropriation to
establish the office I really
loved with the person from the
LFC said a few moments ago which
is exactly where I was coming
from when I asked for this
particular amount of money you
know established the office
immediately to get off the
ground put some professionals in
place no Sappey what they're up
to what they're doing and then
and the police right that you
know that service you know
within state government over
time but instead of coming to
you madam chair and asking for
five million dollars to set up
this office I don't even know
exactly what that's going to
entail so I'd rather just you
know start the thing off the
right way and then grow from
there so those those are my
slides I just want to share that
with you madam chair and members
of the committee and I think you
have a house bill that you're
going to hear right now as well
thank you thank you thank you
senator for the up while you've
got lots of work done and you've
got lots cooking and more to do
and we certainly appreciate you
thank you for proposing this
Office of broadband I know since
the summer during the interim
committees you were talking
about that and and much for
further back than that you were
working on it thank you.
Senator we're gonna move on to
the next we have our
Representative next speakers I
was a speaker but there's one
two three four five we've got
that Representative Figueroa
Representative Garrett humana
representative madam with
Representative Sweetser and
Representative Chandler here and
so are you all I see some of you
here on the screen thank you
Natalie.
The and others but I don't know
if you're all here or just.
I'm here.
We are we are co sponsors madam
chair thank you for recognizing
not everyone can be here and not
everyone wants to speak but this
was
madam chair an amazing
opportunity to hear from all the
different agencies and
departments who have been
working on this
and so appreciate you inviting
us to hear to be here and to
hear from them and particularly
it was great to hear from the
industry the various players in
the industry because it is by
combining these efforts that
we're going to close these gaps
and yet the unserved in New
Mexico connected together shout
out to the LFC two thousand
nineteen report that was given
to you in short shorthand three
slides is fifty one page
document and it's fabulous
fabulous source of information
about what do Mexico needs.
I'm sure there were eight House
threats to started speaking
after the last session with the
pandemic kids three Mr teachers
and we started looking at.
What are the obstacles why is
this happening why are so many
areas of our state still not
connected and that LFC report
was a great starting point.
In the second second source
document was the do it report in
June the strategic plan is is
maybe that it's June twenty
twenty report lays out pretty
clearly where are underserved
populations are.
So our conversations centered
around digital equity and
digital inclusion and how to get
they did the underserved
connected in the state of New
Mexico
Already been pointed out by
various previous speakers that
we have the low density
populations widely spread out is
a really challenging terrain so
we're gonna have to look at
makes technologies make
strategies and look at local
needs and local solutions and
work from there we've heard
multiple times the one of the
obstacles in New Mexico has been
the lack of a unified vision and
plan.
So House Bill ten.
Cease to address that we call it
that connect New Mexico acts
this was just broadband division
and do it.
when that was one of the
recommendations of the two
thousand nineteen LFC planned to
establish an entity and staff it
and give them what they need to
get these projects moving the
department of information
technology and secretary Salazar
and and that broadband office
have done incredible work with
the tiny tiny staff sh and we
also have people in the public
school finance authority who've
done amazing work that the
presented incredible work given
this small amount of funds and
small matter staff they are we
have people in cultural affairs
whose accomplish tremendous
amounts connecting our
libraries.
Almost every department in the
state.
As someone working on broadband
but we don't has.
One office to coordinate all
these efforts so.
The mission and do it they are
charged with.
Coordinating these efforts and
specifically targeting the
underserved to make sure we
reach those populations even
though there's not a lot of
profit there.
They're charged with identifying
obstacles and reporting back in
statute needs to be changed we
heard tonight about issues
around rights of way around
licensing around permitting all
the different jurisdictions in
the state of New Mexico all of
the things that make us great.
Can be calm ossicles when you're
trying to.
Bills broadband connectivity so
this office is charged with
streamlining those efforts
coordinating those licensing and
permitting regulations they've
already started you heard about
the coordination between do it
in the department of
transportation but we have a lot
of state agencies that all have
their own policies and
procedures and we need to line
up and streamline that effort.
Maximizing after assets is also
in charge of the department in
addition to the maps then the
senator talked about that
secretary Salazar talked about
the massive identify the
unserved and the underserved
areas in the state.
We also need to have massive the
assets we've got.
And.
State owned towers where we have
polls already lined up and the
secretary of
For Tatian already talked about
projects projects under way but
not just transportation projects
and those maps where we can
leverage those projects and
build infrastructure under
Indian ones policy but also
massive include read our
renewable energy transmission
authority we're building out the
electricity grid if those lines
are being built in the direction
of unserved populations we need
to double the effort there and
leverage those.
Construction projects.
The office is also charged with.
Goals systems and grant writing
assistance the US service areas
of the state are the lowest
population and do not have the
technical expertise to write for
incredibly complex federal grant
so.
Nicholas is grant writing is
essential.
And then reporting Micaela
Fischer and LESC talked about
reporting we need to track where
the dollars are spent and what
we are getting for those dollars
so reporting is an essential
responsibility of this office
they're gonna coordinate all the
efforts across agencies and now
with the big picture is make
sure we are moving forward with
a unified vision and a unified
mission to get the job done.
Also on the blast it has to
other sections and addition to
broadband division it's all day
is the rural telecom Act with
some definitions and the rural
universal service fund building
on the exceptional works that
Senator Padilla did in two
thousand seventeen so it
increases the amount of the
rural universal service fund
that is dedicated to broadband.
and it coordinates.
The rural universal service fund
does grant broadband projects to
telecom agencies.
In house.
Those requests.
Under.
The broadband divisions not a
financial aspect of it but leave
prioritize ation and alignment
with the state plan so even the
PRC broadband projects now are
going to align with the state
plan and move us forward to
reach the unserved and the
underserved.
the.
This
last piece of the bills is is a
grant Fund and grant priorities.
It lays out the division is also
promulgate the rules but it lays
out there we want to prioritize
reaching unserved areas
underserved areas we want to
prioritize leveraging existing
infrastructure in the state.
We want to prioritize digital
inclusion.
We want to make sure an alliance
with the state plan.
We want your ties economic
development and job creation.
In the sense was the project
leverages.
Financial or in kind by in the
from the local area so.
Is a combination effort from the
local area from the industry
from the state to leverage and
get those federal dollars and as
multiple folks mentioned
tonight.
There is a lot of federal money
becoming available.
In this bill positions New
Mexico to funnel those funds
strategically and in a targeted
way.
The other two bills you should
be able to see on your screen
our house bill one forty one.
And that's a more immediate
solution to amend the technology
infrastructure definition in the
public school capital outlay act
will allow us to use some of
those federal dollars for
services to students when
they're not on campus right now
the definition of educational
technology is essentially on
site and this is a tweet to make
a connection between students
and teachers even when they're
not physically in the same
building.
House joint resolution line is
an ambitious effort to identify
the.
Broadband connectivity.
Along with electricity natural
gas water wastewater as
essential services.
So those are three built the
house is working on there are
many more but those are the only
three I am.
Qualified to talk about tonight
I know enough to share with you
but I am so excited to see this
group of mines gather together
to tackle this project so thank
you for having us madam chair
thank you Representative while
you're you're all really very
needs the you have done all this
work I'm does anyone here before
we go on anyone else that we
have received your that we are
in Representative Chandler would
you like to make some comments
here Representative level you
want action not making comments.
Thank you Senator yes it's so
good to see you good to see you
almost seven Senator Padilla
good to see both of you and yes
we're excited about this bill I
I just wanted I just want to add
that it was it was eight
representatives and and we went
from the southern border there
to the northern border we had
and the Sweetser in and how like
a Rubio we had Natalie on zero
we had Marian Matthews we had
Chris Chandler we had myself we
have joined we have data
baseline all of us we deeply
connected with education and we
when we watched our educational
system collapse without
affordable universal internet we
all we all just got together and
I I want you to know we started
meeting I think last March end
of March April and every Friday
with me with me for two hours
and we'd assign ourselves a.
Projects to go through find out
about it and we come back and so
for every Friday we met for
about eleven months trying to
bring this bill together and
certainly we started with the
LFC recommendations and do it's
amazing strategic plan and then
we talked to secretaries from
the department of
transportation of the shift keys
from the Economic Development
Department Ryan Stewart from PED
we we we went to the the we went
the PRC and we went to the USDA
we we met with private ISP
providers so we met with that
with leaders in the in the
nonprofit world like John to
dial in and release risk from
the Kit Carson electric coop we
we I it was it was really a
labor of love but we're
dedicated to see if we couldn't
get Dale for double universal
internet how do we do that in
the state and you know when
people say oh would be five
billion you know I how do you
eat an elephant one bite at a
time when but it's at and so we
wanted to have something that we
could deliver to this
legislature that would set out a
plan for the future and again
Natalie laid it out it was
really taking all the assets of
our state you know mortgage
finance authority building homes
are building you know senior
citizen housing and and and that
department of transportation
laying roads in and
All the all the things that work
in our state is how do you
combine them so that we can use
the assets of the state to
create this universal system and
that's that's what we intend to
do
it won't it's it's not going to
be overnight we know how
difficult this job is but if you
don't have a plan and if you
don't have a budget if you don't
have a mission and you don't
have a vision you're never going
to get there so that's really
what we set out in this
legislation and I too would like
to thank everybody of for
listening to this I'd also like
to say I really don't think
money is the problem I really
think the federal money's going
to come in we stress just some
of the the CEO of the kit car
Selectric just got twenty six
million dollars to do eight
thousand drops and I including
the pueblos of pick a decent
house on he also offers a one
gigabyte speed when he comes in
so he also at the beginning of
the pandemic just decided they
would hook up as many students
inTaos that wanted to be hooked
up to the internet they didn't
charge him they are nonprofit
they're kind of a leader in
their field and they just did as
many as they could because they
thought it was important that
kids get learning and especially
kids from our blue economic
groups so so I think I think
that's what we're focused on is
how do we serve the unserved and
the underserved how do we how do
we how do we take this digital
divide in and and collapse that
and and how do we make that New
Mexico like leader leader in
rural in in the rural western
states with affordable universal
access to the internet so with
that are closed
madam chair and I thank you for
your time and I think all of
this committee for the.
Our time thank you
Representative that are very.
Your this you know working with
our well you know it's it's just
amazing how much is that your
thank you thank hi and just
gonna move on on that I wanted
to ask.
Representative Chandler if you
like to stay if you work off
that was right here thank
absolutely I am thank you so
much madam chair and thank you
committee members it's good to
see you again I I just wanted to
touch on the house joint
resolution nine and
And and sort of talk a little
bit about why we're doing that
this in part this proposal in
part stems from our many
discussions with with the office
of the department of I. T. and
secretary Salazar I mean I think
you heard him say that the anti
donation clause is an impediment
for them their ability to bring
essential internet service to
the underserved areas and that
the state needs to show
All offer a greater role and
show greater leadership in the
world communities where their
status but excuse me that are
sparsely dense populated and do
not have enough population to
justify a of some of the private
for profit or even not for
profit entities to go in without
some incentives from the state
we also decided to include in
this joint resolution other
essential household needs that
still are lacking in the state
many of our especially rural
communities but urban as well
still do not have adequate
running water electricity and
waste water to their homes in
this resolution after
implementing legislation is
enacted by this legislature
could provide the vehicle to
provide additional support to
poor and rural communities in
the state and that's what the
driver is on join house
resolution nine thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you thank you
Representative Chandler
very nicely stab and get lots of
work I know you and I are
somewhat very briefly but
earlier about the brought the
bills would you happen to be
working on thank you so much for
that I do we have I don't want
to leave Representative Garrett
representative we there are we
are hearing are you here and
it's not if you are already a
few words and that there are
represented here are you here
thank you you can proceed if I
know you've been a very integral
part well we're off well so
I have nothing more to add I
just want to thank everybody for
being here and and for the years
of work I taught middle school
in the middle of rice fields in
South Korea in two thousand and
three we had internet
connections that allowed us to
link to classrooms all over the
world when I came back to New
Mexico I was in shock at the
difference so our goal is to
really make us a world class
connectivity state thank you so
much.
Thank you very much appreciate
those words are I do we have
Representative Sweetser here.
I think I've seen her here thank
you all very much for that you
know I I've gotten and learned
so much certainly so much
information from this whole
thing that I guess one big thing
that has struck me today at
least one from all that I've
heard is the the fact that
you're looking at serving not
only the answer but the under
served and and that with that in
mind you're looking at some of
the most important crucial
things that we have to have to
make sure that all this work so
we have this comprehensive
network in place and that is
that internet broadband fiber
optic any kind of connection has
to be what's called affordable
if you have sent four of and
accessible and reliable the
three of all the three we know
that four ability is huge and
that's something that we have to
work together on to make sure
that we don't put all this
together and then there's many
poor families in our state who
don't have a way to connect what
may be easy for some of us they
it's only twenty five is only
fifty dollars a month is only
seventy five dollars whatever it
may be is huge for that they
have to choose between
connecting to something like
this provide grocers but gas in
their car and so I'm very happy
that you're looking at all that
together and you working on this
thank you very much for that
and I and I see the before he
seven as in all the planning
here with respect to all in
agreement that we need a
broadband specific broadband
office.
The clearing house very anymore
to be able to to collaborate and
have a comprehensive system in
place that collected in one area
so that we can communicate with
each other and still have that
ways to go back to when we need
to proceed thanks to all the
presenters for that and for all
your work so I'm going to move
on now we've got Adrian this
wanted to make a presentation
and I want to thank you
Representative Garrett also for
this so let's move on to Adrian
Avenue and then we've got a
Senator Jacob R. Candelaria
wanted to ask a question or or
make a comment after this so
Adrian you want to move forward.
In their thank you madam chair
and I'm very mindful of time
someone is just quickly present
kind of the holistic vision of
everything that's been presented
and kind of find a framework
that legislators can work off of
as a start considering all the
legislation that's coming
through I would like to mention
that this panel is holistic it's
not comprehensive there are many
many other entities such as the
New Mexico exchanged Care group
Hey Carson electric
many many others who could have
been incorporated here but we
wanted to provide you as much
information as possible in a
brief amount of time
so with that said.
I would like to relatively
quickly.
Over just some assumptions and
sum up what everyone has said to
give you a good idea of how to
ask questions so we know based
on everything that's been said
New Mexico has a strong
broadband.
Act that we can build off of it
with the schools that reach
every single school in every
community with fiber or some
other technology it with the O.
T. yeah with any other agency we
have something to work off of
second
Based on the do it report that
the house representatives very
much mentioned and as well as US
secretary Salazar the best way
we can leverage all the federal
money that's coming in was
identified through three ways
encourage companies and
communities to develop plans
that are specific to their areas
so focus on regional projects
and focus on local projects
develop tools for public private
collaboration to call.
Great synergy between both
public and private industry and
lastly develop this middle mile
concept which
Jonathan presented with the for
example school districts
partnering with certain areas
creating that security and that
speed and that reliability on
the network and this is one way
that we can do this and then as
you saw from private industry
all of our industry partners
very much use different types of
technologies and any legislation
that comes through needs to
remain technologically neutral
out so to conceptualize this
right this is kind of the idea
tying everything together right
and I've highlighted in green
the specific elements that need
to be addressed by the
legislature if we truly want to
address the broadband issue
holistically the first cell
focus on funding we need to
develop a mechanism that
provides that local match
funding right because we want to
optimize and maximize the amount
of money from the Feds that we
can use instead of putting it
all the state funding so that
needs to come first second we
need to focus on that last mile
investment I have public
infrastructure funding present
because we already do that right
three different entities
different funds but the let the
last mile and the local match
are missing with in statute we
you ensure that all of our
regulation.
Focus on baseline broadband
standards and alignment we need
to bring up basically the
language to code.
we also should try to promote
will.
We can.
That.
Into the anti donation clause.
access to state infrastructure
if a locality or region what and
why not give them access to it
and the CIO of department
transportation mentioned that
right it's a let's create a
system where we provide easement
right of way and collaboration
that level we make sure that the
legislation remains
technologically neutral so we
don't disadvantage and you want
an industry.
And then with public private
partnership that's always been a
sticking point within the
legislature especially over the
past few years.
A lot of that needs to one kind
of initiate their role before it
goes into statute right so
establish the ability to work
with public partners.
It's kind of set the parameters
in statute but let the rule and
the agency and the specific
region figure out the details
as.
I'm.
Every prop project is going to
be unique and different so we
need we should never lose sight
of the account bility and the
ethics that come with that and
then last the if we do take this
regional or local approach and
needs to align with our
strategic plan that we have
through the broadband entity
that we create our that you all
decide to create
and it needs to also in some way
be fiscally self sustaining or
sustainable or some type of
mechanism needs to be included
where they're not coming every.
Every legislative session asking
for more money to complete our
project right so maybe creating
some type of mechanism where
they can generate revenue from
the infrastructure that there
and in regard to the broadband
introduce there are some
elements that need to be
strongly incorporated in that
entity not only should they find
that specialist component with
technical and design and
strategic planning but they
should coordinate a lot of the
grant efforts station provide
localities a lot of expertise
and then once the they do need
legal counsel they need a legal
counsel present within that
brought an entity to be able to
navigate all of the elements
related to tribal line easement
right of way and
Be able to get everything
aligned hope when state so this
is just giving you all of
wholistic view of how broadband
could be tackled and
highlighting elements that you
should keep an eye out for
with that said madam chair I
think we the panel spoke and not
we would love the panelists here
here professionals from you all
from the legislators
So I.
Thank you thank you Adrian
North charts and information
presented very well well done
thank you very much for that
let let me just go on what I'm
gonna do first is I'm gonna go
on to the for the sake of time
again because I know it's thirty
six thirty and I'm going to go
on to the committee and see if
there are any questions before
we
We move on do we have any
questions for many committee
members I'm looking at my
participants list and I don't
show any hands any questions or
comments we do have senator
Candelaria asked earlier I had
him first and then I do see
Senator Steinborn after that
anyone else I can put your name
down here.
Hey so for now we have senator
Candelaria first for questions
and then we'll go on to Senator
Steinborn Senator Candelaria.
Thank you madam chair I wonder
if I can address some questions
to are at LFC analysts.
Your.
If you're in our.
Yeah hi hi hi hi Mister chair
good after good evening thanks
for being with us
and your order the office I can
get home right now watching my
husband play Mario kart so weird
or different states it's right
up thanks for thanks for thanks
for bringing that oil with us so
I I really appreciated your
slides more than anything else
that was presented today for
simple reason I have to be
honest this is not meant to be
critical but I'm I'm walking
away from this presentation with
not much clearer and idea.
Of of of what we're expected to
be spending money on what I here
today is there is a plan needed
there's a lot of collaboration
and there's a lot of hand
holding there's a lot of come by
all that needs to happen but
I've not really heard any
specific detail on how the
executive branch would actually
spend hundreds of millions of
dollars in state.
Capital outlay funds for
broadband and as you mentioned
you know we're expected to see
federal funds coming in for this
purpose so I guess the first
question N. as.
Do we have an idea of how the
for executive is going to
propose to spend that federal
money.
and number two
just LFC have a sense.
From this gap analysis that's
been done if we are going to be
investing public money you know
how on one leg I just feel like
I'm going crazy because I keep
asking the same question what
are we spending this money on
guys and no one can just answer
that question.
and so again can you help me Mr
chair.
How are you answer that.
Thanks for the question Senator
I as far as the first question
about do we know how the the
governor's planning on spending
the funding the answer's no
it'll come in the much the same
way that the corona virus relief
fund but it from the cares Act
and that was the center fifty
million dollars that got
appropriated into the general
fund in for special session so
Hey.
I don't know the answer to that
question is is the main
is.
Lancer as far as you know what
are we buying I mean I think
that's that's the question right
like how if there was money the
side of the state money would
have to be spent within the
confines of the anti donation
clause which is been brought up
quite a bit here and there are
things that can be done and and
and the biggest most this thing
is matching federal funds that
would come in or you know there
might be Senator Padilla said
some some ways to create some
public private partnerships to
help you know skirts some of
that but it's it's difficult
without a prioritize plan of
projects saying you know we're
gonna focus on support first
we're going to go hearing.
to know what the need is
you know the other side of the
coin is that is the date of the
chicken and egg situation once
you find what you need is you
want that money to be liquid
with the state to be able to
spend that money
so I I I just I I put my first
point out there is a word of
caution so that you know you
could continue to ask those
questions is you know workers
create proposals for setting
funds come either in the form of
state funds are in federal funds
in the future.
Madam chair and I appreciate
that Mr chair because I I've
heard reference to different
concepts but no hard concrete
proposals are are actual plans
you know for example in my mind
money could be spent on
subsidizing low income
households to get to get
broadband that's a very
different type of state aid then
the state purchasing lands to
secure a right of way connection
or the state I mean it's it we
it is none of that exists and
and and I guess you madam chair
this is my question Mr chair
and.
Yeah there's there's there's a
lot of talk about the office of
broadband but.
And that we need a clearing
house but I mean essentially a
not this isn't meant to be at
the but don't we already have an
office that's meant to
coordinate large scale public
policy problems like this and
isn't that office called the
office of the governor like it
is does anything in current law
prohibit the governor's office
from already convening all the
stakeholders being the clearing
house coordinating all the
efforts.
I mean do they really need us to
enact the law establishing an
office of broadband before they
can actually put together the
kind of concrete plans that
we've been discussing today.
Madam chair and senator
Candelaria my understanding is
no they could they could do that
and and I believe that office
also has some vacant positions
that they could potentially even
re orient they wanted to build
outs that expertise this and
that's my that's my caution to
us madam madam chair as we I
think we have a reaction the
legislature.
When a court issue has not been
addressed our reactions just to
build more bureaucracy and build
more government as opposed to
having a moment and saying well
why hasn't the executive
actually uses existing resources
and authority so that we have
these plans in place before we
even got into session.
And we've been discussing how
this pandemic opened all of our
eyes were almost a year in none
of us I have the executives
resources at our disposal so I
really think it falls on the
executive chef uses existing
resources to put this together
and yes I understand people have
worked hard but at the end of
the day our job is also to
ensure that there's
accountability in government and
if this is such a tremendous
need I really think yeah it's
it's I don't think in offices
need quite frankly and and madam
chair this we think about that I
I I I don't I think it's I think
it's I think it's window
dressing on a problem with all
due respect and and that's just
where I'm at as a person
everyone can disagree that's
fine
Anti donation clause madam
chair.
You know I I do think it's
instructive and I'm glad we're
having this conversation today
because I think I think what
this conversation is again
showed me is that the answer I
got nation costs is an arcane
and blunt instruments in our
constitution and and I do agree
with the spirit of house joint
resolution nine.
But I think it needs to go a bit
further and so I've introduced a
constitutional amendment done
expected to pass this year but I
do hope we can have the debate
process on them and I propose
would simply repeal the anti
donation clause and instead we
would replace it with the
statutory framework
you know this isn't the first
time a large issue like this is
come up madam chair in my nine
years here where the
conversation is how do we get
around the on to go nation boss
how do we search for it how do
we not implicate it right we
also have tacitly recognize it
is a barrier to achieving the
goals we want.
It's it's it's to a bunch of
instruments and so madam chair I
respectfully submit that as part
is broadband discussion which
also a real serious conversation
of just doing away with the
entire nation boss and replacing
it with the statutory framework
like most other states out as
opposed to a constitutional
provision so madam chair I
appreciate our staff Mister this
law you putting together that
road map that was incredibly
helpful from a gap procedure
perspective.
but madam chair I just I'm just
saying closing and leaving
today's hearing I'm less
enthusiastic about committing
hundreds of millions of dollars
in state money to quote unquote
broadband when again we have no
I personally for anyone else I
personally and we today with no
clear idea of how that money
would be spent but when I came
in to this hearing several hours
ago thank you.
Thank you Senator Candelaria
your comments and we're gonna
move on to Senator Steinborn
you're next thank you thank you
madam chair and I'll just be
very first of all I just want to
thank everybody for your
extraordinary effort and
leadership in this regard and I
know what it's like to champion
an issue and.
Ross the ties and educate rural
and Senator fifty and that
starts with you and your years
of effort but certainly all the
other legislators in the house
makes me really grateful to see
the new black frankly that comes
into the legislature and the
passion I think we saw that on
display in the Senate various
ways looking at the work you all
doing in the house is very
impressive I I like the
constitutional amendment because
we have such vast drastic
infrastructure needs in the
state beyond broadband that out
your you know your your
constitutional then it kind of
speaks to
You know I'm a big fan of
getting when it comes to big
complex challenges getting a lot
of smart people together around
the table starting to figure it
out and it's clear to me
that are this is a big complex
challenge for the state of New
Mexico very profound lots of
different directions we can go
whether we we lay down all this
infrastructure and we lease it
out and that's their you know
the.
Buyable.
Or or.
Someone we got an echo somewhere
there we go or yeah we just
finance pay people's bills
important frankly as senator
Candelaria just said you know
some of the new satellite
service coming online and you
know are different ways to do it
but it sounds like something
most people agree on is.
Having a centralized entity that
workshops this consistently like
an office secretary Salazar you
said that the other day you
embrace this idea at
And of course Senator Padilla
and.
And in our annals are
All right LFC folks who did a
great job kind of saying Hey.
Here's a measure good next step
for us so.
I don't think any of us well
probably lots of us would it you
know very smart people on this
call and say Hey if you are the
one saying here's the playbook
you would have a playbook
there's no doubt about it but as
the state doing something like
that seems like a good step for
us to make sure we get it right
and then we don't waste money
and don't throw good money after
bad all those kinds of cliches
but are true in this case so so
I just appreciate all on also in
our staff kind of consolidating
it all for us and.
So.
There you go so I wanted to say
thank you very much everybody
through time.
Thank you Mr.
Madam yes thank you.
And thank you thank you Senator
Steinborn for your comments to I
don't see any other hands on my
list so if there's anyone else
we've them waiver let me know if
anyone has anyone with I don't
see in my Rodriguez yes.
Yes.
No I just I just want to thank
the panel in and I hope this is
been a lot of information in an
entry should everybody came
together and and this is a
learning process for all of us
so I want to take all the
panelists and everybody that
participated and and all the
hard work this presentation
today.
Thank you Mr chairman how well
that let me just make that need
additional comments and add a
little bit sure that because I
think they're very much in order
to already the presented today
and all the work that you've
done
It seems to me on this Burke
back to our cabinet secretary
John Salazar I'm you mentioned
that approximately twenty two
million dollars thank you for
fiber projects in seventy one
percent of those work better
what legal private or privately
at cemex funds trying that was
that was in the state if we use
that saying formula instead of
all it would be almost as they
are three to one return so it
seems like as we continue to go
for it our goal here would be to
I to ensure that we can have
patient matching funds to
continue to leverage to make the
gap that you're talking about
now understandably I think
everyone agrees that and because
of the amount of money that
coming here the federal
government stimulus and other
ways that you know you can't use
it all in one year but that's
never never has been you're
request you requested them that
you have an office that you'd be
able to put together a framework
the streamlined in that way you
can connect I to the entire
state of my every need to
provide.
Out with that in mind thank you
for that but let me just ask a
quick question I know we're all
right I now that this morning
that question in the gallery you
mentioned that approximately two
point five billion was coming
into New Mexico I understand the
state from the stimulus coming
up for the federal government
one baby adverse wall eight
approximately a hundred and
forty million for local
governments in this fall
governments that amount Micaela
is there any idea what would be
coming in there we can count on
for right that we can say this
is the amount will be required
out because this is specifically
for drugs we have any of that
yeah.
So madam chair the the short
answer is is no and yes because
of the the one point six billion
that's theoretically coming to
the state has really brought
uses it can be used even for
revenue replacement which the
credit by really fund money was
not usable for so you know
potentially your somebody really
wanted to go how well they could
use all that money for broadband
and same with the school money
it's it's really brought and how
it can be used now of course
there's other needs
the state needs to know how to
use that money for your
employment insurance system
schools need it for you know we
have to prepare whatever I don't
know but
Hi there there's nothing
directed in the language of any
of those pots of money that says
any of it can or cannot be used
for.
Okay thank you have did you for
a one point six I had written
two point five billion.
It's probably all together with
the with the total of coming to
the state and local government
thank you I wanted to confirm
that so K. make sure there's no
confusion that a that in
addition to the other one
billion so thank you very much
for that okay I don't have any
further questions I just wanted
to comment briefly before I move
on in just that state that it
seems like this is a very just a
very busy year in addition to
the prior year for Senator
Padilla of course that the many
others who have worked on
several pieces of legislation
and it seems like it's the year
that we can truly focus on
something that we're gonna do
finally to connect people here
in New Mexico everyone every
single person that the gold
right every single person is
going to in in the household I
should say connected to
broadband and hopefully
affordable here but the plan
that we're talking about needs
to be done implemented first the
staff wish a centralized place
as we talked in David Guetta get
the plan implemented
in but you know it's amazing how
as long as we have all these
pieces out there we're just not
able to do it there's a lot of
money coming in a lot of great
ideas a lot of smart people and
lots of work that has been done
we can't seem to put them
together into into fruition
until we we have that
centralized place so I want to
thank everyone here today the
representative who spoke thank
you for all your work I didn't
realize you had worked every
Friday for for many weeks and
then months my goodness thank
you and of course the many
others who have worked so hard
again thank you to Senator
Padilla and all the presenters
presented here today Johns house
are mentioned
Earlier you got your work cut
out even bigger now with so much
going on that thank you we have
the.
Very good experience in you and
we thank you for that and the
many others who present thank
you for that and I will move on
because of the time so you Mr
chairman less you you have
something else to say I'm gonna
move on to the subcommittee that
we are going to be talking with
us
right right and then last year
thank you very much and thanks
again every month that and that
Adrian everyone you all be safe
and thank you all right now
we're gonna move on to the
subcommittee on Senate bill
three seventy seven that is the
junior bill and that we get we
has ever getting the amendment
after that so we've got the
committee the finance committee
this everyone knows that in
assigned for this Senator Campos
chair Senator share no others
are members Senator Candelaria
senator Munoz senator Burton
Senator which were ready to hear
you there you go your.
Tell us what's going.
Thank you very much madam chair
before we go forward I'm going
back to German you know just to
give us a an outline in terms of
what it is
plan would be as we produce a if
you will not only Senate bill
three seventy seven but the
process that has been engaged in
order for us to report and then
I would to I'd like to go to
make a few comments again going
back to the chair Senator
Williams please.
Thank you Mr chairman being no
all the forms have been turned
in we received them LFC and
Senate by that staff is starting
to.
Disseminate them into agencies
and where they are but we did
get all hundred percent of those
the process will be that you
guys well as a committee will
start looking through those LFC
will chat with you about if
there's any problems with where
people place money and and then
you can review Messick Committee
and
proceed with your
recommendation.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you madam chair as we move
forward and I know what we've
already done of course is gone
through the
requirements in order for us to
move this forward so just in
privative what I'm going to do
is to mention those quickly and
then again I would do is convene
I believe possibly tomorrow
afternoon as we had an
opportunity to review the
amendments to ensure that
they're going to the proper
agencies and then again this is
the work of the of the
Legislature of our our state
senators as they move forward to
assist us to place resources
where we believe they can do the
most good in our communities so
within that just real quick we
all know that the US senators
may propose the general fund
increased appropriations to
programs and agencies contained
in house bill two through our
Senate bill three seventy seven
which is referred to as the
supplemental appropriations act.
Number two each Senator has been
allocated two hundred ninety
seven thousand six hundred from
the general fund which may be
applied to either recurring or
nonrecurring purposes through
Senate bill three seventy seven.
And I bring this forward because
this is another attempt as we
move forward particularly by our
chair to operate in transparency
and so individuals realize and
know the amounts that the the
state senators will be dealing
directly with.
After state Senate passage if it
is a past
Senate bill three seventy seven
will proceed to the house for
representative as well as their
amendments in a manner similar
to the Senate.
Again this is again the mutual
agreement and understanding as
we move forward regarding these
particular appropriations.
Number four individual senators
of amendments to increase the
general fund appropriations in
the house version of house bill
two will not be considered so in
other words this is the direct
framework of by the New Mexico
state Senate.
So as we move forward and
prepare if you will to take
action as a subcommittee than
when and to the full committee
of the Senate finance committee
again giving people an
opportunity to present with
equity their thoughts and ideas
working very closely with their
constituencies and that is the
purpose of Senate bill three
seventy seven.
I would like to close with
something and having the
communications with chairman
when else.
It's quite a few resources that
are coming into the state of
from the federal level and of
course as we continue to see the
increase in the price of gas and
as we move forward of those
resources then generate
additional dollars.
But what we want to do is to
ensure that resources as many
members in fact all members of
the Senate finance committee
have expressed we want a high
level of efficiency we want
these dollars to do the most
good for those that are most in
need and as we move forward we
want to ensure that there is
full accountability in this
process.
The one thing that I will
mention is that often times and
this is through research when
you have large amounts of
resources it's not just to get
the dollars out the door it's to
ensure that those resources are
going to be spent efficiently if
not all of them can be utilized
from the onset that quickly
going back to with the Senator
Candelaria has been a referring
to over and over it's that
accountability it's where's the
plan it's how are we going to
implement the use of these
resources and then where the
outcomes in essence what it
means as we move forward we want
to make sure that our reserves
are going to be at a level where
if we continue to run into
issues that affect
the economy and the health of
New Mexicans that we're prepared
to deal with that as we move
forward with this particular
manager we want to ensure that
these particular amendments will
do the most good for students
four agencies that are dealing
directly with health and other
issues so again to chairman
Williams who are vice chair.
Right yes to the members of the
Senate finance committee as we
move forward the actions that
will be taken for consideration
as we do we as the subcommittee
will be to have that
conversation.
As to how we're going to
continue to assist.
The constituents of our great
state so with that Mister chair
I turn it back to you for any
further comments and again the
members of the Senate finance
committee into our staff thank
you the diligence for the
outreach.
To each and everyone of us to
ensure that we're getting the
information that we need that
we're getting that right and as
we move forward that there's a
level of transparency and
accountability thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Chairman thank you Senator
Campos I don't know who is that
talking I was Jacob R. E.
cigarette go ahead I did Mr
chairman.
I'm doing good.
I just had one quick question
and and I ask Miss I'll direct
this is the chairman of the
subcommittee Mr chairman at a at
a for some folks ask me the
junior bill money that you know
let's assume it's that it's
scored quote unquote as non
recurring though I think we all
know and I think folks
understand that any general
appropriation is had inherently
nonrecurring it has to be built
into a base budget for next year
or it has to be included so
folks if they think things are
important they need to make sure
they stick through the LESC
process make sure they keep
advocating for their issues but
if the legislator wishes to
designate their appropriations
nonrecurring can they
appropriated for a capital
outlay project or does it can
only be used for operational all
right so it's a great question I
really appreciate that Senator
Candelaria at this point
according to the direction that
we're taking a nonrecurring
would be used for programmatic
or for operational purposes only
now again is what we talked
about I don't see it as one of
the appointments that's been
listed and what I would do is
deferred directly to the chair
to see if he has either further
instruction or insight into what
that means so we deal and non
recurring and recurring.
Then Senator Campos is right it
will be one time non reoccurring
money not available to transfer
to capital projects yes he
within eligibility and and this
is a learning process percent
fine it's it's never been done
this way before and I've said
this you know we're gonna try
not to make any mistakes we're
gonna make sure our our staff
and everybody are on top of
everything so we'll watch that
as we move forward but
Mr Chairman I think you're I
think you're right thank you and
subcommittee chairman I write
shouldn't go to capital I just
want to raise that because it
was initiative and floating out
there so thank you Mr Chairman
Mr chairman if I then I want to
thank you Senator Candelaria
because these questions are
going to help not only to
respond to our constituents but
more importantly as we go
forward to design a system of
utilizing the revenues that do
come into the state in a
responsible manner and if we
start to deviate of course there
could be some additional issues
and again it does get out of
hand but with a question and
questions to come that's the key
for conversation and to set the
right direction as we move
forward particularly with Senate
bill three seventy seven and the
the probation that will be going
into this particular measure
thank you chairman appreciate
that Mr Chairman I think Miss
Senator Campos and cinnamon yes
I agree with both of your
positions hundred percent like I
said I just want to raise act
question I received I think the
direction we receive from the
chairman is that correct all
thank you I appreciate it thank
you.
Semenya's thank you
Mr chairman you did a good job
and and we're all of this and
it's a different process so will
allow ourselves a few mistakes
and do the best we can
appreciate.
Chairman and and the members in
the so I think we're we're good
if you're done
I think we are are going to wrap
it up I appreciate you guys
staying late and I apologize but
that do a presentation of the
broadband presentation I think
as members of finance there's
just so much out there and
nobody's working on one single
thing I think it was a good
presentation and very
informational to to the members
that stayed with us so thank you
guys I appreciate it we'll see
you to Morrow morning I may
reach out to Google Q. the chat
with the in the morning so thank
you guys
Thank you to my vice chair
Senator Rodriguez for chairing
the meeting that I'm sorry I
didn't have a town hall
scheduled in Gallup for a while
before I did this and it's just
one of those things but I
appreciate you guys helping me
supporting chair thank you thank
you Mr chairman.
Thanks to everyone thank you all
very much.
