The motion to temporary table
Senate Bill 189. Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes Yes, Senator.
Compost compost, folks. Yes,
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes. Yes, Senator
Hemphill, Senator Hemphill votes
Yes, Senator Padilla. Padilla
votes. Yes, Senator. Sheriff,
Senator. Sheriff votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chairman Chairman. Sports.
Yes, we have nine in the
affirmative. Secure Senate. Bill
240 is next Chairman. So Senate
Bill 240 provides $1.5 million
to C Y f D for trauma, informed
training for all employees and
Foster care families. It'll be
distributed.
$500 500,000 per year over three
years, And with that, Mr Cherry
Stone for questions.
Anybody in the audience and
support
But one person come on up.
Two people. Anybody on June
Okay, anybody else?
Oh, man, one person on zoom.
Zoom, anonymous person.
Make sure you state your name
for the record, please.
Yes, this is Carrie Lee Clutter.
I am the CEO of the Chavez
County Casa program. We are an
umbrella program of 28 programs
that serve these Children
thousands every year. I believe
that many of the problems going
on with the why F D come back to
the lack of trauma informed
practices.
And this, uh, measure is key to
solving some of the problems so
uh, I speak widely in support of
this action. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in
opposition?
Seen none questions from
committee members.
None can have a motion. Thank
you very much. Mr Chairman. I'd
like to move to a question.
Sure. Oh, chair and Senator.
Just briefly explain how this
training will be conducted with
Foster.
Families. Will it be done before
they get kids?
Will it be, um, over the
The Internet.
Exactly how are we going to do
this training for the foster
families?
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods. Thank
you for the question. Um, I just
spoke with the CFD secretary
earlier today, and we're going
to be talking about that once
the funding is secured, and the
bill passes with the funding,
we're going to talk about how
that actually will be
implemented My view. My intent
is that prior to foster family
taking in a foster child that
they would have
This training and the training
would be available on an ongoing
basis. So if behaviors come up
that they're not really sure how
to best respond to or mitigate
these behaviors that there would
be training available for them
to attend, both in person
training and online training.
Um, but I really feel like it
needs to be trauma informed
because of the way that our
brains are processing trauma,
especially when we're very, very
young infants who aren't able
to, um, get this support and the
nurturing care that they have
will that
Those stress hormones are
actually stored in
Mr Chair and Senator.
There is some specific training
tools out there to do this, Mr
Chair and Senator Woods? Yes,
Evidence based trauma informed
and and there is some available
online. Additionally, I think it
would be helpful to have that
training in in person. For those
who are able to access the in
person training.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. I move for a
temporary table without
prejudice on Senate Bill 240 is
once amended.
Second
Senator Byrd.
So yes, Senator. Bert votes? Yes
And compost? Yes. Compost votes.
Yes, Senator Brentley.
Senator Gonzalez? Yes. Gonzalez
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes Yes,
Senator by the
idea Votes? Yes, Senator
Scherer, Senator Sherrod votes.
Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes? Yes,
Senator Woods? Yes. Votes? Yes.
Vice Chair. Rodriguez. Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez votes. Yes,
Chairman Yeo's
Jeremy. No. Suppose yes, we have
a
Temporary table 10 to 0.
Uh, center Stefan IX.
I think you've been in Senate
finance more than anybody. We
like you. Okay? You always have
good bill, Senator.
So house build two did
House.
Okay, So, Mr Chair, um, members
of the committee today I have
the food banks and it is a
statewide bill requesting a
large amount of money. 5 million
was in the governor's budget.
But, um, this group has
requested seven. It's a total of
25 million. I apologize.
We have given you a handout that
stapled together.
Five. Food banks provide food to
hungry New Mexicans and all 33
counties that gives a few facts
on the back. You will see the
service regions and then per
request of the chair.
US for pounds distributed by
food food banks in New Mexico
compared to missing meals with
me Today, I have Sherry Hooper
from the, uh she's not from
Roadrunners okay from the Santa
Fe, Food Depot and Katie
Anderson from Roadrunner Food
Bank.
Um, road running is the largest
correct in the state and Santa
Fe covers this area and north
Central. So, uh, a few minutes
from each one. Mr. Chairman,
members of the Committee. Thank
you very much for this
opportunity. Today we are here
requesting your help.
Uh, the food banks have been
experiencing several things. One
is we went into the potential
pandemic and we found that we
saw an increasing number of
people who are seeking help.
Since the pandemic has ended. We
expect that is indeed we have
not seen those numbers decline,
so we're helping an increasing
number of people. We're also
seeing other issues. One is we
are seeing a food prices or
continue to rise. And so those
who are buying food have they're
not able to stretch their dollar
like they used to.
It also impacts the food banks
because we are finding that more
and more of the food that we
have available to people who are
requesting assistance food that
we've had to purchase those two
donations continue to decline as
well and they are declining
because food banks have relied
heavily on big food companies to
donate to us and they donate
when they make mistakes and
production.
Well as they become more
efficient. We find that those
food banks are making fewer and
fewer mistakes. Therefore, they
are making fewer donations to
the food banks. This then is
requiring us to purchase food. I
will share that as Senator
Stefanik shared. I am I have the
honor of running the Food Depot,
which is the food bank that's
headquartered here in Santa Fe,
but serves nine counties in the
northern New Mexico.
40% of our budget this year is
just for food purchase.
40% of our budget. That's about
$5 million is what we're
spending in this fiscal year
just to purchase food so that we
have enough to help the
increasing number of people who
are asking for emergency food
assistance.
I have Katie here's well. She's
my colleague and food banking
And in the zoom. We have
representatives from two of our
other food banks. The royal food
banks, one is community pantry
and Gallop and one is the Food
Bank of eastern New Mexico in
Clovis, and they would be
willing to answer your questions
as well. I'll turn it over to
Katie now.
The first thing I'm going to
mention is that the yellow area
on the map, it belongs to this
food bank and the Red area on
the map belongs to this food
bank. So please, Katie.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, chair Munoz. Um, and
committee members. Thank you for
allowing me to be here today to
talk about some of the
challenges that we're seeing all
of the things that that Sherry
Hooper shared with. You are
absolutely the same situation
that Roadrunner is saying, Um,
across the southern part of our
state. Um many of the partners
that we work with are giving us
reports of increases of 160% to
200%.
Increase in the number of
individuals who are seeking out
support there a variety of
reasons for that food, inflation
and inflation for food prices is
absolutely a part of that. The
fact also that there are 250
grocery stores and our entire
state. There is a real lack of
access to food for many parts of
our state and for many
communities.
So this food will really allow
us to fill gaps in areas where
there just is not food
availability for folks that are
seeking out that support. Thank
you for allowing us to be here
today. Ah, and as I, um, as we
mentioned, there might be some
people on line, and if not, I
have a comment, so go ahead.
Uh, let's go the audience and
support
So
I know I have
Six people online, so maybe
we'll do three and three. Let's
do online first.
Hurt Reagor.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. And
this is Kurt Reagan on the
director of Lutheran Advocacy
Ministry of New Mexico, and we
also speak for the status
position of the Mexico
Conference of Churches and I'm
here today to express their
strong support for SP 46 States
budget is reflection of our
state's values and priorities.
We support all efforts to reduce
a staggering number of new
Mexicans living with food
insecurity, including meeting
the direct needs of so many in
our communities that face this
challenge in a day to day basis.
Food banks from the front line
of addressing the immediate need
and the actual need of our food
bank network is reflected in S P
Food banks from the front line
of addressing the immediate
need, and the actual need of our
food bank network is reflected
in SP 46 over this last year.
I've heard an overwhelming
number of bipartisan support
from representatives and
senators for this asked by the
food banks, I urge you to fix
the shocking absence of such
funding and HB two for the food
banks, as well as the other
significant shortfalls related
to hunger that are absent. Thank
you, Mr Chair and members of the
committee for this opportunity.
Speak with you today.
Thank you. Alex. Alice. Alice,
are you there?
Yes, I'm here. Can you hear me,
Alice?
Good afternoon, Senator. Thank
you all for having us here I am
in support of this because of
the fact that over here in
McKinley County where we have
geographic geographical mileage
in between grocery stores for
our community and lack of
transportation as well, Um,
these people over here have very
few options for a grocery store.
Some of them rely on convenience
stores.
I can't imagine any of us having
to feed our family based on what
they have available at a
convenience store, but the
average person who does not live
in Gallup troubles a minimum of
30 miles, one way to get to any
resources of any kind. So we ask
that you support this bill so
that we may reach further into
our communities and take care of
our community members without
the substance to take care of
them that leads to other issues.
That our communities will have
to deal with later.
Thank you.
Mhm, Corey Man's
Thank you. I also would like to
voice support of SB 46. I manage
a small food distribution
program in Madrid, New Mexico
and one of the food depots,
partner agencies.
Um and without the food that we
supply get supplied through
them, I really wouldn't be able
to reach the needs of my
community.
Um we have more and more people
signing up every week as food
costs are rising and food
insecurity is also on the rise.
So, um
I would just also like to
address, uh, expressed support
for additional funding for our
state's food banks and thank you
to all the food bank workers
here today and thank you. Senate
Finance Committee for the time.
Thank you. We'll take three from
the audience.
It's jump up three of you.
I don't think that might
working. You may need to come up
technologies good until it
failed. My name is Cynthia
Hannah and I am a citizen who is
concerned with the growing
number of people who are hungry
in this state, and I'm just here
in support for the funding for
these food banks. Thank you. I
live in Santa Fe.
Next.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you for letting
me be here today. My name is
Tracy and right. I have been a
volunteer with food insecurity
organizations in New Mexico
since 2017 and I was on the
front lines, distributing and
packing food during the pandemic
Financially. That crisis has not
ended for the food banks or for
many citizens, it continues on
But also the food banks step up
during other natural disaster,
other disasters.
Many of them were involved in
helping out folks in the fires
last year, and we'll be there.
Hopefully, if anything else
should happen, So I hope you
will support this bill. Thank
you, Senator Marco. Real quick.
We don't have the amendment for
your if we happen to get it
before we leave.
Thank you next.
Hi, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. I'm Yvette Ramirez.
Amerman. I'm CEO of the New
Mexico Primary Care Association.
80% of our 196 clinics are in
rural and underserved areas.
Sometimes there's no grocery
store in the area. This is the
most basic type of health care
is getting enough food. Often
our clinics house, um
Food banks and we stand in full
support of this bill and thank
the senator for carrying it.
Thank you.
Yeah. Come on up.
My name is Joanne Fry. I
appreciate senator and but I
would. I would like to talk
about the fact that we really
need this bill to pass. It's
been a really hard couple of
years for the Food Depot. And I,
um, hardly support this.
Thank you for your time and
effort. Thank you all. So we
just got your amendment. It's in
the email get pregnant,
so
Questions from committee
members. Gonzalez Hmm. Oh, thank
you, Mr German. I just have a
first of all. Thank you for all
the work that you do very much,
and I apologize. I didn't get
your name. The lady on the far
left.
The far left this one,
Hooper from the Santa Fe Food
Depot. What did you What did you
mean by more mistakes are made.
List, Okay?
Go ahead.
Mr Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you. For the question.
Food banks started many years
ago in the 19 seventies, and
they were started one to
eliminate food waste in the food
industry and to get that
perfectly good food to people
who needed it so food banks
started to actually retrieve
that food or rescue that food
and get it to people who needed
it.
What we're seeing now is that
those food companies that were,
um, making mistakes in their
production? It could be that
they've mislabeled package. It
could be that they're testing a
new item on the market. I
usually share this. I'll try to
make this quick. But one of
those examples is when oat Bran
was considered the end all and
be all for good health.
And we found at the food bank
that went out brand products
were being purchased. We were
getting a lot more sugared
cereals, for example. Well, then
people realize that Oprah and
tasted a lot like sawdust. And
so they stopped buying those
kinds of products on the stores.
so those food companies pulled
those products off the shelves
and donated those products to
the food bank.
So it's when they overproduced
as well. Any of those reasons
they have extra food that they
can donate into the food bank
system they do. However, those
few companies continue to
improve their efficiencies, so
they're making fewer mistakes.
Now they're not overproducing in
the way that they were, for
example, and so when that
happens, there's fewer donations
being made to the Food bank
network. And that is I want to
make sure that I'm clear on
this. This is not
A source of food that will come
back to us.
It was. Efficiencies have set it
up so that that food is, uh as
now being sold, And if there is
any of that extra product, the
secondary market buys that food
up to, so it is not going to the
food banks like it used to.
That's why the food banks now
are forced to purchase so much
more of the food that they
distribute.
Very well. Thank you. Thank you
for that answer. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Hmm.
No other Senator Woods.
Could you
Mr Chair.
And Senator, could you kind of
walk me through?
How this money would come out
of.
The health care. Oh,
Tell me how this walks through.
So, um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods. The money would
go to the health care authority,
which is the old Human services
department.
They currently receive the money
now.
To distribute to the food banks.
so the healthcare authority
would receive any appropriation
and then they would contract it
out to the five food banks
around the state.
And they would do it
proportionately, based upon the
numbers of people and the number
of distribution sites, the
healthcare authority indicates
that there's a food shortage of
£21 million of food.
So in the past $5 million, only,
um covered about £4.2 million of
food, so as you can see 5
million cover, maybe £4 million
of food, but the healthcare
authorities estimating maybe £21
million of food might need to be
purchased, but
It would go on the money would
go all over the state.
Well, I guess my question is Mr
and and Senator.
Um
Is there any qualifications?
On receiving this food.
Do you have to prove need? Do
you have to
Is it pretty well?
Taken out and and distributed
and picked up. Uh, whoever shows
up Well, exactly How is that
part of it? Work Mr Chair during
the pandemic, Senator. The rules
were a little different, So I'm
going to let one of our experts
answer the question of how it's
handled today. So, Katie, do you
want to answer that?
I'd be happy to what we are
seeing. Excuse me all of us
contract to to also distribute
the fat foods or USDA
commodities. So what oftentimes
happens at these distributions
is that in order to have enough
food for the folks that are
coming they are receiving
receiving T FAP or USDA
Commodity foods.
Along with food that is been
made possible by the state. And
there are some very distinct
rules and regulations about T
FAP commodities, including a
required self declaration form.
So the vast majority of
individuals who are coming to
pick up food are completing
those forms and they are self
declaring that they are that
they are in need.
On top of the fact that in many
cases people are coming to these
distribution points and
oftentimes standing in line for
many, many hours to get access
to that food, so we were seeing
a wide array of people come in.
They need access to that food.
Yeah, I've been. I've been to
the food bank there and in
Clovis and and
I know at that time they were
having some trouble with
reimbursements.
Uh, they were asked to do a
program and all of a sudden
They stocked up to do that
program and all of a sudden
The reimbursements quit before
the
Some of that food was delivered.
Um have we cleared up? A lot of
that kind of stuff? Are we doing
a better job on getting our
reimbursements?
Mr Chair. I'm trying to keep
leaving him out of this
conversation. Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods. Thank you for that
question. I know that the food
banks were participating with
the aging and long term care
department to provide senior
food boxes and then the aging
long term care department. We
were being reimbursed for those
senior food boxes.
That we distributed our service
areas. There was some discussion
at the state level that that
maybe wasn't the most efficient
and effective way to reach our
seniors with the food that they
needed where they are.
And so the state decided against
continuing that program. This
did happen specifically no at
the Food Bank in Clovis, their
food Bank of Eastern New Mexico.
Diana Sprigg, who is the
executive director. There, she
was able to talk to the state
and be reimbursed for the food
that she had already purchased
for that program, so she was
able to get reimbursed for it
and she was able then to go
ahead and distribute those food
boxes as planned. Okay, I guess
that brings up just one more
question, Mr Jared.
So is there more than one line
of state funding?
To the food banks.
Mhm.
Food banks currently, uh sorry,
Mr Chair. Uh, Senator Woods, the
food banks currently again have
this contract with what used to
be the Human Services
department, and there are a few
lines of funding. One is as
Katie mentioned we received the
USDA Commodities foods and that
is a federally funded program
that is administered by the
state.
That is one source of funds for
us because the federal
government allows for
administrative funds that go
with that food to help cover the
cost of that food distribution.
We're finding that that that
money is not enough to cover the
full cost of distributing the
USDA commodities.
So the food bank story able to
take some private funds to add
to that, so that is that is one
source. The state has also been
very generous with the food
banks and giving us a little
over a million dollars each year
to access fresh produce. We're
all we know that the five food
banks are very committed to
providing nutritious food to
people in need.
And so, um, we're able to take
that money and purchase fresh
produce with it. The two main
state, um
Hmm.
Revenue sources for the food
banks, the food banks rely most
heavily on private donations.
Food banks see that most of our
donations come from individuals
and we also all five food banks
work with foundations and
businesses and others to bring
in some additional funds. We did
see some extra funds coming to
us from the state and from the
federal government during the
pandemic, Those funds have
stopped.
Does that? Answer your
questions, But it approval
answers my question. I guess I
was just wondering. How did you
How did you come up with the
number? What You said that that
is supposed to be pretty hard
dollar money that you need.
And I know that escalation and
food prices is also something
we're contending with.
Ah!
I just I knew there was more
than one source of funding, so I
just wondered how that worked
out. And, yes,
I'm glad that they got
reimbursed.
That was that was a good thing.
Mr Chair. I'm satisfied. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Good
afternoon, senator. And, of
course, Sherry and Kelly. Thank
you for your incessant work for
helping the good cost. My
goodness. You work so much on
this, And I remember sharing Mr
Chairman in the summer You were
out there in Los Alamos that a
meeting of we had a committee
meeting. Economic development. I
remember and you were very much
advocating and expressing the
need to have more funding
because 40% of your budget.
Now goes to purchasing food.
It's like you have to go to the
stores. You have to go to
different places to buy food
with 40% almost half of your
budget. That was not the case
before and so I can see why you
were desperately asking for
that. And you continue to do
that, because your budget is not
intended to go to purchasing
food.
You have your operational needs
to, But anyway, that being said,
um, I really appreciate you
continuing to fight the good
fight and continue to request
and advocate for this money. I
know there's some funding and
house Bill two that now we have,
um, but it's never the end. I
don't think it's complete nearly
as to what you need.
But, um, it's it's not done
until it's done. So we continue
to work and see if we can
reconcile things to define more
funding. Um, and the way we do
these bills that have
appropriations. It's not
anything against for implying
anything, but they're
temporarily tabled so that we
can reconcile numbers and try
and figure out what is the next
step.
So that's what we will do today.
Unless there's other questions,
Mr Chairman. Uh, no, I don't.
But the house did not have
anything did add some in the
Senate.
Senator Senator accompany Thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman, Um
I moved for a temporary table
without prejudice for Senate
Bill 46 without prejudice.
Senator Bert? Yes, Bert votes?
Yes, Senator Campos? Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Bradley, Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill. Senator
Hemphill votes. Yes, Senator
Padilla.
Senator Scherer. Yes, Senator
Scherer votes. Yes, Senator
Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes, Senator Gonzales?
Yes. Gonzalez votes? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes? Yes, Chairman
knows yes. Votes. Yes.
We have a temporary table eight
in the affirmative zero in the
negative.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Senator Hill. Are you in the
Come on up.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chairman for
hearing us today. Now with this
bill does Mr Chairman and
Committee is it distributes $35
million to state and local law
enforcement officers,
correctional officers and
probation and parole officers
for recruitment investing in
recruitment. Senators, as you
know, is an important component
of protecting and improving
public safety.
And I'm confident that this bill
will improve vacancy rates.
Joining me today are Sylvia
Serna, the AP the ASD, director
of DPS, and Wesley Billingsley,
the director of D F A. And we're
here to answer any questions you
may have.
One second center on the last
bill. The vote. What? Um, just
one. This which
Anybody having to add quickly?
We have an amendment.
Mr Chairman Motion by Senator
Rodriguez. Second base, Senator
Stain born strips The
appropriation bill can move on.
Questions on the
motion by here.
So before we do, this council
said, we can do a voice vote.
I'd rather just do a hand
object, right? Yeah. So any
objection to adopting them and
Zero.
Back on the Million amended
Bill.
Leslie, Mr Chair members of the
committee.
Thank you for allowing us to be
here today. We we wholeheartedly
support these efforts, the
recruitment and retention
efforts. Um, on behalf of DFA
and DPS. Thank you for your time
today on the bill questions from
committee members.
None. Emotional. I center
Hemphill.
So getting by Senator Rodriguez
We called her up.
Senator Brute
Yes. Votes. Yes, Senator.
Compost? Yes. Compost votes.
Yes, Senator Brantley.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hemphill. Yes, Senator
Hemphill votes Yes, Center
Padilla.
Senator Scherer. Senator share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods.
Yes, Senator. Woods Boats? Yes.
Senator Gonzalez. Yes, Gonzales,
but
Vice chair. Rodriguez Vice
chair. Rodriguez. Yes, Yes. I'm
sorry.
Uh huh. Leo's not wearing pink
today? Yes, Ceremonial supports.
Yes, we have nine in the
affirmative. Zero in the
negative for temporary table.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Adopt the amendment. We already
adopted the amendment for the
past 80 on adoption of
amendments.
Effective on the DuPont Do Pass.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee on
Wednesdays. We wear pink. Yes,
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Wesley. I have I have enough
problems just wearing a tie.
Kind of wrapped up.
For the day. We're caught up. We
did get the amendment on
geothermal. But Senator Ortiz of
Pinos in another committee, uh,
we will hear 249 tomorrow before
the basketball game.
So
Senator shared that's a signal
to you.
So we're adjourned till
tomorrow.
Uh um.
