In the house and it appropriates
with the list of the projects
and things that are going to be
funded out of these funds
originally was five hundred and
four point five million dollars
that are coming it will be
approximately twenty six million
less than I will explain that as
we go forth if you bear with me.
Center were not on the amendment
explain about the exactly that's
what I've said I was gonna do
explain the bill first and then
the amendment thank you Mr
chairman so basically in this
thousand and and those are out
of funds that are transferred
give me a second converted arpa
eight point eight sixty six
point eight of funds from our
pet funds also that are to be
used for a mostly like capital
outlay for example
is it would be five hundred and
four million five hundred and
one point eight until we amended
have you explain them and.
And explain your amendment I
need a motion to move the
amendment.
Of thank you Mr president I Mr.
Chairman chairman there we go.
forty six million dollars for
highway three eighty.
Senator explained the amendment
so Mr chair highway three eighty
that ball rolling here so
without all stand for questions
with questions on the amendment
from committee members.
new motion by Senator Campos
second by Senator Rodriguez
click we are secretary call the
roll.
Senator no Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria is excuse Senator
Diamond.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes.
senator Munoz test measurement
LCS for that is five yes or no
into excuse.
That I'm not going to make a
motion for disorder but he knows
it's two two one seven four
three it's for twenty million
dollars for hospital in San Juan
So you're the drawing that
amendment we have one more
amendment need yes and so the
the last one Mr chairman I move
twenty six million dollars of to
help schools and districts
increase bus driver salaries and
sold that's all it does Mr
chairman.
Questions on the amendment.
I need a second on the motion
second Mr chairman thank you
senator Ortiz have a motion and
a second impelled cholera.
Thank you very yes Senator
Campos.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
yes that is seven yes.
And.
one more minute and Committee
amendment on house bill two and
everybody has amendment from all
explain it real quick on the.
Rauner payment fund to carry out
teacher loan repayment act
that's one on page three line a
line eighteen space tracks
And then it should strike the
twenty six million for
broadband.
The students.
yeah number two that strikes the
twenty six million on the
broadband money that is from
general fund it leaves our but
capital money alone at a hundred
Thank you Mr chairman I'm just
trying to up to to pull it up
just a amendment number one on
here striking House
Appropriations Committee and
finance.
Mr Chairman can you Senator can
you repeat your question please.
On line one of the management
striking amendments six and
Steinborn is initially there
were two million dollars in
there for the teacher
affordability fund and now it's
going to just the language is
going to change the amount stays
stays in the same department.
And this is a request of the
agency.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
amendment because seventies to
renumber the sections and
subsections.
Thank you very much Sir thank
you Mr so have thank you senator
thank you any other questions
Steinborn Pat will you call the
roll please.
Yes Mr chair Senator for.
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales is excuse
Senator Hemphill.
Pass.
Have.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yet Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes.
Yes at nine yes and to
thank you so the minute passes
center back on the bill.
Questions on the bill.
Senator Mister so I have a
motion for the past from Santo
Campos second from a Senator
get you those phone books that
in season over there.
We're voting on on the bill as
amended on the bill is meant
okay yep the vote is on the bill
as amended all right.
Diamond Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales cystic you
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
yes and senator Munoz yes yes
yes it is nine two two thank you
senator you have amended bill
just stay next year text
messages or will let you know
sorry to ruin your you know that
Senator Diamond one echo what
Yellowstone that was our
priority for the night so thank
