We have two hundred plus
partners across the state with
Turkey in delivering services
and housing at the local level.
The need as a sender mentioned
is great not going to go into it
is detailed in the first but
there's increased housing costs
that you know about families are
cost burdened there's a shortage
of not only home ownership but
rental homes so estimated that
it would take billions and
billions of dollars to meet a
fraction of the need out there
the housing trust fund has been
very successful.
Thank you for the appropriation
of twenty seven million dollars
since two thousand five we've
been able to leverage close to
seven hundred million dollars
with the money that you've got
put into this which is a twenty
nine twenty six to one ratio is
the senator mentioned we've
developed over forty five
hundred units across the state
in sixty five communities and
this is a statewide program in
addition to that as you know
housing as a driving force for
economic development in addition
to the initial infusion of that
seven hundred million dollars
there's been five hundred and
eighty and economic impact
across the state.
That doesn't even mention some
of the US social impact sector
we're well aware of.
This bill would be
transformational
indeed there are some safeguards
in this bill that on the other
legislation doesn't have a
similar bills in this one here
if the funds would revert back
to the state if they are not
encumbered within three years so
it's that safety net there and
this will go a long way in
improving and increasing
affordable housing and
addressing the need that's been
mentioned in closing on
mentioned that housing is the
foundation for strong families
and thriving communities and we
are urge your support in this
thank you very much Mr chair
thank you thank you the.
We're gonna go to the audience
for this really go to the zoom
For.
Well Linda bridge.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Linda
bridge I am the executive
director of Albuquerque Housing
Authority and I'm here this
morning to speak in favor of
this bill
the senator and is the already
did a great job in explaining
the need I just wanted to that
additional details from my
perspective has a Housing
Authority.
In addition to the seventy
million of need immediate needs
that they already spoke to
housing authorities across the
state owned and operated thirty
nine hundred units of public
housing that serve extremely low
income populations this housing
is the need of preservation
the estimated media at eight
for just three of us Housing
Authority is over forty
million representing units of
the spaniel of Los crucis in
Albuquerque.
In addition right now in
Albuquerque we have hundreds of
thousands of folders households
old vouchers provide rental
assistance that they can't find.
There is a gap of over fifteen
thousand needed units affordable
units in Albuquerque
As we spoke to housing is
economic development every
dollar that goes into the funds
right back into the economy
through jobs.
Two senators
in one household has improved
over their house they have the
stability that kids can stay in
school.
The parents can go to school
they can get jobs that in turn
goes right back into the economy
and as I mentioned this would be
transformational can help in the
cycle of poverty and address
housing needs to start County
and I support thank you thank
you Dorothy seeing.
Rachel Biggs
Hello.
Yeah we got you.
Okay
Mr chair I'll be brief
Representative veterans and
military families caucus in New
Mexico
I served twenty years military
and I've been in longer than
that as a federally retire in my
usual and then into their
families I am learned that after
traveling the world.
Service members veterans
treasurer home of their own this
will help put an end rooted in
Mexico and having the security
of their own home.
The my Senator Senator Rodriguez
has made a very presentation I'm
not going to repeat her points
this bill addresses the problems
in a sustainable way and we
strongly supported.
Thank you Rachel Biggs.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs with Albuquerque health
care for the homeless too many
of our families in New Mexico
struggle to remain safely in
state only has due in large part
to the severe shortage of
affordable homes for people with
modest incomes even before the
pandemic began housing
instability too often results in
the brutality homelessness it is
devastating right now to have
doctors in hand and have to tell
them they will have to spend
ninety days or more living in
their car until we can secure
affordable housing for that well
the need for increased
investment in housing only
exponentially increases each
year and has a has received
inconsistent funding for the
housing trust funds stable
recurring funding is needed to
ensure advocate you need a plan
to address the skyrocketing
needs for affordable housing and
this is a very smart solutions
addressing that critical
part of us one thirty four and
the sponsor for her tireless
commitment to this critical
issue thank you.
Thank you Randy trainer.
Thank
you members of right atrial
representing the New Mexico
homebuilders association and
I I I would be in the apartment
association of New Mexico the
pandemic has revealed the long
time problem with housing
affordability and availability
the issues it was created many
years ago during an interest
rate rise the help thousands of
New Mexicans with a variety of
housing.
Now more than ever before it is
crucial to support all levels of
programs that provide health The
New Mexico housing trust fund is
one of the he proven successful
program.
It is easy to support it but
this year and is critical for
MFA in the house you for us.
Thank you Jack Mullarkey is our
last one that I have on the
list.
Good morning chairman committee
members thank you
we support MFA they are the
state's proven.
Agency which has emphasis on
housing all new housing and
existing housing and MFA is very
important to us and we.
We always say that the this is
one of the best places we can
spend our money because all
these all construction projects
in New Mexico are made in New
Mexico this is spending our
money in New Mexico in the
multiplier effect works
beautifully.
We we support them because I
left a.
encourages the upkeep of
existing housings which actually
is really important for new
housing as well we need people
to have all all areas of
thousands because as any of you
know the children you move into
an existing home fixes up you
could connect with the move on
up to the final slide so we
would encourage you to this
support this bill thank you
much.
I think I'll have on my list in
support.
Anybody and zoom propose.
Nobody anybody in the audience
and support.
What is it called for support.
C. did you register because the
hand.
On this someone initiated this
link hi go ahead real quick in
the north.
This
chairman members of the
committee landscapes here
Servicio capital here's favor
one thirty four urged supporters
well we exist because very few
banks if anyone make home loans
on tribal trust lands and
rebel as there perceive your
credit risks of dealing with
sovereign nations but we
specialize in that and we
figured out how to do it we make
residential construction loans
and once properties built we
facilitate long term mortgage
financing I you know if you if
you to the state no no that
homes are not just sticks and
bricks there's places.
San Antonio during these days
you know that it's a very
special place but the needs for
housing on tribal lands are are
extremely significant and
there there's the most difficult
to serve almost by definition
since the banks won't do the
work that they need to
having a flexible swords funds.
Communities and organizations
serving those tribal public
needs is critical
we're innovating solutions
particularly now when COVID has
affected so many communities and
we need Dr mix additions and
other renovations to be able to
help with this pandemic.
As a as in New Mexico nonprofit
corporation limited with like
twenty million in loans to
support tribal communities and
our home loan program has is
your fault right we would never
been able to do what we have for
the last sixteen years if it's
not and for initial investment
of state housing trust fund
dollars are flexible funds that
allow for innovation we found
MFA to credibly
resourceful and helpful and
exceptional administrator these
types of funds and so supporting
is filled with meaning that more
communities like the ones we
sure would benefit from critical
housing investment and we
request that you support thank
you very much thank you.
Then in the audience.
Thank you Mr it's not yep the
hold button I think of this.
I thank you Mr chair madam vice
chair and members of the
committee my name is Alyssa
Kenny Dyer I'm a resident of
Santa Fe and I'm an advisory
board member of the housing
trust fund of at MFA it is a
great honor to serve on the
advisory board we're more aware
MFA staff prepare proposals for
consideration by advisory board
members from around the state
I've been very impressed with
the strong due diligence by both
staff and my fellow volunteer
advisory board members.
However I've been dismayed about
how little funding the housing
trust fund has received to meet
the tremendous housing need in
New Mexico.
Prior to moving here last year I
served as an Oregon state
representative for nearly a
decade.
And service chair of the house
committee on Human Services and
housing from twenty fifteen to
twenty twenty.
I know every state is very
different and we all have a lot
to learn from each other but I
respectfully offer my
experiences as the former Oregon
chair of housing
to New Mexico as it aims to
address its housing needs over
the past decade organ suffered
as New Mexico has from rising
rents and home purchasing prices
for variety of reasons one the
federal government decreased
investments in housing starting
in the early eighties with the
exception of short term rent
relief in some of the COVID
relief packages.
To the housing industry dwindled
during and following the two
thousand and seven to two
thousand and nine recession
three the burgeoning short term
rental market took many of the
long term rentals off the market
and for now COVID and inflation
are driving up housing
development and renovation costs
recognizing the extreme hardship
faced by so many Oregonians the
legislature realized it needed
to treat housing like an
essential infrastructure and
fill the funding gap the primary
way to is increase was to
increase access to affordable
housing by increasing supply to
increase supply the Oregon
legislature with strong
bipartisan support dramatically
increase funding through the
general fund general obligation
bonds library bonds and low
income housing tax credits the
allocation of state funds for
housing grew from approximately
fifty million per biennium in
twenty thirteen to about seven
hundred fifty million in twenty
twenty one this is just public
funds this is not this is in
addition to all the leveraging
from the private sector that
comes with the public funds well
the funding allocations increase
dramatically over here we also
recognize that we needed a
steady income stream that
housing developers could depend
on it takes several years to
purchase land designed the
housing apply for permits and
then construct housing with no
assurance of dollars on the
table housing developers are
reluctant to start a project
that will take several years and
fewer businesses build the
capital to purchase equipment
and grow the secretary.
Best with the support of the
organ realtors association and
bipartisan support we triple the
document recording fee in twenty
eighteen this raised recurring
ninety million for for the
housing print for the first
by a name and grows over time
Oregon's housing dollars have
developed in reserves affordable
housing promoted affordable
homeownership renovated
manufactured homes and
infrastructure for manufactured
home parks expanded weather's
ation for low income residents
and expanded homeless shelters
and Services the reason for such
strong bipartisan support was
that these funds are providing
more affordable housing
improving physical mental health
stabilizing K. through twelve
school population and serving as
an economic driver creating many
jobs in construction weather's
ation.
Okay well I urge you to pass
both the Senate bill one thirty
four and Senate bill nineteen
thank you so much.
I think that's all we had in the
audience anybody against.
Senator Steinborn.
I.
The rooms okay that I'm of the
past year second no there's
some.
Senator Woods.
I I notice on your bill.
On the.
Page four.
One twelve.
The talks about the the fund
balances and the loans proceeds
and the proceeds from severance
tax bonds prior to.
In a word using the O. O. bond
money before you start trying to
use any new bond money and want
land bring that up.
Does that mean you're not going
to sell the bonds and to you
need to.
Is it bring that part to me
on that Mr chair and and and and
that would thank you thank you
so much Senator was for the
question I will be happy to
clarify that absolutely not the
needs are there not only today
that they've been there for a
long time we're just waiting for
the funds in the bonds to be
sold so that they can have the
funding necessary to get the
shovel ready projects out the
intent is to is to sell the
bonds as the process goes on the
usual way that the state sells
bonds and start immediately on
the homes on the building in and
so on so I hope that answers
your question we would not wait
at all having the need that we
have NMFA so right now you have
Mr chair right now you have no
no balance to be loaned out
right now I mean you what I'm
trying to say Mr chair.
You income for every dollar
every year.
Is that right Mr chairman and
madam and I have to go I'm going
to be as if to explain Mister
chairman Senator Woods that that
is a correct MFA generally on
gets all the money out the door
gets it encumbered and spent in
this case that piece of language
here is we the vast majority of
the funds get put out as loans
so we receive programming come
in the form of principal and
interest so this languages are
so that we spend that
program income if you will
before we spend the new money
from the bonds issued currently
we do have about three point
nine in the fund that is because
we just signed contracts with
DFA for the last five million
that was approved we have
applications in place right now
so that money will be out the
door within a couple of months
and and what what is the
administrative part what percent
is the administrative part of
this fund respect your and then
Senator.
Mr chairman Senator what's I
don't have that off the top of
my head it is a very minimal
under a.
Maybe we can find that and get
back to you we just expense the
staff time that gets put into
this so it's a very minimal
amount that gets spent every
year for administrative costs
of the vast vast majority of it
ninety nine point something
percent goes into the
communities in the economic
development and building homes
around the state okay and and my
next question on one of the F.
orce it talks about.
The use of senior severance tax
bond proceeds for the New Mexico
housing trust fund projects may
trigger.
R. S. tax implications would
issuing tax exempt bonds in
other words when we know that
this is directly allocated out
of the severance tax bonds it
may have an effect on our is
standings of tax free bond.
Was it is there any thanks to
that can you give me an idea on
that Mr chairman I'll defer to
is the I I don't think there's
an impact on the but I'll let
him determine Mr chairman and
senator woods we did meet us
several times with the state
board of finance who reviewed
this bill in their tax and bond
counsel reviewed as well they
have mechanisms in place to make
sure that we're compliant with
the IRS very similar to the
colonias and tribal
infrastructure funds that
receive a I think four and a
half percent versus a two and a
half percent so there's
mechanisms in place to make sure
that we are totally compliant
with the oversight of state
board of finance in their tax
and bond counsel.
Thank.
That is that is the question in
my mind and I'm sorry I didn't
look at it ahead of time Madam
last year I I.
Thanks rebounds the I I know
people that invest in these
bonds in that's the reason they
invested in because they're
usually a little.
pay a little less but the money
that you get back is this tax
free and I don't want to
jeopardize that for the state of
New Mexico
wanting to get back to me
maybe I should just to taxed rid
of that question or or I don't
know who to ask that question to
you the clarified even more Mr
chairman but let me just add a
quick copy ought to that Mister
chairman Senator Woods that
If this would be the case in the
impact would be in the way that
your concern is then we would
have had that impact for many
years ago this fund was
established in two thousand five
and it's receive the same funds
from the severance tax the only
thing is that they haven't been
recurring so this bill merrily
says they will be sustainable
fund recurring from this fund so
that we can continue to count on
these funds to continue to build
affordable housing that's all it
is so it's the same as far as I
go in the past and I don't mean
to argue with you sure sure.
Mr chair in the past we didn't
designate this to happen in the
past it was an appropriation
from the legislature so it's
kind of a eggs and apples Sir.
Kind of the deal and.
I have a problem with that part
of it.
and so I don't want to push this
deal any further thank you Mr
chair thank you very much.
Share.
Thank you Mr chair certainly I
know this is an existing
programs been there since I
didn't know two thousand five I
know it's been a while.
But I've got a couple questions
in general terms.
How does this actually work who
who owns the house at the end of
the at the end of construction.
Mr Chairman can I have is a
hammer back explain how consent
process Mr chairman and senator
sure it'll depend on the various
activities that
that we take on with the fund I
can tell you that if we do see a
down payment assistance program
to assist families the end owner
of that house will be the
homeowner that has a mortgage on
that house that receive down
payment assistance when it comes
to say providing assistance to a
developer to build a hundred
unit affordable rental project
it's generally that developer in
partnership with the limited
liability corporation and other
partners in their that invest in
that us would really varies
depending on the activity.
We had Mr Casteel testified we
do we have on home so in that
case you already have a
homeowner maybe an elderly
person that needs accessibility
or modifications to their home
that homeowner is the owner of
that house.
I hope that addresses your
question so Mr chair and
probably is the
so the down payment assistance
does the homeowner eventually
repay that to the state or to
gift them for as the down
payment Mr chairman senators
sure in the down payment
assistance programs that we
currently have there are
payments coming back to MFA over
of fifteen twenty or thirty year
period depending on what term
the borrower opts for.
If if the home of.
The builder built it so you know
nights at an apartment complex
essentially how do you say that
this is affordable and that's
not.
Mr chairman Senator sure when we
the.
Housing trust fund requires that
the money that is loaned out or
granted via at the that Fund is
for low to moderate income
families that they are able to
afford the the properties of the
homes that they purchase so we
put restrictions land use
restrictions as we column in the
example that you gave with an
apartment complex to make sure
that the families that they're
renting to our at that low
income that they can afford the
the rent that is due to Jerry
there's some formula so I make
ten thousand dollars a year does
that mean my rent is a hundred
dollars or I make
sixty thousand dollars a year
the server formula for that Mr
chairman and senator Sherrod
there is generally speaking the
family as ink thirty percent of
their income toward goes towards
your housing payment whether
that be rent or mortgage so that
is generally the the formula
that we use so if somebody's
making say a ten thousand
dollars they would use no more
than three thousand dollars
during that year to as rent this
to be divided up monthly
Representative thing you want to
add in that area.
Mr chair Senator share so there
are national there are national
standards in terms of the rent a
lot a usually for the next
housing trust fund we base it on
the room size and we follow
those national standards put by
the federal government as you
mentioned it is aimed to do
about thirty percent of the
income so and when somebody
moves in into a rental property
we are partners their property
manager what the get their pay
stubs in compliance by them and
then put them in the correct
unit based on their income so we
we do that annually every year
to ensure that the person is
income qualified to live there
in a rental property so Mr
chair.
if I'm if I only apartment.
Which to keep we've seen on I'm
not gonna do any but it's only
going to pay three thousand
dollars I have to have at least
twenty thousand dollars from
whichever per.
Twelve thousand dollars from
whichever put this moving and so
I'm just not even going to take
your application because I know
you don't make that much money.
Mister chairman Senator share.
When a developer comes in to
access housing trust fund monies
I have an application and they
opt say this is the types of
income levels are going to serve
when it eventually goes to the
advisory committee and our board
to get approval we then long on
those monies and we put
restrictions land use
restrictions in our agreements
with that developer
ensures that they are going to
rent as a proposed we do monitor
on a regular basis to make sure
that they're complying with that
and we have the mechanisms in
place so that if they do not
comply hopefully doesn't get to
that but that eventually we
could for close.
I thank you so Mister chair I
think there's a couple issues we
talk about affordable housing
but then we do everything we can
to limit sand and gravel mining
in the state so we don't have
concrete we do everything we can
to limit copper mining so we
don't have the wiring for a
house we do everything we can to
shut down oil and gas would have
plastic pipes.
We will go or forced to then we
burn down so we don't have any
two by fours and then we're
angry because housing is
expensive.
It's transformational.
Why did in transformers since
two thousand five.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you senator sure is yes I
do have some questions so so
you're a state agency that is an
enterprise agency right.
You in twenty twenty two year
operating was thirty million.
Mr chairman not that is correct.
And what percentage of that
operational went to
Housing.
Mr chairman not the.
Your operational budget is
different than the total amount
of money that we make available
towards housing last year we
were able to assist over twenty
five thousand families with the
seven hundred and fifty seven
million dollars I believe so
those are programmatic funds are
operational funds are a little
bit different than that that
puts place obviously the the one
of the biggest expenses this for
salary and operations but we
have other things in there for
for contracts in for for verses
that we provide our and
contractors that we find a
funding to to be able to develop
these homes.
And so what I'm just looking
here here your total operating
revenue was thirty one million
year operating expenses were
nineteen million so that's
roughly a difference about
sixteen million.
So where is that sixteen million
being placed because I am not
seen an Mr Mr chairman I I can
provide you some details on that
I don't have it handy on me but
what we do in your at the
mortgage finance authority we
have a housing operating fund
and so on housing opportunity
fund I'm sorry in in that fund
you need a.
The excess revenues if you will
require a public entity may call
profits those monies in our case
going to the housing opportunity
fund under that housing
opportunity fund I'll give you
three examples of how we use
those funds one of them is for
down payment assistance last
year we provided are provided
nineteen million dollars in down
payment assistance we partner
with habitat for humanity across
the state and we find them
leverage or liquidity we
purchased the loans that they
make a zero percent interest so
that they have that money to be
able to do some more home so
that's another mechanism for
that and then we also provided
monies for training and
technical assistance to agencies
that may need across the state
those are just three examples
there's probably another a three
or four in there or put another
program is a Primera programs
which is a pre development fund
we lend monies to developers for
construction cost up front so
that is how are excess revenues
or profits if you will get used
from the difference between our
revenues in our expenses hope
that addresses your question
Senator.
You have five point three
billion in grocers.
The manager approximately five
point three billion growth I'm
sorry gross assets right.
Senator the.
The assets that we have is a
little over five billion dollars
that includes MFA is a self
supporting HSD and we issue
bonds mortgage revenue bonds to
fund the mortgages that we make
throughout the year this last
year we were probably at a five
hundred million or so in
mortgages that we made those
assets contain not only a state
developments that we have out
there but also contain those
bonds there are announcements
for the organization.
And so vehement managing that
and your revenues are thirty
million in your appropriating
nineteen million and then we're
giving individual money.
And and so you have nineteen
million of I'm sorry for the.
A Levin million.
Warning this is the LFC both
right Levin million
left over but you I don't
understand we explore the other
revenues coming that you're
telling me expansion.
Mr chairman we we're kind of
looking at apples and oranges we
have our operating budget of
what you mentioned then we have
assets that are totally
different that are managed
assets
so we're not looking at that
that you're not going to find a
the and Jessica your finance
minister system financials are
different than the operating
budget that we have.
Then I can definitely spend more
time with you Senator if you'd
like and I bring my our experts
the CFO or accountant a
controller to talk to those
numbers with you but that's how
we use our excess revenues if
you will is into the housing
opportunity fund and then let me
ask you earlier on you sent out
of the twenty five million that
you receive just from the
legislature not in your
operational or anything else
you've been able to match that
to get the seven hundred million
correct.
The Mr a you Mr chairman and
senator the
Want to make sure that we're
clear here it's not match
funding but leverage funds so
for every dollar that we use
that the state legislature has
appropriated about twenty seven
million dollars we've been able
to leverage it with twenty six
other dollars to for every
dollar that you put in we bring
in twenty six hundred dollars
for the B. federal funds low
income housing tax credits for
the B. loans from institutions
out there for gap financing on
some of these developments so it
really varies on how that
leverage comes in but it's
leverage versus match is not
like we get another twenty six
million dollars in there or.
That we get some additional
money in there too long now it's
money that comes into the
projects to make up the total
development cost and so just
give me your total revenue do
you do leveraging that to the
same twenty seven and one.
Mr chairman NMFA's total
revenue.
No we do not to leverage that to
the twenty six in one not it
depends on the various programs
that we have I can tell you that
we have a state the some federal
funds that we receive for from
hot for a homelessness the HSD
program in that program and we
lose money we are not able to at
best you break even where those
programs that we that they're
structured so it really varies
depending on the program that we
have Senator.
Commission and I just want
members to kind of know this
reduces our bonding capacity
right twenty five million
annually thank.
And so that's one thing because
we have the T. F. we have the we
have the.
What someone in southern loan is
so this is adding another
portion to that the center the
only thing how much is currently
do we have an do you know this
is in the severance tax bond
fund account.
Mr Chairman before I go on to
that I'd like to just mention a
little something about your
previous comment that although
this does take over a year mark
eight two and a half percent
that's of the bonding capacity
it's still goes to capital which
it does now anyway because it
still goes to building.
Building affordable housing and
or whether is Asian whatever
maybe it still uses the same
resources jobs people
construction materials and so on
so this is merely about just
ensuring that we can provide
sustainable funding for housing
needs in New Mexico and because
we already passed the bill last
year that allows for all this to
be done we need to have some
funding that the MFA can count
on to to make a dent hopefully
huge one here and so that that's
where it's at and bonding
capacity I don't have the
current bonding capacity that we
have overall Mr chairman is and
I have done or is it will the
one we're dealing with today is
the numbers I have in that
Six hundred eighty one million
dollars is the net bonding
capacity that we have in the
state as in us severance tax
bonds that's after the Cologne
yes and the tiff has already and
the water projects project fund
has already been taken out so
this is a nap that means that we
have approximately eight hundred
and just roughly eight hundred
and fifteen million dollars and
bonding capacity by the water
project fund take seventy six
million the Cologne ask each
take four and a half percent the
tiff tribal infrastructure fund
takes another four and a half
percent so about thirty eight
million for each and we still
have six hundred eighty one
million dollars in capacity I
and so.
You know that there's plenty of
funding in there that we can
ensure can go into housing and
still be capital outlay that's
all we're saying thank you
Senator my question was the
severance tax bond fund okay I
don't have that phone number I
don't know Dawn is here I know
she had she had that but I guess
she's not here but we can get
that for you senator helping
another member that's my
question and then the in a three
year period.
You would have roughly almost
one point eight million if
indeed the twenty six to match.
Are you do you have the
capabilities to get that amount
of housing it and money into the
market.
In two years we give me twenty
five minutes you said twenty
five make seven hundred right.
So you have.
In this at some point there's
going to be a tipping of of
where construction is and and is
there enough is there too much
and and the housing market
that's that's moved some.
Thank you Mr chairman of very
good question you probably saw
in the further and we can give
you definitely some other
numbers that Rebecca could pull
up here on four we estimate the
need I I mentioned and rough
numbers that it would take
billions to meet the housing
need out there one of the things
with this here to make sure that
there's a not a misunderstanding
I'll give you an example we have
say a twenty million dollar
development that's going to
develop state two hundred
apartment unit complex
that that would cost twenty
million dollars a housing trust
fund would make a loan of a
million dollars in your account
financing to make sure the deal
comes together there's nineteen
million from other sources this
not money that comes to MFA but
there's this developer was able
to track tax credits and funding
from lending institutions for
that other nineteen million
dollars so in short we see there
being tremendous need and that
this money would be able to be
used out there
I will tell you that should this
get approved the R. concept has
been because it's been an up and
down with the funding we've used
all these funds for revolving
loan fund so there's loans that
go out
that the principal and interest
if this was approved it'll give
us the ability to make some
requests out of this I'll give
you an example we have some data
that shows that the statewide
and in light of the rural
communities there's an elderly
folks that have not been able to
maintain their house so this
could go to rehab some of their
homes to do accessibility
improvements on their homes we
don't plan on the likely making
a long to those seniors it would
be likely a grant for the senior
so that twenty six to one ratio
is going to decrease some from
we make some of those grants
versus making it all loans so I
want to put that out there in in
the case of if we for some
reason we're not able to expend
all those funds this.
Legislation here has a safety
net in there that after three
years of is not encumbered it
would come back so that it's
we're not sitting on a pile of
money and not using it does not
something that we would want we
want the money to be put to use
we believe it will be with us we
know it will be but the if
there's not enough capacity out
there or not need the money
would come back to the state.
Some of the let me ask you this
once you take this money and do
the twenty six to one match and
leverages to get the seven
hundred million and then switch
your operational in order to do
grants and keep your match money
at a higher rate instead of
instead of making this a grant
money and so that that's a key
thing I mean we're trying to get
the most bang for our Buck in
your town that's okay we can get
twenty five million to one that
now you're telling us okay we
may just make this as a grant
program well here's my here's my
big issue is.
If you turn this into a grant
program then we're paying.
Bonding interest anna grant.
That should be given out that
way I don't mind paying interest
on infrastructure development I
I get that at the end of the
game that's becomes my big
question is why would we want to
bondage rant the same with
police cars right I hate when
city cops come to us and say
okay have STBs for police cars
that's a consumable product
in the life of the police cars
maybe three to five years but
our bond is for twenty five
years and so on I want to ensure
that we get the biggest bang for
our Buck in that we're not
bonding grant money.
and I want some.
Certification that that we're
not funding grant money for
twenty five years and and stood
we're using it for the twenty
twenty six to one match that's
my biggest concern that if we're
going to do this you cannot do
this in Mr chairman not that
that's a very valid in a if I
mentioned earlier.
The NMFA's intent would not be
to grant granted the full twenty
five million there could be some
instances a limited instances
like an example that I gave you
for some of the money would go
out to requests but the
legislation when these present
trust fund was put together back
in two thousand five there is a
requirement that we leverage at
least a five to one to the funds
so we need to make sure that we
are meeting that and this point
we're way exceeding that as you
know and that would be our
intent is to out perform and do
that if the intent is that we
don't do any grant funds out of
this and help those folks that
are elderly
you know that that's something
on that we can definitely
discuss that with our board as
they make their on their
policies and approve policies
for the for the use of these
funds and so you I mean ejected
you know I'm getting and that it
doesn't make common sense to use
grant money and and bonded STBs
for twenty five years the other
issue I I have is you know I I
wish I would just.
It had a little more time to
look at this input a sense and
on and so came three years let's
see where we're at and then
either we authorize or not re
authorizing there we may discuss
that a little bit on the floor
before we go to the floor but
that's something because then
you're gonna get to get seven
hundred million
over the three years that's
almost
one point four almost two
million dollars in a three year
program if you fully funded I
don't think you're gonna find
the contractors or order
construction workers or anything
costs are so high the number's
gonna go down limited
availability is we're gonna
build a fund that just goes
crazy.
In just a second is going to go
crazy and and.
I understand we need to do but I
don't want to get into the you
know look at the early childhood
Trust Fund you know tuning two
billion dollars right now and
we're getting that situation
without some clawback provisions
are some flexibility to say.
And it and it only comes if it's
a twenty five to twenty six to
one match of the seven hundred
million.
that's my little bit of a worry
about it you know thank you Mr
chairman if I make it does
quickly
Say something about that that's
why we already have in here all
I colonias unlike to F. on like
any other legislation we took
the initiative to say we want to
make sure this money goes to
housing building housing and so
we put a a three year provision
in there that if in three years
this money's not encumbered
it'll revert back to the
severance tax bond fund to
continue to generate interest so
that that provisions already
that in there to to protect that
so that doesn't build up any
doesn't go for the purpose
intended well I mean he's got a
he's got to sell the bonds and
the bonds have to be given out
to whatever whatever the project
is that money's going to go out
and then the developer has come
up with his portion of the match
and and then you funded the
whole the note on it and you
earn your income but as you your
name coming in earning on the
income side growing on the bond
side so you should have a
reduction as you grow with the
amount of development that
correct isn't.
Mr Chairman so it this bill has
a two provisions in there one of
them is that what the senator
just mention that after three
years it reverts if it's not
encumbered it also has another
provision in there that says
that we have to use the program
income or the principal and
interest we have to prioritize
its use before we use the new
money so those to safeguard
really come into play in making
sure that the funded doesn't
grow over then in sit there that
effective reverted back so if we
did have sufficient program
income over a period of time
that builds up then that would
mean that we're not income
during at the new monies if you
will from the bond issue so
those would revert back.
As well right now you're gaining
nine operational side as you
grow your agency right revenues
are going to grow because you
have more bonding capacity have
more sales for a homeless so
that should be revenue side
could here because I HSD and so
you're growing on one side and
at some point.
Yes Mr you're going on both
sides and and that's that's a
question Mr chairman it will
obviously be able to do a lot
more with this recurring funds
that we however we do work count
differently so the housing trust
fund has its own set of books
and that program income revolve
within that it does not go to
the operational side of MFA it
does pay for the expenses of
state if I Rebecca is working on
that fund it'll pay for part
time there but it does not to
bleed over into the other income
we're going to our housing
opportunity fund is a self
contained in the housing trust
fund.
Thank you Simon you have a
question.
Mr chair I was just gonna
comment on the three year thing
because your your concern the
funds can accumulate so that
they address it so we are ready
for a motion.
Interpret.
But we do have senator Senator
Woods had one more question and
more
a phone further reading and and
further review.
So this is will not qualify for
tax free bonds.
It's a writer's program no no
doubt it goes to good people
good things everything else.
But it doesn't comply with the
tax free bond regulations so Mr
chair thank you that's all I
have to say thank you Mr.
When
I may respond as quickly just
wait a second time on thank
Senator just fast I'll be really
quick in that in that bond
counsel has already reviewed it
for that over several meeting
Senator and also MFA is they
want to briefly mention
something that you can't have
you have the capacity to make
sure it doesn't happen go ahead
tell Mister chairman Senator
Woods we will ensure that we are
complying with the requirements
of the funds and state board of
finance as a second layer that
will ensure that we're also
complying with that so we have
no intent we're willing first on
what the capital outlay
requirements are Senator and we
will make sure that we are
complying with that so that we
don't put any investors in
jeopardy thank you that's how we
have first time where you have a
question I'm ready for motions
to.
Let me ask this question can you
find a month.
Funding.
And then you're gonna go back
out and one thing is.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure if I
understand your question but the
bonds would be issued by the
state board of finance after we
tell them that we have the need
for a certify that we have the
need for the state to twenty
five million dollars.
Ring severance tax bonds right
and then we're taking that money
and then we're actually another
bond and.
That is not our intent that is
Mr chairman is this T. once that
we received the funds from state
board of finance we will use it
for the appropriate activities
we will not re Bandini of those
monies and they don't affect our
other side of the business for
we do first time homebuyers and
we do the mortgage revenue bonds
that's a standalone program for
we get different bonding
capacity from the from state
board of finance for that so
that would be totally separate
and apart.
We have a motion at the second.
I'm sorry I forgot the past Mr
thank you do you have that have
the Senator Steinborn made a
motion for the past second by
Senator Padilla in the past week
hello.
Senator Burt.
Yes.
Thank you for yes.
Okay so how for yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond is
excused.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill is
excuse Senator Padilla yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share no Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
Senator many of whom have seven
yes to know and to explain it.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you very much I want to assure
our senators that if there's
anything I can clarify for you
thank you but.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have seen
you know our ours are for some
of our tourist areas of towns
windows so here in Santa Fe
formal housing is is all but
nonexistent which puts a lot of
people in the service industry
on the road they have to
community and and especially
with the weather that we've had
in the last few days pursuing a
dangerous situation there's no
reason they should be not to at
least four into the possibility
of I house near where they work
it also increases the employment
within those
the service areas and we will
see more more that we we can't
hire enough people to keep
restaurants open as it is.
The service areas and are
needing affordable housing also
the military I think it was
mentioned that I know especially
someone Clovis and Albuquerque
but especially Alamogordo the B.
A. H. which is the base
allowance for housing is always
behind the curve and so.
Our young serviceman who may
have a small family if they can
get on base and base housing is
limited they have to go out to
the community and they end up
living in what I would say are
sub standard for or not maybe
the best houses in the world
this provides yet another
opportunity for our service
people to have quality
affordable housing and so again
that's wind warning for this it
is a good program it has its
issues I understand that but
there's no perfect program at
all this is simply so that we
have some reoccurring phone so
that we know what we're going to
deal with on a year to year
basis of have to come speak to
spoon feed this on an annual
basis thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you.
I think have a passed out the
minutes.
Senator.
John you want to explain the
amendment to us so.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir in
order to make sure that.
You're you're you're gonna have
to stand up here by speaker so.
Thank.
The minutes.
Richard he for you need to copy
them and.
Thank you.
So.
This.
Thank you Mr chairman members
and I am very good at playing
amendment I'm very good thank
you.
Mr chair the amendment
I believe the addresses Senator
Steinborn concern about of the
excess.
Where is the person so.
Basically it shortens the
sentence and.
Streamlines the.
So the
Aiming Committee.
Well let's let's adopt the
amendment for discussion
purposes we're more Center
friends bill which is for oil
Senate bill thirty four as
amended.
The
motion to adopt them and then in
the second by Senator Rodriguez
we're on the amendment for
discussion purposes.
And everybody is looking to see
how tracks.
Mr.
We just want to fire somebody to
read it as I think it is so that
we can hear effect.
John none do that this is for
sure so with the amendment the
the language would read as
follows making a shooting threat
consists of maliciously
communicating to another person
the threat to use a firearm with
the intent to one place a person
or group of persons in the fear
of great bodily harm.
To prevent or interrupt the
occupation or use of a public
building or three because a
response to the threat by an
official or volunteer agency
The amendment as Mr chair is is
I read striking through.
At least on on.
Thanks to be here I think with
drop through to March.
That's why I wanted to read out
loud because I just.
Or.
I'm done with.
Senator Steinborn.
Mr chair I mean it definitely
deals with the issue I had with
that first part of it now it's
basically a threat under this
new one which is at the it would
be illegal to make a threat to
shoot somebody sent to do more
and that it has a few other
things and I'm just wondering is
that not already across the.
The threat to shoot threat they
should somebody.
We can alter it is something
else we simplified it we needed
to but did we not.
Is that not Ortiz crime
threatening to shoot somebody
this is now making a conflict
with another part of statute.
On the amendment to the criminal
defense questions.
Read more yes Mr chair Senator
Steinborn
It's a.
There is a crime.
That would be an insult if to
threaten to shoot someone would
be
The for the crime of assault
however the so it's very likely
that that this already is a
crime the argument against this
already being a crime would be
the.
The attenuation between the.
Representative and the harms
threatened so also is when you.
But somebody in the
All over the fiscal somebody
believes that there imminently
in danger.
If you call up and say you're
going to do this in the future
the eminences more tenuous.
but it is likely that this would
be.
I
least for the.
At least for section a
One right.
You will think question Mr chair
and if I can ask for experts
here what is the penalty for
doing that that you decided us
all through whatever I would
have to look at it okay is it is
a greater than a misdemeanor.
I believe it is but I would need
to look at a so with that Mr
chair if that were true then
then be one we would potentially
be reducing the penalty well we
have a conflict
and in law so.
No that's not the Sanchez
intent.
So you know I don't know what
the solution here is maybe we
did cross out too many words on
December and then just ask some
questions and then we may have
to.
And you back somewhere to.
Every time we try to fix
something.
Any other questions on the
amendment for the service so so
what about the you know the
Snapchat or the Facebook threats
is that clearly covered here
because Mr Chairman I think
that's the reason for making
communicating is updating.
The language from.
The current language that we
haven't involved scare factor
had someone suggest that we
actually need to change bomb
scare into communicating instead
of stating
communication includes more than
just a no.
Stating something so that that
term pools in.
Those other areas.
They believe that's the the the
right term to to bring that in.
The communicating to another
person.
Where thank
we've Sir brown that's sort
through this.
Are not known well if we are
known for Judiciary skills right
now because they sent this over
without the fixes.
And why don't you go to council
and and when we bring someone
from council down when you do
this so that they can explain
the statute with you.
And and we can make sure we get
it right I'm I'm trying to save
you from a fight on the floor
that we get it is correct as we
can his those attorneys one
walked in the room.
We'll probably look at this bomb
threat be able to say okay well
this is wrong this is wrong this
is wrong.
And so are you in agreement with
that.
Mr this need more expertise in
the room yeah I think that
you're probably correct as far
as needing more expertise
it's the the bill
I think Sir sure maybe right we
struck to much.
When it was separately printed
it it looked right but it
doesn't read correctly now the
me the intention is if you
threaten to shoot up the
building yes if I make a direct
threaten threaten to come and
shoot you to your face and you
believe I'm real about it that's
already crime that's correct Sir
Steinborn
that that is already insult.
It's a felony for me to do that
this is a misdemeanor this is
intended to be like a bomb
threat for building I'm not a.
Direct threat against you.
And now let me ask you this and
I when you go up there may be.
We just put educational
buildings in trying to do the
school stuff and and see how we
can expects that correctly but
when you do that with the the
amendments under if we can do a
rack of of the bill and council
with the amendment in it so we
can read it correctly and then
the amendment separately so then
we can read it on taxes.
Is this thank you check I just
suggest you you might just
scratch with you have to just
start over which is stating
exactly what you want to do
because I think we say we
scratch too much but then when
you look at one on here that's
also created the conflict
because that's a situation where
you're making a direct threat to
somebody and not come of the
circumstances are after C. maybe
just look at it with fresh eyes
and just simple I just Rep which
won the tried to do with the PS
that suggested in the FIR and
this year it in like that so
it's we were trying to balance
between what Senate judiciary
To try to keep from having that
fight on the floor it is
It's more complicated than it
should be some.
I was ready to to go to work on
that Mr Chairman but I also have
a bill up in Judiciary
that well this one is very
important that one is a life and
death bill as well that I need
to are not come back on Monday
so you can thank you for morning
and then go to work thank you.
Thank you very you had.
The morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
Line item number again have you
been here before I have not this
is my first time for many Sherri
Committee.
I I I I feel on Senator Brandt's
paying about that thing
Judiciary Committee.
Who had center we're near Senate
bill one forty four.
Yes thank you Mr chair.
What this bill does is that we
have an existing provision in
our election code that addresses
intimidation of folks who are on
voter board election boards of
voters.
Let's see who is our challengers
watchers and existing provision
says that if someone
is seeking to induce fear in any
of those folks for the purpose
of impeding or preventing free
exercise of the elective
franchise for the impartial
administration of the lecture
lection code then that is a
fourth degree felony what this
bill does is simply extend the
success is existing language to
ensure that all election
officials are covered including
our secretary of state and
her employees and agents heard
county clerks are municipal
clerks and their employees and
agents.
Since twenty twenty threats
against election officials of
both parties at all levels has
increased tenfold are on
secretary of state who was
targeted by on the state of Iran
and how to spend time in hiding
at the end of twenty twenty as a
result of this those threats and
secretaries of state election
officials of both parties are
receiving full time law
enforcement protection around
this around the country
and as a result state local
election officials are leaving
this profession because of the
threats and the stress of this
is coughing predictive and their
families now on the federal
level the DOJ and the FBI have
created a joint task force to
investigate and take action on
these threats that's not enough
we need to address this at the
state level as well we have a
lot of.
Amazing volunteers who are who
that that's what makes our
elections wrong for the people
who are willing to go be poll
workers on and we want to make
sure that everyone from those
local volunteer poll workers to
our secretary of state are
appropriately protected in the
same way that our state has
already already chosen to
protect voters watchers
challengers and election point
with that Mr chair also and I
should mention secretary state
would have been my expert but
she's busy doing all the
secretary of state right now and
so could not be with us but
otherwise I don't know if
there's I don't think there's
anyone here to speak on it but
all of our state for questions
even having serving on as an
expert witness will go to zoom
is there anybody in support or
anybody in opposition I have a
list zoom up races know anybody
in the room and support no new
money in opposition questions
from committee members Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair at the center
thank you so much for bringing
this bill forward it's so
important what is one question
on a page well one money twenty
what agent defined is not
defined in here but I'm sure
that's a commonly used term in
this case what that means
Mr chair Senator Steinborn yeah
it's it's a common legal term
and the reason and it means
basically someone who is doing
something at someone else's
direction so and the reason we
want that agent language in
there is because there are a
whole lot of folks that kind of
works especially contract with
when they're putting all actions
on the folks who come on this
call as temporary contract
workers so they're not actual
employees of the county clerk
but they are agents and and we
wanna make sure that they are
protected as well
Mr chair Senator with this
include like a volunteer even
those working on Mr chair
Senator yes that what exactly
those those volunteer poll
workers will be covered under
that agency language right thank
you the bill thank you Mr
sure.
thank you Mr so I first question
did you say that Iran threatened
the secretary of state Mr chair
Senator chair yes there was a
price put on her head and she.
and her address was sent out to
folks and she had to go into
hiding.
Are we going to address the I
told with.
Mr chair Senator that is a good
question no clearly not and and
and we will have to see how how
much this ends of the.
Obviously with a threat like
that a bill we're not going to
be going after dental and for
the fourth degree felony
where this will more far more
likely come into play is is and
local situations
where let's say someone who saw
the the docks and that was done.
Yes around I'm here in New
Mexico and decided to take
action on that.
this is a felony right.
Sure Mr chair Senator yes it's
it's a felony already on and so
this would just this expands the
pool of people that the existing
felony would apply to okay so
just a point of interest if
somebody says that they want to
blow up this building it's a
crime if they say they want to
shoot up this building it's not
a crime but for me to insult a
poll worker is a felony.
Interesting.
Mr chair Senator no you would
order simply insulting that.
Over for would not be a felony
it's only if something was on
what's important about this is
the man's rant on it up at that
the intention.
Of the person who is doing the
intimidation and it has to be
for the purpose of impeding or
preventing the free exercise the
free exercise of elective
franchise for impartial
administration of the election
or election County.
Mr.
Senator Woods and then Senator
Burt for the first time.
Senator if you know a pretty for
all your.
Thank you.
Watch many on TV.
So.
The in in the analysis that I
get.
It refers to vagueness.
So right now there's we have a
loan of books that this done
protect everybody here want to
protect so you want to include
support how many causes of
action have been initiated
against people for the what we
have on the books right now.
Mr chair Senator Woods I don't I
don't know the answer to that my
guess is probably not money I
would I I certainly haven't
heard of any recently
but we also have an
unprecedented recent up tick in
on threats are grants against
election officials specific
against if the folks that we're
adding into this bill
specifically.
So.
Want to add to it so but we
never have enforced it.
We want to add to it and I see
your point when when you talk
about the secretary of state and
direct you know.
But that's gonna like Senator
Brandt's Bill just a few minutes
ago.
Where we argued over ifs and
ends and things like that as to
what we could make hold up in
court.
So you know the the internet in
the social media is full of
threatening people.
I understand what you're trying
to do that.
I don't think that we're
confirmation of purposes.
Apologize for that thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
bring in bill I do I to
understand your attention what
you're trying to do
When I look at these legislation
look at.
If we practically apply this so
I've got
a pulled count on in reserve or
over the back the other services
I want to challenge that.
And the counter says no I don't
I don't think it's accountable
offense this goes back in back
in the in the volume rises and
all that stuff
maybe even gets the point that
don't be stupid then you start
calling each other names what
where's the line I mean how does
this practically apply.
In in in how do you make a
reading of that in practical
application.
Mr chair Senator Burt
So any time that that if someone
were to be charged under the
statute on there is a judge
who's going to be using their
discretion there's a prosecutors
give years ministration bringing
the charge in the first place
there's a judge who would be
using their discretion in
evaluating that charge if it is
brought and generally what our
courts tend to do is is use a
reasonable person standard so.
Insulting someone having an
argument with them even having a
very spirited argument with them
I I would not expect most judges
to see that as.
Inducing or attempting to induce
fear for the purpose of impeding
or preventing access not elected
French hi my but as with.
Every criminal statute we have
there's usually are a real
person sitting there looking at
the facts and and making a
judgment call about whether this
rises to behavior that issue
rises to the level
whatever it is that's but that's
prohibited and so the same thing
would happen here and in Mr
chairman and senator I I.
I can I think that some way
practically applies
but in my experience when a bill
goes before judiciary judiciary
looks at it as to defend against
it or can I prosecuted.
And so those lines have to be
very distinct and and drawn in
I'm not.
I'm not on the internet by any
stretch of the imagination but
this doesn't seem like those
lines are there's also objective
it's what an interpretation may
be the interpretation make come
in prior to voices being raised
or or after maybe didn't see
what prompted the the
conversation also and the noise
level wrote rose to the point
where it's now attracting the
people within the the confines
of whatever building here and at
that point
I'm not comfortable with the the
definitions and the clarity in
this number one item number two
back to comments isn't to share
maybe we're looking at and
making a threat with the gun
misdemeanor and we're looking at
someone yelling at somebody else
subjected to a judge's decision
and that's a felony if there's
no equity no parity this this
makes no sense to me whatsoever
enough parents to you I
understand what you're trying to
but but if you take a step back
and look at what we're trying to
go with a lot of the stuff there
is there's no one reason in the
average person I think most
people in the judiciary look at
that angle I don't how's this
work again on internet but but I
I just have.
Real concerns about how this the
more interpretation you do at
the judiciary level the more
problems we get into and and I
just don't think we want to go
there
in my opinion I think this needs
a lot more clarity and and
dividing lines so that it's easy
for attorney as well as a judge
to where's the that line as
opposed interpretation or or
subjective decision making so
that's all I have Mister thank
you.
First time one for second time.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
just to clarify it's really
interesting on the threat of gun
violence so our experts me that
threatening to do someone harm
actually is a felony so yes and
this is only so there is parity
on that level of what senator
Graham was trying to do with
would have been parity but for
that's why fix it but just to
clarify madam Mr chair Senator
this is already lost right now
correct for for election boards.
And and the only thing we're
doing is we're expanding the
round of who's involved in
actually putting on Alexion's to
include secretaries of state and
their staff and counties is that
correct Mr sent Mr chair Senator
Steinborn yes right and we do
know secretary St had to have
protection this is a fact this
is not theoretical we know on my
County same situation bomb
threats or whatever I will tell
you because I want to share
something with its pre fasting I
learned two days ago it goes
beyond election officials there
is a group that actually put out
a fake report of fraud true
story.
That is my sister of being a
dominion.
A representative of dominion and
actually put her picture up in a
report that's being circulated
may even be used I'm
contemplating G. one why do they
have now brought my sister and
it's ridiculous she's in
California.
Thankfully she laughed about it
I'm not laughing about it
because this is the reality of
our elections today is
intimidation is part of our new
reality a new normal that
somehow accepted or what was a
the call yesterday part of our
democratic process will is not.
In democracy is not acceptable
it should be a felony and I just
want to finally add that.
In this bill.
On page two.
It talks about.
The qualifying thing that we
require prosecution for the
purpose of impeding or
preventing a free exercise of
the election is that right Mr
Senator Mr chair Senator test
there's a specific Maez ram
requirements that is already
existed in here so unless
whatever's happening is
happening for that purpose this
would not apply okay so I think
this is wholly appropriate and
This is about defense of our
democracy and standing up for
public workers who are doing
that very important work of
thank you Mr.
Senator let me ask you some
questions.
And just because have your
questions on tribal lands.
Mr chair
probably the same way and it
whatever intergovernmental
agreements we have and we have
this checkerboard
jurisdiction throughout New
Mexico with travel issues
so I don't know the specific
answer to but it would not be
enforced on tribal land any
differently than any it how the
rest of our laws are are handled
with with tribal land.
That that's when my questions
because we have read the county
city are not counting the county
elections a lot of my house and
chapter houses on tribal land
right and so then if the person
is a native they may not be able
to be charged because we don't
have jurisdiction authorization
to charge on those that's
something I want to answer for
the for.
And then how many times is been
used.
Mr chair I don't know the answer
to that and and that that is not
state has not been used it's
just that I don't have that
information here today and and
I'm gonna tell you **** as
members of the legislature we
get those all the time.
I mean how many times everybody
in this room is probably got a
threat for someone to.
Madam up should some issue right
but we don't go running as
elected officials to the law on
state over Texas protect us
right I mean we should amend
this to include legislators and
public officials the judicial
branch has one that is coming
over for the rest of the judges
but just as legislators.
And it's happened to me my whole
family's not hit list we don't
have any protections so I urge
you to look for the body to to
do that or we may have to and
then the judicial plans
somewhere when it comes over but
that's another thing and I just
wanna know how often it's been
used because.
The defense now of the
I work for the for the secretary
of state in some way shape or
form County clerk if you tell me
anything I'm gonna charged with
a felony.
And you know some poll workers
going to get.
The morning I can try to use
this to intimidate the other
side and that's where the
temperatures are going to
flatter.
Is and so
that's my only caution is as we
move forward is is understand
the situation and politics have
gone too far the left in too far
to the right.
In elections used to be social
events.
And and they're not the social
events anymore because because
everybody is so partisan in in
the world and so I'm afraid
election workers are going to
use it against the public in the
public's going to use it against
election workers and they're
going to be a whole bunch of
cases that people say we even
talk to me you know from that
motor that omission charged with
a felony and then they got to go
defend themselves I think it's
gonna be a little more
substantiated.
for me.
What's your the committee.
Mr.
A motion for a new pass in the
second by Senator Rodriguez.
That we call the roll.
Yes.
Revert.
Thank you for no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond is excuse Senator
Gonzales to sixties Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes sister excuse.
Senator sure no Senator sure no.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods now Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
senator Munoz yes I yes.
Three no and three excuse.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
thank you members of the
committee thank you senator
let's.
Yes the last we have a business
and Senegal just try to do it
from here we have any bearing on
those you.
Anybody in the audience and.
Not scanned then are you for or
against.
Bills are.
So this is a sunset on the state
racing commission and all it
does is extend the sunset any
questions from committee
members.
a motion that.
Our mobile data services.
Then Senator Campos for Depeche
motion second by Senator
Rodriguez that we call the roll.
Your Senator Burt.
Thank you for yes Senator Campos
yes Campos yes Senator.
Diamond is excuse to consult
with you Senator Hemphill.
Sorry I think very what will you
do one twenty three.
Funds that for the right here.
And we're voting yes yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Padilla six
Q. Senator share yes that's for
sure yes Senator Steinborn us
Senator think of a yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes.
I'm going to be voting yes Sir
that somebody gets to.
You have eight yes Senator and
three excuse.
Chairman.
Monday morning.
Monday morning.
This issue for nine thirty.
I have a bill is for.
We will be able.
Well that might come.
This lot of the.
On I.
