madam secretary do a similar.
Just.
The card is not here either is.
Madam.
I guess we can start with the
school for the for the blind and
visually impaired three.
Hi Mr chair wedding COVID now.
I.
The.
Mr chair we don't have the.
Well.
I'm trying to save some time.
Many had long legs like Connerly
taken two seconds to.
Thank you.
The.
With
can go and start giving as a
comments afterwards we can play
catch up.
And then could you tell us.
If the house to the which
wrecked they took yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee it's good to see you
all today my name is our homes
and the fiscal analyst with the
LFC and I'm here with
superintendent feature of the
New Mexico school for the blind
and visually impaired I just
want to check are you hearing me
okay.
Thank you Mr chair and this is
the not that we're working with
that says special schools at the
top.
This year the LFC general fund
recommendation for New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired and for all
the special schools provides a
five percent increase from the
prior year within the base we
also agree with the executive
recommendation both of our
recommendations include
appropriation for instructional
materials as requested by age
AGD the executive recommendation
has a slightly lower increase
for the general fund based at
three percent
both recommendations also
include a general fund
appropriation for instructional
materials at one hundred one
point four thousand and included
three hundred sixty one point
nine thousand for early
childhood centers and one
hundred eleven point one
thousand provision clinic
programs those are slight
increases from FY two three on
the early childhood centers and
vision clinic programs
additionally you'll see that the
other state funds have
significant discrepancies
between the exact and between of
cease recommendation for school
for the blind and visually
impaired this also come up for
school for the deaf you can look
and volume three at page one
thirteen to see why the rex
deferred but
essentially there was a
different understanding about
HUD's initial requests for other
state funds and and the House
appropriations and finance
committee hearing DFA explained
to the committee that our
numbers for the correct numbers
for other state funds across the
three schools
thank you so much and I will let
superintendent Beecher speak.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee first I want to
say that an MSP VIP is very
grateful for the state's support
our families and our students
are also grateful.
And I want to remind everybody
that we are more than just we we
do have to school building two
sites one in Albuquerque and one
in Alamogordo but we are is
statewide agency that provides
services throughout the state
for students who are blind and
visually impaired from birth
through twenty one.
And as such last year we served
over sixteen hundred students
and provided over twenty six
hundred specialized materials
for students throughout the
state.
We provide experiences for our
students that are unique to
other school districts and we
including things like sports
would what would shop as well as
all of the core academics and
the expanded core curriculum
that specific to students who
are blind or visually impaired.
While we're under H. E. D. we do
follow recommendations for PED
for salary increases as well as
for things like health insurance
which are costs that we are not
that we do not receive
probation for so we have
reviewed all three budget
recommendations and would
request respectfully the LFC
recommendation.
Questions.
Looking for.
Thank thank you for to do for
those children they still fly
them on the state plan for
member of the whole for the
weekend Mr chair yes our our
students that live the furthest
away from Herrell Alamogordo do
you are flown.
Thank you.
There's no question.
Thank you very much thank you.
Going to the school for the
deaf.
Mr chair members of the
committee
thank you again for having now
we have doctor bill that are
superintendent or board of the
New Mexico school for the deaf
Likewise with school for the
blind the LFC recommendation
provides a five percent increase
from the prior year within the
base the general fund whereas
the executive recommendation
provides a three percent
increase from the base in
general fund both of the
recommendations in terms of
general fund agree on an
appropriation for instructional
materials in both include an
additional two hundred fifteen
thousand for outreach services
and Mr chair that HFC Committee
took the LFC recommendation for
the school as well
and I will turn it over to
doctor the ball to share with
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
First it's an honor to be here
with you today.
As with the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
impaired we are very grateful
for your continuous support from
the house as well as the Senate.
Just a few comments I love to
share about our services we have
three main services at the New
Mexico school for the deaf we
have early intervention services
but we serve babies all over the
state of New Mexico we also have
our instructional services and
we do early childhood all the
way up to twelfth grade in
different locations for
locations all across the state.
R. K. to twelfth programming is
here focus in Santa Fe we're we
also feature of residential
program for students who live
very far.
Students who checked choose to
stay within their home district
we do provide service support
services within their their
respective school districts and
that's on an ongoing basis we do
both direct and indirect
Services.
I do want to make a comment in
regards to the budget.
As you know seventy five percent
of the funds the state that
typically are funds come from
the land permanent funds and
from those appropriations the
projection for next year looks
pretty healthy.
However I do want to say in the
last couple of years what is
project projected and what we
actually receive haven't aligned
last year we were projected to
receive fifteen point eight
million and we budgeted for
fifteen point five but what we
actually received
And if this trend continues will
receive fifteen point one so
that's less than was originally
projected and this seems to be a
trend in all of the projects and
we've seen.
All of the bills that are
currently being proposed.
There are many that are strong
and positive but they also have
fiscal impacts on our screen and
and the misty is not part of any
of those appropriations.
So with that in mind we
respectfully ask and for the LFC
is recommendation for general
put appropriations which is
twenty five percent of our.
Request so thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon doctor who built and
of course there are the staff
interpreters
I just want to say thank you I
do know first hand the services
that you provide the New Mexico
school for the deaf and
throughout the state in the
satellite programs and you know
many times we forget that these
are children that live in the
silent world that is structured
for the hearing.
If you just think that for a
moment.
From the time they are diagnosed
as being deaf.
They are displaced from a world
that is structured for the
hearing with the communication
and it and so as we continue to
fund and look at ways to keep
the schools adequately funded to
provide these children the such
great special needs to provide
him with the adequate funding
that they need we need to keep
in mind the specialty of
services and the type of
teaching that they need it is
not only getting a teacher which
are wonderful by the way of
special education these are
teachers that are specialized in
deaf education completely
different and I wanted to say
thank you for for continuing to
provide the the gold standard
for children that are deaf here
in the state of New Mexico
doctor heard about herself Mr
chair has I think it's five
children I corrected her death
for three.
Yes three that's it for me yes.
You don't want to more are you
okay.
No and your husband your husband
Steph also and so I just wanted
to to bring that up thank you
for serving that's all I have
Mister chairman thank you.
And and Sarah in the LFC Rick we
we talked about five million
right is that because the shore
fell from the land grant
permanent fund so we're trying
to back fill.
So that the base is is just
bumped up five percent
and so they're holding out right
around five million I believe
for their general fund
appropriation you'll see there's
a pretty big bump in what we are
projecting for their permanent
fund increase from this fifteen
point eight million which is
where the current estimate
stands for this year though
there's likely to be a shortfall
the projection for the coming
year is seventeen point two
million for school for the deaf
so that's where we're seeing a
pretty significant increase.
Okay.
Remind people when they want to
tap the the permanent fund
that's who they're really
hurting.
and how we have to offset those
Gallup polls costs when we do
this so
Thank you for your presentation
thank you for your time and
budget he corrected Center
residence on the number of
children you have total shock
but.
It's I because if it's not
children with her doctor about
her husband and their three
kids.
But they're adults.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you.
We'll do New Mexico military
institute.
Then Senator you know where
you're DFA.
Personals of the issues.
Okay Mister chair members of the
committee
we now have superintendent
Grizzard General grizzle as many
of us know him from New Mexico
military institute there's also
a DFA analyst Nicole miss yes to
if there were any other
questions for DFA about the
previous two recommendations on
special schools you could answer
and I'll just begin again by
saying as with the other two
schools we have a five percent
recommendation for an increase
in the base general fund for New
Mexico military institute
the executive and LFC
recommendations agree on three
hundred twenty seven point seven
thousand for athletics and one
point three five million for the
no scholarship on top of the
respective increases to the base
that recommendation for the
military institute also creates
an increase in general fund for
instructional materials by fifty
five thousand I will turn it
over to Nicole.
Mr chair members of the
committee may have nothing
further to add that and what
services you mentioned turn it
over to
Representative.
Mr chairman committee thank you
as the other schools of
indicated we're all very
grateful to be included in the
funding that we do receive from
the legislature and the state
you very much thank you for that
in this year you we provided you
with handouts previously in the
one the special initiatives that
we have identified the one thing
that I'd like to just actually
make a comment about is.
What I think has occurred this
year made it come to life more
readily for me is that there's
some wonderful legislation this
initiated
dealing with education in the
state and the students sometimes
the language doesn't include a
special schools and as it was
indicated earlier we're we're
not included then for funding
but yet we're expected to honor
the the legislation I just spoke
with Senator Padilla and just a
an example in his just before
about lunches for students the
language is great in the
descriptor of who's authorized
it says that it is school
districts and charter schools
United States Department
interior bureau India age Indian
education schools tribally
controlled group schools and
private schools but yet the
three of us are not included in
that will have high schools
school for the blind school for
the deaf have K. to twelfth I
have nine through twelve soon to
be six to twelve I guess focus
Senator Padilla it could be just
I don't think sometimes it we're
we're sort of and I don't think
there's any ill intent
whatsoever but I'm not sure just
the committee point different
pieces of legislation come
before you this you always
consider what we do and try to
include us in the litigation has
relations this year's budget
again we have looked at the
budgets are available and we'd
like to actually to approve the
LFC is recommendation endorsed.
Thank you question Senator.
thank you Mr chair general of my
question has to do with the nose
scholarships do you know what
kind of use there is an do we
all know that we have one.
Maybe the new people don't even
know.
So Mr chair Senator sure sure
I'd be glad to because this is a
very powerful program for us on
an annual basis we have about
two hundred students to
participate the one hundred and
twelve Senator Representative
each of you have the ability to
send us a student we try to work
with you individually when we
receive a packet that meets the
criteria if you don't have
someone in mind we try to work
with you just to that
recommendation we also have you
and you control those
nominations up until July one
and then at that point we would
have underground where we can
use them across boundaries so
that I can try to use all of the
scholarship and because of that
change were able to use all one
hundred and twelve every year
and we average of just a little
over two hundred the in the
program and the program cost of
the about the one point two
million that you help us with
we have also a build legislative
representative not regard
Representative from Rossell is
sponsoring that will allow that
the time period to go from forty
six years we don't there's no
money needed we just want the
ability to continue to try to
retain our students that have
been there for years in high
school if they have a desire to
stay we can continue the
renewable scholarship them
there's a secondary positive
about that with the new
opportunity scholarship this
actually relieves some of the
pressure burden on that if you
will because it takes up fifty
percent of the cost to attend
and it's applied before you
consider opportunity so the two
of them together now could make
it so that a student could state
in and then I the at no cost to
their education so a great
question thank you so very
powerful program we appreciate
all the support we have from the
legislature to keep it going.
Thank you Mr chairman my last
comment is I believe it's a
great school because well they
got ready you shortly and kept
me.
All.
I think we both went the there's
physical hazing.
any other questions Sierra thank
you Mr chairman just very quick
so in terms of the packets are
we gonna be receiving those soon
so we can review if you will the
applicants to to me.
Mr chair Senator Campos yes we
will be sending those to you
shortly and then again if you
don't have any in your packet or
someone you specifically.
And from your district our
financial aid folks will work
with you to assign the
scholarship to someone I really
appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman.
I'm sorry general explaining
that know scholarship has to be
someone at your district first
consider sure got the city an
applicant already and and then
if there's not one in your
district then we can either call
you someone calls us for you you
guys will use is that the way
you see fit sure that's correct
you until July one teach the
district Senator over House
controls the nomination
essentially so if you have one
someone you specifically want to
nominate you control that we
will send you a package of
qualified students from within
your district you from about
that approach from within and
you can choose one of those and
then finally issue that the the.
Hi Laurie highlight that July
one will start looking to fill
all of the one twelve we usually
try to stay in close proximity a
district that touches each other
but in the interest of using the
scholarships and helping the
students will because of the
number of applicants we have the
ability to fill all one hundred
twelve each year.
Any other questions from
committee members Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
I want to thank you general for
for your comments and for your
work at the of military
institute you do great work
certainly very committed thank
you I just wanted to
to tell you that I'm happy you
brought this up about Senate
bill four hand seen it so I we
didn't know but I did discuss in
general the necessity to include
the special schools any time
that there was early childhood
funding distributions going out
and that was early on before the
session started but now that
bills being proposed is good to
take a serious look at him
because I know I could tell you
that and please correct Mr
chairman center that it was an
inadvertent situation here I
don't believe that it was
intended as I conceive Senator
Padilla nodding so if we can get
a fix to that that would be
greatly appreciated.
Thank you Mr chairman sure
Senator yes what we discussed
with the senator it was he did
it he did one of those your
personal poses in he said you
have a high school and it it it
it hitting that we we should
have been included in the bill I
believe that's just what happens
is people sometimes just don't
think of us in when they're
developing the let the
legislation that we thank you
for that and also that the
special schools they have from
birth actually on going out.
That's that would it was
intended for that to to
distribute some for them for
child early childhood thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chairman and I appreciate the
general bring attention and all
we need to do is add a simple
line on special schools and will
capture the remainder that
weren't in the original pass
thank you and that bill is here
Mister chairman whenever you're
ready to that through and make
that change.
More work to do thank you
general did we get the bathroom
issue fixed it the if the if
that will be the funding in this
year's legislation it will
almost take care of everything
and as I've said before it it
benefits us to phase it because
I try to do when the cadets are
not there and even if I had a
hundred percent the funding I
just couldn't spend it
immediately trying to phase that
and then availability materials
and labor so thank you Senator
yes we're going to get
assistance in this year
legislation as secretary should
enter and so.
that's a good thing that we got
that resolved thank you thank
you Sir.
Madam secretary let's jump back
to you and.
Mr Connor.
Yes Mr chair.
Good afternoon Mister chair
numbers my names Conor Jordan
said on the LFC analyst for
higher education institutions.
We'll find it
This presentation.
In front of you in this will
have.
I should of bullets
high level and a detailed.
Thank you yes that that's the
correct presentation.
I also wanted to point out
before we get started there's a
few there's a few key tables
that
might interest you at they have
some data on enrollment by
institution over the last decade
that is in your volume three the
spiral bound one on page one
fifteen.
You have to mission in fees also
for the last decade on page one
ten
and then you have a break out of
the total tuition and fees on
page one eleven.
and then there is.
History
how New Mexico compares the
state and local funding on page
one sixteen so those are just a
few of the highlights in your
volume three I wanted to point
out.
I think it's probably easiest to
just jump right ahead in your
packet to page seven.
Page seven is the one page high
level different sheep between
the LFC and Executive
recommendations for all of
higher education.
So overall if you look at those
bottom three lines the LFC
recommendation was for one
billion eighty one million seven
hundred eighty one thousand
three hundred dollars that's a
fifty six point four million
dollar five point five percent
increase over FY twenty three
the executive recommended at one
point two billion or about
eighteen percent over the prior
year there's a few differences
in how the recommendations
actually came together that all
go over but also for the
committees.
Knowledge the house
appropriations and finance
committee met on Friday and they
took preliminary action to adopt
to the LFC recommendation so
that's the starting point on
your recurring budgets now I
believe there is a word
processed and no action has been
taken on nonrecurring items so
that's where they're at in the
house.
went back to the back to the
budget just.
If you look at the third line
down the percent of new money
that got allocated through the
funding formula the executive
recommended a two percent
increase that's fourteen point
three million dollars that will
go through that performance
based funding formula and end up
allocated to each institution
the LFC recommendation was for a
one percent formula increase
that's about seven point two
million dollars
the LFC recommendation also
included a series of non formula
adjustments that will go out to
all of the
at higher education institutions
in the state and you can see
those under the heading non
formula adjustments right right
there in the middle of the page
There are four of them the first
is the E. R. B. pension that was
seven point seven million
dollars last year you all passed
In an employee contribution
increase to the educational
retirement Act covered employees
so that was needed a one percent
increase in FY twenty three and
a one percent increase in FY
twenty four without additional
funding the institutions would
have to cover that increase with
their existing appropriations so
LFC included seven point seven
million dollars to cover the
cost of that pension increase
that's already been passed
There is also another seven
million dollars for targeted
faculty increases this is split
out and includes six million
dollars for all of the higher ed
institutions and one million
dollars at the health sciences
center
two and a half million dollars
for students support this is a
theme that came up a lot through
the interim is how do we as a
state provide those US services
to students to keep them engaged
keep them in the in the
classroom and ultimately getting
them to finish their degrees so
student support services can be
things like enhanced advisement
or mental health counseling I
know we have other programs such
as food pantries and also fall
under that the student support
umbrella so there's two and a
half million dollars to get
pushed out.
To institutions that way and
then there is one million
dollars for per student equity
many of you remember the LESC
meeting at Silver City western
New Mexico university presented
an analysis that showed that
compared to peer institutions
they were under funded on a per
FTE level in other words they
were getting fewer state dollars
per student that they actually
have been were peer institutions
so the one.
But one million dollars would be
split five hundred thousand each
for eastern and western and go
to try to equalize that base.
A little bit and then on our
PSP's that's the next.
the next chunk there it's called
other categorical vis our line
item appropriations they're not
made through the funding formula
they are all individual spending
lines you'll see them marked out
under each institution in our
house bill two but we sorted
lumped in together for ease of
use of this document.
Overall not a lot of difference
there is one point two billion
dollars of difference between
the LFC in the executive the
executive recommended that ten
point four percent increase the
LFC recommended a nine point
four percent increase both of
the recommendations included
significant new funding for
health care programs
particularly nursing so last
year the Legislature provided
fifteen million dollars in
funding for nursing nursing
program expansion across the
state that funding was made on a
nonrecurring basis however a lot
of the.
A lot of that funding wound up
getting spent on things like
faculty salaries that are
recovering costs
So back filling that became a
priority for both
recommendations to make sure
that the increased cohort sizes
those programs are experiencing
can continue.
So that is our PSBs eminent so
you the biggest difference in
these recommendations is in the
higher education education
department itself and you can
see there the lottery
scholarship the opportunity
scholarship I'm sorry
the executive recommendation
includes
a hundred thirty five point four
million more than the LFC
recommendation for the
opportunity scholarship and the
reason is the executive.
Recommendation fully funds with
recurring dollars that projected
cost of the opportunity
scholarship.
If you'll turn with me to page
eight.
Because this is such a large
difference we wanted to.
Take a little while to go over
it
this is a our financial aid
media and revenues projection
but LFC put together with the
DFA H. E. B. and input from the
eight yards.
So if you look at the top box
the sources box.
What do you can see our.
The lottery other state aid and
opportunity and so you can see
on that bottom line total aid
that is state dollars going to
support scholarships in New
Mexico.
Last year when the opportunity
scholarship was passed we
estimated the cost to be around
a hundred million dollars.
As of a couple of weeks ago the
the best gas we had was it might
actually be closer to a hundred
fifty seven million dollars
We got together and we through
the validation process found
that that the true cost of that
scholarship isn't likely to be
around a hundred thirty five
million dollars per year.
And so what what drove that
difference between the hundred
million dollars that was
estimated in FY twenty three
verses the hundred thirty five
or so million were at right now
if you can take a look at.
This third column over it's the
FY twenty three.
One slash thirty one update
that's showing side by side with
the column to the left.
It's showing the difference
between the initial estimate of
around ninety three million
dollars and the updated amount
of a hundred thirty five point
eight million.
you can see that we assume that
the same tuition base but what
really what really drove that
difference was a few things one
was enrollment growth we had
pretty big enrollment growth
this past year
it was about about four point
three percent overall nearly ten
percent for first time freshmen
so enrollment growth was steeper
than anticipated in those
projections the next.
Item was tuition increases.
The initial projections assumed
about a five percent tuition
rate increase we had about
eleven percent tuition rate
increase on average that
accounted for a really really
big
increase in the opportunity cost
and then the the last one was
the use of opportunity
scholarship to cover the bridge
semester and we were estimating
that cost right now about
nineteen to twenty million
dollars that bridge semester is
the first semester that a
student who is going to be on
lottery
that first semester when they
show up to their institution.
They are not receiving lottery
scholarship
the opportunity statute rules
allow that the institution to
pave the cost of that first
semester with opportunities
funding we estimate that to be
around twenty one million
dollars.
So right now the the reason for
that
very large difference between
the LFC recommendation and that
that executive recommendation in
the opportunity scholarship you
can see the column second from
the right that's that LFC.
Based on the one slash thirty
one update.
But the LFC recommendation does
not anticipate any additional
Costs to opportunity for tuition
so it's holding tuition revenues
flat and it currently has guard
rails that disallow use of
opportunity.
To pay the bridge here
and that creates that creates a
pretty big difference between
the two costs when you disallow
use to pay bridge I'd like to
stop there.
On opportunity and handed over
to secretary Rodriguez.
Mr chair members of the
committee Mr chair I was going
to go over to the overall
executive recommendation for
higher education institutions
and the department if that's
okay.
Perfect thank you so federal
members of the committee Mr
chair thank you so much for your
time today I'll be presenting
our budget recommendations we do
have this briefing document
before you today and that's the
one I will be referencing in our
presentation.
Turn your briefing document over
to page two on the top right
hand corner in the blue box I
know my colleague Conor has gone
over this but I do want to
reiterate that the executive
budget recommendations has
really recommended a two percent
increase to the higher education
funding formula at eight hundred
sixteen point seven million
dollars our recommendation also
encompasses one hundred ninety
five point six million for
research and public service
project and as you know this is
a higher education institutions
recurring needs pertaining to
research programming public
support or student oriented
services submitted by each of
our colleges and universities as
Connor noted our recommendation
to the LFC is not too far apart
in those recommendations stated
the types of priorities each of
us had and that on page three I
want to direct your attention to
the work of the higher education
funding formula technical
committee which was completed in
the interim and I know Mr chair
you presented your bill this
morning in at the Education
Committee our efforts in this
administration have been really
the first thorough reexamination
of the funding formula since two
thousand sixteen the agency as
well as our partners from the
department of finance and
administration in the
legislative finance committee
and other technicians from the
associations who are here today
amended the outcome based
components to one include in
demand hi I need workforce
credentials for all four
classifications on top of stand
H. the removal of general
education certificates the
addition of improvement measures
for all four classifications in
the funding formula increase
that risk award threshold to
match current federal Pell grant
standards and incentivizing role
made by increasing the and of
course student credit hours by
four percent in reducing other
measures by two percent Mr chair
members of the committee as you
are well aware we're committed
to evaluating the funding
formula further in the inner.
to really continue to improve
the performance based funding
formula but also to look at that
face that has come to your
attention for many of their
constituents and the higher
education institutions
themselves on page two and three
will also see data related to
our sectors recent enrollment
increases and humility of two
pre production from twenty two
thousand eighteen to twenty
twenty two I won't dive into it
but nobody's available there for
you I will quickly do for your
attention to the higher
education department's budget
recommendations please open your
briefing document over to page
four.
The higher education agency
budget will count for only two
percent of the general fund at
twenty two I'm sorry two hundred
twenty three point two million
dollars and the higher education
budget as a whole is about
twelve percent of the state's
general fund at approximately
one billion so really fast I
want to talk about FTEs and
vacancy compared to our sister
agencies fifty two FTE ease
accounts for seventeen percent
or less of the work force that
exists at early childhood
education and care department
and the public education
department however our agency
oversees twenty four public
colleges for tribal colleges
three special schools and of
course the University of New
Mexico health sciences center
breaking down this number even
further thirty eight F. T. E.
support state funds.
And my last point Mr chair
members of the committee if this
opportunity scholarship with
bipartisan support of the
legislature and the governor's
signature we are proving that
there's no wrong door to higher
education in over thirty six
thousand students every single
one of those students based in
one of the districts of the
legislature I can assure you are
benefiting from the opportunity
scholarship this semester.
Additionally with over a hundred
and thirty million dollars of
fusion of the lottery
scholarship we have sustained
programs that program for the
next four years and
approximately ten thousand
students are benefiting from
that program has Connor said we
have worked together to decrease
the original ask of a hundred
and fifty seven point four
million dollars and we are
requesting a hundred and forty
five million dollars of
recurring funds less than two
percent of the overall state
budget for the opportunity
scholarship other priorities for
the agency which I will not dive
into so you may ask questions
include the teacher loan
repayment program health
professional loan repayment
program adult education dual
credit the indigenous technical
assistance centers and the
state's future longitudinal data
system that will be live in
summer twenty twenty three with
the first phase and the second
phase completed in the summer of
twenty twenty four with that I
will close my presentation but
please note that included in the
briefing document leaflet of the
agency's accomplishments thanks
to your help Mr chairman the
legislature and also a funding
status report of all the federal
dollars you provided to the
higher education department
thank you for your time today
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Sir Mr chair members
of the committee I just want to
add a couple points of the
secretary kind of messed but
the executive also included four
hundred thousand for the tribal
dual credit which is an increase
of a hundred and thirty six
point one thousand dollars and
then another item that was also
included in the executive
recommendation was it an
additional FTE for the financial
a division within the agency
there really you know what that
F. T. what I levy eight workload
within that division with the
increase of financial aid that
they're getting out for the
agency so other than that that
concludes my comments at this
point thank you Mr.
Question.
The issue.
thank you Mr chair.
First of all curry started off
with the.
R. P. S. P. funding here in.
In the volume to.
It talks about there was an
audit done at least a for New
Mexico the University of New
Mexico and it says that was
missed spending of these funds
and I know it's a hundred and
twenty six thousand dollars
whatever it is versus the
additional.
It doesn't say what the
misspending was for we know what
it was for.
What was just been exposed
before and what was the spent on
I guess that's the question
Mr chairman and senator share
that was related to to our PSBs
at UNM I think the the robotics
was the the name of that
particular PSPP kicked off a
special on it and your bring up
a really a really good point
the audit found.
Essentially an explosion in our
PSP's both the number of R. P.
S. P.'s and the funding
dedicated to those are PSP's
over the last fifteen years and
I think the upshot for the for
the committee is the audit with
the auditors were looking what
they found is that the financial
controls over a lot of these are
PS peas are very very lax
and it results in an environment
where.
It's possible that the
institution housing the R. P. S.
P. might not even know of you
know miss spending of R. P. S.
P. funds for years because of
because of the small dollar
amounts that fall under the
threshold of materiality for a
financial audit and that was
again kicked off because of that
UNM robotics are PS P.
finding.
Mr chair Senator it was also
because the more C. hall which
is under the African American
Africano studies program at the
university of New Mexico.
So Mr chair it is kind of
pointed out so in two thousand
seven that was ten million
dollars and twenty eight
programs now there's a hundred
and forty three hundred thirty
four million dollars and a
hundred and forty six programs
well that's the that's the
expansion there what kind of
return on investment do we
expect from any of these with
another low dollar amount but
the time we get to a hundred
million dollars we're we're
we're almost talking real money.
Mister chairman Senator.
I think that's a really good
question in and honestly we
don't know and it varies by
it'll vary by our PSP
you know often times are PSP's
ought to be re reviewed
periodically over the
Over the course of several years
and some of these frankly are we
could think of them as base
activities based funding
activities like there's a lot of
student support dollars built
into your I. Angie base but it
also appears in our PSP and so I
think there's a policy
consideration of doesn't make
sense to continue having such a
large number of our PSBs or can
some of these be consolidated
into either I NG or rolled
together to in to reduce the
number an increase the financial
oversight capability of the
university on them.
Mr chair the.
Is I look at this a hundred
forty six special projects of
some kind out there and
apparently we don't know what a
lot of those do and we don't
know what kind of return on
investment we're getting for
those so I guess the question is
how do we at least know if their
valuable how do we get a a
return on investment report or
something like that says so we
did the robotic so we did pencil
sharpening or whatever the
whatever the special thing was
what value of what's at the end
of it and are these perpetual
once they're into the perpetual
Mister chairman Senator.
Every year there is an R. PS
peer review process those are P.
S. P.'s are.
Submitted for internal review
with the institution level.
After that review they are
submitted to the higher
education department
which makes recommendations it
it here is the R. P. ISPs it
here's the case for their
continuation or
or growth are you the staff at
committee on behalf of the LFC
and then and then a
recommendation is made I think
at this point
you know so it it it would not
be accurate to say there's no
oversight over the R. P. S. P.
but when we're dealing with well
over a hundred of them and and
hundreds when we start looking
at them broken out I don't know
that the amount of oversight is.
The oversight capacity that we
have is probably not adequate to
the task of a of a thorough
vetting and so we rely a lot on
that on the institutions to
perform that.
And Mr chair Senator I will say
each year when we have that
process an institution must have
performance measures that they
meet in outcomes they have to
report to our agency that we
share with our colleagues who
sit on that committee and we
have made decisions the past few
years since I have been there to
not fund our PS peas that are
not performing to that level so
the ones that you see before you
are the ones that are very close
in our recommendation we did
review them thoroughly to ensure
that they are meeting targets.
Mr chair this just.
You know if you if you if you
take care your pennies the
dollars will take care of
themselves and I think these are
pennies that have grown from ten
million two hundred thirty four
million.
And that's a lot of dollars all
of a sudden and in.
At least I don't know if of any
return on investment but then
again I'm not paying attention
but nobody's bringing it to me
saying Hey this is good this is
bad so.
Chairman and senator I'm not
also be remiss if I didn't
mention you know that the type
of the R. P. S. P.'s differ a
lot so.
Think about health sciences
center Carrie Tingley is a is an
R. PSP poison control is an R.
P. SB office of the medical
investigator also in our PSP so.
Office of metal you've I thought
that was a.
Mr chair Senator isn't quite as
a state agency that is housed at
the university of New Mexico
health sciences center but it is
funded through the our PSP
process.
Are you confused me even more go
ahead.
Hi sorry Mr chair sorry Senator.
Senator I think
My point and that was just to
say that.
Our PSP has become a very very
broad term and it can mean a
whole lot of things
and.
The purposes they serve are are
very diverse so it's hard to put
your finger on exactly what they
are which is not to say that
they are not without value
because again things like
children's psychiatric I think
has great value to the state
but it's also classed in with
student support services in a
lot of areas or or specific line
items for say an H. back
technician program out of Clovis
so our PSP is just it's a very
diverse universe of programming.
All right Mister chair can.
Probably go on longer than you
want to hear about it so I will
set up but I do want to also
talk about opportunity
scholarships in the growth in
tuition.
I was pretty sure that when we
did this tuition would rise to
whatever number the opportunity
scholarship plus so if the
opportunity scholarship got up
to a hundred billion dollars so
would tuition.
And I think we're already seeing
that thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I'm gonna go through these
Questions or if you will topics
very quickly because I know this
quite a bit of information we
need to share.
But there are issues as we move
forward and we can start with
the R. P. S. P.'s when we deal
with that and you are correct
the do serve significant
purposes but again when we start
talking about the oversight that
is going to be essential because
in order for us to move forward
really talking about the
consequences of the outcomes so
that's one issue and I'm just
going to go through these and
privative but when we start
talking about the HLC in the
inform visits and how we work
very closely if you will with
with the higher learning
commission
as we continue to go ahead and
find issues hi where those being
addressed and we get back if you
will to the governance piece
would be a shared governance
piece or V. governance at the at
HEDT slash or at the the local
institutional level when it
comes to the audit says we deal
with the findings that we move
forward that continues to go
ahead and be an important issue
and I've had a great
conversation with the secretary
regarding all of these issues
and I I really applaud if you
will the due diligence as she
moves forward but there's so
much that we still need to
address when we start talking
about how are we going to
improve if you will education
for population regardless of
whether it's an adult or young
people in moving this forward
when it comes to in Rome and
then we start talking about the
return of investment on
investment going back to what
Senator sure is talking about
what we take a look at some of
the latest articles that have
been written again New Mexico
continues to be not at the top
but somewhere either in the
middle or towards the bottom.
Of of a lot of the good areas
and so the issue is how do we as
a system itself help each other
so that all boats rise if you
will verses one or two so that's
going to be an important issue
when we start talking about in
class verses the online
Education another issue because
here we have these facilities we
work on square footage but at
the same time as we move forward
are we making the shift to
online education and if that's
the case our our expertise in
the professors and those that
are gonna want to provide the
instruction are they gonna be
located across the country
across the world and we're going
to be putting together if you
will a I hybrid or a new new way
to to continue to educate
people.
the vacancy rates as we move
forward with all of our
institutions of
You need to go in the that we
have vacancy rates when we look
at the local level we talk about
everything from our food
services to our maintenance or
custodians all the way if you
will to those vacancy rates
within each one of our
departments and they want to
really comes to the outcomes the
outcomes in terms of are we
really making the connection so
our students regardless of age
regardless of their interest
regardless of their first second
or third career whatever that is
are we we really reaching that
career opportunity for them and
I'm gonna go back to the to the
whole issue of of how we're
gonna be funding education.
So we deal with students and
we're talking about the fast I
or we when we talk about the
lottery we talk about the bridge
regard we talk about hello we go
ahead we talk about other other
methods why do our students
still have if you will that
struggle as they move forward is
it because of finding housing or
continuing if you will to hold
on to a couple of jobs while
going to school and and how can
we really deal with this so it's
a it's a more global issue as we
move forward and I just wanted
to to bring those points off I
don't I don't expect a response
but I really hope during the
session as we put together if
you will our educational
components that in each piece
that we're gonna be looking at
this and we start to come up
with more of the solutions as a
whole regardless of whether it's
a community college for your
University regardless of what
that is how are we going to
elevate ourselves into the
future and so Mr chairman
respectfully today I I'm not
expecting any and the
conversation but I hope that
whenever you all go back home or
your meeting if you will with
your organizations that you
really help us to come up with
some of the solutions because
that's definitely going to go
ahead and be the future for New
Mexico and so with that Mr chair
right but again I just thank you
all for for listening in the
hard work that you all are doing
and
Let's move forward so that all
of our institutions rice
together thank you Mr chair
thank you any other questions if
you're.
Thank you Mr chair.
I've got a question or two about
two.
Accounting.
But first let's talk about.
R. O. how many of our
institutions.
Have turned in a audit.
For the previous year the last
audit period are we all.
Mr chair Senator Woods we are
only missing one on it from the
twenty nine institutions we
oversee the three special
schools and health sciences
center okay and the other
another question I have.
Is there a uniform.
accounting program that we use
in the higher it institutions.
Mr chair now.
So.
Mr chairman and senator what do
you mean how the state uses
Here as its accounting system
across all state agencies it.
There is no.
Software equivalent in higher ed
institutions.
They are not on share and
they're not required to use the
same financial reporting systems
and the question I have.
Is why not.
Why why wouldn't we require.
Everybody to use the same
accounting system so that when
we wanted to.
Isolate.
All of these numbers here that
tell us all of these things that
we couldn't do this.
Print that off real quickly and.
And tell us what we want to
know.
Mr chair Mr chair Senator I do
know that has been a concern
that the legislature I know one
response was in the public
education side there was the
open books that was established
this year through the public
education side to see how school
districts were spending SCG
dollars or the funding formula
for students through that side
so there has been some changes
on the Public Education side but
those districts are still not
and share similar to S. and
higher education or are colleges
and universities are not on
share.
And Mr chair and Senator was a
five.
Expand there's also an
initiative right now it's
affecting a handful of community
colleges all the chess program
you'll see a section seven I. T.
appropriation for it
essentially the it will be a
financial system that is shared
across multiple institutions so
it's moving in that direction
but it but that is the entities
involved are participating
voluntarily and not all
institutions.
See see the need to change over
their financial system as well.
Well I'm sure that the auditors
could figure all that out as to
have.
Have a each institution keeps
our books.
But it's it's so.
Very complicated system and it
seems like you would be.
I guess what the a question I
would be asked to quite a few
institutions to issues excel
spreadsheet kind of a situation.
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator no most of them
actually have software systems
to help with accounting
information they're putting into
their systems across our higher
education institutions I don't
think there is one that is using
excel spreadsheet in with that
is so are we talking about a.
I'm in at a common we're not
talking about all of using the
same thing maybe I could ask the
question is.
When they use these.
Purpose is accounting programs
cover what's the cost of one of
those programs.
Mr chair Senator it really
depends on the size of the
institution in their student
body also the staff and faculty
that they have hired so let's
say a small independent
community college such as
southeast New Mexico college
would be a very small price when
we were looking at it originally
we're looking at a starting base
of about two hundred fifty to
seven hundred fifty thousand
depending on getting them
started up but and institutions
such as the university of New
Mexico would be significantly
higher.
I'm assuming when we asked about
these accounting programs.
Each individual program.
Vendor and and I'm assuming we
have then there's and there are
you kind of qualified them to be
a vendor to our universities.
And they have some kind of back
up system support that goes with
these systems.
It might get too much in the
weeds madam secretary Mr chair
Senator no I think your
questions are perfectly alright
when you say back up systems are
you referring to a cloud or a
physical back ups.
I'm actually madam chair madam
secretary I'm actually talking
about support systems so that.
we can train.
Users.
Check try in the financial
agents to use the system Mr
chair Senator that's usually
what will be entailed in the
contract for whoever's and
boarded the bed for those
software systems to the
institution will work with the
contractor to insure that
there's proper training for
their staff that are using the
system.
With that of madam secretary and
Mr chairman of.
We have again we have a
procurement type code that we go
through so that we know that
we're getting sound.
Systems to to that someone can
pick from.
So.
One of the tell you how much I
appreciate.
You and your endeavor to.
Go ahead and.
Look into some irregularities
that's going on and.
These these small community
college sure are so important to
our our small communities and
there are major employers and
our particular communities and
many times our our students that
are not high income students are
able to go to the small
community colleges and and you
know get some workforce training
get some get some.
college are cheaply was staying
at home.
And it's it's so important.
in that regard.
And.
I know that you're working
towards that means and.
We never we never can have a a
perfect world and I just.
So I worry sometimes on how we
can hold the stuff together we
have so many different
universities and so many
different community colleges and
we've got a population of two
point one million people and it
seems like.
We have a a lot of individual
colleges out there.
And
I sometimes wonder how we're
going to.
Keep it all together in a way
our our I worry about our LFC
thought about Mr chair of
switching subjects many of.
Our LFC is their budgets as well
we're not going to use any of
the opportunity scholarship for
bridge level.
So.
Do we supply any scholarships
for that first semester we don't
use a lottery for that first
semester so.
How are we going to help someone
go to school the first meshed
restriction.
Mr chair Senator I'll take a
stab at that question and then
I'll let me colleague Conor
Lavery typically the bridge
semester is covered through
institutional scholarships
private scholarships for federal
aid but this year we made a
decision to cover the bridge
scholarships so that students
can use up that federal aid
toward the cost of attendance we
did apply institutional aid
first so our colleges did help
support some of that provide in
the first semester for
opportunity scholarship the
bridge semester about twenty
four million was used to help
with the bridge semester and
then another twenty four million
was provided by higher education
institutions across the state of
New Mexico to support tuition.
So Mr chair madam secretary so
we actually made the first
year's tuition free.
To any student that showed up at
the door.
Mr chair Senator that is correct
as long as you're eligible in
New Mexico state resident.
Okay.
The staff strives soak in my
head and I appreciate your your
help and Mr chair I think of all
quick more questions right now
but
a collector brag on her little
bit so.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you guys for time we value
you guys your time and being
here Connor I want to start with
you real quickly on page seven
you mentioned the per equity
we're gonna make that right
between eastern and western were
there any other universities
impacted are those the only two
schools need to be made whole.
Those are the two that on a on
an F. T. E. basis were the most
under funded in the
In their in their class of
comprehensive universities.
So that's a maybe.
Mr chairman and senator and I
think it's a slightly more
complicated question what we're
doing here is a little bit of
mixing and matching the funding
formula is a performance based
formula and is primarily driven
by awards the problem with that
is that.
It also doesn't have
redistribution so the funding
formula only grows the base but
it doesn't shrink.
this up until a couple years ago
the funding formula used to.
Reach out essentially claw back
money and then redistribute that
funding based on those
performance criteria.
And the idea was that we would
get to I'm equalizes performance
based budgeting process when we
distribution ended it
essentially resulted in it'll
take a lot more time to sort of
equalize funding across
institutions because all we're
really distributing like in the
LFC rack is one percent and so
to the extent that there are
inequities in in large part
driven by changes in enrollment
either students not showing up
or more students showing up it's
going to take much longer for
those marginal little changes to
stack up and equalise that
funding so this is
sort of to be seen as a first
step in trying to catch up.
but it's done in a different way
than the normal funding formula
process thank you Mr president
not a complete six actually
heard from both of those schools
I heard that yes may still have
some concerns.
Visit with them about two
in the university's president's
budget recommendations Mr
president they're asking for
increased campus security
funding can you show me where in
this
budget LFC recommends where
their recommendation is for
campus security or is just too
high level.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
I think.
A lot of that campus security I
think is going to be capital.
The.
For us the.
Mark is that is you eight
million dollars capital.
To separate so.
Mr chair.
I.
The New Mexico council members.
So that's going to be a
nonrecurring for a million
dollars as for quick meant as
for training and that's of and
that's force that statewide and
that's felt by the chief place
Mexico state university and
that's my plan really now so
it's a quick meant training
number of other items as well
that's not in the REC Mr
chairman and
senator Tom.
And Mr chair Senator Diamond
thank you for that question I
will say as far as capital is
concerned the higher education
department LFC did prioritize
requests related to safety on
campus so those are income based
in the capital recommendation
the other thing to also new is
the law enforcement recruitment
and retention provide
that was funded at a hundred
million dollars last year
there's another recommendation
coming for this year however
within there I thought funded
state entities are not included
and that adversely have an
effect on higher ed institutions
which our state entities and I
strongly encourage the
legislature I know secretary but
we has been looking at it to
look at that language to see how
they can qualify for that
funding.
Thank you Mr president mark if
I'm if I'm hearing you correctly
you would like to see some of
that in the budget but we may be
able to to meet those needs with
capital outlay for the request
correct.
Chairman moon yo's Senator
Diamond there is no so the
request came in the form of a
nonrecurring request and we
could try to get some individual
capital for it I think that
makes it more challenging to do
it on a statewide basis for all
of our for you in our
comprehensive reserves are
committee colleges so that's why
we we made it we request on
behalf of the counselors
presents to Mexican colleges and
the branch is so we prefer to
have that come as one
appropriation for training for
government for all of our
campuses including try looking
tribal schools as well
and so but there's nothing in
the exact track or nothing else
to rectify for those funds that
we request that your point out
Mr chair Senator Diamond and
thank you for bringing that
because as you all know that's
something very critical when it
comes to public safety and
mental health and and so we
would look for working with this
committee and the Senate I meant
for that request thank you Mr
chairman the short answer is
it's not in the budget I'm
surprised UNM is not loving
little harder to get that and
this year.
Mr chair and and certainly
economic clarify individual
schools did request for public
safety and for mental health as
well and that may be in an
individual recommendations when
I understand that Mexico that's
not the case.
Mr chair Senator Diamond Mister
chairman Senator and would be
happy to get a list of the
security related capital items
those are not in anywhere in the
REC in front of you this is only
the recurring and non recurring
specials but would be happy to
get you more information on
capital projects okay thank you.
Mr chairman I have one quick
last question for the secretary
and it has to do with the
opportunity scholarship and I
will be very direct with you of
all the calls that I get from my
constituents nobody is happy
with it and I appreciate quick
responses from your office to
kind of clarify but but if I
walk into a university with
thirty and I've worked hard and
I have thirty five hundred
dollars worth of scholarships
with me and my tuition is four
thousand dollars it's a last
dollar and if I still understand
this correctly so the university
then we take the thirty five
hundred an invoice the state for
the five hundred and I leave
with nothing at hand is that the
Anything towards the cost of
attendance so we would only be
covering the tuition and fees.
So what the thirty five hundred
dollars is that reimbursed to
the student because or or is are
you charging the state your the
balance of the five hundred and
Mr chair we only cover the
tuition and fees so we do not
send a check to the student for
the additional dollars.
Okay I think I'm I'm still a
little bit confused on this so I
have FFA kids to show up with
thirty five hundred dollars
worth of FFA scholarships
academic scholarships community
bank scholarships when they
enroll in school.
And it doesn't cover all of
their tuition are you invoicing
the state for the balance of
what their scholarships did not
cover in tuition and fees or or
you or is this state are you
waving all of tuitions and fees
are covered by the state and the
remaining of that balance that
student can use for lodging a
key books keep other other
college expenses Mr chair thank
you for explaining that it
created Senators as long as it's
not state so they don't
receiving financial support from
the state and it's not their
first semester so they're not
It's not a problem we definitely
should look at it okay thank
thank you I think there's a
little bit confusion for with
different students what may Raul
and and to the credit of the
universities this rolled out so
quickly I don't even think that
they knew the answer when when
kids were there but I have heard
some real frustrations out of
We to enroll in school and I'm
left I mean the state's covering
this thing out as much but
there's no incentive for these
kids to work hard and to come to
the university and that's what
I'm scared of is that where do
you just disincentive I think
kids to work hard if if the
remainder of those for those
scholarships could pay for their
housing for their groceries for
the vehicles whatever their
expenses are there still an
incentive for these kids to work
hard but that didn't seem to be
the case what the number of kids
that the rules Mr chair Senator
the school should not be eating
up those dollars so if that's
happening we definitely need to
sit down and figure that out and
fix it immediately but I also
want to say anytime next
constituents have an issue we
have a financial aid hotline and
will get directly involved get
the answers that you need but
something I definitely want to
side bar with you about I'd like
to visit with you Mr president
Mr Mr chair I should tell you
that every time about individual
cases to New Mexico State
University they were quick to
resolve the problem and to work
with that student but but I
still think that there's a lot
of of work to be done it it
worries me that we're not to Mr
shares point that we're not
we're not getting a return and
so what I'd like to see I will I
will be very clear with you I
voted for this opportunity
scholarship and.
It is quickly becoming my number
one regret about because the
devil was in the details and so
I would like to work with you
quickly to resolve all of these
Clear if we look over this
budget for the long term that
this is not a sustainable
program but if we really do want
to invest and kids who want an
opportunity to really what
they've worked hard through high
And what that looks like and
when when this program goes
broke and we could have perhaps
prepared better make sure that
there's some real long term
change here that we see so I'd
love to visit with you of lying
about it up that the individual
issues thank you Mr chair thank
you I got to go to meetings and
are pretty so let me just make
some quick comments in no
Senator Diamond your point of.
Some of those scholarships are
not designed to go to the kids
they were designed to go
straight to the university
because of the way the
foundations were set up and
because of federal filing status
Children will not be successful
my wife and not have a gated
fire and stuff if you don't have
someone to navigate that system
it lead you through it you're
you're going to struggle
I think the R. P. SP will be a
very good audit that we should
maybe sent to the the state
auditor and have them review
although some of all those are
PSP's because a lot of that
makes sense with a hundred fifty
thousand the start of mining
programmer when program or
whatever but there's there seems
to be a lot of I don't know that
and we need to clean that up as
we go for two hundred twenty
four million dollars is a lot of
money.
And what are we really getting
Today in in education there's a
study out there because I see
could drive from New Mexico tech
Zach reason why.
In over the ten years from
twenty two from thirteen to
twenty two right.
The eastern New Mexico lost
about four percent.
Highlands came about twelve New
Mexico hello in in M. C. the
last about seven percent western
came about thirty two percent.
Is this to Gallup grants right
well they lost about.
Five percent in grades and for
or
can see there's a link to their
forty one percent in Gallup in
so.
We have to rebuild the whole
I'm not willing to do that.
For the so I think we're gonna
have to have to do a hard study
or the study this morning see
better get tuned up because it's
going to come to your agency and
Eighteen year old adult can get
an education healthcare they
take a basic English one a one
class if they make it through
semester funding have not the
least participated right.
A at qualify for this qualify
for that sometimes life happens
to people
but already children in my
district really got to go work
at McDonald's and then got to go
home and and try to do their
homework and keep their grades
up and it's a struggle.
I like it but I think as we move
forward and put some some better
guardrails on there I mean I
don't know if we can say you
know we want you to exceed so
how do we help you succeed but I
think that's very important.
I know some of those kids
personally because they wrote it
with my kids right and I don't
want those kids to lose those
post credits
and we'll have to figure out how
the have to figure out how to do
that but I really don't want
those kids to have started
something and then not by their
fault but by the fall to
somebody else that they fail in
their sale items one semester
two semesters away from
graduating in the win
development field and and I just
don't know how that's gonna work
but you need to let me know if
we're gonna need to put money in
there and fix that problem it
and if anybody wants to
volunteer and take that over
raise your hand now.
The.
I don't see anybody so get ready
to pull teeth of.
You know.
There's a lot of money to hire
it a lot of money right.
But we can train it would give
free tuition to every kid in the
state but if there's no job at
the tail end of that.
Make some state here.
What is opportunity done for the
state we just shipped about.
That's the hardest pill to
swallow is when you invest this
amount of money in education and
there's nothing that the
tailored for those kids to go to
work at I think the university
have gotta get on top of that
the Economic Development
Department just to get on top of
that in the governor has to get
on top of that.
The amount of money we spend.
And kids are to leave because
there's no opportunity here for.
Goes to run through that door in
about three seconds so
Madam Mr chair and madam
secretary so that the accounting
on for Senator which was going
on the accounting standards and
principles work we're all
dealing with fast being cast gas
B. is that right.
Yeah
so that that's that takes that
off so we do have similar
The state universities are the
vast majority it might still be
using something called banner
and I know that the community
colleges have moved and a
consortium or something like
that to something called workday
or moving in that direction so
there are a lot of similar
standards that are going to spit
San Juan community colleges at
writing said generally with
direct direction folks reading
it I just wanted to.
So I just wanted to point that
out there from accounting
Secretary afternoon good to see
you analysts thank you for being
here course great to see our
team from Los crucis and house
and everyone else number one
contracts in the opportunity
scholarship and romantic it is
costly but it's the best
investment we can make and one
of them and so it's so great to
see enrollment growing I mean
This and and like only programs
I'm sure will refinance and you
know we'll need to as we learn.
I just have a question kind of
off topic and forgive if you're
not expecting it but I want to
ask about the health
professionals loan repayment
program for those that don't
know what that is it's a loan
repayment program for medical
Quantify qualified a little bit
more secretary absolutely so
Mister chair Senator what we do
is you play your agency and you
have to be working in a
medically to a designated
medical shortage area in New
Mexico which is typically
If you have student debts down
if you are an allied health
nursing other medical
professions You received twelve
thousand over two year period
and can also re apply if you
haven't finished paying off your
debt.
And.
From your experience how much is
The four percent over what we
can actually award independent
and regards to applicants so if
you go to page six of the
briefing document that I
provided there's actually a
carve out right there we've
increased applications by four
hundred seventy seven percent
and all of our loan repayment
programs however as you can see
for health professional loan
appropriation from the
legislature and then we received
a one point two million dollar
federal grant.
Okay thank you Mr chair madam
secretary I know in talking to
the LFC and
Trolls I spoke today that the
LFC is puffing on a lot of money
recommending to pop in a lot of
money into this program which is
great and and I and yet still we
may need to do even more
How long will you give that
funding to someone for someone
who's it was the commitment that
they serve in an underserved
area and if so for how long Mr
chair they have to serve with
the they have to work forty
hours per week with whoever we
approve when we approve that and
it is in a medically underserved
area typically a rural community
we also prioritize us small
clinics FQHCs Indian health
services things like that.
Representative and thank you Mr
man sector for how long do they
Considered.
Medically.
Underserved area Mr chair I
believe thirty two although I
know Kerry Robert Brugger and
then hospital association is
hearing could correct me I
believe thirty two are counties
are considered medically
underserved areas at this point
in time.
That's basically everybody but
what.
Mr chair yes but once again we
prioritized rural rural clinics
rural areas before urban
communities that okay well
that's something that I
personally think you know as we
deal with the shortage is a
great way that it's been proven
to support the medical field and
having providers that up we
should look at increasing
funding to that and so wanted to
ask you about it and hopefully
we can work together to make
sure we get it right.
So that's all I have Mister
thanks.
There anyone else.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
great to see secretary of staff
I just had a question I have to
institutions and my district and
both of them have some issues
with the I. N. G. funding
formula and I know that we're a
studies going to be taking place
secretary can you tell us how
that process works with what's
the timeline when do you start
when do you anticipate having
the information and what happens
next to address those
institutions concerns Mr chair
Senator fair question so we have
a work cut us a steering
committee for the funding
formula in which there are
higher education institution
leaders such as our presidents
and chancellors who are on that
of course the three associations
are part of that and then there
technical experts we plan on
working on this as soon as the
bill signing period ends
so we probably will have our
first meeting in may we'll start
to develop that work probably
bring on a consultant to work
with the institutions to figure
out what the issues are and we
plan on having a report to the
legislature before you begin
doing a lot of your budget
process in the executive
hopefully in the beginning of
the fall.
Okay thank you so much Secretary
thank you Mr chair thank you is
there anyone else.
With that
Madam secretary and the staff
of.
That concludes that part because
I was gonna ask you.
We have three other items under.
Messel and send them the higher
rate of department.
At higher education institutions
so have you covered everything.
Yes I spoke to the chief of
staff earlier and he said that
it was all encompassed in this
presentation right now.
Very well.
Anyone else of the though we
want to thank you and we want to
thank our audience for being
here.
The thank you very much.
