AH State safety Plan one and it
adds fire members, which is
approximately 90 members, which
will become a part of that that
plan at para Mr President and
members of the plant the fund or
the plan is funded at 124.9%
right now by adding 90 members
were in very good shape to
absorb that, Um
I think that's uh, the most
Concise description. I can give
you chief Mr Terror Members
Committee. Thank you. Yes, this
will really support State Fire
Marshal's Office and e m R D to
retain employees and regroup,
which I think will be very
important for the
Thank you Don't need to hear
from you yet. Those in support
Who drove the farthest
For this first we'll hear three
or four
Anybody on zoom
One,
Okay. We don't have anybody on
zoom.
Come on up.
You're killing time.
Now he's afraid to talk. We're
gonna make it talk.
There's your microphone, say her
name for the record.
Good evening, Mr Chairman,
members of the Committee map
prop on the Valencia County fire
chief. We stand in support with
the state Fire Marshal's office.
We've seen a lot of turnover
over the years from the agency.
A lot of that had to deal with
the retirement. We work and in
hand with these folks every
single day on inspections and
investigations, so
I was absolutely the right thing
to do. We support it. Thank you.
Thank
you, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee Miguel Timon FF 244
standard support of this bill.
Thank you this to the sponsor
for bringing in, um keep it
short. Hmm.
Mark Porto City hubs. Fire
Department fire chief We stand
in support of the bill. Thank
you. Make sure they take you the
bullring tonight. Anybody else?
Anybody in opposition? Nobody on
zoom.
Questions from committee
members.
Understandable. Center Stein
born Mr President, Senator
suggest real quick. Just, um,
explain, because I don't know
that you did. What plan or the
Firefighters currently on and
why the recommended move. Mr
Chairman and Senator, the
firefighters are not in this
plan at the State general plan,
and this also just puts
everybody related to safety
Public safety into one plan
again. That plan is already
funded at at the moment is
funded at 124.9%. The addition
will be approximately 80 to 90
members, so it's absolutely can
absorb that with that, Um
Without problem.
So, Mr, uh, on the floor all
day. Uh, this chair Senator. So
have the firefighters been
basically the lesser plan right
now.
Compared to their peers. Mr
Chairman Center. I'm gonna ask,
Mr Toyoda Responsive. Mr.
Chairman, Senator stay born
certified law enforcement or
certified line enforcement
officers under the state Fire
Marshal's office have been in
the state general plan. Uh, the
state got about 80 new hotshot
fire crew members last year.
They've never so we never had a
state fire plan. So this wraps
everybody into the same plan.
Okay. Thank you. So I have so
Uh, Mr Chairman and members if
their tier one they would be in
the enhanced plan similar to
state police. If they're cheer
to, they would be in the 25 year
now.
Mr Chairman. I believe there are
30 or so under the state Fire
Marshal's office, but the this
plan only applies to them for
years going forward, so there's
no retroactive enhancement for
years that they've already
worked.
How many years we fixed?
Now we're seeing this slew of
bills come in to
Just a man but people in plans
that are 124% continue the
battle.
Cautionary tale is
This might be the last one here.
Yeah, Understood, Mr Chairman.
I just think that
Targeting state police that has
paid it. They don't get social
security You do you fireman
received Social security there
paying for Social security
benefits.
State police do not pandas any
Social security, adding them you
to that plan.
These gentlemen are shaking
their head. No, Mr Chairman,
it's up to each individual
municipality County, the state
they all adopt a Social security
agreement.
So I mean,
That's a difference. Everybody
else pays into Social Security.
State police doesn't mission is
what number of fire members
don't
Mr Chairman. I believe there's
40 new. Uh, hotshot fire
fighters, Um, believe the state
forester can correct me if I'm
wrong. Um, I'm not sure what
their status is their brand new
positions to the state, so I'm
not sure if they are eligible
for social Security. Um in state
Fire Marshal. I'm unsure of
their eligibility for Social
security as well. Mr Chair,
members of the community as
state Fire Marshal's office does
All security. Sorry, speak a
little bit like Marshall's
office. They do paint Social
Security. Just caution. We don't
withhold state police. Don't do
it right. That's why their plan
is over funding because they
paid a higher rate.
Because they need a bigger
benefit because they're not
painting so security would never
Tacked it onto him.
Our paintings, Social Security
and and
Getting that's their own
preference, right?
We got lots of money in the
cautionary tale. I guess you
This is the old 907 scenario
where we got everything is
peachy and Rosie and then
Everything turns and we spent a
lot of time fixing these funds
so
I'm done. Have a motion sensor
Rodrigues. Just real quick.
Thank you. And thank you for
your work and presentation
Center. Thanks for the bill.
Just quickly. Um, when you
mentioned Greg, that about the
tier one. What does it take to
be on Tier one, as opposed to
tear to briefly, please. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Insider
Rodriguez, Tier. One was an
employee that was employed as of
630.
2013. So there are 21 members
anybody hire or hybrid 71 2013
after is a tier two member.
Okay, thank you for that
explanation.
Mr Chairman. Thank you. We have
a new past motion from Senator,
You've got a question, Senator
Stein born again.
Senator do pass motion from
Senator Gonzalez.
Second from Senator Bert.
We call the roll.
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost, Senator.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Senator Bradley votes?
Yes, Senator Gonzales, Senator
Gonzalez votes? Yes, Senator
Hemphill, Senator Hemphill
Boats? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes, Senator Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer.
Senator Sir Scherer boats? Yes,
Senator Stein board. Yeah,
Senator Stein born boats. Yes,
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
Voters? Christ Children. Guez.
Yes. Chair. Rodriguez votes yes
And Chairman knows yes. Passed
the 11 to 00 and pull the fire
extinguisher. Pull the fire
alarm on your way up other one
or just come back.
Uh, can I do my other one to
come back?
Let's just do it real quick.
Roger.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, nine
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members.
Uh, as you know, we created the
Office of Cybersecurity last
year. We knew that we'd have to
come back and do some cleanup
and some fixes as in whenever we
create anything. Essentially,
Senate Bill 129 creates a
requirement that a public body
that receives the General fund
appropriations researches must
report their cybersecurity
standards to the cyber Security
office.
Have with us, the acting
secretary of the department,
information Technology and the
chief information We do Have the
officers do have a substance you
do? Yeah. So we need a motion to
I m Senate, Rodriguez moved the
substitute bill for me. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. I am moving.
Do not pass on Senate Bill 120.
I'm sorry. We're over here on
Senate Bill 129 and a do
passport discussion on committee
substitute for Senate Bill 129,
Mr Chairman.
With all due respect, we did
have a substitute in Senate
health and public affairs, so
that would be the proper motion.
not do not pass that one and
then moved to the user
gets. It doesn't have that in
here. But, um, on the title of
the whole thing, But we can do
that. So I do not pass. Give me
a second state Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 129. This is the one that
passed, Okay, so they do pass
for discussion.
Shin would be on the Senate
Finance Committee.
Substitute for Senate health and
Public Affairs Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 120
Correct, Mr Chairman, Senator
Thank you, Madam title. Thank
you Have a second from
discussion. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Alright,
I'll just go through the
explanation very quickly. It
creates a requirement that
public bodies report their
cybersecurity standards to the
Office of Cybersecurity. It
allows the security officer who
to adopt and implement rules
that are applicable to executive
agencies. Only it develops
cybersecurity awareness policies
and training standards
establishes an centralized
cybersecurity and data breach
reporting process.
And it reviews and approves
allows them to review and
approve agency cybersecurity.
Thank you, Um, procurement for
validity and adherence to the
standards of the state Office of
Cybersecurity has set that
allows the security officer to
conduct it. Security
assessments, essentially spot
checking out there on the
standards and all executive
agencies.
It allows the security officer
to issue compliance orders to
agency executive agencies only
that aren't meeting standards.
it provides a nationally it's
called NIST, the National
Institute of Standards and
Technology Requirements for all
state agencies that those be
adhered to and that the cyber
Security Office shall adopt and
implement and require the public
bodies.
To certify that they comply. It
changes the composition of the
Cybersecurity Advisory Council
to make the chief information
Security officer, a voting
member of the council rather
than advisory. What this does
for us is it brings
cybersecurity to an entire state
government and then others that
want to do transactions with the
state government. Whatever that
may be, and put output, bringing
information and drawing
information out, would simply
have to adhere to the statewide
standards that are set by
The state cyber officer
cybersecurity or the NIST
standards. Differences from the
original bill is it eliminates
the provision that that provided
the security officer
jurisdiction. Instead, it allows
them to set rules for state
agencies and if you want to do a
transaction with state State
government, it creates a
definition for public body. It
eliminates the requirement to
receive approval from the
security officer before
executing an emergency
cybersecurity procurement, and
it clarifies that a public body
not otherwise. Under the
security officers, jurisdiction
may voluntarily comply.
Okay?
However, they're not going to be
able to do any transactions with
state government if they're not
meeting the minimum standards,
So if you meet those standards,
you're good. You can transact
back and forth with state
government, So the state
government state agencies are
protected.
Um do you want to just say just
a few words?
Thank you, chair and members of
the committee. We are looking
forward to the these substitutes
are amendments to be made so
that we can have a effective
cybersecurity program across the
state. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience and support
Anybody in opposite a lot here
today, Mr Chairman.
Let him in. We have their name.
Ryan, you're on.
Are you in supporter opposition?
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Brian
Brock. I'm counsel to the Office
of Cybersecurity. I'm in favor
of the bill. But I'm really here
in case there's a question that
needs my attention.
Well, we'll start learning how
to hack, so we'll ask you some
questions.
Senator. Questions from
committee Center Woods.
Real quickly chair.
For some years I've been asking
Agencies.
What? What is I two doing about
cyber security?
Now you're telling me on this
bill?
That all public bodies can come
to you and you will give them
direction.
For Sabbath security, okay their
plan for civil security.
Furnish information to them.
If you saved my line of
questions, Mr Chair and and
Senator, I'm trying to figure
out
But the job of the I T
department here.
Do it? Yes, I'm sorry, Mr
Chairman, the I T department or
do it has multiple functions.
One is they're responsible for
implementations in various
departments, or is it relates to
this department? What are we
doing here? Different than what
do we need This legislation? I'm
saying, Okay, and Senator, What
are we doing different with this
than what?
We did yesterday, Mr Chairman,
Senators, probably three
critical things we're doing
differently. One is agencies had
their cybersecurity plans if
they had one. We don't know if
they did now, with this office
week there, this office will
certify that all offices, all
state agencies. All executive
agencies have a standard that
meets this nice thing that I was
talking about Little while
that's the number one big thing.
Two is it will make sure that
it's consistent.
Three. It's going to make sure
that if you want to do a
transaction with state
government or a state government
agency executive agency, you
don't have to have cybersecurity
standards, But your information
is not getting it and start
getting out unless you meet the
minimum set of standards in.
that's the question I have with
their what their s O s with our
Uh,
Blacks and Rev.
Uh, different agencies trying to
communicate with each other
handling very technical and
personal information. That's a
thick. This is kind of what this
fixes and Mr chairman and
Senator, absolutely. That's
exactly what it is. However, I
just want to clarify when I was
before use this committee last
year when we passed this bill,
the secretary secretary of
state's office, um
And the Department of Homeland
Security already meet the
federal standards, which is a
higher standard than ours. So
they were exempted from this
this piece of legislation this
office
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair, One
housekeeping deal just to make
sure this is 084.1 correct.
Correct.
Any other Senator Bert
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, so you
mentioned earlier. There's a lot
of silo owing and different
agencies and all that stuff.
This will break that down and
make a standard plan across all
agencies. Is that my
understanding Mr Chair and
Senator Bert, That's absolutely
correct. I couldn't say it
better. The other nice thing
this is going to do for us is it
should ideally bring down cost
because there will be
essentially bulk pricing is
All will be adhering to this
particular to the state
standard, not going to be buying
this program that program in the
East 40. Then another one over
there, they're gonna appliance
and some and they office will
supply them the standards and
the Softwares and whatever's
well, Mr Chairman. I'm glad to
hear that because I think we've
spent millions and millions of
dollars that we didn't need to
on.
You know, parking, software and
security and things like that.
I'm hoping this will standardize
things and and, uh, bring about
higher standard across the
entire state. As much more
efficiency. Mr. Chairman, I do
have one other question in the
analysis here says that this
plan, though, does not provide
descriptions or requirements.
What should be included in the
plan.
So are we. We still lacking
within the plan. Is it not
complete? Are we not at a level
that we need to be at Mr
Chairman and Senator we did
spend also served on the
committee that the council that
was put sure it was called the
council or commission. I can't
remember that put a plan
together that was being
submitted to various agencies,
including the feds, and all
that.
But the reason that that one is
like standards aren't aren't set
as we really don't have to set
them now because we're going to
hear adhere to that NIST
standard, which is the national
National Institute of Science
and Technology, National
Institute of Science and
Technology. Standard of
Cybersecurity. So is that in the
original bill, or is it that in
the substitute that were that's
in the substitute, Okay?
All right, That's all I have.
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you.
I know that.
Me and Adrian yesterday looked
at every cyber
Funding in the stem language
stuff. I think they have any
other questions from committee
members see, none can have
emotion.
Emotional passer infill.
All the real
Might be close. You might want
to close your eyes, Senator Bert
Vote. Yes, Senator Bert votes.
Yes, Senator Campos.
Senator. Compost votes? Yes,
Senator Brentley. Senator
Brantley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzales? Yes, Senator Gonzalez
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator By the Yes, Senator
Patty Edwards. Yes, Senator
Scherer.
Senator Scherer votes. Yes,
Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes
yes and Chairman News.
Thank you members.
Thank you. Thank you. We're
gonna get Amanda in the seat. We
need to adopt the house. Go real
quick. That
Take only a couple of minutes.
We adopted the Senate's role
funding the other day. You need
to adopt the houses and her
who's the expert witness. You're
Adrian. It's me. He offered to
sit up here with me, Mr Chair.
Fire away. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Good evening. Mr Chair,
Remembers, Um, you should have a
handout that looks like this.
I'm going to apologize in
advance for the handout. It's
missing page numbers as well as
line numbers, But your staff
does have the full clean
version. Elektronik. Lee. Um,
this is the full list of grow
the house appropriations begin
several pages in where the first
column turns Gray.
That's the first of the House
appropriations.
Um, what you'll see on the
spreadsheet is not very
different from what you saw in
the Senate version. There is a
healthy mix of appropriations to
councils of government as well
as to state agencies. Um
Most members did three
appropriations of 160,000, which
was their minimum appropriation
amount. Um, a couple of members.
Did you know the full
appropriation for one thing, but
pretty standard stuff? Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Questions from committee
members.
None can have emotion to the
emotional center. Gonzales
second base center, Woods.
Call the roll.
Could you tell the house how
efficient
I will, and I'll be giving you
all a thank you card. What's
Adrian's birthday? The 13th?
Oh, sorry. I missed your
birthday.
Oh, you did send us a cupcake
guy,
Senator Bert.
Yes, Senator. Bert votes. Yes,
Senator. Compost, Senator.
compose votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Senator Brantley
votes? Yes, Senator Gonzales?
Yes. Gonzales votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill? Yes, Senator
Hemphill boats? Yes, Senator
Padilla,
Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer.
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein born Senator Stein
born votes. Yes, Senator Woods
Senator Woods votes? Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez
votes? Yes. And Chairman Yas?
Yes.
Thank you, senator Compost. In
other words.
Birthday billion out of the
chair safety.
I'm sorry, Mr Chair today we
present to you, Senator Bill
151.
This is a simple bill.
That essentially
It distributes makes another
distribution.
Out of the emergency met the
premium tax fun.
Of the first
The change we make is a third
distribution.
Pursuing of 716.1, and it shall
be made to the Emergency Medical
Service fund.
And the the Bureau shell
administer that fund and the
fund should be used for the
local support the cost of
supplies equipment operational
cost other than salaries and
benefits for emergency medical
service personnel using a
formula by rules adopted by the
department.
According to the relative during
urological, geographical size
and population of each county.
Of the relative number of runs
for each of welcome recent
recipient established to the
participation in the
distribution.
Ah, it will
Received no more no more than
22% of the fund may be used for
emergency medical service
improvement projects.
Including the purchase of
medical
Emergency medical service
vehicles.
A statewide emergency medical
service support projects. The
state trauma care program and
Emergency medical dispatch
agency.
3% of the fund may be used for
the Bureau for Administrative
Cost.
With that.
Yield to Senator Thank you very
much. Mr Chairman, members of
the Senate Finance Committee
and, of course, Senator Woods
and estimates the Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 151 delays the year mark in
a premium tax revenues until
fiscal fiscal year 26 and
instead appropriates 22 million
to the M s fund in fiscal year
25.
One of the big things, and this
is the reason why this has come
to us at this time as we
continue to go ahead and deal
with the large emergency
services throughout New Mexico.
We're finding that it's taking
much longer for people to
respond in in, particularly in
rural New Mexico because of the
lack of equipment, uh, the lack
if he will of the people that
need to respond to these
emergencies, and as we go
forward, we have found that
there is a great need for us to
continue to improve the M s
services.
As we move forward. This is
something that we've been trying
now for several years, and with
us Mr Chairman, members of the
Senate Finance Committee. We
also have some experts here if
you would like them to identify
themselves and make a brief
statement. If you give us that
opportunity.
Center of Combo. Sweet Do you
have an Amendment?
So I can have, um, motion to
move the amendment discussion
purposes. Second, that
We're on the amendment. Could
you have a copy of the
Amendment? Mr Chairman? We just
We just got a copy of that. So
this is, uh 100.1 so or have the
same version, right? Yes.
This is Amendment.
I want to explain that.
Sorry, Mr Chair. I'm not sure
this was
Our amendment, Mr Chair. I'm
sorry. I'm not familiar with
this amendment. Actually don't
not A J. Is this your amendment?
Check
on Page four line three. Yeah.
Mm hmm. Mr Chair. Um, I believe
the amendment that um was sent
down would have changed the
appropriation from 22,000,002 11
million. So that's in Section
three and then on page one
line
21. It would have changed the
amount from 10% of the net
receipts to 5% of the net
receipts.
That wait one second better
share.
If I read this right, it's
simply strikes the
appropriation.
Mr Chair. I I haven't seen this
amendment before. We did see an
and a different amendment, um,
from council service, But I have
not seen this amendment so I
don't know where this came from,
So and I'm not sure why, but
wine for page four line three
through 83 or Section three
appropriation, and it ends at
eight.
So it's just the appropriation.
Well, why not? That's what we're
doing on the field. Just step
aside and talk to a J real
quick. We'll do Senator Hart
meows bill real quick because we
do have one from YouTube Center
compost.
Explain it to you. He'll come
over next week.
We got a written, We have to run
the amount
Uh huh.
Reduce it was 5% army held these
gentlemen want to pull the fire
alarm. We told him not to do
that until after you presented
your bill. Thank you for that,
Mr Chairman Amendment on this
bill. Okay, thanks The
appropriation as we move
forward, you want to explain the
bill real quick, and then we'll
We'll put them in mint on Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. This bill would
appropriate $35 million into the
Firefighter Recruitment fund.
We're thinking national trend
that's hitting new Mexico that
we're not finding enough
volunteers to be the next
generation of firefighters. This
would help us in ensuring that
we can recruit were paid
firefighters and E M. T s
And this would also help not
only in battling blazes and all
of our communities, but this
would also help in, um improving
our I s a ratings. I do have
three experts with me. Randy
baklava, the state fire marshal
prop Valencia County Fire Chief
Miguel Tinman, Local 244
President. I know we've had a
long night. We won't make
comments, but they're here to
help me. Answer questions if
need be.
Thank you, Senator. We do have
an amendment on your bill. So
just so everybody knows the
money's in house built to build
the requirements for the statue.
Will strike their preparation
appropriation isn't have gone
forward and appropriation is
already there. So you have an
amendment. You have that
amendments can have a motion to
do.
Some more and motion to Senator
Gonzalez second to remove the
motion in amendment for
discussion purposes.
They're on the amendment for
discussion purposes. This
standard Senate finance strikes
the appropriations so that
That story deal can move
forward.
Any questions, None can have a
motion moving to pass on the
amendment. Mr Chairman,
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes. Yes, Senator
Campos.
Senator Brantley. Senator
Brantley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzales? Yes. Gonzalez votes.
Yes, Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill votes? Yes, Senator
Padilla. Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator, Sheriff.
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods senator would
sports. Yes, Senator Campos
Senator Compost votes? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes Yes, Germano's
You have an amended Bill center.
Anybody in the audience have a
zoom list.
Let's go to zoom. Let's go to
the audience first.
Two or three in support.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Committee. Um I'm TJ Kathy Fire
Chief Palace Fire department.
I'm also the president elect of
the Fire Chief Association board
of directors, and I also come
representing the six volunteer
agencies that also serve our
community and we support this
and appreciate your
consideration in the work that
these gentlemen put in. Thank
you.
Mr Chair Members of Committee
Alberto Ortega on behalf of
Mexico Professional Firefighters
Association. We also stand
strong support this bill. Thank
you.
Committee chair, remembers John
Wickersham assistant fire chief
City of Espanola. We stand in
strong support of this bill that
will directly affect us me all
the city of espionage Fire
department. Thank you.
No, Mr Chair members. Uh, Kevin
Hope fire Chief City of
Artemisia, also president of New
Mexico Fire Chiefs Association.
And we also support this bill.
Mr Chairman Committee. Charles
Cox farts useless department.
We strongly support your appeal.
Hmm.
Thank you. We'll go to zoom
right now. Tanya.
You're in support.
Justin, are you there?
We don't have anybody else.
Anybody in opposition None.
Questions from committee members
second
Senator Woods has a question
question.
Chair.
And central
How do we keep one Fire
department was pilfering from
another fire department.
What's in this bill that shows
that these guys can't jump.
And get more than one.
Bonus was
Mr Chair Senator would That's a
great question? Um, I think you
can be confident in the process
of the rules making as this was
a collaborative done between the
FF International Association
Fire fires the labor
organization in my Professional
Firefighters Association, as
well as the Metro Chiefs and all
of these chiefs here in an
audience. This is a
collaborative done in the
interim. We had a bill last year
that didn't didn't make it
through a long process and all
the stakeholders have been
involved.
I myself come from Albuquerque,
New Mexico, which is a big
brother. We will not benefit
from this. We're here to make
sure that our our smaller
departments are smaller Locals
are smaller municipalities and
counties benefit from the
staffing needs that we that we
have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. This bill
didn't make it last year because
the governor vetoed it.
Guardrails. Have you put in
place to ensure that if you
addressed her concerns or
We've passed this bill before.
So have you met her concerns
that she outlined those for you,
Mr Chairman, Senator, So she
vetoed the bill because there
wasn't an appropriation. This
time we put the appropriation, I
guess.
How much I know this is all this
is kind of based and where
firefighters we have
Less cost. We paint our home
insurance, right? What are the
What are the insurance companies
signaling to us that if we don't
recruit firefighters? What could
our insurance rates go to a New
Mexico? Mr Chair? Members of the
committee, um, not sure on the
insurance companies, but what we
do see from our offices,
classified department retros to
a class 10 because they only
have three members.
You're going to see the
department actually lose funding
quite a bit of funding plus
insurance rates going up in
those areas give an example in
2017 and 18. We do have Donut
and the county where they lost
their volunteers and most other
departments to class tens and
the insurance rates doubled to
tripled in those areas.
So in efforts to fix that
situation in 2019, they did a
resurvey and they consolidated
two districts in north and
south. They all went to a class
five and they started hiring
full time personnel in order to
fix and remedy the situation.
So that the insurance companies
come back and re read read the
rate those areas. Mr. J.
Remembers the communities they
did. So how are we going to make
sure that
From North
Just South.
How are we going to make sure
that that's equal so we're not
Getting that reaction across the
state Sue bra pureness.
How do we
Get it. Mr Chairman, members of
the committee. That's a great
question.
The intent of this, uh, this
bill is to to allow these
agencies were identifying these
deficiencies to be over, able to
overcome out Come them starting
today. Really, uh, with the idea
that they'll be able to fund
them in the next couple of years
by doing that the agencies
themselves are recognizing the
problems and they're being given
the opportunity to fix them with
support from the state Fire
Marshal's office and the other
agencies.
So we don't need to require this
to be spread across the board
Real remote county and
Real areas go up in
All the world gets their share.
So
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. You're right on with
that, and the intent is that
these funds will be distributed
based on recommendations from
the Grand Council who will see
the need from the agencies that
need it the most and put the
money where it's really going to
have the most benefit in the
state.
I just
You know, like caution.
You know when the first time we
did the pollution recruitment?
Really got to figure out how
we're gonna get it spread across
Retain those people for
especially for volunteer
firefighters and
Raymond. New Mexican Wouldn't
ministers this
Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee will be a ministered
by D F a different sided by the
fire Grant Council, But just
make one note on your statement.
One thing that it it will do for
a lot of these agencies is given
the opportunity for the
volunteers that are currently
there or youth in the
communities to now have an
opportunity to stay where they
are.
The way it sits right now is
maybe somebody is interested in
the virus service and Magdalena,
for instance, but there's no
opportunity for them to work
there, so they come into the
larger areas where we're going
to try to do is make sure those
opportunities are available for
Current volunteers, youth and
the communities so that we
ingrain the people in their own
community. Keep them there. Keep
invested. Give them protecting
their own families. And that's
the intent of this.
Both in intent can go awry.
Brother quickly.
I'm just saying you better get
make sure rural has
Fair shot that we
Insurance rates on someone and
ruin the Mexico more.
We'll be watching, I guess.
Overdue pass.
Motion for do pass by Senator
As a mentor, Senator Bert
Yes, Senator. Bert votes. Yes,
Senator Campos. Senator compose
votes. Yes, Senator Brantley.
Brantley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzales, Senator Gonzalez
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla? Yes votes? Yes,
Senator Scherer. Senator. Sure
votes. Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods.
In the woods boats? Yes, by
school. Rodriguez. Oh, yes,
Thank you.
Nice chair. Rodriguez votes Yes,
and chairman OSCE Yes.
Yep.
I think our bedding
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Have a
good night, senator. Good bill.
We're going back to 151. So just
to clarify this
Can you pass out 99.12
amendments we need to adopt.
First one is to strip the money.
9.1. That's one. I had an okay
151.
Can you pass out the men and
100.1?
So you already have
accomplished 100.1 is to strip
the appropriation.
So we know how we're gonna do
this and we're gonna go to 30.1.
And we're gonna
Stop number one and strike
number two.
On the appropriation.
Can have emotion.
We don't introducing the bill.
Mr. Chairman,
Thank you. Can I have a motion
discussion purposes to
promotion? My center sheer
second by center, Rodriguez
To adopt.
100 point any questions on
We're going to do one at a time,
so I don't okay. We called the
rope. Can I have a motion for
So much more should adopt
second. Call them rope.
Senator Bert
Yes. Votes. Yes, Senator.
Compost Compost votes. Yes,
Senator Brantley. Brantley
votes. Yes, Senator Gonzales,
Gonzales votes? Yes, Senator
Hemphill? Yes, Senator Hemphill
Boats? Yes, Senator. Patio? Yes.
votes? Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes
Yes. And Chairman Yeo's Yes, we
have it. Ellis. Mr Chairman,
second that I have a question A
030 point Chairman. You're
looking at me and you didn't
call him. Thanks. Chair and
senator Compost. I just want to
make sure you're comfortable
that I remember two on the
document I was given was struck
out. You're comfortable with
that document. So, Mr Chairman
Center for the
Thank you. I will need emotion.
Number number one. Strike number
two
Ocean, but
By Senator this year, right
number one.
I mean to leave number one.
Adopt number one. Strike number
two, Not me.
Questions on that motion.
Color.
Senator Bert Bert votes. Yes,
Senator Campos? Yes. Compost
votes. Yes, Senator Bradley,
Senator Brantley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzales? Yes. Solace
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill?
Yes. Votes? Yes, Senator by the
yes
Votes. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes, Vice chair.
Rodriguez votes Yes. And
Chairman knows yes.
Jeremy. I mean, Chairman Na
spokes. Yes. 10 0. Okay, Your
bill has been amended twice or
back on the bill. I need to go.
Wait. I gotta go to the audience
and support
Anybody in supporting the
audience.
Oh, I got to on zoom, and then
I'm gonna take too. So I have.
Tanya, Are you there on Jim?
You got one minute.
Hi. Thank you, Chairman and
members of the Finance County. I
am Tanya Latin. I'm the deputy
chief of the village of
Corrales, Fire Department and
EMS department, Um, for M S and
emergency management. I've been
in the village since 1997 as an
M T. And that paramedic and fire
fighter. I'm stand fully in
support of this bill and to give
you a little bit of information
wide and physical year 2003 we
received $8071 from the M s Fund
Act 20 years later in fy 20.
Three. We only received $9134.
During that that's only 1000 $60
increase, and that was based on
our run numbers in 2023. We ran
over 740 M s calls. That means
we were getting an average of
$12.50 per M s called during
that time medications have
increased exponentially, and
2003 epinephrine was roughly $2
a vial today when I went to
purchase I have to pay 2548 for
one vial of epinephrine. We have
also had an expanded scope of
practice, which is
Is wonderful, but it's added
more medications and tools that
small role departments cannot
afford. Most of us do not charge
for any of our EMS services who
must find doctors.
And pharmacists and medical
supplies and equipment out of
this, So please, please, please
pass Senate Bill 151 to the
floor.
Justin, are you there? You're
next.
He's not there.
Okay?
Uh, those in support that are
going to buy from
Firehouse SUBS. Stand up Mr
Chair Centers. Miguel Tinman
registered lobbies with the
Albuquerque local to 44 and
domestic professional
firefighters. We'd like to take
the sponsors for bringing this,
Um let's bring it up. We stand
in strong support of this bill
for the reasons that we just
discussed earlier, um, the
resources that we need to do the
job.
The equipment. The firefighters,
um e. M s as well is is lacking
in many of the corners of our
state. This bill is going to
help reach all of those
departments and give them the
resources that they need to
provide this this invaluable,
UM, service, a service that
keeps growing and growing in
terms of what the what we
provide.
To our constituents to arches to
the citizens of New Mexico, so
we're standing strong support
and we urge your votes. Thank
you Have someone shorter next?
Mr Chair members to me, I'll be
short New Mexico Professional
Firefighters Association Alberta
Ortega on their behalf. Uh short
and sweet. We support
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name's Eric
Masterson with Sandoval County
Fire and Rescue. I'm also the
vice chair of the Metro Fire
Chief Association. We stand in
strong support of this, It'll
drastically impact rule and
tribal entities of Sandoval
County and the rest of New
Mexico.
Obs Hearts chair. Uh, members of
Committee I thank you for your
time tonight I stand in strong
support of this. I come speak on
behalf of southeast New Mexico
City hubs. Fire department. We
run over 10,000. M s calls a
year see an increase of 15% year
over year. This increase in
funding would greatly benefit
the Habs Fire department. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Committee. TJ Cathy again.
Patellas, Fire Department Fire
and E. M s chief. Um, right now,
Alison Last fiscal year RMS Fund
Act attributed 0.4% of our total
operating budget.
Of over $4 million total
operating budget. Now our
department does provide both
fire and E. M s. And I think we
can all agree that those
services are drastically
important, especially in the
rural communities. That's why I
reached out to our volunteer
chiefs to confirm that they were
in support of this because this
will greatly impact their
services. They provide even more
than the paid services. Thank
you.
I think we missed Groundhog Day.
Today's Fire Day. Any no one
else anybody in opposition.
I'm if anybody's in opposition,
you're gonna get beat up. So
stand up. Yeah. Good. Uh, any
questions from committee
members, senators, any closing
remarks seen none. Have emotion.
Move, Mr Chairman, second.
An emotion over there, you know,
just like that was emotion.
Emotion by Senator Padilla
sectors. Mr
Amended as amended as twice
Yeah, twice a Senator Rodriguez
made the motion.
As twice amended.
Okay?
Senator Burke. Yes. Votes. Yes,
Senator. Compass, Senator.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Brantley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzalez? Yes. Gonzalez
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill?
Yes votes? Yes, Senator Padilla
Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chairman News.
Do we get a firehouse sub with
it?
Yes. Ceremonial sports. Yes, you
have a dupe.
Man. You guys batted 100%
tonight, Mr. Chair. I want to
thank all the firefighting due
to you know what? Thank you guys
for your service firefighter
that drove from Hamas. Thank you
for coming. And I think they're
all going to buy you a steak
dinner.
So we appreciate that curve
Firefighters. We appreciate you
guys we know
We need you your critical when
we dial 911.
You guys are there for us? So we
appreciate this. Thank you will
have some more bills on for
tomorrow.
You don't want to see him. I so
I'm waiting. I'm waiting for one
more expert witness.
Played in the Connie Mack World
Series.
And so we'll do that as soon as
I get that
We'll have Bill's on for
tomorrow.
Or lfc Stafford, you're required
to clean and vacuum the room.
