Meeting of the latest to
That is.
So.
We will.
One
of
this is an issue and management
activities and project manager
project manager or do it right
now
one.
Eighty percent.
A point four during the have the
local decisions and any any any
was taken away from this is a
significant impact on the
revenue management capabilities
and this is just to give you an
idea just thought that it
would not ended right.
Who is the leading reserves
over is
not going to be very very.
Our next.
In order to are recommended
that.
Thank you very much Secretary in
Mr chairman members I'm
interested in the project by the
governor among our primary task
is standing up the office of the
broadband access expansions on
this slide.
Person the LFC recommendation
verses the executive
recommendation it difference.
With regard to the general fund
appropriation two thousand and
LFC recommendations versus one
point five million in executive
recommendation breaking that
down.
In twenty budget difference of
six hundred thousand versus just
shy of one million I am
contractual services
they're approximately two
hundred thousand I in terms of
other expenditures hundred
thousand dollar cap ma'am for
instance comes to mind or
planning communities example
support systems categories with
with.
That said the differences FTEs
is significant for our and
offices such as are looking to
build momentum and you can do a
lot of work throughout the state
in short order the LFC
recommendations for FTE seven
I'm sorry I.
Relation to seven after use for
difference to on the next slide
down without work looks like.
Very quickly here what we
anticipated for a staffing
professionals model for the
office broadband access
expansion in addition to the
director and assistant director
positions we like to bring on
more staff that will help grants
administration project
absolutely critical hi dollars.
Also friends reporting
compliance given the amount of
federal funding is coming to us.
Requests with that entities
across the state transmission
and straight reporting
compliance is integral to our
success the on investment in
broadband mapping and GIS to be
critical as well as investing
the children would be in the
person this is technical
assistance on extending the
reach of the office of
broadband.
Capital and also a lot of the
program the statement on it
happens around the state at
value to that store capital
investment in areas additional
numbers because usually could be
three four positions each
minimally to have twenty to
forty teachers errors beyond
that we are able to bring some
expertise in a variety of areas
professional services contracts
technology integration so you
look at a wide array of
different technologies utilized
provide universal broadband
access around the state we one
have in house expertise to help
us hold providers also just
throughout the state we have to
have a contractual relationship
with that subject matter expert
of course to bring that
expertise in house in addition
focus on and on my back call
this is a the concert on Friday
well into the news had any
fasting not only you
infrastructure but also that
subject matter expertise using
and that in house capacity is
going to be critical our and
then in addition to that over
time to build out mapping and
field elevation capacity within
the office as investing
broadband expansion on the
state's critically important
that we keep track of where the
progresses the NMAA and also
getting sealed in Farmington
that is grant funded work uses
Ingle sat for instance and
finally all of this work is
gonna be critically important
for communities around the state
I have been able to process
excellent communication our
approach is going to make a big
difference in how successful we
are and so we'd like to invest
in all those areas staffing
professionals contract have to
get into more detail but for the
interest of time we can move on
to the next slide and this is.
First date with a five hundred
thousand dollar balance the
fiscal.
That we have sent down.
Hello this message maybe a
hundred ninety two thousand
seven of the fiscal year with
contractual obligations
currently.
In place of a hundred twenty
thousand that easily double in
the next couple of weeks and so
we are building the offices
project as we see with that said
if you anticipated balance I'm
going to fiscal twenty three I
don't expect that to be honest
about the currently right now
with our obligations that
project to be and so with that
Mr Chairman numbers I'd be happy
to stand for questions along
with my colleague the secretary.
Four question slide and on the
bottom of your.
Senator actual costs for ninety
six thousand if you're showing
the annualized cost on the.
Correct.
You Mr chairman members that
that was the cost you calendar
year twenty twenty one and in a
sense.
extrapolated to cover the full
fiscal year given the fact those
costs will be
on January to June twenty twenty
two as we conclude the first.
Question from committee members
yes.
Center.
Thank you very much.
Pretty quickly so you have a lot
of questions nation agency.
Education.
Thank you Mr
chairman I will be very fast I
do have other questions but and
I did walk in about two minutes
to seven minutes late so I
apologize for that Mr Chairman
just real quick it is the plan
for the broadband statewide but
broadband plan has it been
released I I just don't believe
that I've received it so it
hasn't happened yet because I
know that funding is already
started flowing in things are
moving and I know this is a
budget committee so or if the
finance committee so do we have
the actual plan out there fully
documented and out to the people
of New Mexico yeah.
Mr chair and senator we have
completed the annual report and
the initial plan the framework
for how we in this building
assets project in in standing up
our capital programs in working
with a variety of stakeholders
yeah stand up complementary
programming that plan was
submitted to the legislature
hundred January deadline we are
going to treat that plan and in
all of our plans and forward is
process is we get more detail
from federal agencies for
instance your structure just
finalize its rules regarding the
use of certain are propellers
currently conversation partner
treasury regarding the uses of
capital projects fund dollars
hundred.
Ours just in capital projects
fund alone and so moving forward
to access this is the detail to
that framework that we shall not
on January one report currently
eight point four the level of
detail that we feel is
appropriate given the the
uncertainty that the federal
funding.
Thank you Mr chairman so I guess
that's why when can we expect
the actual statewide broadband
plan of the first actual planned
to be released.
Sure there there is a plan that
was completed in the summer of
twenty twenty and that's a plan
that we believe is full of a lot
of guys.
Mexico's task force based upon
that point currently posted on
our website in the report that
was issued in January first we
expected in the coming you know
months so we'll certainly have
an opportunity to further refine
on the plan that we're putting
together and in numbers I I I
don't I hesitate to put a date
on this is because we don't know
when role overview guidance from
our federal funded partners will
come down to us on that that I
anticipated in the coming weeks
that will be able to add more
details to what was the
legislature on January one and I
I would prefer to treat this is
an ongoing conversation where
onto public meeting for New
Mexico consulate which
approximately two weeks ago did
do more and more details will be
added to the framework of
standing up regarding both the
office of project
connect New Mexico program and
all the other work the
compliments forward.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr director I just you know what
in all fairness to you you've
just taken on this role and I
understand that and I know that
there's I was with you on the
day that you were announced and
I'm we're all very excited to
move this along and make this
happen for the people of New
Mexico in the state.
I'm I'm a bit concerned and in
but I will tell you this Mr
chairman because
if we don't have the plan in
place I think it's going to be
really hard for us to be going
and putting our hand out asking
for dollars turns into be can
become very problematic so I'm
not going to press any further
on a date he told us you don't
want to give us a date I can
respect that but I'm very
concerned of how we're going to
be asking for dollars when we're
relying on the plan and I I
think I heard correctly that's
now almost two years old I'm
very concerned about that and
You know that there's other
things I could ask about that
are supposed to be in this
office and I know that you're
building it now Mr director so I
will be on this
You can expect me to to be very
very interested in your
activities and what's going on
with you but we need that plan
and I think that plan is
critical to getting the money
that we need so we don't have
that done yet I do ask
respectfully that that be a huge
for a top priority thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Padilla and
Matt maybe you know.
I was told that Deloitte and
Touche did a plan for New Mexico
and that plan was given to the
feds for approval and where we
at with that plan so that may
answer a lot of committee
members questions.
Yes Mr chairman members a lot of
work was put into a plan on
preparing showed the officer
project from the lawyers I think
there is value in that that
works however I would not
call in the state of New Mexico
broadband plan.
There's so much uncertainty
regarding the level of funding
and interest in the restrictions
of the guidance can be tied to
that funding I hesitated for a
detailed plan.
That we know is fundamentally
flawed in so I in my view.
Establishing a framework in
added details to that one or
more as we move forward he's
he's our best approach you in
terms of and.
The public with key stakeholders
our communities tribes with
doctor and providers where we
are currently what resources you
have currently in how we plan to
integrate different resource
streams and and programs moving
forward and so with respect to
participate
Report I think you are elements
that we will be including into a
lot of work in the we stand up
in court documents that the
release of the public.
With regard to a more detailed
stated plan moving forward but
that in my mind the funding not
committed to standing alone this
is the office of broadband.
Daniel loan does not constitute
broadband plan and so I think
there are elements of that the
little the lawyer that would
like to see purpose but I don't
want to to point to that and say
this is our approach for this is
not.
Thank you center went.
Mr chair it's just a standard
question.
I noticed that you haven't quite
a bit of money for contract
services in a huge increase in
contractors doubling it is what
you're asking is could you give
me a list of your.
Contractors that that you're
using and twenty twenty one and
twenty twenty two and give me a
of the amounts of their contract
in the services they provide and
Mr chair that's my only request
thank you any other questions
from me.
During cross let me ask you do
we have enough money in cyber
security I know that to an issue
that's on top of everybody
across New Mexico with schools
shutting down and so where it
was Senators carrying in is
there enough in the budget to
handle that for the.
The.
Members of the committee issues.
Thank
is here in the.
The design and you were losses
the movie the animals and then
and.
To get letters likely receive
funding
who staff about legislative
process the state these hi about
the.
Two million dollars you from the
show.
Would be appropriated to status.
Senator the difficulty
after eight
a message to
the state
Date
and.
The the lack this is needed to
he is the network what I was
provided.
So.
I for community service in
addition.
However the.
Wendy would not rest initiative
in the trucks.
All the work to do gate.
With the state I'm.
Or or or maybe that
They.
Funds
I am in
the office.
Home security
at the facility in this meeting
act of writing this is Katie
providing that.
That is why
the.
Thank you I I just got one more
question what do we play
Deloitte for that plan broadband
plan you guys know and does
analyst know that.
Hi Mister chair I can look that
up for you I might have it
available to you if you give me
just one second.
My career arise do you know that
number that we pay them for the.
and this is the and yet the
dimensions available.
Thank.
Well the analyst is looking that
up thank you guys for your
presentation today let me tell
you broadband is center for the
is greatest love in the world.
It has to happen in New Mexico
and even rural New Mexico and
and I'll give you the perfect
example in the you've probably
seen this in the news even the
country of Cuba as now.
Dedicated their money to
starling.
To get their technology driven
in.
No this is I forget who on
starlink but
so I mean.
A small country like that.
Is already seeing that they're
not gonna have the technology or
the time or the infrastructure
to lay that in the ground and so
on rural New Mexico is going to
be very key because the hardest
part is the last mile thank you
yes Mr chair members of the
committee on the deployed
contract was for a total of five
hundred thousand dollars there's
additional details about the
what was supposed to come out of
that plan in your November
broadband brief that was
presented to LFC and that's on
page three of that brief.
Thank you I just think you know
we've got to get this resolved
in New Mexico if we don't get it
resolved we're all going to
suffer in order to get left
behind again I mean if we can't
be last and everything this is
should be something that we can
resolve so thank you guys for
your presentation thank you for
your time today will move on to
sites when do you want to do TRD
and I think the this Montoya is
the DFA analyst and I believe.
Is on with us.
Hi Mr chair.
if we could just make sure that
the new Montoya is available for
a on the panelists okay perfect
just wanted to make sure.
All righty so again Jessica hits
then LFC analyst I'm joined by
Cindy Montoya the DFA
counterpart for this agency will
be going over taxation and
revenue department agency code
three three three I apologize
for not mentioning this the
previous presentation but you
can also find your associated
volume one and volume two
documents the page numbers are
on page three of your packet
volume one would be pages one
sixty two and volume to would be
page sixty five.
I'll go ahead and go over the
highlights on your first page of
your packets.
Of recommendations for the
taxation and revenue department
supported general fund revenue
increase over FY twenty two LFC
provided the general fund budget
of sixty eight million which is
a four point one percent
increase well the executive
provides general fund budget of
seventy one point nine million a
ten point one percent increase
of the executive fully funds
agencies request in all
categories however the LFC
applies a vacancy rate to the
agencies I programs and fun
slightly lower amount for other
costs like I. T. services and
travel both recommendations also
room included funding for
requests F. T. E. expansions and
program support and the property
tax division however the LESC
did not support requests FTX
pensions for the motor vehicle
division due to high funded
vacancies on the executive also
budgets two hundred thousand
dollars from the weight distance
tax ID permit fund for internal
transfers which the LFC
recommendation did not include
due to a technical submission
error so if the committee adopts
LFC we recommend adding that two
hundred thousand back in for
transfers both recommendations
supported requested increases
for property tax which was
twelve point three percent I'm
sorry the property tax program
let me be clear for twelve point
three percent and compliance
enforcement program for eight
point two they also included
language for the weight distance
tax ID permit fund transfers to
the department of transportation
and the department of public
safety analysts have come to a
consensus on performance
measures and targets and then
just a few notes on performance
at the bottom of your sheet
there will the HSD fall short of
its collections of outstanding
balances target but did make
improvements in collecting audit
assessments increasing
increasing the correction rate
from twenty percent to thirty
percent FY twenty one a good
handed over to Santo yeah DFA
for additional comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
just briefly
stated he does we find.
With the majority of the members
personal services and we have to
worry about meeting higher than
the LFC recommendation the.
Addition provided additional
funding in the program so that
agencies need higher critical
positions related to tax
collection I.
The technology and has the motor
vehicle division this is all in
an effort to reduce the overall
agencies.
This with that Mr chairman and
members of the committee I want
to pass it over to secretary
Schardin fire for a
presentation.
Madam secretary I think you need
to focus on pages six through
ten on the budget request for
the differences in the exact and
the most the rest of those pages
are kind of just left that we've
seen.
Twenty seven thousand times the
prior presentation.
Thank.
Okay so Mister chairman I I
realize these are here for your
reference and that is the plan
was quickly the staff members on
to help there are needy and
expressed that I can answer with
me is deputy secretary Emily
Oster administrative services
division director
your identity compliance
division director I.
and I. T. director Mike Papa for
your reference Mr chair members
of the committees are trying to
reach out to these individuals
communities in the department
for calling.
This is current again mission
statement
and moving on to some of the
initiatives to reminded
committee what we've been
working on their way really been
focusing on rebuilding workforce
training standardized
procedures.
These were were very.
Customer experience customer
service highlighted here are
some of the projects through the
recently completed a two million
dollar property tax division
remodel and every design
purposes tax finances
appreciation taxpayers as well
as the light twenty one.
as far as policy changes you
know as well as anyone a lot of
changes to the tax code is
twenty nineteen and I just
products to stated implemented
all of that time budget.
And.
as previous balance the
executive recommendation goes
provide more federal funding for
agencies and the executive
director the LFC vaccines maybe.
Hi for fifteen point eight
percent funded agency rate
versus the twenty point two
percent funding the LFC lar I do
realize that the labor supply
excellent right do you have
trouble retaining and recruiting
but Canadian budgeting out
eighteen months.
Some of that will alleviate and
the agencies
homes that will be in a position
to fill a vacancy to success.
This is a reminder that our
mediation is revenue collections
of the more collecting.
We have a more revenue agencies
we have working for all state
funds and local governments.
the differences in the
recommendations
Five million for contention
Appropriations for Bill patients
depending on what and I think
and several have been introduced
that would if passed.
Limitations for the agency C.
will be passed on both
recommendations we're grateful
to see support for hundred
thirty six thousand dollars
supplemental for programs for
division FY twenty two we
started this the security.
Holding out the hires.
Exactly right.
Thousand for a statewide tax
preparation assistance program
for low income.
Photos and this is something
that's been funded and
past about on several years and
if you're interested in learning
more about I think it's a
supplemental information on that
program to the LFC it has a very
high return on investment
of one of the tax preparation
fees for it does not rate and it
also results in three five both
state and federal funds coming
to the state is like forty
Mexico.
and then both of find out of.
We have three other local
retailers.
If there's really wanting a
committee committee with its
that we really request your
support to more fully.
budgeted for the whole next
eighteen months twenty percent.
Will severely hamper efforts to
reset.
Ministration program program
about eleven dollars for every
dollar programs for every dollar
we spend our energy on our
collection agency turned out we
returned about eleven dollars to
the state and local.
we are fully funded.
Programs support program AT the
office of the secretary Schardin
the that will allow us to.
Tax code to try to prevent
recurring revenue losses the tax
law.
And allow for adequate staffing
program for distributions to
local governments and state
funds are right now receiving AT
one hand as taxes
we.
Distributing three different tax
programs that have a little
component Canada's local option
G. R. T. and local contact
twenty it was only one out of
every three it'll ensure correct
revenue distributions to all
those local government finance
you madam CJ do it secretary
moment ago cybersecurity.
As.
Held every taxpayer drivers.
They were very serious about
signing the cybersecurity.
And as we will move on I have
also thinking a good review in
the committee has are asked to
get out
of the question thank you.
Your questions.
Thank you Mr I noticed that
you're asking for a eight
hundred fourteen thousand for
governance risk and compliance
software how much help is a at
the do it I do I do do it
department has been do you on
these request.
I'm sorry it was
yes yes this is Woods yes thank
you Mr chairman I thank you for
that question Senator works to
our CEO Mike.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee the if I
understood the question
correctly it was and how much
help with is is is the
department ninety I I can sing
enough praises for the
department of IT we where we as
Carmen motor vehicle attacks
were considerably higher in our
in our technological
infrastructure and that is
particularly towards work a lot.
The department of I. T. S. help
as of the last three years
Really modernised on network
across the state and that's
that's not for this morning for
for motor vehicles are people
trying to get eight hours and
it's also important for the
communities a lot of times the.
departments agencies wrote these
government institutions of
service institutions so I I
can't sing enough praises with
the department of ninety eight
area players and members of the
Mr chair and and and.
Then of I'm sorry I didn't catch
your name Sir but another
question for you of.
So are they helping you.
Fund these programs and install
these programs and.
Exactly what part do they play
in this process.
As chairman.
Madam chair members of the
committee the Department of IT
has an oversight process for
large projects in the state of
New Mexico the projects
certification committee once it
is funded it used to fund
projects will have to go through
a strict planning right with the
department they release funds
you faces and Senator
requirements to ensure a
successful project our
department taxes Representative
has a long history of successful
projects.
This is and I don't know fund
our IT infrastructure request
but the department of nineteen
monitors all executive agencies
and elected officials
particularly through section
seven.
My last question is
I notice you're asking for quite
a bit increase in contracting
services.
And I was
I would ask if you would send me
a list of your contractors.
The amount of the contract.
And the type of services they
provide.
Thank you madam.
Absolutely Mr chair Senator
Woods will send that to you a
preview for you that we have two
very large IT systems that are
having a contract for services
there's a genotoxicity for the
tax system of record and then
the immediate customer records
fall tapestry and both provided
by St Andrews fast and that's
our I. T. budget for contracts
very their services but there's
a lot of other support well so
that all to you.
Thank you very much thank you
madam secretary.
Thank you madam chair yes thank
you senator Watson thank you
Stephanie next we have Senator
share.
Thank you
madam secretary on three kind of
points here the first one is
motor vehicle department always
been a problem.
Don't have a solution for you
but golly we need the of of
somebody that's in leadership
there so that people can just.
Not be so frustrated the
destination of the gross
receipts tax how is that is that
been a problem for you to figure
out where.
Where things were happening.
So thank you for the question
madam chair and senator servers
to the point and be I share your
concern.
And we can provide the
exceptional customer service
that's required but I would ask
you to maybe a seventy mile for
me updating you on what the
services like now the wait time
for person is down about forty
two percent from the beginning
of this administration wait
times are down the online
scheduling tool is working very
well the call center for
maintenance on challenging the
wait times there can be high but
our field office services
actually excellent right now and
it might be time for if anyone
expects NMED terrible it might
be time to revisit that
assumption about destination
based sourcing it is a lot for
taxpayers to adjust to and
ultimately taxpayers are the
ones you have to know how to
file the return which location
codes to choose and then we just
simply would receive our process
the revenue and we may audit the
return on the back end of what
we've been doing a lot of hours
to business groups and taxpayers
at all all time we have a
YouTube channel with that
educational outreach to try to
make sure every business
taxpayer has the tools leading
to file correctly.
So it I appreciate that madam
chair and madam secretary I just
know that for some of the local
communities this is still
problematic so is problematic
for the business the thanks they
live in Farmington think they've
done service in Farmington and
they find out they've done
service in San Juan County of
just because it was across the
street or something so I know
that that's I just wondered if
that was an issue for you with
people coming back in and of
trying to to amend their tax
returns because they don't know
where they are.
Right madam chairman Senator
share it certainly under the old
law of origin based sourcing and
now under destinations forcing
taxpayers have the same time
here is they've always had to
amend your return and that issue
of where you are located is a
brand new wishes to different
issues now it's always finishes.
We all are familiar with units
okay.
to the Supreme Court AT twenty
fifteen and so it's different
now but it's it's not a new
issue for taxpayers or the
department okay and then my last
area here is of a more agents
out there to enforced
collections.
I think there's a
For our tax system in America
has always been mostly voluntary
and so you don't build back
better plan they talk about
eighty thousand new iris agents
just made me cringe even if it's
just wanted new aged and in New
Mexico I would a question that
but I also understand the trust
but verify issue.
In from that how many.
What what do you expect from any
new of the.
Really called tax collector for
food lack of my ability to
remember to call.
Madam chair and senator shared a
moment of ask for comment for
more easy director ice a lot but
I kind of want to say before
turning over that having
Louis a vacancy filled easy
isn't just about shaking the
trees and collecting it's about
customer service it's about
being able to answer the call
that our call center it's about
being able to give you guidance
to taxpayers who want to
voluntarily comply so that they
know how to do it correctly
about updating our publications
about it's also about collecting
revenue but it is about a lot
more than that I should do you
want to add to that question.
Madam chair members of the
committee I would just add that
in addition to the education
components kicking taxpayers
involuntary complaints because
that is our goal to enforce
voluntary compliance way we're
very heavily reliant on IT
systems to help us prioritize
what is the best return on
investment in actually measured
based on return on investment in
the I'm in compliance division
hello dollars to every dollar
spent so basically thought the
expectation for every employee
and easy to generate revenue and
we do that by prioritizing the
efforts whether that be an audit
on the front or in compliance in
collections any act and area
that you're basically working in
we try to use technology to help
us work smarter.
thank you.
Strittmatter servers over there
now and I I I understand we have
to do that and I'm not opposed
to that I just I do think that
is it is a matter of policy.
We do need to ask for the money
but.
But I don't think we need to be
harsh about it and I've seen
some of that words you will pay
now we're.
Face the wrath of the secretary
versus Hey let's see that you
know you know you have a problem
we know you have a problem let's
try to work it out in so it's
just that attitude that I want
to make sure that we don't
wander off in the in the
harshness area but.
Thank you.
I share that concern you know I
we we have a tough job to do
early balances Forsman with
customer service and what we are
you still in staff every chance
we get is like yes you need to
go into our code with you so
with empathy and and treat every
taxpayer and and the customer
with dignity and respect.
Thank you I really appreciate
that thank thank you Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
chair and I want to take a
little different perspective
when it comes to the and V. D.
because this is a personal
experience
couple of months ago as I was
dealing with having my license
re renewed I will I follow the
steps things work out I was
scheduled for an appointment I
did have to go back and forth a
couple of times but it really
goes back to what you're trying
to do madam secretary and that
is as we go forward what is that
balanced enforcement and so
unfortunately during the time
that I was there at the MVD
individuals that were there
would get quite agitated part
and practically at times become
really really forceful when they
they didn't have to be and and
the reason I bring that up
because as we go forward and
we're talking about patients
were talking about trying to get
the work done there are those
ways that you're trying to
promote to get it done so again
to the motor vehicle department
I want to thank you for working
if you will on in a diligent way
to ensure that there is going to
be the patients as we move
forward and of course I I'm very
optimistic that over time some
of the other glitches are going
to be worked out so I I wanted
to go ahead and and compliment
you on that and that wasn't
intended it was just something
that came up as one of my
colleagues had to had mentioned
that issue the big issue for me
as we continue to deal with the
FTEs throughout government and
we talk about the need for
additional personnel have you
taken a look at what that long
term logistics and is going to
be including the out years.
And the reason I say that
because if we're going to go
forward and we don't have the
employees but were able to go
and put forth the resources to
deal with this how are we gonna
be dealing with that and is that
part of the strategy that that
you're implementing as we go
forward thank you.
Well I think the madam chair
Mister chair I can tell we'll go
to madam chair.
Mr Mr chair then we're gonna go
ahead and go to madam secretary.
And and Senator Campos
right now we are staffed at a
level that I even we're we're
not staff right now at a level
that I can even start to think
about you know are there
vacancies we have it never need
to be filled because of a
different way of doing things
we're twenty four percent taken
right now and all I can really
focus on is getting people and
those tests every day and
keeping like keeping a person
from happening in retaining the
staff that we have an apartment
training you know if you look at
our chart I think we have about
one thousand and eighty or so
positions and there's probably
some level there it could be
activated off into the future
but we're just we're nowhere
near it right now and frankly
neither the budget
recommendations get us here at
you know fifteen percent funded
vacancies last we are investing
heavily in our I. T. processes
are in our eighties systems
because they make us more
resilient they allow us to work
smarter not harder keep our job
going interventions going even
when we have turnover in staff
but there's certain customer
service aspects of what we do
that we'll never be able to be
replaced through automation and
so to the extent we have staff
who still need to be getting
correspondence out answering
phone calls responding to emails
all you know processing immunity
transactions so we're just
knowing you're having the number
of actual staff that we need but
we do need to keep dusting and
I. T. so that we can get further
and further more mature way.
So Mr chair and of course madam
secretary as we go forward what
is the investment and what is
that strategic plan in order for
us to not necessarily catch up
but to try to stay ahead in
terms of not only the person
that we need to hire but also
that has already been mentioned
to deal directly with the the
balance strength that we need
when it comes to delivering the
services for taxed ram.
Well chair and senator Campos I
want to highlight our C. two
projects there is proper this
year and.
The prioritized list strategic
initiatives that we thought it
was best to proceed with one has
to do it collections so in our
in our audit and compliance
division we kind of had to
branches we have audited the
goes and audits return to make
assessments and then we have
collections that collect on
those from amounts that were
assessed as you we have all
kinds of tools and collections
between making phone calls
payment plans liens and levies
you know garnishment and things
like that but our audit side has
benefited from tech maturity
over the last few years we have
this amazing algorithm in place
that chooses G. I. T. returns
for audit the audit audit
selection assessments are there
for you really well but we
haven't paid cap space on the
internet collections and so
that's what that thing to
project is about is creating
collections a lot so that when
we just maybe we can actually
have the tools necessary to
allocate our resources resources
well to collect.
there's another about
correspondence automation it's
really exciting as far as
bringing down our postal costs
community better with taxpayers
automating a lot of the
communication
and and then if we are to talk a
little bit about governance risk
conditions control that's sort
of like having a twenty four
seven who is on the ground to
monitor for abnormal system
activity it could detect
external as well as internal
threats of this uses of our data
it's really exciting to think
about we could expand we have a
staff of about five in internal
audit and internal oversight
imagine if those I have there
been.
Review what's happening with our
systems and our data all the
time electronically so that
those are the top project that
we've identified right now that
would make a big strategic
difference for.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you very much Mr chairman thank
hi spend you have some that I
thank you Mr chair thank you
representatives are Senators
apologies I just wanted to know
if the for the committee sensor
is great interest in M. V. D. E.
performance I just wanted to
point the committee to page one
sixty three of your volume one
which is the report card for
taxation and revenue
specifically for that and the D.
deficiency you can see how wait
times have changed and how
they're how they're making
progress on meeting some of
those performance targets.
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
good afternoon secretary
Schardin Clarke and your staff
and everyone hear presenting I
just have a quick question
Stephanie I may call you that
on the MV do a give us again a
little brief piece of
information as to whether
someone can actually walk up if
you need to read to do
registration or renew their
driver's license can a person
actually walk up to the MVD
office or offices and in just
walking like they used to or are
they supposed to call for an
appointment or for internet do
it on the internet how does that
work.
Chair and senator again thank
you for that question and we do
offers a very wide range of
service models right now
if it's registration or license
renewal and can be done online
from the comfort and safety of
anyone's home that's the first
line of defense but if someone
does want to come in for an
appointment either want to or
need to they would either go
online and book an appointment
and it's typically they're
available same day or next day
if we have a lot of vacancies
like or for example we are you
just taking COVID it might be a
couple days out but they're
readily available if you don't
have access to internet your
caller call center to make that
appointment again you'll get the
same you know same day or next
day availability for that
occasionally we do have
customers just walk up who.
Don't know or wanted to try to
stop and see them they well they
they won't turn away unless
they're busy Act up with people
who have a point
in Albuquerque area we also have
these kiosks in the retail
locations there are two in
Albuquerque area Albertsons
stores and a brand new one in
this and the federal credit
union bank
and at those kiosks people any
time of those businesses are
open which is late night and
weekend basis Albertsons can go
in and renew their registration
sticker on site again updated
driver's license info they can
pass station and we're always
expanding those
we offer a lot of service
channels but right now we're not
offering walk in these to answer
your question sorry and as a
result of the broader refinance
significantly well as I
mentioned about forty two
percent and really that has to
do with us being able to control
the stream of customers coming
in so that they're not all just
like for example they're not all
guessing the getting there at
seven thirty on Monday morning
is probably the best time to go
because we all have that same
idea and we also have been
waited two hours.
For the customers or our staff
and we're going to be eighty
days and appointment model thank
you Secretary quick question
here for clarification for real
ID for example you have to renew
your license but you have to be
real ID compliant right so how
would a person do that when you
mentioned in please clarify this
for me when you mentioned out of
the comfort of your home for
example that there's several
documents that have to be taken
to the end of the day when you
want to renew your license to
comply with real ID it's not
just going to renew it like we
used to and so how does a person
do it from the comfort of your
home online to present all those
documents you have to do here I
think it's a well Senator
therefore I in there on your
list how do I do that.
Rodriguez depends if you're what
you're renewing like so the
first time you get a real ID say
you're moving from a standard
license to your first real ID
you would have to make an
appointment that's not a renewal
that's a new take a license
however if you're like me I
think I got my really.
S. and sixteen are so and so
when I reviewed it recently I
can renew it online and
similarly if I had a standard
license already I ordered when
once with all the documents
those are already existing in
the tapestry system every time I
want to review that same license
I can do it online and same with
registration I see okay so I
think you clarify it now knowing
that the renewal you may do but
not the first time as you
mentioned that would have been
that are your numbers clear on
what numbers to call to make
appointments only because when
we get calls more constituents
who want to make sure we can
give them the correct
information.
Yes
Terence Rodriguez they are
finding a number is in the least
I really want to know that so
that we can look into it and fix
it yeah you can the call center
and the other ways to contact
their online okay thank you very
much for all your hard work
appreciate all that you do you
and your staff thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Rodriguez madam secretary I will
tell you I use of the N. B.
quite a bit and that there is
been quite a few improvements
with with online appointments it
and it speeds up but where I
live.
People still walk in or they
don't have access to make an
appointment and so that's
something we're gonna have to
you're gonna have to figure out.
We're at the point with corona
COVID whatever you want to call
it that it's going to be with
us.
And we're gonna have to make
those adjustments in our lives
to do stuff in you're gonna have
to make adjustments in HSD in
this going for lunch secretary
that people are gonna have to
come into the office people are
gonna have to start walking back
into and we do when they can
sometimes only people can leave
during their lunch hour that
maybe the only our they have an
in so it's getting harder and
harder even though we made
adjustments but you're gonna
have to make a few more to to
figure out how we get people
that don't have access to the
internet or want to go to the
library to make an appointment
in the the and then the after a
and M. D. V. eight it becomes
really hard in rural parts of
New Mexico to do that if you
take a person from Quemado
that's going to go to support
our billion to the NBC and make
an appointment and has a flat
tire gets a love note from a
police officer and they're late
the third point is canceled it
and so we're gonna have to
figure out how to do that and
how to do that quickly
you know I keep asking you about
this cost savers ation
segregation and how we're gonna
get those refunds out and I keep
getting pushed back or no
response I don't want to have to
run a piece of legislation to
force you guys to do that or to
start the conversation but I
want some answers a it's time to
get the answers that have paid
that and have large sums they're
waiting re funds in your
department you have any comments
on that wire departments not
getting those refunds on the
cost segregation.
Thank you for that.
Or or W. Emily Oster probably
has the most up to date
information on where we are
crossing the funds.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary and members of the
committee we are working hard
to.
Including costing Education and
other types of refunds we just
had a meeting internally on that
last week and by continuing
contact you are fine if there's
any specific teachers that you'd
like to look into I'd be happy
to do that for today I can tell
you that we are certainly aware
of the need to improve our
protest process Senator during
our very best to resolve
disagreements about taxes owed a
lowest possible level in the
case of the conservation and all
other types of refinance and
other types of toxicities so
that's very much on our radar
and it's part of our strategic
plan vision as we continue to
improve our operations.
Specific things I I do have a
good look into those.
My my best come into you guys
get some Windex include revision
up and and get those refunds out
people are waiting for we'll
have a conversation later but
there's some rather large ones
and other people that when
they're due a refund need their
refund and they're not gonna
wait two to three years in your
department to get that it's
getting kind of old and I am
going to keep hearing about it
madam secretary
I caution about starting any new
programs especially right now
you know and and I hope you're
gonna stay on for CPOs
presentation about hiring
employees and and pay bands and
how we're gonna do that I think
that's very important for
agencies to hear the vacancies
and and we do an item taxed
revenue may be able to resolve
some issues I don't think the
the.
Noting exposed and a good job of
explaining to agencies and HR
people and agencies on
Thank you for your time today
and I appreciate it thank you
for all your work you do we'll
be seeing you in this committee
several times with the
governor's G. R. T. reductions
and other tax bills that you
want to have a conversation
about so thank you madam
secretary.
Thank you members of the
committee.
This is.
This has been and then secretary
Romero in.
Misia's is our DFA analyst.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee again just because
it's meant LFC analyst joined by
nickel Musaeus we also have us
secretary Debbie Romero on with
us from DFA and all her
introduce our team on the when
the time is appropriate.
And this is for the department
of finance administration of
three forty one is your agency
code.
On there is a high level for you
of the executive an LFC
differences on page three of
your packet so feel free to to
look this over while I go over
some highlights on the first
page currently both
recommendations to provide for
increased general fund revenues
I apologize Nicole Musaeus is
actually I don't know if she's
here but Andrew Miner is here in
her place I apologize for that.
Again both recommendations
provide for increased general
fund revenues over the agency's
FY twenty two operating budget
LFC recommend the general fund
budget of twenty five point six
million which is a fifteen point
one percent increase well the
executive recommends a general
fund budget of forty point eight
million or eighty three point
four percent increase the
executive recommends a requests
five million dollars of federal
revenue expansion this is for
grants administration
initiatives of the LFC
recommendation supported a
portion of this request with
appropriations made during the
twenty twenty one second special
session of funding included four
hundred and thirty five thousand
for person and related costs and
five hundred thousand for
temporary employees and
contractors related to those
federal grants administration
initiatives.
The executive recommendation is
higher for person they provide
an additional eight FTE that
were requested by the agency
within the base and eleven F. T.
E. within the expansion.
On the executive for other costs
including consolidated a
consolidation of requests for
statewide hunger initiatives on
these are consolidated from
eight other agencies for a total
of fourteen point two million of
all the LFC recommendation does
not consolidate the requests and
instead funds about one point
one million for specific hunger
initiatives in those associated
agencies.
Most recommendations authorize
transfers for emergencies and
transfers from the enhanced I'm
on one fund the D. W. I. grant
Fund the tobacco settlement
program fund and county
supported Medicaid finally of
note the recommendation for the
from the executive included
higher funding for some of the
agencies non operating
expenditures I'd like to point
you to page seventeen of your
packets this shows the breakdown
of differences between LFC and
exec on those non operating
expenditures the executive was
just a little bit higher for a
few including leasehold
community assistance County
detention of prisoners and the
land grant council.
one final note of on your the
next page you can see
information on civil legal
services contracts LFC included
a four hundred thousand dollar
increase or fourteen point seven
percent of course the executive
fully funded the requested
increase of eight hundred
seventy one thousand or thirty
two percent both analysts have
come to consensus on performance
measures and targets and I'll go
ahead and handed over to Andrew
Miner or but whoever's on four
of the DFA portion of the
presentation.
Right here Mr chairman and
committee members I just like to
highlight all points the
executive recommendation
regarding the grant program
assistance said the.
Five million in federal revenue.
Funds.
to grant writers structures are
as you mentioned funding for
this program is needed from
like three.
By the special session one
person remain here FY twenty
two.
The state have also recommended
the positions within the agency
those include one special
projects because this
to my position and to CDC have
all outlay analyst and the nine
eleven position and role on.
And then as previously mentioned
the executive included funding
for statewide hunger initiative
fourteen point two million total
dollars at the FAA that we
presented in detail and
secretary Romero's presentation
and so that concludes my
comments and I will go ahead and
turn it over to.
Madam secretary hope you're
there we do see the tree that
you killed today in a
presentation
Mr chair thank you very much and
and we just have a lot of really
cool things that we want to
share with your Senate finance
committee so knowing that you
want to just kind of research
these are going to go to page
five are just like I did you
know the first part is our our
mission and our state.
You normally hear from us but
this time I can talk a little
bit about our.
we do most of them but there's a
couple things that I really want
to point out to the committee is
the the ministrations of the
housing assistance the emergency
rental assistance program and
also the housing assistance
program just to date we have
awarded a nineteen million
dollars for to keep renters
house for utility assistance and
just recently received
notification from the state from
the US treasury that the state
will be getting fifty point two
million dollars for mortgage
system and and we do partner
with the mortgage finance
authority they get an excellent
job of developing the plan
I'm gonna stop there what I
failed to do was knowledge to
people working so hard on your
behalf this is we have
so first I'd like to see to the
knowledge are W. secretary maybe
more we also have acting deputy
secretary in the state budget
director City Martinez Andrew
Miner drive and miners actually
the.
Deputy director of state budget
division but as you can see he
does
double duty is needed as us many
of these employees we have
doctor the the law those.
This is the one that.
I heard cricket team in in very
much appreciate all his hard
work in unity if you know what's
available this far as revenues
Sir we've got a Trujillo our
state controller more are going
to control director actually
leaches our border finance
director and Marcos Trujillo
state board finance director and
I can't
Forget that we have to talk
about who is the local
government division director who
is available to answer your
questions all of these
individuals are available we
have in you HSD director thank
you thank you and then I can
remember was driving the slides
for me today these because
director of HSD and then at the
end right as our budget director
so Mr chair I thank you for
indulging but I just cannot do
this job.
Eight they need to be knowledge
you know please.
Again back to you you have and
the assistance program to
initiatives that we never
expected to take on in FY twenty
two something that should have
taken us eighteen months to
seventy Representative program
we actually got access in three
months and started making awards
almost immediately
the.
Just
a little bit on the grass bureau
that we the staff members we
keep hearing over and over again
and how we need to do a better
job of providing reports to the
legislature and governor on that
plus a communities they do not
go and that's one of the
functions of This Is Your vote
but they also are exists to
provide technical assistance to
state agencies and local
governments
so Mr chair it's really
important that.
Know that the total amount we
requested that December was
closer to twelve million dollars
for both.
Administration infrastructure
that are operating right now and
as you heard earlier we only got
about nine hundred thousand and
the definitely not going to get
us to where we need to do in the
data to provide reporting to the
federal government be able to
set up systems to have staff
available to manage all of these
you know my I have.
In my part in taking on these
additional responsibilities and
I worry about for now you know
we talk about how hard it is to
find people I'm I'm using my
right now and so really need
some support
tried mediate workload that they
have for reviews of programs.
This is to go to slide eight.
So this
yesterday you have a question
with General Services Department
was talking about the capital
outlay and so this.
The deal if the budget division
provided you're over actually
overseas all of the capitol
creations made by legislature
and so this is just hard to give
you an idea of the.
Category there are over six
thousand.
Objects that is this your own
overseas and I can tell you that
about half of them are still
active
and then about three billion
dollars and that we only have
half it has been it earlier
today I said your committee of
more detailed report of the
status of cap slides please feel
free to reach out to you either
myself or whether you have
questions about account
creations.
Like nine.
One of the major for the
governor this year is a hundred
mission.
Seven New Mexicans.
insecurity and more drastic for
children and seniors all
students especially in rural and
tribal communities
I thank the legislature for the
investments that need happening
because it has provided a
positive actions.
We know that we insecurities are
climbing in New Mexico and data
shows that New Mexico has the
scientific improvement rate in
the nation so.
That's really great reviews and
I and the most recent
appropriation was not very
helpful to to
during the special session that
was the food bank that's only
one small piece of what we
really need for this entire
operation so we can't stop there
I think this is Jessica
mentioned that the right state
agencies.
That a request of twenty they
requested a total of fifteen
point two million dollars for
this initiative.
A decision is made by the
executive to consolidate all of
the requests to one department
which is the FAA and we also
Three
there are three positions in the
separate agencies budgets for
MTV to help with these programs
this is a life extensions use
the agencies that we're
proposing funding and the
purpose the description of the
appropriation.
I think they has demonstrated
that we have the experience and
expertise to transfer funds to
oversee this is an integrated
program like this
DFA wants to develop the
dashboard insurer
a dashboard metrics to track
progress in our homes this will
provide ported to you to the
executive and to the public to
know how this project is where
the gaps are in so slide you
have slide eleven here that just
gives you to break out we just
were in the position to be able
to provide the information if
you look at some of these
appropriations there to pick
agencies and so small five
hundred dollars five hundred
thousand dollars appropriation
delay compared to their multi
million dollar budget the easy
come you know kind of lost in
the shuffle and so we want to
make sure that it's ace
allocated in the there's a lot
of attention to the to the
hunger program and so that's
one.
Funded through DNA.
This.
You disliked fourteen
This is just one of those like
differences that touched on so I
think you can just go past that
one
Slide sixteen.
Local government division I
think there was were are
slightly higher as well.
It is like seventeen I just for
your information to see the
number of C. B. C..
Legislative Council procreation
that go to the local government
division local through to look
to local entities so
you can see that there was a
request for additional CDG
project managers and and this is
why we anticipate with the
federal infrastructure money
come into state New Mexico that
is division's work loan is going
to increase of the status.
So this chair on flights like
twenty twenty three are actually
in on Friday.
Just so easy that gives you an
overall my point is actually a
roll of the differences between
the LFC but like twenty four Mr
chair backs
really highlight some of the.
Thank you madam.
You know the biggest differences
I think have to do with the
county detention of prisoners
there's point six million
dollars increase for this we
provide a clear for more local
county officials that they
needed more funding these are
this is for housing for state
prisoners disabilities so that
recommendation give them a total
budget of about five million
dollars
not in requests just recently he
because the state in order
finance just recently your order
are they did a procurement
process for fiscal agent
services and you actually are
going to need about eighty seven
thousand dollars more then we
actually that was included in
the request to table for these
contracts
other things that are included
in the
Request our member cities this
is the for member station not
the association western
governors association and the
national association of state
budget officers to be added so
services was also increased
court piece had decreased but
the legal assistant needs have
increased and so we are
recommending more fund to help
support civil legal services and
then again
The big initiatives for our
department right now or funding
for the Pell grants
administration for the radiation
and there's also a hundred
million dollars is a
nonrecurring request for the
governor's crime commission Mr
Chairman I stand for questions
thank you very much for the
opportunity.
Thank you madam secretary
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary as I review this.
Where is the five million
dollars of federal funds for the
grant management coming from.
Mr chair of the Senate diamond
we are hoping that it's
coming from the are both of us
the federal government allows
you to spend up to ten percent
for administrative expenses and
this is far below that ten
percent threshold that provided
by government and so they can
have come from the.
Then walk me through that Mr
president how how do we I I
guess my last question would
have been if we could confirm
with certainty that those funds
should not have been deposited
into the appropriation
contingency fund of of general
revenues that based on the
Supreme Court ruling.
So Mr chair Senator Diamond
I'm not sure I understand the
money the court said it
into your preparation.
As directed by house bill two
during the special session so
that the federal guidance does
allow the money to use for.
So the reason that it was
deposited that was revenue
placement there's calculation
that has to be done we did
calculation verified
populations with legislative
finance committee so now the
money can be used for general
government services this is one
of those government services.
priorities can be paid for using
the are permanent okay thank you
madam secretary and and Mr chair
DFA yesterday we will confirm
DFA transferred about two
hundred sixty seven thousand
dollars of our funds after the
Supreme Court ruling have any
other are funds spent expensed
by the executive post Supreme
Court ruling ruled that that act
was illegal.
So Mr chair
Sure so so there were there was
money could previously get
allocated prior to the order
K. five and so the.
If you look at the one point six
million that was what was left
after the.
Patients may so there are work
contracts in place previous
issue or order and and and and
the legislature never tried to
save that money was not
available it was just the one
point six ninety four we haven't
see the actual decision by the
supreme court and so if there
was any money that was this is
because I don't think it was
transferred there was eighty
eight we actually rules that are
committee and and did not have
access to it until House Bill to
you appropriated million
appropriation continuously by
then we have to reactivate the
council we could transfer so I
would be really surprised if
there was a national transfer
and I
know that was
thank you Mr chairman yesterday
our treasure confirmed that
there was a release of funds
after the Supreme Court ruling
which really which many of us to
do so I guess the question was
is why DFA continue to release
our funds after the ruling.
Any at all.
Mr chair I know what you're
talking about there was the
ruling hang out we have
contracts in place for a
particular purpose we we we did
we pay the bill was what
happened once we found out that
in the process we need to
reverse that transaction and so
that money was was placed back
in uses your program it was just
a tiny issue I have a roll the
have to and.
It was in our we corrected the
other it was it was thinking
here thank you Mr chairman so I
just want to confirm what you're
saying there was a release of
funds but you were confirming
that all funds that were sent
out of DFA post ruling were
reverted back for collected back
is that what you're saying that
the funds were.
Absolutely everything was
rehearsed thank you Matt.
Other questions from committee
members.
You madam secretary let me ask
you a few questions the treasure
was here yesterday and we're
talking about DFA train our
transfer through the Here
system.
And transfers that are made
immediately he wasn't able to
see and could have prevented
some of the stuff do you think
they're in the share system we
ought to put some accountability
so when transfers are made and
you could have anything happen
to example of the someone that
move a million dollars a share
than moved it out of that that
account and other account made
to transfer electronically do
you think we need more
accountability of or more
regulations on that share
transfer account.
Who so Mister chair
I think that we have the the.
The necessary
Systems to take care that I can
I think that you know my
understanding is that state
treasurer's office has access to
those accounts in DC activity on
a daily basis so whatever
happens whenever award.
Is a process that they can see
that the payment is being
processed and and and that's
exactly what happened indicate
that senator Senator they I
brought to our attention.
And and so I think we have those
safety mechanisms in place we
were able to create that account
and make sure that nobody else
could have that that couldn't
happen again I think it was just
kind I think I'm willing to look
at some of his other concern.
To speak with them to find out
what is some of the concerns are
but I really do think that those
leading those practices already.
Well according to him it in the
share transfer and then I I'm
not gonna use a court case for
example many use any other court
case DFA transfers for contract
payment and maybe the contract
was one million maybe the
employee makes a for three
million transferred gos out of
the system into their bank
account immediately and then how
do you recoup that.
that's the issue that we're
talking about is where's the
checks and balances in the in
the chair system so that we
don't get caught a cyber crime
could happen.
And they can hack into the
system and make a transfer other
share system hope I'm not
getting anybody ideas but
transfer of the shares system
and there's no one to say Hey.
Why was this transfer made wise
is why we're my name catch it
but if we happen it'll be too
late.
And so that's the the
accountability or forensic
measures the wants to add an I
mean do you see that the chair
system I mean that is possible.
So Mister chair.
I'm sorry I don't know if he was
on page probably a better more
but I can tell you that so my
understanding of the way the
process works an agency has to
submit.
All the required to purchase
order requisition and one in
order for a chance to do.
Once that payment is made then
it's taking out the state
treasurer's office so so some of
the text.
That we have is.
The department finance
administrative control issues
last review the request from the
agencies for you the PO
records or the warrant at
either.
So then the money treasures that
in this process I think the
percentage that there's ever
been a case where it has
something has indicated and and
then we have to you know reverse
that at some point I can tell
you that there's this is the
processes in place to allow us
to do that so I think balances
begin at the beginning and I
think that.
The only thing he's and state
treasurer's office my
understanding is state
treasurer's office is monitoring
this is the biggest monitoring
so and really good working
relationship with the staff of
the state treasurer's office I
know troll treasurers offices
communicate on a daily basis so
I'm not sure that it is a big
issue as some of the.
So let me ask you this then that
you brought to my attention so
when the the lawsuit was filed
in the in the Supreme Court
ruled DFA would have to approve
that transfer.
So who and DFA approved the
transfer the two hundred sixty
five after the ruling and that
will tell me right there if you
had approval in your agency to
make those transfers are not.
So I'm gonna tell you that it is
you know that ruling was made
high level you know why I'm
taking the blame.
I didn't pass that information
on staff to let them know that
we need to agree that we need to
stop all transactions that stops
the Buck stops here the staff
processes payment money normally
cross patients for contracts
that we have in place it was an
oversight on the job of making
sure the programs that house
where.
And I'm not so worried about
that I'm just worried about a
cyber crime or transfer taking
place immediately electronic
payments that will be too late
for us to go find somebody in
Havana Cuba or Porter Rico
however the transfer in in
whatever the transfers made that
that's what I want to talk and
maybe I'll get back to treasured
I'll get back to you offline
about that but I just want some
control so we do have a cyber
crime and they do the can
million from us or something
that we have some accountability
or assistance system in place to
stop that ma'am secretary thank
you for your presentation
Good conversation and look
forward to staying on for a CPOs
presentation.
The agency.
The committee thank you K.
secretary of state is next.
Already thank you Mr chair
members of the committee this is
the last one for me today second
to last for you hopefully again
Jessica hits then LFC analyst
I'm joined today by Simon Miller
who should be on the webcast
from the department of finance
and administration this is for
the secretary of state agency co
to three seven zero you can find
your so seated volume two
documents for this agency on
page one twenty five.
Ugh going over some highlights
of the recommendations of both
recommendations reflect a
decrease to the agency's budget
for FY twenty three LFC
recommended a twenty point three
percent decrease while the
executive recommended a
seventeen point eight percent
decrease which was recommended
by the agency I do want to just
make sure the committee is aware
that recommended decreases it
for the agency's budget reflect
the costs of running just one
election in odd numbered fiscal
years as opposed to to.
for the administration and
operations program of the LFC
provided for in eight point
three percent increase in
general fund revenues where the
executive legislative for
fifteen point four percent
increase that's a difference of
about a hundred and sixty
thousand dollars.
Of the LFC recommendation
applied a vacancy rate to the
administration and operations
program well the executive fully
funds agencies requests for
personnel.
In FY twenty two just as a note
the HSD inactivated I long term
vacancies and so all total
funded vacancy of about four
hundred fifty six thousand
dollars.
posted recommendations support
the agency's requests in the
elections program this includes
nine point eight million in
general fund revenues which
again is about a twenty seven
percent decrease and again just
want to know that this decrease
it reflects the cost of running
just one election instead of
two.
in that elections program of the
both recommendations support the
requested increase for person to
fill vacancies and also to move
an unfilled auditor role from
the administration and
operations program into the
elections program analysts come
to consensus on performance
measures and targets and then
just a quick couple notes on
performance in FY twenty one the
secretary of state reported that
eighty two and a half percent of
eligible voters were registered
to vote in New Mexico and this
is only slightly below the
recommended target of eighty
seven percent and again the
agency fall short of its target
for percent of reporting
individuals in compliance with
campaign finance requirements
reporting only seventy four
percent in compliance compared
to a target of ninety nine
percent I'll go and handed over
to us Simon Miller of Mr chair
members of the committee for
additional comment.
Not.
The committee eminence on Miller
nine analysts with DFA Jessica
cover everything there so I
don't have anything noteworthy
to add.
Going on so with that in it over
to our secretary of state thank
you thank you Simon Ralph.
We hope you're enjoying the
beach behind you while we're
waiting for the snow storm.
The elevator.
LFC again Simon good looking.
Madam secretary good.
Thank you no kidding Mr chair
nice to be aware of that is
right now thank you and.
The at the real quick overview
of our and budget request in
where we are committee you know
of course you need to come over
here and recruit me of course
that the teenager discrepancies
not dealing with any you doctors
recommendation on the house side
the LFC recommendation can be
addressed according you each
need to come over to you all but
it doesn't
He can be linked to those issues
I will tell you in general our
budget request schools and as
just contamination yes we need
we need less money means you're
you're you're only running a
general election and the
upcoming fiscal year not to
other statewide elections
otherwise our goals for at the
school twenty meter reading much
security programs staff fully
into the operating budget I.
For about at cybersecurity
percentage.
In in the election programmers
in the secretary of state's
office immunity and revenue that
primarily on federal funding
that we are continuing to
advocate for the federal level I
cannot.
So the really that hundred each
day
and and just to reiterate and
I'm talking about right.
In the budget.
we are trying to repurpose
funding sessions to meet with
the office and some of our
particular challenges all
address one of those in just a
moment I'm trying to support the
legislative requirements of
course he fund all of our state
elections knew everything we do
in our office is at these
constitutional and statutory
mandate that the happily take on
in our house that the funding in
order to realize and then of
course can be active supporters
costs and maintaining IT
licenses and warranties
etcetera.
One challenge that I want to
address before a couple of
questions on this is the
committee we are having some
ongoing challenges with you.
Around and causing Services
Division we thankfully you all
here funded an initial one
project to overhaul our existing
systems and it has been
recommended by dust and see for
us to receive the table the rest
of that funding this year we are
right now we're also seeing I.
strategic planning in our office
right.
That we're making the right
decisions about these teachers
the system relying on what what
the experiences like many of
these other state permanent home
is found.
These workflows and homemade any
activity positive is that are
needed to speed up our process
is not.
You know.
Is that right.
Process and is your one.
ET Mr chair and members the
challenges that I want to
address this committee and
he maintenance requests chicken
appropriations.
And you know I I genuinely.
This can be addressed in the.
Process and House Appropriations
the reality is Mr chair members
that are budget
just twenty hundred words the
budget this year remember to
June this call still
even.
That that we requested less
money and is there a request for
school years so
Mister chair and members you are
reading issues first of all as
we head into our primary line.
probably.
I.
Else's.
Right on this very quickly I
agree first and the rest of the
district it is fine are you on a
we are currently funded
approximately two point six
million and that is reflective
of the request is reflected what
was adopted I appreciate.
That that is you're also going
on organization operations all.
One hundred and forty one.
And.
I just.
The differences in LFC and
request that will get us to
where we need very quickly Mr
chair
For colleges.
Documents here center for our
administration
this is you.
Here he.
We have in.
For the candidates that we are
currently hiring for is to get.
Our request was forty four
hundred forty one thousand Mr
chair for the LFC recommendation
was.
What was adopted by corporations
finance recommendations four
hundred forty one looking at
pretty the significant gap
around three hundred thousand
dollars to be able to Hey does
that you know.
And that will be heading out
into primary election.
our Alexis and this again is an
operations budget of a hundred
and ninety one thousand dollars
we have received that we
Mr chair as the primary election
all of approximately two point
six million now there's one way
to get to that and I just want
to emphasize structure this call
looks like.
Is counties not getting
reimbursed for not getting the
money.
I there are lectures
what we do and Mr chairman you.
Is that we provide for these
towns
right in the in order to provide
election he able workers to see
their staff to provide any
additional supplies etcetera
etcetera and eating whatever
contracts see that and that are
required by law and if we don't
have the funding eight in
that sense
staff
and perceiving that.
so we need to request in our
special request Mr chair we have
some money left over from the
special election that was last
year commercial district one
little over a million dollars we
have requested to carry that
we're in a little
recommendations.
Last so that.
Some million dollars closer
worst million Mr chair to the
needs of our primary much so it
makes sense in terms of you know
we're we're we are is your.
And three hundred thousand.
to fund our current
administration administration
operations were about one point
six million.
To provide our primary election
in terms of what you.
We'll probably see but I'm not
my.
Coming over from.
From appreciation thing is to
when it comes to you all on we
have some other just some of the
other things that we're doing in
the office is Boston general all
of our what we were in LFC
recommendation but it is telling
us that
Mr chair terms of closing the
house.
Chair in.
You know wanting to get onto
your I know you're excited.
Committee members
to stand for questions
Is that.
Thank you madam secretary
referred Leger and lightness on
the cuts that will have to make
coming over from the house to
fund your agency since they
didn't take care of it over
there to questions from
committee members and we know
the secretary has two giant
election bills.
That that are about as tall as
the capital that she probably
needs to read and start again is
a brief on informants Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman you know
just just want to follow up on
the two point six million dollar
primary election item that the
secretary commented on some
madam secretary I guess I'm
trying to figure this out how
are you going to have an
election with that kind of a gap
in your budget I mean it I I and
I know that's kind of a maybe a
facetious question on my part
but I think it does this get
fixed Mr chairman and where does
this get fixed I mean this is
right around the corner we're
gonna blink in this election is
going to be here so it's
partially for you Mr chairman if
it's alright with you can we fix
that here or do we have to or
madam secretary do you have
confidence that this is going to
get fixed over the house yeah we
don't have to run in a primary
next year so another great
concern to lovers.
It's a concern of mine and I
want to make sure that this
thing goes down the right with
friends in the house you live.
So hopefully the house will make
counts amendments and for the
secretary and get a lot closer
and then we can make some
adjustments and Senate finance
if if the house doesn't make
adjustments madam secretary you
have my commitment I think the
committee's commitment to fix
those two budget cuts warehouse
over appropriated or or.
So we'll we'll fix those we
understand how the primary
election is there's a million
and in that came from the CD one
race that was a three million
dollars appropriation that only
use two point five and that will
make an adjustment on that and
then we'll fund the ballots.
That's great Mr chairman I'm
glad that we got your commitment
today that we'll get that fixed
because that's a huge amount for
this office to take all in one
year to hold a statewide
election there some happy to
hear that commitment that's
terrific the we'll get that
fixed for the secretary for the
support for this office on the
administration madam secretary
just ask you what specifically
when you're talking about your
I. T. area or whatever it is do
you have do you do your own I.
T. or do you rely on the states
that do it to get the work done
there.
It is.
Senator yeah it's it's a
combined effort many offices in
the state and particularly with
a lot of the institutional
knowledge and specialty areas
and possible options we provide
small but we do team in our
office at five one of the
positions that we need to be
able to fund it is actually a
deputy CIO position our currency
I am is you know and I know
everyone else reasons of their
IT staff there he's already he's
fantastic but I see a release a
supporter
just muted all of the different
initiatives.
We are now Department
information technology
personally to supporting offer
offices well obviously the
legislative all of our
networking current phone system
in all of the things that she
oversight that come along with
being part of state government
Mr chair but by and large you
know anytime you deal with the
system has to do with the
secretary of state on and I'm
sure many.
Now and again it was very very
sorry and that's why we continue
to try to support and expand it
and feel that Alexis at program
in order for from here forward
Mr chair Senator Padilla thank
you Mr chairman and madam
secretary in your I. T. folks
this just maybe just turn on of
the chairman wants to move on
but they they actually work in
your office the the work here in
Santa Fe because you know
salaries I guess would be
another way for you to maybe
find the folks that you need
because I know there's there's a
challenge with pay bands and and
salary would have insurance hard
to fill those positions today
actually working or Santa Fe
office or do you have them in
Albuquerque or were they
typically located.
Yes Mr chairman and senator.
Needed and director.
Here and have a New York.
I.
They're at which
it.
Here.
Here and the other.
Ensuring that infrastructure
needs of our office and all of
the other business services we
we have at any rate in order to
see the thing is committees
address already
In nineteen world when I don't
have any is incredibly simple
folks you know we're losing back
to you know remote remote
positions are you know we.
Worker anywhere.
You to be able to receive that.
I'm not K. for running but just
a select special.
that is Mr chair Senator I would
thank you very much Mr chairman
I'll stop now but again just to
thrilled to hear the commitment
from the chair that will fix
that that gaping hole in the
budget that you have right now
so I think that's a great move
thank you.
Thank you Senator Woods.
You want to run this cycle.
Yes Sir.
Yes Sir I'm I'm not running a
the legend bill this time thank
you.
To learn a lesson last time.
Is going to missions.
Madam secretary
Hi my question is more about to
contract services line I noticed
that you had a.
There's quite a bit of
difference between your budget
did and your actual spending on
contract services and but I do
know that you requested.
Actually less than you have
budgeted for the next year so
it's kind of in it's a little
bit confusing and I'm sure that
that it's a lot to do with the
COVID deal but.
My question for you
Madam secretary if you would
just send me a list of your
contractors.
And send me a list of the you
know the value of their contract
in.
What services they provide for
the contract.
Yes Mister chairman Senator was
at thank you for your
sponsorship here we're happy to
send you a list
does that scene in the
contractual costs again Julie
related to the number of boxes
that are going to be running you
in fiscal twenty three and that.
Mr chair Senator Woods but.
Okay thank you very much and and
the other.
The question of good
I know the same day registration
is because in.
T. problems especially out in
the rural areas.
have we pretty well that that
down now that we're able to to
get enough broadband service out
there to to have these.
More than one election polling
place.
during the election cycle.
I know that the most of it set
the county courthouses out there
in rural areas during the the.
Free free election day voting.
but I was wondering our our our
with pretty good owner broadband
services out there in rural
areas for voting now.
Mr chair Senator was you know
thank you so much for reading
question.
You know I don't I don't have to
tell the committee and I know
you you by the world champion
on.
The video as well.
And in committee and communities
are on concerns that traditional
uses law.
We are going to and now I
actually visitation of our
systems are secure at moody's.
Certification committee going to
have
the sentence in the receipt
restriction at every polling
place on election day what
you'll see Mr chair and senator
is first and foremost we can
only have one places places
where we have internet
connectivity pursuant to one of
the pieces of legislation Mr
chair Senator with that Mr chair
representative and that is just
codifying what we get it twenty
so we're making sure that any
willing places a state access
have that we're also doing and
have been in the in significant
work on our statewide.
Station information system to
make sure that it's not that
system per se that's causing any
sort of religious issues
process.
and Mr chair we been able to
work with are I. T. department
on external vendors he had
waited as well as stated
permanent information technology
to ensure you're not only in
valuation and any you know only
sacrifice activity because
Senator it's not.
Person you registrational
Committee wanted for.
Commission.
Right we have some important
needs so we are that is five six
eight one of our offices very
top top two top three priorities
this is going to the eight
twenty twenty two years to
ensure that that is all working
the way that it
so please please know that Mr
chair Senator.
Well a Hey you know elections is
the number one.
Topic of conversation.
Actually right now and in
wonder.
And I know it's federal loan
understand all there is to well
I don't understand damn thing
but.
Federal law we have to
When we talk about purging voter
rolls.
And.
Is any of the bills being
introduced do they discuss
purging of those voter rolls at
all or have you had a chance to
look at any of so far.
Mr chair Senator Woods right now
you're correct
federal law in terms of how we
can remove voters that are
either deceased or or no longer
in the state you know from our
voter rolls in the force we have
a very comprehensive process you
got to ensure that we're doing
we're teaching both goals and
making sure clean water rules
committee approved eligible
voters who are you know living
in this state from the rules
what we do already and I will
address is one part of what we
knew already is the are the
state
or.
And with the charter and that
that is continues to grow and
get information from our
organization here.
Was moved out of New Mexico
Mexico was easy because we are
social security.
File information out but we
didn't have for one time in New
Mexico and to meet any actors
the roll that way
He can claim.
Is dresses are needed and was
Senators question Senate bill
six which is election.
Transaction
bill is in some additional
proactive processes actually I
think it is the for example
was going to have automatic.
Eight so when the.
Transaction that secretary or
was talking about
If you want to register to vote
we're not
gonna.
Straight into that tax.
Was for.
Mr chair Senator so we're doing
all of these things already we
have pretty much every school in
our head that again about our
water mitigation have to make
sure that we need in our our
rules is seen as possible.
Leave me when I say I
need you.
Okay.
I'm asking if other that's a
little bit far from budget so
thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary thank you.
Madam secretary for your
presentation of thank you Mr I
commend for entering with us
today as we move into the next
presentation and Connor takes.
Connor take a seat.
I want to remind people if you
don't have you ever looked at
the Economic tractor and if you
Google economic tracker and put
on New Mexico we'll tell you the
jobless rates and number of jobs
out there today the feds
announce that you know the new
jobless claims it's down four
tenths of one percent so it
pretty much looks like everybody
that wants a job has got a job
and so those that don't want to
go back in the
The governor and the exact asked
for forty four hundred FTEs R.
four thousand FTEs in that arena
when we already have twenty two
hundred funded we met was follow
and that's why I wanted Ricky
Serna go over the budget real
quick but if you watch his
presentation it in is pay bands.
The agencies have the
availability to move employees
up to different payment instead
of hiring at the lowest to
qualify them for additional
resources
we're gonna talk about that the
seven percent increases and how
that creates compaction and in
really do well in to one of the
key issues as we try to increase
that and and fill those
vacancies I did us all the
secretaries that would be on the
zoom today so they can
understand what's bill actually
does because my understanding
was Bo is.
The HR person if they have one
in the agency doesn't really
look at the CPO and the payments
and how they hire within those
payments they just say okay
we're gonna hire at this and
then they're not taking the job
when they could create
efficiencies with hiring people
at the payments or they can and
going to the statute and getting
additional money for them to get
them hired and so that's going
to be very Ricky I really need
you to drive that home on how
that's done for the agencies
Meister we'll tell you how many
people do we have on the zoom
with it with agencies.
So we have sixty people made a
lot of our cabinet secretaries
watching the payment stuff so we
can we can help educate them so
that I guess this is pay then
one oh one and Connor you can go
ahead and start your the
professor for the day.
Thank you Mr chairman my names
Conor Jorgensen on the LFC
analyst for the state personnel
office I also do a lot of the
staff work for the LFC for the
compensation plan.
So we're gonna be working of
this nice then we'll packet
right here the state personnel
office I just wanted I'm gonna
give a couple introductory
comments and then go through
what's in the pack and then
we'll turn it over to Mr Sarna
over the state personnel office.
So.
Just to start I think the chair
sort of hit it on my hat so
right now New Mexico has a five
point eight percent unemployment
rate and what we've seen
is a lot of tightening in the
labor market ever since comment
kind of started using a little
bit
And so as that
As that tightening occurrence
what we see is sort of pressure
up and down pay bands and we're
in right now what has been
termed the great resignation I
think that's one of those things
that we've heard our agency
after agency.
Private businesses all have
talked about the difficulty in
finding hiring and retaining
qualified qualified people.
and again that's a lot of that
is is just based on where we are
as an economy right now.
So what makes this what would
put us in a little bit of a
sticky situation in New Mexico
is that we also have a pay
structure that it has not been
meeting fully updated in many
many years so we're looking at
very likely about a.
Decade in that general structure
since we've seen any meaningful
movement.
at the same time spell has tried
to address some of this body
pursuing different strategies
like.
Implementing occupation groups
and the idea is that the labor
market moves at different rates
for different occupations so we
can think that an IT worker for
example might face different
pressures than of social
services work.
And so spoke has implemented
several of these occupational
groups at this point to try to
address some of the
some of the movie in wages
however right now a little over
eighty percent of our state
employees are still in that
General salary structure which
again has a I think it's been
adjusted three times in the last
ten years and so when those
adjustments lag the market what
we find is that agencies need to
start looking to things like
temporary recruitment
differentials temporary salary
increases things like this to
try to prop up salaries and so
it really has kind of led to a
You know disparate policies we
haven't necessarily followed one
statewide policy even though we
have a statewide.
Our salary structure so that's
A little bit of the background.
So we're that bring us so right
now I think both the executive
and the LESC it now is that
state salaries are pretty far
behind market.
and both recommendations
increase increased funding for
person to to address it the only
determine in slightly different
ways and so if you turn to page
three on your on your packet
there is a difference sheet that
shows the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation.
What will be focusing on today
is basically about the top part
of that box you can see over all
the executive recommendation was
for about a hundred two point
six million dollars in salary
increases and what that's
binding you sort of varies by
the type of position we're
talking about so if you look at
the salary plan you can see
there's a.
The general salary plan
is looking at an average
increase of seven percent.
And at a cost of about thirty
point three million dollars been
me fat as the occupational
salary plans.
Those are looking at increases
of four percent again remember
the occupational groups are
health care workers IT workers
social service workers
attorneys corrections and
engineers so if you're in one of
those occupation groups you're
looking at four percent and then
there's another four percent for
the executive exempt.
V. judicial block.
And the legislature and higher
education so that's the that's
the high level I want to get too
much more into that a lot Mr
Sarna discussed that.
The LFC recommendation is
basically for a seven percent
across the board on average so
typically the LFC recommendation
includes language that's
specifies that those
rate increases are for an
average rate increase to give
agencies a little bit of
flexibility to pursue their own
strategies with how they want to
spend that money.
Typically that language is also
vetoed and so on average
recommendation becomes an across
the board recommendation the
last thing on this table I want
to point out is if you go down
you can see benefits so you
heard GSD yesterday talking
about the health benefits Fund
and the deficit it's
experiencing
you can see that the LFC
recommendation included
funding for a five percent
health benefit premium increases
I've I think that's pretty
important to make sure that that
fund gets on the right track and
at least this to sort of stop
the the mounting shortfall there
you'll also notice there is
minimum wage increase in their
to thirteen dollars and fifty
cents an hour in the LFC rack
and there is a two percent at E.
R. B. increases that pays for
the one percent that was passed
last year as well as another
percent match designed to
Help stabilize the funding to
the E. R. B. fund.
The very very last thing I'd
like to point out before I turn
it over is and in your volume
three this is on page eighty
five.
And what we're looking at.
Is.
it's state of New Mexico salary
increase appropriations verses
what's been happening in the
market and the market being the
United States in general and New
Mexico in particular and so what
you can see is that overall US
average.
R. U. S. wage growth is pretty
consistent year over year and it
kind of like tracks with
inflation.
Salary increases appropriated by
the legislature for state
agencies do not happen every
year and don't necessarily track
with inflation so that's part of
how we falling behind but going
forward so starting in twenty
one we can see that based on
data provided by bureau over at
UNM
that blue line is New Mexico
they're looking at
wage increases of a little over
three percent and FY twenty two
and could be as high as around
five and a half percent.
And then the the bars the dashed
bars or what was in the LFC
recommendation for FY twenty two
and for FY twenty three and
that's just to give an
illustration that I think right
now the expectation is for a lot
of inflation.
and that inflation is going to
translate into a fair amount of
wage growth in both New Mexico
in the United States with that
I'd like to turn it over to Mr
Serrano for any additional for
his presentation.
Ricky before you before you
started with we've all seen the
numbers and want to care what
paper you read the Wall Street
journal or whatever inflation
that seven percent.
And triggering higher the feds
are signaling that they're going
to increase costs some money.
And there's too much money in
the economy right now and money
is flowing at the speed of life
and when they do that it's going
to trigger a slowdown of those
of the dollars and you're going
to see inflation pick up even a
little higher maybe three to
four points in to the relative
consumer.
That's a big difference and so
if you look at what it cost for
a gallon of gas today versus
last year's fourth of forty nine
percent or fifty percent
and so how do we figure this out
and do it correctly so I Rikki
want to go ahead and start.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
if you don't mind I can I can
get a presentation of.
Thank.
one doing that I wanted to
Thank you personally I know you
really the cover charge to let
people into the committee and it
looks like a lot of my
colleagues is very easy to
figure out of that and and it's
a pleasure that they're here
we've worked collaboratively as
it is the team to understand you
know we're looking at when we
saw our you know how the
exercise of the reason that we
have to help communities in
cities and so certainly there to
speed on what we're doing
compensation I I imagine that
also just kind of went over a
couple of these are that are
important.
in terms of full capacity within
time directly to our our our
appropriations.
If you look at the slightest
chair members of the committee
to see you know how the money
over the years just under fifty
seven eighty four we have the
budgetary capacity bill thirty
seven additions and I'm pleased
to say that one leading the way
for being there which is which
is good news is that we our
arms forty we are happy to see
for perceive amenities in the
resources and just kind of as a
point of reference not taking on
any going easy because you know
what to do business for agencies
you look at it so has thirty
seven if you working as a hobby
agencies chart compare that to
HSD for example like the latest
you have over fifty HR person to
help with your organization and
again that's because that's
necessary I'm not saying to do
and that's in the state the.
Address we talked about and your
we again referring.
You are are one of the if you or
for calling.
So currently cut into the
you can see right here very
quickly just as you all see
what's happening identifying
trend that's consistent with
what a lot of employers seen on
one of our you know resignation
you know we certainly are seeing
an increase in enrollment it's
easy I'm sorry an increase in
overall vacancy rates for state
agencies.
Read twice by the classification
clusters that are affected you
know at a higher rating than
others for example in the field
resources.
We're seeing a lot of strain on
state agencies in the interior
of the finance and that's
another thing a lot of agencies
and so we know that for a long
these workers there is a lot of
competitive with the private
sector's for us as a state
government and that does include
a speech where on private sector
employers are able to offer New
Mexicans women opportunities
you'll believe that any forces
so we know that we Regis are
huge in that space and so you'll
see here just looking on
December of twenty one and two
December twenty two you know we
dropped off a couple of points
the reasonable points in the
city for the result of you know
you.
few hundreds additions all five
hundred decisions for us and we
do a lot to try to address this
is you where would you working
on higher than some of the last
several weeks and partnership US
and been able to go over to one
of those issues on that.
All right
I I do want to address these
again where we struggle in
keeping up with a lot of what we
need to do more compensation
right.
but we also know that all state
constitution Anders a lot of the
you as an organization by way of
retention and talent acquisition
so for example the person
offices don't have to do to
marketing employment
opportunities he's like I want
to thank my colleague over at
early childhood early care
department because you are we
are tiny
working staff we can actually
in in in in real time marketing
younger.
Government using the number of
four of the person who universal
organizations social media your
media like us really talent
issue so you'll see a lot of
what we're trying to secure an
order request our resources to
support the needs and and.
In retention Mr.
Your time obviously the economic
news coming this issue for you
know budget and
And he was right and all that
there are some additional
questions work environments you
know modified work schedules
Sliq schedules number of
opportunities that know really
do you mind what the work
environment looks like for not
just young women across the
board so we really really are
looking through the now
requiring the New Mexico border
and the last forced to staff
resources you know that a lot of
agencies.
in particular was the personal
office connotation.
Once one and on everything else
was too short we also know that
it is easy to do
from for personal reasons comes
increasingly difficult to deal
with issues of your this is
really thank you have staff
working double time at those
were working double time I
received a phone call right this
time we went there we need to
four million and and you can go
into the background.
You know the
the the and and we know that we.
These are these you know so I
want to close the loop you know
six seven months ago the
governor Lujan genesis the
personnel office.
the lead on on the track and the
compensation recommendations
that really focused on he is not
in our partner outcomes that we.
wanted one of the focus areas
was a transparent process is for
you what I did was assemble a
group that works however the the
one understand issues in the two
identify how we can address that
in Representative you may not
need Mimi Stewart cargo trying
to teach that you often read any
while also addresses impacted
our community that are.
We wanted this one
we we we we need to come up with
the driver for moving on the
schedule legislative immunity
ladies and and we also
understand that everything done
in one year and so that the
costs of the.
You should support hi which is
about seven percent is is but it
also you know business suggests
that we're trying
issues here we're trying to make
to get into hi you Mr
Senator so the compensation
recommendation really laws
address if you all are not AT
all the strategies for addresses
on these.
Average hourly rate
dollars and seven cents and
being able for all workers of
almost seven percent
Representative you know not
costs.
These workers we
are our workers.
Thank we have orders and long to
the general.
That is what you're looking at
right here.
Because I wanted to fill in
the blanks seventy ninety nine.
So we have about four thousand
workers convention.
And what we wanted to talk.
We wanted to do was actually
given all over Kurds General
salary schedule to any equal to
fifteen dollars an hour without
any of the news get a state so.
B. as well as creating.
For the record what we did was
Strategy that starts with the
ball.
The house earlier about.
Committee chairman.
Then we have an additional forty
eight hundred the.
Businesses want to mention over
time all has isolated the
philosophy is that we believe
because we cannot handle
together and conduct a study
that essentially provides for a
very market competitive right in
this instance you're talking
about lawyers
social workers health care is
the most recent research.
When we started this.
No workers
salaries and it's a.
Our in the generals had twelve
hundred workers that will be
this is the new dollars an hour
at the time was ten dollars and
fifty cents and mathematically
you see that it.
Representative those workers the
two fifteen dollars an hour so
we started our from this we need
to figure out how to give you
know workers paid upwards of
forty percent okay but at the
same time.
We're one percent increase
across the board to address.
The world very quickly within
that so there are a couple
issues that and to be redeployed
to to get it from the very now
conformational is essentially
the hourly rate of order divided
by.
So.
We have the schedule right
provides for minimum right.
You're free to the and the
maximum.
No position in budgeted at
meeting but that's a hundred
percent.
All hundreds.
So there's a lot of this is a
problem with that is needed is
the.
For our part we hiring the right
and.
This is the work orders at
minute pointing that more
experience higher than what was
what's called the program a new
hire.
And so on the other side of the
coin is you have.
Coming in and we're experiencing
all that installing Education
workers
this is worrying.
Recognize.
So that number please really
close by a lot of the
contributions that C. read the
starters complications.
Right
one hundred six hundred.
We started to identify
challenges
as a teacher competitive.
So if you look at it this year
he's here the generals almost
twenty five to ninety nine thank
you.
We we.
Ricky can you email us that
slight we don't have the
presentation slides with us.
So perhaps so that you're
listening some of the need to
run print that thing.
In our go get it from Pat and
then and have a print several
copies good Ricky.
This is the Mr chair that you're
looking at right now.
Yes we don't have that one we
have your slide so presentation
but we don't we have that up on
the screen but we don't have
that in our hand.
Good.
I know I have a cold I have a Mr
portable one well as consistent
as to and and she.
so when we see on this column
here is conversations about a
hundred percent what we're
seeing there is an indicator
right these these are hiring
workers.
Above the midpoint because they
need to be more competitive when
you look here at the you see six
hundred workers on a on a.
Hundreds of years and what does
he need to look at it is that
agency is part of the
conversation.
Needed higher credit now that
the rating was ninety will also
be measured This Is.
Here on.
That.
The chair of rules right the
first.
From where we need to be so
you'll see here.
Supplied we come off the show in
order one.
When I was at.
Meeting new people.
That.
But we need to further you
realize he's means the need for
any work.
Why is that the if we want to be
competitive because iterations
that the point.
It's not.
With the.
Four but it's also an indicator
that we have
it's not.
These
are the occupational architects
here's.
Wires is see more workers I
you'll see that come from as
always percent contribution to
one hundred percent free show.
So for example right.
Correctional officers in the
seven hundred thirty correct
office is working with an
average complications at you
look at these the first thing
you're thinking of.
If
you don't need to be at a
hundred percent show.
One percent would be
good.
That is one hundred eighty days
here are
there any CTE our workers it is
about.
Senator.
It
committee meeting for the seven
hundred officers on the numbers
occurred decisions.
The first.
Changes
to need to.
Right but.
Point where the position of the
musicians are funded and we can
start the conversation because
now the Mr chairman members of
workers in.
Where we're close to one hundred
percent or less than a hundred
percent but the challenge being
the first agencies there are
thousands of workers from the
general salaries.
Because you can see.
I'm pretty sure we're pushing
the envelope right what
is it paid for so we propose to.
Recommendation is how do we use
conversations to be tried
compensation.
What we propose is.
First is
started first is the.
These.
On the column so we're going to
visit your did you find we start
off by finding.
And we've assigning percentage
increase the highest going to
those at the moment.
A very.
Ninety the forty four dollars an
hour but if I'm still I just
don't want to wait for my point
but you because when you're
going at a higher rate than
those who are towards the top so
that's the first day in as
you'll see later your
I'm sorry the makers.
The two point five percent
increase at the bottom of this
conversation that's a minimal
increase the work on the first
meeting.
Then we do S. increases and that
is how media the lower paid
workers further and fifty
dollars an hour so.
Everybody always gets
additional.
And introduce Senators lines
and you'll see that.
Revisions by the minimum daily
see here is one and a half which
means that some of these Google
increases to one on this one and
a half.
Is that a guarantee that every
worker will be sent to for those
printers.
So we're.
Likely to be at the very top of
their.
And at a very high.
the.
You're looking at some of the
that seventies you might not.
And the outcome of this strategy
is.
We we pull the average rate for
thirty three percent of those
workers if you and I and that is
all we do
this is an average five percent
increase for everybody in the
band said in the fall and even
though the minimum is four
percent.
Hello is this because we don't
have
everybody needing a process so
what we're essentially doing is
press seven percent cost
increase for these workers.
And this is that she nominal Act
and Mr chairman of the committee
because the minimum increase for
these four percent acting.
Four four percent increase does
not.
And then again we were shown
here is this will here shows why
right perhaps four percent
increase would really address
these workers who are within
that range of maybe one.
This is on top you know however
that we need to do.
You know workers to the right so
that minimal resented for
general workers workers became
the largest four percent for the
different personalities in
addition to legislative and his
workers hello the measure then
that afterwards with the need
for ostentation the salaries day
and
mention which Connors express it
is much needed you know for
example we still need to
be done in the budgets we still
have internet access in the
state in which it is when we
but we physicians I know that it
works for less than eleven
fifty without borders.
And if there are no more right
of the state.
That's right they are gonna for
out position with pretty
internal.
This Medicine is is what we're
hoping to we need to create your
R. all the while you know that
that to see if you were usually
New Jersey you know a percent
increase across the board and
and this is your a percent
increase across the board to
increase minimum right of
workers to fifteen dollars an
hour you know as someone making
eleven fifty right now getting a
seventy percent increase it is
just that way and so we need to.
I appreciate it general
questions going.
Connery having come in the.
Mr chair I would just.
Want to point out again I think.
The good news from
appropriations standpoint is
that the recommendations are
actually pretty pretty close for
the general salary structure it
you got you got a seven percent
on average
from the executive we got a
seven percent.
From LFC.
I think the question is going to
be.
the and the the policy question
is how does the committee want
to look at the differences and
where we see those again are in
those occupation groups
and
as well as in the judicial and
the legislative branches.
And higher at.
So I think that that's the big
question is that.
I'm not.
On the occupational structure so
the executive wants to do on
average it seems LFC language
often includes an average.
But the overall amount the
overall dollar amount on the
executive side is about twenty
million dollars less than it is
on the LESC side and I think
that's why the policy question
lies Mr chairman but that's not
including higher ed on the
twenty twenty different correct
Mr chairman that does include
higher ed higher rate is
included in the executive
recommendation at four percent
it's included at seven percent
in the LFC recommendations so
big chunk of that difference
the LFC recommending more is due
to higher at.
But that's and that's in the
bottom line on.
On this table.
Okay.
I guess I mean here's the
situation we're in is how do we
fix that vacancies right and how
does government hire more
workers and how do we get the
seven percent increase into that
system.
And that's a big question I mean
because we create more issues by
just saying here's a flat seven
percent in your vacancies are
gonna go up next year because
you're not gonna be able to hire
within the market.
Mean I'm Cortez Colorado I drove
my mic dollars was eighteen
dollars an hour to three
thousand dollars signing bonus
to flip hamburgers.
Scott still Arizona seeing a
pizza delivery for thirty Bucks
an hour the numbers should use
any missing the same one thirty
dollars an hour plus benefits
and so the mark the the
implement market is is gonna be
changing or structure unless you
want to see those vacancies just
sit there or grow because we're
not gonna be competitive in the
market in.
I mean there's nothing wrong
with the person driving the snow
plow or or anything in life they
have they got a good retirement
they get benefits throughout the
state we got to figure out what
we want to do in this committee
to to fix this structure
otherwise we're gonna be sitting
in LFC two years amassing the
vacancies are now thirty two
hundred because we never fix the
rate then in the in the
compaction issue.
And so questions from committee
members.
Senator Padilla Senator Woods.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you to our analyst and
thank you Mr secretary and I
think everybody does know that
Mr secretary we didn't really
need to thank him for his
service he's been running two of
the most unruly departments in
state government for quite a
while and and I know others are
doing that as well but so I just
want to personally say thank you
I think you're doing a really
great job there and so I just
had a couple of questions on the
the bands in the changes and the
four percent versus the thirty
three percent in the cell that
so is it at all possible that
someone's going to come from the
outside Mr secretary into one of
these bands making more than a
person who's already got ten
fifteen eighteen whatever years
of experience.
Thanks for the.
Combination yes
So the the notion of program.
Insurers one worker comes in
without
the there were only two years of
external to the position and the
case was on Corker's symbolises
unity.
So if I'm an existing
classification you know.
Hundred degree twenty years of
experience including time state
government
and someone comes very identical
credentials the individuals come
in and receive similar or.
She might and so that's why we
meeting these workers or find a
unique way we run our ability to
retain workers at a higher rate
and so when someone comes in and
and basically what happens will
be able to review over fifteen
percent as part of this this
recommendation that work for all
of these will also be coming in
on offer similar time which can
use that there is a higher
rated.
I appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman Mr secretary so so then
it is just thank you for stop on
another subject it is a hundred
percent solid and confirm that
no state employee I guess will
make less than fifteen dollars
an hour Senator.
Mr Chairman that is exactly what
we need to accomplish here not
only uses the most forward
looking.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and so with regard to budget if
we make these changes this way
do you have an outlook on
everything else that's going to
happen to the employee over the
next twelve to.
To.
Thank you just a twenty four to
thirty six months with the
budget and I know that we're
doing some pretty significant
thanks for reading this is
outstanding this is a really
really good move in the right
direction I applaud the
administration for wanting to to
raise every state employee about
fifteen dollars an hour that
that is just.
You know from a human standpoint
that that is fantastic based on
what's going on with the price
of milk and and and putting food
on the kitchen table but what
happens to budget now are we
going to see a dramatic impact
on those versus what we're
seeing in terms of these
percentages we do we take those
into account when these
percentages were put together
terms with the races will be
honored can you you want to
ensure that.
Yes Mr chair yes benefits are
considered and when we say
budget we should be specific
benefits are calculated on
salary our our.
Tension retiree health care and
I can and then other benefits
like health insurance are
influenced by salary but they
are not a percentage of salary
but all the benefits that are
calculated based on a percentage
of salary are included in both
recommendations analysis.
What is the me and make a little
further so cost and FTE missions
around number of a hundred
thousand what is the cost of
benefits for that FTE.
Thirty percent.
It's over thirty and on your
last page of your volume three.
We have the estimates for the
salary and benefits so some of
on the very last page.
Appreciate that and that's in
volume three there thank you so
Mr chairman general follow up to
that one.
Okay so the the last thing I
wanted to ask about madam who
wants to answer this one but in
in in the higher end of the of
the the brackets here attorneys
technologists
I don't you know I don't
minimize when lanes are
necessarily in the healthcare
area but you know in in terms of
those professions are we going
to be competitive to provide
some.
Some qualified people to help us
build our statewide broadband
network as an example.
Yes.
The oncology patients.
That's it was.
You have a.
He was planning the regional
Solomon one of the over four
percent.
So the idea behind
schedule is that it was created
because you really need.
Now I will put in on us the last
two years.
Right on that is speaking so
what we would need to do of
course is occupations
productions.
on the.
Most impacted by the economic
recovery to determine if you
need better coverage thing
whenever we send and we.
The workers that you know how to
generated less than what we
would have to terminate as part
of the study to do anymore
and we will automatically shift
to the minimum rate a lost.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
Connor had a comment as well and
yes Mr chair on those
occupational groups I think
that's that's exactly the policy
question that's that's before
this body right now.
We've seen this.
Just massive pressure in the
labor market and it's up and
down the salary structures and I
think the the curiosity is you
know how can we address that and
and I think the the LFC plan you
know nobody thinks the page
states pay scales are only seven
percent behind I think it
absolutely varies by group but
some of those occupational
groups when I think about IT
workers when I think about
health care workers that's where
we're seeing salaries grow the
fastest and you know secretary
of state
Toulouse also mentioned you know
we're we're also up against some
some unique circumstances now
particularly with groups like I.
T. workers where they are not
bound any longer to you know
working in the same it's in the
same state anymore so their
their job market is open up
tremendously and I think that's
good going to be something that
we have to keep a real close I
am to make sure that there are
significant enough resources
being directed to those really
high competition occupations to
make sure that we can retain and
recruit them in the state and
that's that's why the LFC
recommendation included them at
at the same seven percent.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr secretary and again that's
why I brought the topic up
because we're expecting a lot
from these people we're
expecting a lot from people that
are building broadband networks
running crime labs attorneys you
name it I want to make sure that
we're being competitive on the
high on the top and as well so
we're getting the best and the
brightest to do to fix and work
in the town square and some of
these very serious issues The
New Mexico is facing that's all
I have Mister chairman my
questions were answered again I
just want to underscore my
thanks to all of the cabinet
secretaries that are working
their **** off and and also you
know the secretary in front of
us right now he's done yeoman's
work over workforce solutions in
this role as well thank you Mr
chairman.
And Rikki if we go back to the
corrections presentation you
have if you look at a couple
years ago we're seeing
encouraging Georgian corrections
officers but we weren't seeing
corrections higher at the
straight at the rate pay bands
in order to fill those vacancies
and so then we said all we need
to pay correction officers more
well no agencies in HR's are
looking into correct
implementation of of the
payments in Ricky I I do have
the statutes that we went over
where they can make the
adjustments and score those
increases off of statute of
judgment so roll making I think
it you showed us I think that's
the problem that's why one of
the cabinet secretaries on in
the H. R. people on because
they're saying well I can just
hired this payment when actually
they can hire a higher payment
and increase rate across the
board but they're actually not
doing that and that's that maybe
some of our.
If the vacancy the problems we
have Senator share.
Thank you Mr in the Mr secretary
so I may be a little bit behind
here but.
I'm trying to figure out so
we've got to
Of some agencies out there that
are for that are re classifying
people trying to do what we're
talking about getting paid
competitively other agencies out
there that aren't doing this and
so we've got this disparity
right off the bat but then we've
got the confirmations in there
that I think.
Then or.
Put in the given all the
compaction in their so my first
question is when when was the
last time we updated the pay
bands.
You know that.
civil when we look at the
different sellers.
But we also you can also
reschedule trusted this time
provided the committee this is.
You'll see here in my LFC these
we shared with PED this is on
the right hand side
Representative just.
Your
the general schedule at the top
was last changes twenty twenty
one and increased by one percent
and then you'll see these others
correct as I do you know how
long as you are contented this
is the health care so again and
Senator to your question when
the legislature legislature's
rules increases all the jobs
numbers because we want to
schedule to remain healthy what
it does every one on one and a
half percent.
So what does it do anything to
them.
Operation of the different
things thank you.
First Mr chair.
What pages that I'm looking we
don't have that in our
presentation wrecked in see if I
may so when I directed you to
page eighty five on the
following three.
Some of those increases are
shown in the in the gray in the
grey bars.
but I think also to to your
point that Senator share
I think that's a.
That's our it's a really good
observation that what we have is
sort of a of salary system that
has been.
Roche in kind of like an ad hoc
by agency way.
and so we have a sit situation
wherein certain agencies have
done.
very well with you know existing
vacancy savings that they
haven't they've been able to
redeploy those by the room
reclassifying positions opt to
create more room in pay bands
while other agencies have not
pursue that policy I think the
danger that that brings up is we
have a little bit of a grab bag
in terms of you know what is
appropriate compensation right
now and can we say with
confidence that what state
employees are being paid across
the board by job type is what
they ought to be paid and I
don't I don't think that we
necessarily know the answer to
that question we know that
we know there's been significant
use of alternative.
pay bands is one example our
structures are so far behind the
market that a quarter of state
employees are now assigned to an
alternative pay band and that's
a measure to keep up again most
of these policies are are
pursued on an agency by agency
level and a lot of them are
pursued based on the budget
availability at each agency
which obviously various.
So.
This is on personally struggling
through trying to figure this
out.
What we what we really want is
an engineer paid the same.
in each agency so an engineer
toward an engineer's pay them if
not aware the working.
Or and economist or whatever it
is we have but we don't have
that today so we have some
agencies that have figured out
how to re classify a person.
But this agency has a and so I
think we're.
Maybe.
We call when you steal from each
other Peter all of the people
actually I think we're just
taking it in we've seen this
in other areas here so gosh I
can go work for LFC for this or
I can work for Senate finance
for that it's the same job done
by the same person in the same
way but one is being paid better
than the other so and I think
that's.
You know what what.
And I'm in I'm again I'm
struggling but I think what what
the secretary just said was so
we gave a one and a half percent
bump that one have sent month
did everything it wasn't
rearranging anything to try to
get this right what did I miss
something that.
No Mr chairman and senator I
think that's correct that those
those adjustments to the pay
structure just move it up in
accordance with what was in the
general appropriation act but
you also touched on another
really important point we call
that the the career carousel so
in FY twenty one.
the state turnover was around
thirty four percent.
About forty percent of that was
due to employees moving from one
position within the state system
to the other and so that's the
curiosity is if if we're
starting from from the
supposition that you know.
Of the same person doing the
same job with the same
responsibility should be paid
across agencies why then would
we see so many folks moving from
one spot from one agency to the
maxed I think that's a really
big question that's and that's
in a lot of ways what spoke was
trying to do in updating the pay
scales and in doing compensation
classification studies is trying
to address that I think the
issue is that we've been behind
for again a they don't a decade
and there's a there's a whole
lot of ground to make up in that
regard.
So Mr Chairman secretary thank
you so I'm it may become and
clear my head cannibalism is the
word I was looking for we
simply.
When agency just just you know
it's the people from another
agency of whatever
thirty four percent that to.
That shoot I could run my
business with thirty four
percent turnover.
In fact in one very.
Horrifying part of my life I was
a talk with bill Maher talk a
bill chair.
And.
At that time.
I had a hundred percent turnover
and I was the best taco bell in
whole Denver area.
The it with a hundred percent it
was a nightmare the difference
is.
The little symbols that came up
on the screen anybody you could
figure it out they could speak
Russian or French or Spanish or
English.
Because it didn't say taco with
the DC or whatever was there so
you to teach in the talk about
language and move on but that
was a nightmare and I don't know
how people could could do that
in state government where you
have to have a lot more.
Expertise even if you're doing
the same job you're just doing
it in a different place you
still have to learn the.
The culture of that new agency a
little bit anyway.
So we would be getting back to
the pay bands.
What does it take to make it so
that we're not how do we use the
word gaming the system but so
people are trying to figure out
how to.
How to pay people if they want
to keep.
So I think we have to completely
rebuild reconsider the the pay
bands how do we do that in my
wrong.
It is.
Senator thank you so thank you
Mr chairman Senator so a couple
of a couple of things one is
you're
We do know is that I don't
promotion really for workers so
and workers is that a CDC years
will pay processes these are are
you know opportunities to
advance and and in a high number
provide an opportunity to other
agency and that agency the
perhaps if you are also
opportunity we're going to
appropriately placed our current
higher rate because.
All those years in relation to
County thank
you would really need to hi
Oscars of occupation.
Here are the general.
We can started marketing
headedness and move them into
their own occupational specials
that we.
When perhaps the marketing.
Yes.
Basis on the most prominently
responses.
Every time agency wants the
process as easy for the most
part
that is the person on the
permanent finances industries
for proposals for a couple of
the want to be sure that what
they're proposing in terms of
our duties and responsibilities
to be warranted the necessity
for our workers to to to to
mentorship request no we work
these often times what we're
trying to do is say I.
What legal proceedings you
haven't either right it's it's
it's all.
Maybe you don't need to worry
constitution eighty years to
work out of the number of
intimate at the agency's
finances the nation.
Percent and there's more
does the workers that are
missing.
Following.
You and I can't produce wells.
For for this one work leave and
so there's a lot of financial.
You're on agencies out of state
I'm gonna use myself and I'm
gonna go out and I'm going to
offer everybody publication to
do these well you all know that
from a from a financial
perspective I can only afford to
do that for so long before now
hi I'm.
The capacity to do you need them
and I'm going to need a.
To have higher rate of bleeding
because workers it is a lot of
the agencies on a on an ongoing
basis introduce the try to the
to to survive in this
environment.
So Mr chair brought up a couple
of things are so certainly
compaction is a problem here so
you give somebody a raise here
then eventually.
The person on the top is.
Get paid the same as a person on
the bottom we got address that.
But does this have anything so
we we're looking at all these
things who were with us about
vacancy rate.
This is have anything to do with
that so you know we funded three
vacancies I mean the the three
extra positions just so they
could pay the.
The employee that they want.
So that that messes with our
budget to the.
You mean to the we're not being
particularly honest with what
we're trying to do.
So back to the.
Back to the pay bands.
I guess the question is when we
update when was the last time we
actually did a market study to
see how much.
The.
Whatever is worth that we should
be paying in order to be
competitive.
Of all Senator we are here and
and the report that I believe
you were going to send is a
national compensation in order
that the state personnel board
approves on an annual basis and
that's the report that on
chairman asked that house T.
mobile operations if you look at
it appears your recently as the
identified areas personally I
our losses the industry but a
number of you'll see there the
recommendations that we need in
and we compensation
but.
Mr chair so I'm still really
confused I'm I'm a get more
confused just.
So I do know will it used to be
I don't think it's this way
anymore of that I could make
more money in the private
sector.
But there were certainly better
benefits and retirement in the
government sector and so there
were people at that look at that
and said well yes I can make a
hundred thousand dollars in the
private sector only gonna make
eighty in the in the public
sector but the benefits are
going to be greater than that
total hundred I don't know if we
work any of that into any of
this anymore specially when
we're trying to recruit.
But I'm still not sure that
we've got to the market study
right because if the market
study that I'm thinking anyway
maybe I'm using the wrong words
but the study that I'm thinking.
I would say.
An engineer in the private
sector and an engineer in the
public sector.
Would be comparably rate now
that pay maybe budget versus
just cash but it would still be
comparable and then we would
have all of this.
All of this whatever this is.
So that's why I'm asking about a
market study this is what should
somebody make.
Regardless of what we've been
doing regardless of seven
percent regardless of one point
five last year.
What should engineer make.
We also.
Is that what you're asking so
when we point to go almost.
You engineers correctional
officers social or health care.
What we essentially did was you
are starting to manage market
those individuals to need to.
This is the question of what
we're gonna do is we also we're
we have so we've done that for
over four thousand we're in the
process I.
We still have the twelve
thousand invented General
salaries there are clusters and
I'll give you a couple that.
That kind of coincide with our
troubles.
We're in the process we the
start of the for all of our.
We can pull them all out
isolated do that analysis
Senator counties this is all in
the region.
More
images
we've got to keep doing that
until the isolated those
professionals clusters.
That study to be the difficult
thing we for the higher general
some of the schedule is within
that you have because you need
more workers you have still in
there the short line.
Up until a few months ago you
you had this issue and I.
So why are we going for the
rules and fishing away.
Well read.
Salary schedule is workers that
we can state works for awhile
are those occupation.
Will Mr chair not sure that I
I'm from.
This get more more of a headache
but I would say that something
is not right.
Because every agency that come
in here this complaint that that
they can't hire people.
At the end of salary that well
they can hire people because no
one wants to work for that
salary.
So somewhere in the system there
still a problem Mr chair and I
don't know if it if it's the
market study I don't know if
it's somebody came in this I
don't know but I know there's a
problem because well everybody
the senator says problem.
Not sure if I can go Mr thank
you well now that we've
thoroughly confuse a committee.
This is the problem when we just
do a flat percentage rate
increases right you see that in
the in the last page of volume
three in use in so how do we fix
that right how do we not deal
with the vacancies in the FTEs
because we're funding vacancies
right in order to increase
supply I mean you got to fix the
problem at some point in is in
in government in that's a
conversation so if we do a seven
percent increase what we do is
kick the can down the road with
a structure that's really not
gonna workforce in.
They're very.
Mr chairman I'd say that that
varies generally speaking
occupational occupational
structures are are pretty widely
used I think the issue is how
often do we update them and are
we and are we confident that
when we do the market studies
that we're actually reflecting
the market may I think that
that's where we've had we've had
a little bit of consternation
when we think about even the
even the groups that have been
implemented
I don't think a lot of agencies
are lining up to say you know
hiring engineers has just become
so easy now or certainly IT
professionals I think that's the
that sort of on going task that
spell has is to make sure that
those
those groups are are fraction
that the and that the analysis
is is happening
you know to to match us to the
market so that this so that
we're not constantly behind in
trying to play catch up.
The card with the winner.
Is this.
I wanted to talk to you know
that policies your comments
about.
Morning.
The policy question here is is
that investment where in you can
have as
right you all know it is Mr
chairman you stop your gases
that require in fifty dollars
and you all know that we have
over a thousand workers in state
government or thinking I could
make more there have until it's
gone and then.
We're really need to change a
sizeable investment.
We've got to do that in a way
that does reduce workers and
rest compaction wine
to be sure to work with these
right and so we you know we want
to responsible without
compensation one of the minimum
rating up and as we continue to
perform these studies in a point
where we need to be you all know
that we identified the need
identifying the need is really
only when the agencies have the
finances to right so we
appreciate here today you know
we've got to get all these
people here for parking it is
that agency say I can do that I
just need to just a moment.
But Ricky on that same point is
we're doing that currently with
filling.
FTE vacancies we're currently
planes gaming that system to do
exactly what you want so they
have the they have the ability
to pay someone more with their
vacancy savings in so.
We're all playing their shell
game.
And it's who's got the shell who
can move the show the quickest
and we find that works under the
shell to get the ball and that's
the problem it just seems very
kind of cumbersome number two it
needs to be updated on a
regular basis Reuters or
whatever's appropriate to
updated and and then studies are
done to make sure that the as we
up update and upgrade the the
the our system that is
competitive with other states
This call challenge and then
within this like you say we came
in the system because you the
actor three unfilled FTEs out
there and you can take and
shuffle some money around to
maybe people person in in place
or or helpful person long or I
don't know how that works but
I it's just not.
At another gate aids opens
itself up for a lot of problems
and it could be construed as a
maybe not fair to each other and
then you open yourself up to
lie utilization and.
The at that point it's a mess
because if it's happened one
places happen every agency and
then just blows up on you so I
don't know what you can do.
To get that corrected.
I think you need some work
summer Mr Chairman.
We're just everybody's confused
but is looking everybody with
answers like going to
confession.
Yeah Ricky in about to absolve
us of this.
This issue today but you know
thank you and I think it's a
conversation that we really had
to have and kind of the deep
dive into so we we when we go
home or we start talking so yeah
we gave everybody a seven
percent raise will do we really
fix the problem.
And are we really going to end
up in the situation where all
our state water engineer doesn't
have any engineers and we're in
a drought in how do we fix that
resolve that issue I mean the
drought is coming there's no
snow on the mountains so I mean.
We're gonna take a little bit
more of a Dawn in the committee
and in so and maybe come back in
and have a committee
conversation about what we
really want to do and how we
want to do that maybe bring
Ricky back in the executive on
some director Avid will bring
you guys back LESC back to in
that conversation but it is
problem solving one of one from.
Scrambled eggs to making the.
Thanks and which.
In in so it's just something
that we need to do correctly so
we don't have to hear this issue
time and time and time again in
the get vacancies and Fund empty
vacancies in order to give them
the rate increase the the
payments so we can do actual
budgeting that really matters
understand that agencies only
need you know five hundred
employees instead of budgeting
six hundred fifty.
So I think it's a conversation
Rikki thank you guys thank you
for your time out of the
secretaries are on and kind of
learn some stuff to help them
learn too much.
Then we will be in trouble but
but I think they needed to a to
hear that because your dad all
the time and LESC and it just
gets old for me to hear the same
old thing and not try to fix it
I wish with the star little bit
earlier but I mean that's just
the way the situation is for
members
election bill that was read out
today Senator Ivey so those
Our staffing so John.
the turning the back he's
reviewing that today you may be
up for a couple days that is
something they may want to try
to here in the next couple of
days so you guys as members will
get John to get a suspension and
maybe just a little intro to it
in.
No telling what Senator Ivy Soto
has in there.
I.
Little.
Well Senator sure there's some
coke and water then this.
In the couch if you like to
refill out with cemex we did not
even if.
The.
Aren't we that.
This.
Senator Woods.
We have the paper we have the.
Mr chair
Senator yes the last four
dollars obviously.
What can you record that for
audible involved.
Make sure that.
No but that's something that we
should be on our radars as we
move forward we are discussing
capital with the executive we
did have a conversation well we
want to tighten up their
statewide so we can get the the
statewide just wrapped up and so
then we can figure out what
we're gonna give each member it
looks like it's going to go up a
little bit he to promise
something and then not deliver
but it looks like it could go up
a little bit for member from
from the one point nine M.
including I don't know how much
it we're gonna have to get that
capital bill moving because is
house bill two comes over
everybody's gonna be inundated
with can you help me here can
you help me there can you help
me here and in there some real
issues that we're gonna have to
to kind of watch the keeping a
reserves high in in our mmhm for
me it's it's the forecast in the
economy the that could change
rather quickly that is more
worrisome than anything else
lord knows I want to spend the
June special session I could be.
just.
Dollars.
Simmered somebody asked me that
today in in the gentleman that
sells rainbow bread in my
community says don't you guys
know how much it takes to make a
million dollars.
Right what is a million dollars
in sales and what's a million
dollars and that and how much
how many people that takes and
how many how much time it takes
and how much operational costs
it takes to make a million
dollars so don't waste my money
said well to make sure I'm not
home so takes bread in my house
may well what have you know.
We get the that's a conversation
it it's a lot of money.
A lot of money and it's a lot of
money in thirty days in with the
federal funds and I think we're
gonna bring
More Chavis.
What do Chavis in to see what he
is planning with the federal
funds what their conversations
look like because the cities and
counties have also sent some
stuff
For us to look at and we know in
junior and I kind of glanced
through it a lot of people
appropriate money to local
governments when those local
governments had tons of money.
And then tell you that.
And then we can tell you that
they had tons of local money to
buy please callers to do
whatever they're they're just
saying oh we can get enough and
you know so as we move forward
capital and and everything else
we're gonna have to.
Make sure we put it in the right
places.
Where we had a conversation with
the exact and said we need the
statewide right away and then we
can begin to look at our member
shares and so until we wrap up
and the state lights on that's
going to be a real conversation
timeline.
From that point it was within
the US and and then the date on
the cap of the General Hospital.
We haven't either no no we.
Well the pharmacist Mr chairman
yeah if we did capital the.
From the Legislative Council
Service they stayed with all
last and we're just supposed to
pick the project is that's the
damage that's due on Sunday
yeah.
Next eliminate projects with.
Yeah so the ICAP listed that the
council delivered to your office
was everybody there requested
capital in your name is been
delivered to your office and you
have that sheet and so you just
need to you need to accident and
and.
See where you want to add if you
have over the number because you
don't know what the capital is
but we need to get that.
Executive recommendation so we
know what our number is and then
we can do capital
projects that you wanna Sanchez
I'm gonna try to avoid weekends
until we absolutely have to so
this may be the last Saturday
were not here.
And so as we move forward when
when house bill two comes over
it should statutory be here by
the second.
And and then we can.
Will be quite a bit I'll try to
avoid mornings depending on the
floor sessions how long they
are.
We are not here tomorrow morning
we're only here at one thirty
some agencies Representative of
I haven't heard from anybody
saying the only one here
somebody else or somebody I want
to hear HSD so
we may have a little bit of time
revenue numbers are going we're
going to talk about that.
I don't know what it's gonna
look like it looks pretty flat
to me is projection David.
What is going on.
Revenues in the flat.
Won't have any more money to
expand we have plenty.
On the campus of the governor
say when they were getting their
priority was to us.
No we needing to get that far in
the conversation we needed that
the statewide wrapped up in
tight and so then we can will
know the number from there.
And so madam chair want to get
into those.
We K. zero is our answer.
There's nothing in law this is
we have to give up a third.
Zero.
You can always ask courts for
correction that.
So that's kind of the road map
so we kind of know.
Where we're headed for the next
couple of days.
Get your reading glasses get
some.
I drops in enjoy your voting
rights bill.
Thank you to our staff and
everybody that's working
ourselves created.
