And I've also got slides all
over C. don't have to go through
the full report with me unless
you're very interested so.
objectives of the so valuation
restarted were to full time
starting on the second slide
here of that slide show the
report of the the cover the
report on it.
The first was we really wanted
to look at how compensation
classification of the state's
budget package was impacting the
competitive competitiveness of
the State in attracting and
retaining employees we also
wanted to look at how CPO the
state person agents organization
and agencies could optimize
workforce planning hiring and
other pieces of the state
personal system.
So if you'll turn to the next
page on slide three.
You'll see the table with the
lots of breads from a CPOs
report card you know part of the
reason this board this
evaluations that we saw some
flagging performance in the
state personnel system which is
still going going this table is
actually from the fourth quarter
performance report card that
from December of this year from
the state personnel office
so this is a post the evaluation
look at that second measure
there you know for FY twenty two
to sixty nine days to hire a
percent after the position was
posted which is really long
the other thing of note on here
is the FTE there at the very top
CPOs got forty four FTEs not
that many we've got some of our
larger agencies with many times
over more HR person since but
have
and yet you know several actions
you directions have to be
approved by CPO even though
they've got less huge are
personal things like in pay band
increases new hires changing
positions there is some concern
on our part this was lowering
hiring and promotions in such a
way that was costing the state
good applicants and workers.
If you'll turn to slide four.
Another set piece of context
informing the evaluation was
that you know state has
persistently high vacancy rates
many of you know this vacancy
rates for the state have hovered
between twelve and twenty one
percent over the last decade.
for FY twenty two which was the
last fiscal year we looked at
for this evaluation the vacancy
rate was eighteen point one
percent and that resulted in a
hundred and seventeen million
and vacancy savings
or six percent of six point six
percent of all your compensation
appropriations we're you know
not use to pay people
they were used for vacancies
which the agency convention
around that money for other
uses.
And while the overall vacancy
rate was concerning I'll turn to
the next page page five.
One of the vacancy rates for
some positions are really much
higher and these are in some
cases really important key
positions to the state like
health care aides there at the
top those of the staff that work
at your state to which
facilities like the veterans
home of the behavioral health
institute you'll see
correctional officers on their
child protective service workers
again really key positions
that you know perform critical
functions of state government
and I want to note that a lot of
these positions are in special
what we call occupational rate
bands not in the general salary
schedule that's important I just
in the next couple slides for
how salary increases are doled
out.
But on the next slide slide six
last piece of background
information here is that about
half of all state employees
leave within their first year
this was from a third quarter
report card it was at fifty
seven percent of people were
only making only fifty seven
percent of people are making it
through their first year in
their job in state government
sixty one percent the fourth
quarter so went up just a little
bit.
Still pretty high and that has
implications for you know hi
recruiting costs if you're
having to recruit people over
and over again and also it's
something to consider when we
think about the pension benefits
for the state which I'll go over
here in a little bit.
I feel turn to the next slide so
that was all background
information the key findings
from the evaluation was first
that the way the executive
distributed the FY twenty three
reasons so those are the
increases in compensation that
you approved last session they
were really uneven it left some
of the hardest to fill positions
with the smallest raises.
The second finding was after
some major reductions in the job
classifications so those are
position descriptions over the
last two decades ago is now
managing classifications for
nearly twelve hundred different
positions that's a lot.
Third was that those CPO has the
authority to approve or
disapprove a Jerry activities
like I said most of the H. R.
workforce in the state is
actually on state agencies and
the time that it was taking
CPO to process requests from
some agencies had increased with
some requiring approval by
multiple entities including DFA
as well so the last finding was
and focusing on these HR
transactions in approving them
in compliance we really saw that
spots but was for going some
opportunities to paid play a
higher strategic role in
improving state personnel
management I'll just go over a
few details of some of these
that'll be
Of interest to you as you
thinking about compensation
increases going ahead of the
sessions on the next slide slide
eight.
So for the rate increases last
year if you'll remember of the
legislature approved a two prong
strategy first was a three
percent across the board
increase for the last quarter of
the FY twenty two the prior
fiscal year and then on top of
that so that was for everybody
everybody three percent no
matter what and then starting
for FY twenty three appropriated
enough money to give everybody
on the everybody else an
additional about six point nine
seven percent salary increase on
top of that so functionally most
state workers got at least a ten
percent increase for an average
of ten percent increase
except with some exceptions you
can see on the next page page
nine.
CPO but at the time I think
there was some thought that
there was only enough money in
for a four percent increase
which wasn't the case that was
actually much more so spoke so
again everybody on those
occupational schedules a four
percent increase flat across the
board so they got three percent
of four percent of total of
seven and I think the thinking
was that those occupational
schedules had already been
adjusted to be right sized and
that they didn't need as much of
an increase is some of the folks
on the general salary schedule
who may have fallen behind.
But my ended up happening that
was a little out of whack you
can see on the next page page
ten.
These are the pay bands so
lowest paid twenty five highest
paid ninety six this is the
general salary.
Federal increase of folks that
are paid the least got the
biggest raises you know thirty
one twenty nine twenty six
percent raises and then it went
down all the way to middle
management kind of got you know
eight percent and then up again
at the far end and part of that
was because spoke calculated who
got what raises based on the pay
band so lower people got larger
rate lower paid people got
larger reasons but also where
you fell within your payment
call the conversation so if you
were at the low end of your pay
band you got a bigger raise so
that's and it tended to be that
people on in higher payments is
are kind of your secretary level
folks actually were lowering
their pay band so they ended up
getting bigger races so that's
why you see that kind a U shape
in the blue bars there.
But all of this is higher than
the four percent of the act
folks in the occupational
schedule Scott.
So if you turn to page eleven
you can kind of see some of the.
the reputations of that so we've
got you know.
At the very low and we've got
some folks in occupational
schedules that got that are now
being paid less than some lower
paid people in the general
salary schedule so there in the
green you can see there's you
know and administrative suit
assistant supervisor who's now
going to be making work more
than a CPS said child protective
services worker
in the yellow you got a
custodian of the veterans home
making more than a nursing
assistant at the veterans home
Which is not great again because
some of these folks are
providing really critical
services directly to the state
are really hard to fill.
So if you turn to page twelve.
Some recommendations from the
evaluation that you might want
to consider for issues rate
increases
is talking to spoke about how
they might develop a more
equitable way to distribute
these future legislative pay
raises
based on merit and filling
critical hard to staff positions
and we also recommended that
agencies examine their high
turnover in hard to staff
positions and come to you with a
plan for improving the hiring
and retention we've seen some of
that was CYFD and it be nice to
see that from some other
agencies as well.
And so you know you'll hear from
Joe in a second to but the LFC
budget recommendation this year
for this reason on top of just
some across the board
compensation increases also
includes a section for some
targeted pay increases for these
really hard to staff positions
to help make.
So that's what we want to see a
doctor Hey on page thirteen
just one more note about
classification proliferation so
classifications are job titles
and like I said we've got about
twelve hundred different job
titles for the whole state out
there which is a lot and what
will happen is you know as time
goes on HSD workload changes
they will create a new
classification for new position
if they need to do different
work or if they want to promote
somebody but if there isn't of
back in cleanup of those on used
are very you know rarely use
positions which end up as having
this whole host of positions the
CPO has to manage and they
really can't we got to this
position in two thousand we had
about this many classifications
on the book and at that point in
time
the legislature got some money
to work with DFA and the hate
group to do some cleanup and
some compensation studies to
make sure that folks are really
appropriately placed of the LFC
budget recommendation because
we're back up to that twelve
thousand number recommends one
point two million dollars
special appropriation so we can
go through that process again
it's been twenty years it's
probably time.
And that recommendations on page
fourteen.
But all I will keep moving.
The last thing I wanted to the
last flight I had here was we
looked at the state's budget and
structure as well to see how
that might be playing into you
know our competitiveness in
recruitment and retention
they're kind of a few key things
we found first was in our health
premiums for state workers we
found that they're pretty much
in line with the other the labs
you know APS some of the other
big employers in the state but
they're being held artificially
low because right now the health
benefit funds that GST is in the
red and probably needs a premium
increase to make a whole so
that's not great second is the
pension you know our pension is
really generous and helpful to
people that come to state
government early in their career
and never leave and that's less
and less the case in the
trajectory that people take I
think the bureau of labor
statistics said that people
change their career something
like thirteen times in their
life these days so our
recommendation was the CPO work
with parent investigate you know
what it might look like to offer
a hybrid system where you would
have the pension but also of
four oh one K. option that you
could take with you when you
leave as well.
And lastly we look to telework a
little bit you know at that time
CPO had no mandatory telework
policy out for the state that
said essentially was up to the
agencies to figure out you know
who could tell of teleworking
not most of you know they were
sending that starting February
one it'll be back to normal that
seems like a really big swing in
our report you know we noted the
other states California Colorado
in particular had figured out a
telework policy for out the
state for some positions and
they were actually using it as a
recruitment tool
and we can't do that if we don't
have a standard telework
policies so we recommend that
CPO figure out how to do a
mandatory telework policy for
the whole state.
as I said the findings we also
looked at kind of the delegation
of authority between CPO and
agencies to approve HR actions
but for the time being I'm just
gonna pause there and see if you
have any questions or if you
need to move on Mr chair.
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Micaela Micaela.
Yeah.
Micaela
Are there any exit interviews
that are done well and employees
leaving just to be able to
collect data on the reasons that
we have such high turnover
Mister chairman Senator that's a
really great question we looked
into this in the report is to
mention it here because that is
a best practice CPO had started
initiative I think
really in the pandemic if not
before to do that but it seems
to have fizzled out in some
agencies do a good job of taking
this on but there isn't a
standardized efforts to do exit
interviews across the state nor
is it for kind of employee
satisfaction surveys for
existing please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Are there opportunities to do
sign on bonuses or stipends or
any other types of efforts to
help with that right recruitment
of employees.
D. chair Senator I don't know
the answer to that question I I
believe I'm not sure to have a
jury Simon who is our analyst
for spoke coming answer that
question if you don't mind.
So good afternoon Mister
chairman Senator so I.
So some departments have started
to figure out a way where they
can sort of engine that
direction I don't know if you
were remember they Environment
Department at the LFC hearing
this you know past fall talked
about some of the things they're
doing to make it attractive for
people
it is essentially using comp
time as a tool to get people to
recommend people for state jobs
and then you know to get sort of
as a as a sign on bonus so it's
not a direct cash payment it's
more comp time but I think there
are agencies are looking into
doing those kinds of things
thank you I think the more
flexibility that we can offer
employees also goes a long way
even above and beyond the rate
if you have the flexibility to
be able to care for your
families and care for a loved
one especially because COVID is
still around so thank you Mr
chairman thank you make and
thank you us the.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you so much this is a
great start to I think we're
gonna be headed is on on slide
fourteen the one point two
million that you referenced is
that comprehensive for every
last ounce of state government
in in any position or are there
is there anything left that
would not be included.
So Mister chairman Senator
Padilla I believe the two
thousand study was
comprehensible state positions
and I would expect that we want
to do the same with a study
going ahead is this including
public education Mr chair no
this would just be for state
employees.
Yeah okay
and it seems to me like when
when you go out to put in our P.
out there to do this I'd like to
see two things and it what one
of them are I would recommend is
you know collect.
Every single department give
them a date certain where they
need to give you feedback
they'll be themes that will come
out of that you know.
It'll come out of the the
information that you're from all
the various agencies departments
or whatever those things should
be part of the expectations that
you may be put into the R. P. to
make sure that that's what this
one point two million dollars
will deliver and then separately
when we go through the process
of selection we really do need
whoever applies to to do this
work for us that they tell us
what we may have missed on what
those expectations are that we
put out there after giving the
feedback from all the
departments this we might as
well not do it unless it's going
to be completely comprehensive
because then you're going to be
right back in the same spot
where department or agency is
you know kind of taking workers
or whatever and so I just wanted
to make those comments
It's in my reading this right
that we have twelve hundred
different classifications.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator that's correct
I think if I remember right I
think I saw that so it just
started a process of starting to
clean those up after this
evaluation so you might want to
ask them that their budget
hearing yes twelve hundred is
what we found when we evaluation
Senator Padilla dissing of the
secretary is in the audience I
see miss this is but how are
you.
Yes so I I guess I'm just
curious of the twelve hundred
did we Tiffany's the idea what
percentage or duplicate
positions I just have a
different code laid laid out for
them.
Mr chair and senator I don't
believe many if any are
duplicate there were a lot that
we're I would say outdated you
had like word processors you
know that your switchboard
operators you know things that
don't aren't applicables in
today's state work force and
there were some that were I
would call them duplicate but
there needs thank you have a
kind of general exit like a W.
secretary level type position
then you have a special on just
for the department of cultural
affairs was special and just for
another agency but not all
agencies and so I think that was
part of again the proliferation
issued have these new jobs come
up new classifications but
they're probably actually
functionally not that different
thank you Mr chairman I mean you
know kiss social workers you
might have a social worker
that's a case worker even of
social worker that's clinical so
I get that part in in in terms
of the positions that that you
say are are kind of use the term
outdated I agree with you our
agency still hiring of those.
Hiring word processors and
switchboard operators and buggy
whip manufacturers make
thermistor chair and senator I
don't believe so it's probably a
better question for a director
Padilla but the problem is is
those positions might still be
on the books in contributing to
our high vacancy rate.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
I'm gonna ask at the moment this
so my of my committee here is a
comprehensive or just don't do
it at all I mean it's it's not
gonna work for us unless we have
complete state government revamp
and reform their thank you for.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr well my first
question is is is the request
funding request for the study in
our budget.
Yes Mister chairman Senator it
was part of the LFC budget
recommendations okay so sounds
really important
I want to go to slide six just
just kind of caught me a little
bit.
You know prior to the pandemic
arise the pandemic we're
starting our retention or I
guess first year
loss of we had only about thirty
percent less than thirty percent
of employees leaving.
At the end of the first year the
highest city been under any
number here in this chart going
that for years so within the
last five years anyway we're
doing pretty well the pandemic
hit and suddenly we went on the
slide you can kind of an up tick
in now were on a downward
trajectory so is that
distributed to the great risk
the great whatever the call
resignation or do this or any
analysis on that.
Insurance Senator we didn't
actually look into the why it
was changing I don't have a good
answer for you but that seems is
as good of a explanation as any
I can think of.
Yeah I mean people were allowed
flexibility to add jobs that no
no
but I realize whatever.
Well I'm just curious because
we're seemingly doing things
right four years ago you know or
even sorry just to stuff just a
year ago mmhm so we're looking
at big picture things and.
You know and I realize that
society we have some big picture
trends taking place certainly
but I will say Mister chairman
Senator wallet it didn't you
know go up and then down it was
still you know.
Forty percent of people are
making it to their first year
and it's not great you want you
like to see a little bit higher
number that and part of the
reason isn't there some there's
a real cost to recruitment
retention you know that the
state bears and so the less the
more you can minimize you note
turnover of people good workers
you know you want to try to do
that I agree totally and I agree
with at all and just saying the
number I'm saying this is not
forty percent of this is less
than thirty percent were leaving
after the first year right back
to you know so but if you're
able as it sounds it sounds good
and
You know I look look forward to
how long will it take to do the
study.
Mr chair and senator I don't
have a good answer to that I
know that for the two thousand
study the started in ninety nine
and they finished in two
thousand one so it took a little
bit to get through it.
And I'm glad that we're looking
at really in demand jobs I think
that's the smart kind of end
result beginning with the end in
mind and figuring out what we
need to do to fill really
crucial positions so it's smart
thank you Mr thank you if you
want to go Senate Senator
Campos.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Micaela for outstanding
report just we're not cessation
I'd like to make on the report
is in the.
Up health benefits
yeah we're kind of compared with
other states but the reality is
within our state it is so and
even between the agencies people
who are employed to get their
insurance NMCA are paying a lot
more proportionally for their
salaries and people that APS the
state so that needs to be about
as well and some of that may
come through the health care
thirty but thank you for that
observation I bypass the the
chairman if I may make a few
comments the reason I wanted to
make comment on this is most of
my career wedding may think it
was a.
Healing people and being a
doctor and and much of it was
but the vast majority was in
business running billion that
several billion dollar
organizations with several
thousand people up and four
thousand people of when I was
CEO at loveless and and as I
went through all of those
experiences the organization
only achieved its goals based
upon the talent and the passion
of the people who work there.
And when I talk to people who
work in the state I'd.
Some absolutely great passions
with you all LFC I mean and you
can tell you really enjoy what
you do but for for others it's
just kinda and and the turnover
is astounding and that's speaks
to our the the engagement the
passion the wanted to do it is
just not there and if that would
happen an organization that I
work look in I would go to the
HR department and say what are
we doing wrong and sometimes we
were just doing the whole
process wrong.
And and and some of the
organizations four we have money
just like this one point two
million to come in and say.
No it's not a fix it's a start
over completely it's it's so it.
If if we get the study to put
party in the cracks.
Just gonna have the same house
of cards that that we have now
in terms of attracting and
retaining employees so I I I
want to really emphasize the in
and it's you know this is so
fundamental I mean people are so
fundamental to the ability to
get anything done anywhere and
getting the right people in the
right positions particularly at
the higher positions we have to
compete with other states this
exist in a market place and to
get good talent you have to pay
for that talent and you have to
have a working environment that
helps them fulfill their passion
to be able to get their jobs
done so that's that's another
piece of it isn't just the money
it's also what the environment
is but I know we're down to
basics here the basics are
failing us absolutely completely
I I work with the department of
health and I just just.
Their inability to hire really
good people are some good people
I suggested come look at it and
they just said you know I'm here
get a life it's not even close
to competitive and as I say in
health care for physicians and
so forth we are in the market
place we must compete we can't
say over to state government we
can't do that well then we just
waste all of our money that
we're putting to programs
because we don't have the talent
to execute.
And we have to attract and keep
the talent to execute those
programs and you have to pay for
it and they have to make the
environment appropriate for
itself my pleading you and think
I'm not on this committee but I
am I I definitely am working on
programs that will result
actions of this committee in the
reserve throw out the old
completely get rid of it.
And bring in a whole new look at
best in class organizations not
necessarily state governments
some probably do well but large
businesses who are able to reach
at track to retain and execute
and achieve organizational goals
we are so failing in our health
care goals in the state we're
getting no better in a lot of is
the fact because of the
personnel system doesn't enable
us to get to people and be able
to get stuff done so just want
to say throw it out.
Start from scratch investing
class thank you very much Mr
thank you just enter Hickey I
think you're going to learn a
long lesson in government we're
not good at doing that.
Everybody in the room smiling at
but I I do want just quickly
look look at page forty two.
If you look at the educational
team from LFC thank you look at
the number of PH dis that worked
on this report.
Kind of amazing that that LFC
has that kind of staff so
I think we're getting their best
advice it depends if we follow
through thank you so you did you
your one all pass and Senate
finance.
Senator Gonzales you're next.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
table.
one minute you said something
that.
You know all.
Going to a little bit more if
you're saying that an individual
call nowadays changes their job
I thirteen times.
So looking at that and say that
they are working thirty out
thirty years to retire that's
only like two years.
In a position.
So as an employer.
Would you want to hire someone
that you know it's only going to
be there two years and invest a
lot of training invest a lot of
everything.
Or the other way around us.
The individual it keeps changing
does that hurt also in getting
the job.
Mr Chairman center it's a good
question the twelve and thirteen
times is is jobs it's not not
necessarily employers I think
the if the employer numbers half
to a third of that but yeah I
mean it's it's a good question
right like it takes some of the
jobs and state governments to
the jobs in state government are
complicated and complex and it's
difficult to work in an
environment where you're how we
train folks all the time and you
lose institutional knowledge.
So it works both ways against
them and also against the
employer.
Correct thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair so
Senator Padilla started off for
I want to go Senator Hickey went
further than I want to go but up
but I would like to point out.
I was Army re officer.
The military has twenty four pay
grades.
Two point two million.
People in the military right
now.
When there were ten million
people are a hundred million
people whatever was during World
War two they had twenty four pay
grades.
We have.
Less than thirty thousand people
right in a hundred and twelve
hundred pay grades.
But the difference is if you're
not paid by the in the military
They also have about six hundred
five or six hundred jobs your
call of in was military
occupational specialty.
So that's anything from
Senator Baca who worked on
nuclear power plants in aircraft
carriers to Senator share he was
a rifleman okay
But.
It didn't matter if you were and
three which officer third rate
right what service you're in or
what job you're doing that's
what you got paid.
But it was similar
responsibilities.
So you had similar numbers of
people that you were supervising
or similar a kind of tasks that
needed to be accomplished.
And I would like to see our pay
scale something like that
because what that does is that
keeps agencies from poaching
each other.
Okay if you are if you are in
the third pay band then you're
in the third pay band it doesn't
matter who you work.
Okay.
In in so just thinking about how
to do it.
I would like to see a model like
that partly because it keeps
people from approaching each
other and get to stay where you
in the.
Agency of longer and get to know
the job better and more
experiences so you know it's the
same way
is in the army infantry guy so
you start out doing nothing but
holding life but eventually you
get to where you are commanding
a thousand or ten thousand
people it'll rifles.
Yeah and in organizing them in
making that happen so.
That's that's what I would like
to see if we're doing this now
the military also has sign on
bonuses.
We needed their Buck linguists
once upon a time they paid
people thirty or forty thousand
dollar sign on bonus to become
Arab linguist as my son in law
okay.
there's also special pay if you
jump out of an airplane you get
extra pay if somebody shooting
at you get extra pay.
So there's there's room for that
if you were a doctor you get
extra pay.
But that's all built in so would
drive in the airforce in
adopting army get paid the same.
I I I think that that is a model
that we can use but the other
thing that I would like to to
look at here is once upon a time
and I'm not sure when it
changed.
People got government jobs
because of the benefits not
necessarily the pay if you
wanted to get paid better you
work in the private sector less
benefits usually.
But if you were looking for you
know better health insurance are
better retirement or better
whatever then you came to to
hear.
I think now we're we're also
competing on both levels and I
think that that's that's.
Not productive to us or the
private sector so I just want to
throw those out there.
I think the military model is a
good model six hundred job
descriptions twenty four pay
grades.
Madam chair and senator I think
that's a good idea I didn't talk
about it here we don't have
twelve hundred different pay
bands with twelve hundred
different jobs so that the
equipment but we do have a lot
more payments than the military
we also compared it to like the
need S. schedule at the federal
level.
A lot more different you know
payments and pay opportunities
because of the occupational
schedules that I think you're
right there's probably some good
analysis to look at
down just for the reasons you
mentioned remember how high the
G. S. goes up twenty one I think
fifteen and sixteen all my
brothers in eighteen.
Getting paid very well thank
you.
Thank you very much for that and
anyone else before I go on with
a couple of points I wanted to
make thanks a lot for your work
and of course our secretary here
Padilla thank you very much
today S. and your staff all our
staff this is been a long hard
job thank you for your work let
me just say something here
because I've seen this for so
many years now and to see that
the time has increased so much
the time that you need to
process an application is huge
it takes an enormous amount of
manpower you know ours more just
more work in general so it
delays the process of hiring
people in what I was seeing here
is that it's taking multiple
different entities it says here
to process it's in the the
problem has increased it's now
taking multiple entities to
process and just I guess they
submit their recommendation more
it's supposed to be approval but
it's it's more of a
recommendation because
ultimately goes to to the state
personnel office I guess from
different state agencies but I
guess the question that I have
here more than anything is I've
seen it for too long that
there's so much bureaucracy
truly so many places that an
application has to go through to
get approved what they call
vetted reviewed
requested any changes if they're
not accurate or whatever and
then finally approved I don't
know how long that process is
taking but in here at one of the
key findings that it says on
this report is that it's taking
its increased over the last five
years this new think about
getting more multiple agencies
to approve and I'm just
wondering is that something I
think would go a long way is
that something that we can do to
centralize and consult.
The date this process more right
doesn't have to be every agency
has like their many H. R.
division or bureau or whatever I
know what it's called but it's
it's an area of every agency or
department that has their own
there see there seems this is
something understand this used
to be a lot of duplication and
that's why in the process okay
and that's why it keeps bouncing
from place to place but time he
gets to spoke and so you have if
I may say it here secretary but
DO that you you get at the very
end after the state agencies do
their thing each one of them and
it seems like it's multiple
entities to do this process
before it gets to you so I the
question I have is how are we
going to fix this problem I
think that's one of the
remaining reasons why we're not
hiring as many people and on
time it takes a long time and by
that time maybe somebody they
found another job or you know
whatever it may be what what do
you think Micaela Senator and
and director Padilla of course
can.
Talk about this for there appear
to when we looked at this it was
not always but many times to
hire a new person the HSD had to
get their own ducks in a row
internally as you said sometimes
DFA had to review things improve
things and that was taking time
and inspo as well so you're
right that there is often three
different entities and that
would slow the process down
you'll see just in our last car
the most updated time it's
taking to seventy days from
posting to hire a person that's
a good long time and so you know
what we saw during the
evaluation was at that time CPO
is piloting you know for the
bigger agencies that have their
own HR workforce just delegating
that authority back to them they
said you're the keeper of your
budget you you know you don't
need to have everybody approve
everything we're gonna delegate
to you and see how that goes
they did it for transportation
and environment
they decided those pilots didn't
work out well for one reason or
another but I think the the
intention was good if you've got
the work force there you know
the it might be worth trying to
figure out how to empower
agencies that can to take on
some of their own HR activities
with and how we in the house and
that was a recommendation of the
report I see is it possible
thank you for that and I I think
it's a good idea I mean the
agencies know best how they're
doing they're they're working
what they need so it's
understandable but I guess the
question that I have is is there
any way that we can set a time
frame that's a little better
than two months to process an
application with somebody's
looking for a job they needed
job I mean the they want to get
hired as soon as possible if
they're going to be hired in
order to wait two months just to
process it it's not necessarily
hiring gets is to process the
application so I just wondered
maybe there's a way to.
Not only encouragement maybe a
little more
request from the agencies to to
do it within a certain period of
time so that that just a if I
may call you by your first name
can know when she's going to get
these applications and be ready
you know as you're coming in but
I don't know because two months
is a long time madam chair I
think that's right it's a good
idea thank you and the final
thing is that we're back to two
thousand and one I I was reading
here on the class and number of
classifications that we have we
have so many now gives there is
a lot more work to go through
all of these when you could be
working on some other things
that we're talking about now
it's taking up a lot of your
time to review all these
different classifications we've
got approximately twelve hundred
well give me a second yeah I
think I saw twelve hundred
positions two hundred position
but there were several
classifications and I guess the
thing the question I have is
that that's what we had in two
thousand one.
To.
This whole act was was done and
I and I guess I'm looking at
twenty two years later you know
it's something we would have
consolidated maybe a little bit
more on.
It's easier for people to apply
and for the department to do its
work in the agencies that so
much for that I'm just really
thinking out loud here as I'm
reading your presentation
Micaela thank you and then on
the last point on the fifteen
dollars an hour we approved
fifteen dollars an hour as we
know of that would be the
minimum for person to get paid
and right during that time it
was an after it was during that
time employees we already
getting paid in different areas
not only in government more than
fifteen dollars an hour so
you know it's fifteen obviously
was not enough it's too little
for employees as a gross pay
because they go home with maybe
eleven ten dollars an hour by
the time they pay all their I
got insurance and everything
else is deducted and then taxes
at the end of the year so I
guess what I'm thinking here is
that we approve fifteen dollars
an hour but only eighty five
employees.
If I read correctly it only
apply to eighty five classified
employees tell me County so
madam chair that's right so what
happened with pay increases last
year since the risks such a big
increase the the increase was
applied for so say you're making
you know fourteen something in
our you got to raise first and
then anybody who is after that
increase still making below
fifteen was raised up to fifteen
and that was only eighty five
employees so most people got to
the fifteen dollars an hour
through the increase so that's
what that means what makes sense
thank you thank you very much
and look forward to continuing
to review this as a study
continues thank you for your
work your efforts
secretary but the and your staff
and of course our staff we can't
thank you enough.
Okay I think we're going to move
on I don't have anyone else on
the list so
Go on to executive and
legislative compensation plans
and we have Simon hi Simon
Miller
and DFA and David Happy
Birthday.
Your Mr Representative.
Thank you thank you very much
we've got Simon and Simon
exactly what happened here I
thought maybe we have cloned
somebody and it was I didn't see
it Simon Miller he's always and
so both Simon.
Emails that thank you supposed
to go to him and he gets a lot
of emails are supposed to go to
me so many secrets between us.
Thank you for that okay we can
get started good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
as a we were saying my name's
Justin Simon I am here LFC
analysts for compensation issues
and we're here today to give you
a high level overview of the
executive and the LFC
recommendations related to the
public employee compensation you
should have a packet before you
start with a key hearing issues
on the top I'm just going to
point out a couple of things on
this also want to point out in
your volume one that you have on
beginning on page eighty six
there's an extended discussion
of the state employment and and
compensate compensation issues
that for you to review at your
leisure.
so madam chair for FY twenty for
the LFC recommendation for
compensation included a total of
three hundred and thirty one
point two million from the
general fund for a public
employee compensation.
You can see that in the table
lower on the page
that amount
Compares with three hundred and
fifty seven point two million
for the executive
in the on that table in the in
the far left column just give me
an idea is our agency estimates
of the cost what the cost of a
one percent across the board
increase would be and you can
see from the total bottom line
those numbers are still are
fairly close there's some small
differences notably I'll point
you to the executive that
they're where the executive as
as a little higher number than
the LFC and then for example in
public schools LFC is a little
bit higher number than the
executive so we're still working
to reconcile differences to come
up with committee back to you
with the consensus number on
what a one percent would cost
the state but.
At this point we're fairly
close.
In addition to a average
increases the LFC recommendation
includes several areas as miss
Fisher was pointing out before
for target compensation and in
your packet on page four I
included a rundown of some of
those compensation increases so
you'll note there is our
increases for public safety
whether it out through the the
courts dust Department public
safety or corrections for some
in some Water professionals
CYFD and the department of
health are all included there as
well as a education.
Moving beyond
salary compensation settlement
Madam chair of the LFC
recommendation includes ten
million dollars for to fund and
the general fund a portion of a
ten percent rate increase for
state employee health benefits
as many of you may know the
currently the state employee
benefits fund is at a
significant deficit the
the executive and LFC
recommendations both include a
total of ninety six million the
executive entirely from the
general fund the LFC
recommendation includes other
state funds from other entities
that participate in the plan as
well as other funding sources at
the state level whether federal
funds or other funds
to resolve that deficit
however the LFC recommendation
for a ten percent increase it if
effectively funds the what GSD
is estimated to be the current
year deficit in the fund right
so.
they're projecting this year
thirty nine point three million
dollar deficit essentially at a
ten percent rate increases we
think would be bringing about
thirty five million dollars the
department is prioritizing some
cost saving measures and so we
hope that the departments able
to realize some some cost
savings from from those there's
a new at a pharmacy benefits
manager contracted that the
department is confident will
help lower costs to the plan.
The executive recommendation
includes four hundred and forty
eight million in revenue for the
the group benefit program that's
about ninety three million more
than in the current year
so there's there's work yet to
do on the employee benefits
side.
and with that I will just I'm
handed over Simon to talk a
little bit about the executive
recommendation.
Showing madam chair members of
the committee again my name is
Simon Miller I'm an analyst at
the department of finance.
Filling in for our new secretary
Mr Propst.
So the executive it compensation
plan includes a four percent
increase across the board for
all employees and executive
judicial legislative higher at
public schools
And then the executive also
included a hundred million
in the public schools support
budget to shift more of the cost
of insurance from the employee
to the employer so right now to
the New Mexico Public School
Insurance Authority most
employees the state covers sixty
percent of the health premium so
under the the governor's plan in
the state would cover the first
ten thousand of everyone's
premiums of if you have single
coverage that is going to cover
your entire premium
if you have to party coverage
than the state will cover you
know roughly ninety issue
percent of your
health premium and that if you
have family coverage it'll be
around seventy five percent
covered by the state.
I think that covers the the big
ticket items so but more than
happy to answer any questions
madam chair just just one thing
I I'd forgotten to mention DLC
recommendation does include
additional funding to increase
the
The rate at which the employer
covers the insurance for public
school employees the LFC
recommendation I'll essentially
aligns the
The public school system with
the state system now so bring it
you know bring it in line and
and not having that difference
that has been historically the
case in the public schools so
others thirty two million
dollars in the public school
support budget for that for that
increase system of a little bit
not a little bit quite a lot
less than the executive
recommendation.
Thank you any questions from the
committee Senator Woods.
Share.
Some of your lost as usual.
Madam chair and I apologize.
