I am thrilled to join you and my
previous assignments percent
education for nine years and
Senate business taxed
transportation the old
operations and transportation
committee for nine years as well
Thank you all Mr chairman bill
state senator but Bobby J.
Gonzales size.
The representative districts six
Thank you Mr chairman senator
Jeff Steinborn from Dona Ana
County.
Thank you and and vice chair
Thank you very much Mr chairman
state senator Pete Campos
Representative ain parts of
northeastern New Mexico very
happy to be here and as we go
Mexico and the people that we
represent thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
Senator Siah Correa Hemphill
from Silver City I represent
Senate district twenty eight
which includes Grant County
Mr chairman Pat Woods from
Senate district seven curry
where in you counties.
And I've got with me beside me
here Mister Tom Clifford as a
In San Diego is just back from
Trinidad Colorado.
I mean Senator Diamond.
Good afternoon Mister chair
Senator Diamond Senate district
Caitlyn I guess you're online
Caitlyn.
Yes Mr Chairman so you want to
go head start and then you know
again my name is Caitlyn one
Very.
I am the LFC analyst for the
department of game and fish
that you should all have and
quickly go through the
differences between the LFC and
executive recommendation they're
present the LFC we don't have
this pandemic it's in your email
they're they're bringing it over
from LESC right now and so you
it.
Thank you Mr chairman and and if
you would like to see the full
LFC that recommendation you can
find in your volume two on pages
and those are in volume three on
page seventy five.
Starting with the overall HSD
summary.
agency mostly related to hunting
and fishing licenses.
LFC is recommendation increases
revenue by ten percent compared
presentation is you're calling
for be there for us the public.
I Senator Shia she can't share
her screen.
just wanted to see it on the big
screen that's fine thank you.
Sorry about that thank you Mr
chairman.
I'm in the base budget the
vacancy reduction across the
agency there are no differences
in language between the LFC and
Executive recommendations and
staff reached consensus on all
performance measures.
At the recommendations for
federal revenue in this program
are the same and LFC recommended
it more than the executive in
other state revenues and the
recommendation which is slightly
higher would provide Valerie
increases of on average eight
percent for conservation
officers which is an initiative
of seven and a half percent.
The other costs funding
recommendations which also
received an increase supports
conservation services this is he
is seven one seven.
The LFC recommendation increases
other state revenues by twenty
The recommendations increase the
person budget by an almost equal
amount and the supports and
eight percent Valerie increase.
vehicle replacement increase per
diem rate and wildlife habitat
studies or similar contract.
five thousand dollars higher
than the executive providing an
eight percent increase in other
state revenues this supports a
six percent salary increase for
than LFC the LESC recommendation
increases contractual services
and other costs more than the
executive for wildlife
depredation contract and
The LFC recommendation for other
state revenues is one hundred
twenty eight thousand dollars
higher than the executive
overall providing a ten percent
revenue increase for the
program.
average salary increase in the
program the executive
recommendation it does not
increased funding.
That is the end of the different
sheets at.
and members the committee
pleasure to be here with you
this afternoon thank you Caitlyn
for explaining the differences
between the recommendations very
well so I have nothing further
to add and I will just turn it
today as you know the department
works diligently to conserve
wildlife crawled back into it
but I toward future generations.
In order to accomplish this goal
funding in the most critical
areas and maintains appropriate
they can see rates well ensuring
we continue to deliver services
necessary for long our system of
our one of our.
recovering America's wildlife
act this act upon passage.
Available twenty seven million
dollars the department will
require nine million dollars
them as identified in the state
wildlife action plan.
This is the greatest
conservation needs are those
that often receive little or no
funding are imperiled are
to be added to the endangered
species list and the burdens
that come with those listings.
Finally these funds will meet
the declaration set forth the
New Mexico wildlife conservation
our state by ensuring that we're
able to conserve the broadest
sweetest wildlife in the fourth
most bio diverse state in the
nation I hope they look
yes the budget presentation that
you're going over.
Mr Chairman abstract.
Let me ask you one question is
again so members can start
looking.
carrying over the cash those
good question points there's
about forty million dollars or
and I see with cash balances in
the game and fish and so
Mr chairman thank you very much.
All right thank you very much
director song question in the
special session we avoid
appropriated half a million
those on the list initially I
thought.
It's kind of a raw what down
payment.
So are you saying that in the
DFA executive recommendation
Well in the course is federal
bill has not passed yet.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn that's correct it is
scheduled to have a hearing in
hundred forty representatives I
partisan I think in the Senator
even more Republicans than are
Democrats that have signed on as
sponsors our own senator
Heinrich is the one of the
money did you say we would then
get.
Mr Germans Senator Steinborn
twenty seven million dollars
twenty seven million the
need Mr chairman the chairman
I'm going that's our climate of
the funding just.
Okay and given the statutory
passes we need to update that
mission that you have
statutorily to modernize our
statutes to give better
scientific guidance to the
recognize that our laws are
drafted back in the thirties and
fifties and that.
An approach and meaning of words
has changed significantly in
species of greatest conservation
the.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn I believe we do though
I'm not convinced that I could
name one off the top of my head
On the game and fish laws for
for bearing species that say
that bearing species shall be
manage such that no further is
wasted.
language in what we're talking
about doing is giving a very
huge sum of money to manage as a
director pointed out what is
it's been scientifically
document is one the most diverse
to manage these resources so you
all know I've been working to
modernize those I'm all for it
for for while we have this
abundance to to go with the LFC
ecosystems it's good for.
Just that future generations and
it's part of the the environment
that we have been given that we
have a
And let me ask you final
question director if we were to
do that would you spend any of
that money prior to rollicking
pastor would you hang on to it.
just.
it would be contingent upon the
row of passing
the LFC recommendation I believe
is only for half a million
Excellent well Alex that's my
pitch to all and I hope we see
fit to do this and it'll be a
great down payment and all of
the center for our passes the
Thank you I don't see anybody
else's hand raised on the zoom
Lincoln from trying to see.
Senator Diamond.
and to be Frank with you they
seem to have given little little
consideration to those
liabilities my question perhaps
for director Sloan may be best
liability may exist without
litigation.
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
over the year and Ezzell been
involved in a couple of
personnel issues that are also
largely been resolved so there's
not a lot of my ability there we
I could not possibly in a number
to those though I feel like from
a
Legal standpoint we're in a good
position
So I I don't think there's a
got forty million in savings
anyway that that may be able to
help with that my last question
is just really quick and it's
probably for Caitlyn Caitlyn on
licenses offered on an annual
basis in New Mexico so we have
an actual in twenty one of
thirty seven I but then we're
budgeting for thirty five
hunting tags we're keeping flush
at eighty four what specifically
is that recommendation Caitlyn
is out for the actual number of
tax.
the budget process the agency
will submit to LFC and DFA a
request for what their
performance target should be and
in these cases those are
getting the target is that you
know anymore of what we hope to
see so the HSD makes a request
for their target and then LFC
consensus and in this case DFA
in LFC staff have agreed and all
the.
Thank you for your time Mr
chairman thank you Caitlyn for
that answer.
of the part of the program is
land acquisition.
And I see here capital projects
of of the twelve million from
some of the projects.
Mister chairman Senator share I
believe that the fourteen
million dollars is largely
in those capital requests.
Okay yet Mr chairman and
director are their acquisition
could not agency requests but
Senator share there is interest
in looking at the L. bar
property we continue to discuss
that with the trust for public
to do with the the wildlife
restoration.
It seems to me that the the one
breed them or anything like that
to to restore the the
population.
Mister chairman Senator sherry
yes is the short answer to your
question I can give you three
examples
actively raring those fish
stocking them out I believe
that's one of the major factors
that prevented them from being
listed under the Endangered
Species Act we are in the
process of renovating our
more quickly and then finally we
have in the past
with so right now I'm oriel
towed we are those and several
of our facilities in an effort
speed up recovering so yes we do
undertake those activities.
Okay thank you and how about
mammals or other kind of mammals
are on the endangered list in
are we doing anything with with
them especially for bearing
hundreds are stations address
conservation need they were
extirpated from state would
reintroduce them into the Rio
Grande that their population is
taking off we have had to
we are working with them mammal
and the impact of our.
Okay thank you and then finally
my understanding is it and I'd
Mr Chairman Senator sure yes
that's correct he retired at the
end of the twenty twenty one
okay and then so director do we
have a.
of retirement a week before the
new year's day I've subsequently
put together an advertisement I
believe will go out this weekend
had a of of somebody was
qualified from Colorado were.
Wyoming they could apply at this
point right would they even know
about it.
It'll be open for ten days so
yes anyone can apply okay right
thank you Mr thank you.
Thank you Senator Woods.
answered this and so if you
don't mind and turned again.
Fourteen million dollars
fourteen million five hundred
thousand dollars.
Would you mind repeating that
again what that fourteen million
was for.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
for the some some upgrades and
maintenance is is always a big
cost for us we have bear canyon
management areas across the
state.
one of show me what that is made
up of and what those approximate
cost are.
do you take in lacked the danger
species in the national forced.
You know and I'm thinking about
the Sacramento's in the jump in
maps.
no we we are.
That's an interesting question
so we certainly comment on the
large projects in collaboration
with the Forest Service to
improve
while I have a job across that
entire area reduce the risk of
catastrophic Water wildfire
Our service there are habitat
stamp funding which is funding
that when you buy a fishing or
hunting license and one hundred
fish on federal lands you need
to buy the staff that those
been used for fencing and those
sorts of projects to assist with
the.
Large they have that recovery
would benefit all stations.
wildlife and and and counts
around and you know especially
in the antelope when.
Especially on my place.
wondering on the endangered
species how do you actually
count that how do you count
those animals to to see how many
are present and how we're going
Who's doing those counts for
sure you is that part of your
contract services.
Money that do those counts
this any general information I
So Mister Mister chairman
Senator Woods you have to
broadly answer question there
are a huge number of techniques
used to count down the most from
all traps we dig a hole in
for prairie chickens in
particular.
We do both background survey is
during the the lacking season of
the breeding season to determine
contractual services budget so
there's that that aerial survey
underground survey both give you
slightly different information
we're also engaged in our region
so that we have the best
available science.
To make our case so what the
status that species should be.
Our elk deer those sorts of
of all variety of techniques
that are available to us.
Mr chair I'd like the.
Tom have account it's a good on
mice.
so would know.
Where we are at this point in
time and and see if the habitat
improvement is working because
be matched by some federal money
also.
And and I'd like to list of the
contractors that are are
contracting those services from
you.
Is your I haven't got it right
in front of me and and and the
chair is going to be upset with
me because I don't but.
about the the the game wardens
are actually out there in the
field and those guys are pretty
well armed now and I know they
have to go through the academy
police academies and and that
kind of stuff are are you having
that trouble to are you have an.
recruitment and retention issues
are which is part of the reason
for the request for personal
services in our field operations
division although we have been
fortunate here recently we have
and the other seven later in the
all will be recruiting again and
You may of this year
we're seeing a turn in terms of
being able to recruit we made
some changes in terms of our pay
structure internally and I think
with the budget request will be
in a better position to keep
I'm probably right those
excellent efforts over the past
few years
and we also need to continue to
One last question Mr chair.
Do you recruits.
Are they required to have a
college degree.
Mr chair.
they go into schools and teach
kids stay
are involved with depredation
they're involved in some of our
studies and surveys so we do
Mr chair that that bachelor
degree is there a particular
field of study or just a general
bachelor's degree.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
Yes let you go thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr.
I thank you Mr chairman and let
me get to center got Gonzales
because I just sent his hand up
and then we'll go back Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you all thank you Mr
being issued on a yearly basis
to see approach said pretty much
the same more.
For all I know that some of them
basically have a cap.
comes vote every four years
we're about to go into the
rulemaking cycle with the state
game commission so for that four
year period there are generally
flat except for over the counter
flat over the course of the four
year rules cycle unless we see
some dramatic population change
and need to reduce or increase.
example in Turkey and fishing
license during the peak of the
COVID issue
we serve yet to determine if
that's going to carry forward or
any age with wildlife and was
saying that whether it's going
to persist in the long term and
judge of this point.
Thank you Mr chairman so I want
to ask a question first of all
in the program evaluation for
LFC under conservation services.
Mr Chairman their conservation
services program includes the
information and education
division wildlife Management
Division fisheries Management
Okay thank you Mr chairman
director is it fair to say that
the consecration Services
program is kind of main main
ask that question because it's
it's a little bit of a black box
at times
has been in the past and.
The reason I ask the question Mr
illustrative of what the mission
of the department has been which
is been really primarily to
serve hunters and anglers in the
state it's not really been about
conservation or ecological
management at the forefront
mission of which everything else
is a derivative in a
beneficiary.
look at the performance
measurements under the
conservation services.
The top four are all about
hunting licenses right and
hatchery.
only down to the very bottom
list you see percent of state
Representative endangered
species are candidate species.
That are concerned through a
plan.
you could argue is kind of on a
lower wrong so the question Mr
director Mr chairman what
percentage of New Mexicos.
Steinborn at I don't have a good
answer for that
In.
Yeah I don't have a number okay
the the number I've heard Lisa
Garza hunting licenses is
being a public trust doctrine
that's owned by all New Mexicans
and we talk about this
department and this ecological
bounty we have as a state and
hunting is one user of that but
up but so are eighty five eighty
five percent of New Mexicans who
don't have a hunting and fishing
license right who like to do
we need to we need to update
these performance measurements
and we need to update our laws.
but certainly is worth
considering giving a major sum
of money to conservation we need
long as we're asking for a
little bit less from you Mr
director I would really welcome
seeing a list of that particular
performance measurement for
to see the.
That work products it's saying
that we have done forty five
percent this year.
It was fifty one percent last
year.
Well it's a performance
measurement and there's a metric
next to it so somehow or another
that work was done and I as as a
member of the budget committee
to hear last night and again
commissioner was was relieved of
services as I understand it
somebody who would kind of
fought for conservation and I
think is it true we only have
wildlife biology background.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn I don't know the
in our administrative services
portion of the agent
Yes and most people work for the
department don't do conservation
work they do law enforcement or
other things so having just work
really it's really great to see
these vacancies to see some
people who represent just
wildlife ecology you have those
reform it's it's kind of a
glaring I think deficiency
frankly
although we have some people on
the commission to prepare very
much about conservation and
But Representative.
I would just like to take issued
one statement most of the people
that work the HSD not the law
so I I I think that's a mis
characterization of what the
agency is how the agencies
composed.
And I think that's correct
that's in our books in that's
Gonna start charging.
Thank you Mr chairman other
questions again for you Caitlyn
on page two one to a volume two
I just want to make sure that I
manages that Caitlyn it looks
like our revenue sources from
federal art three hundred twelve
thousand and if I read that
correctly about ten million ten
So that ten million dollars is
quite substantial if I
understood your presentation the
majority of those revenues
derived from hunter's correct
came protection fund and that's
where most of those revenues
come from that that's a
substantial amount I guess we
should be very thankful and
grateful for those New Mexico
hunters who are the large
contributors to this agency and
and they they you know invest a
large significant contribution
Mr chair Mr Sloan we talked
about current are outstanding
litigation something I did in
the meantime come across was the
property I do hope that the the
new commissioners to come on
board understand the importance
of that within that that
outstanding litigation I suppose
of the Supreme Court granted a
Mr chair Senator Diamond.
You know I that one is is very
complicated in my mind and I
don't know what the there is a
taking soup might not be allowed
but certainly there there could
be additional litigation I would
well from any decision made by
the Supreme Court.
have to it you know really
really put the state in a huge
significant burdens if if this
game commission continued
without or if the court ruled
significant amount of money into
this agency and into the state
and that equally their
respectful these private
property owners to do so much to
really move the conservation of
I guess a better economic up to
go through some questions on
your agents.
you're given fourteen point two
million in federal grants and in
federal grants that and that is
to
For the acquisition of habitat
or migration of corridor
associated with capital outlay
projects from spending on our
sergeant wildlife area
north management area to answer
New Mexico state forestry
division on public lands.
So none of this federal grant
money will be use that you were
given in twenty one twenty one
My best guess is that would
probably get you some of that
for the acquisition of the
Afghan ranch and I rose above
and the Baca county's.
LFC report on budgetary issues
others you know three point nine
increase in the op ed spending
budget in the spent want to
overspend that by one point nine
million and then you receive
appropriated twelve million for
numerous projects including
acquisition migration corridor
conservation and construction of
facilities I just want to see
helpful for me to just clarify
quickly also I do want to be
clear the description of what
these types of federal grants
are used for that you're looking
typically uses these requests
for that was something that
I believe it is the HSD CFO had
given to me when I ask you know
one.
Well maybe we ought to reverse
the question state with this
bill then million what are your
what are you gonna do with that
so then we have a definitive
answer and we're not reading
the game and fish and I see that
you've you've already budgeted
we're we're giving you the the
LFC rack which gives you more in
what's that in a look like for
employee retention ring
retention retention and hiring.
With a thirteen percent
increase.
Mr Chairman.
states indicates that we are in
that ten to twenty percent hello
Compensation compared to those
other states I think that would
seventy percent vacancy is what
you have the other member and so
they don't look to be out of an
exporting high number compared
to other agencies so but with a
six percent increase in an
You have to follow the a man's
with CPO in hiring or do not
have all that.
Mr chairman we do after all the
state personnel rules and events
lowest rate then in across the
board is given a thirteen
percent increase than the new
hires would be at that higher
rate in order to be competitive
back.
look at what current pay rates
are and what we bring people in
that and yes the new officer
would come in at about higher
rate.
Okay.
Thank you in in just you're
to end I also want to go back to
some of of
Some money we appropriated in
twenty twenty and twenty twenty
one we gave you a two hundred
says that you can use it for
that direct per purchase
somewhere budgeted for a desktop
calculators typewriters clothing
Where do slide typewriter ribbon
in twenty twenty one because
that's just totally are that you
would buy a type writer.
Miss Mister chairman maybe it is
purchase so we use that money to
upgrade our body worn cameras
for officers and our computer
In center state more may have
one thing right about the game
in fishing may need to change at
a gore goal expenses and have
typewriters anymore.
category of expenditure in the
state system that came directly
from one of the justifications
that the department provides as
Even though I had to learn on
when that may age me
I think we just need to be
careful in how we spend tax
dollar numbers and just one of
the words it kind of stuck out
number of licenses in the state
in New Mexico it's kind of
perplexing to me that that we we
do the number elk licenses but
You know when that began were
you with the agency or
department and.
Mr chairman I was and yeah I
can't tell you the specific here
but it was the year that we
started performance based
negotiated as miss one noted
earlier and they were
I think the objective was
something that could be readily
counted and reported.
Thank.
be I can never match of any
single story with what I'm
hearing in and so do you know
where we're at today as the
fish other than the General
Appropration from from the
legislature of fund the
difference on the part.
agreement are still seeking
their portion of the funding we
would bring federal funding for
the table as are part of the
Patman act well what are portion
of the federal match for the
range so.
Mr chairman when I come from I'm
sorry.
comes from the sale of
ammunition guns and other
hunting equipment and excise tax
manufacture level.
Cases and so so then the game
dollars sitting there right now.
Mr chairman in order to bring
those federal funds we would
need nonfederal match
to find that nonfederal match
and what is the federal match
rate that we would have to have.
the minimum is seventy five
federal the twenty five state or
is it wrapped right so then I
don't know what the purchase
price is so so then get just
give it to me in dollars if if
the state only needed twenty
this but why would we do that
and and I don't even know the
purchase price of maybe you
could tell us that.
And it what what that
There's a lot wrapped up in that
question I think the purchase
prices and they swore any one
twenty three million dollar
range
the funding.
And that we could bring federal
funding you know where we also
have to be conscious that we is
that federal funding for our
operations you all of the
so twenty five percent
Thank twenty million dollars
make the math a little bit
easier is what about four
million dollars million dollars.
feds are giving them half you
divide that by half and that
give you ten point five so then
at the ten point five we need
twenty five percent of that so
two point five million in order
number that I remember hearing
it is somewhere around three in
the third so what we're probably
off by the price and some of the
nuances there but yes that that
session because this will be one
of those topics that that we're
trying to figure out you know
whether we do it I am mean
ranchers do not want to seems
for thirteen years when they did
the sergeants and and did a
whole bunch other places up
there and so that we missed some
opportunities in New Mexico
services but I mean everybody
has a difference of opinion but
we know that every hundred
things every big deer and being
LFC is on the other side of the
fence on the private landowners
it's gonna be a tough issue to
struggle through
During the session so any other
things you would want to make us
aware of it within your budget
that you may need may not need
we may have you back imagine
we'll see some type of
approve a purchase of any any
property with state funds.
So are you you know and.
Any idea of anything else you
We're excited to move forward
with it thank.
Thank you I do appreciate your
work and in in the game vision I
know it's kind of been a tough
of my family around the game by
I kind of watch out for a little
bit and and so I hope we can get
commissioners appointed helping
get good commissioners appointed
they have made some decisions
that mission should a maybe and
so here we are again let me ask
you one final question what is a
contingent how many lawsuits are
Mr chairman I don't have a
specific number but I know it's
I would say it's three but it's
certainly less than five.
That's okay.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
thank you.
Will move on to our next
presenters and.
Go ahead Caitlyn if you want to
begin in the madam secretary can
just start in right behind.
Thank you Mr chairman so this is
Overall the LFC recommendation
for EMNRD is a nine percent
increase compared with the FY
twenty two operating budget and
a thirty three percent increase
budget and a forty two percent
increase over FY twenty one at
bills.
LFC recommends a general fund
increase of one point eight
revenue increase is made up of
federal funds which are
projected to increase
significantly in the state park
and eight forestry division.
infrastructure improvements land
reclamation and restoration and
replacement.
And rather than go program by
program I'm just going to give
you a highly of some of the
goodness in person and that's
meant in the state R. three
division LFC recommends three
hundred and forty six thousand
dollars I knew FTE and sixty
duplicating any across the board
increases for all state
employees.
The executive recommends is
seven hundred and fifteen
thousand for eleven at the E.
reduction is milling please
hiring contract or grounds
maintenance and roadway and
facility repair.
ensure the division have
adequate state match or federal
funds available.
Other large health project.
The executive recommendation for
general fund revenue includes
thousand dollars for vacancy
reduction and one hundred ninety
nine thousand dollars for
seasonal employees and this is
despite the programs funded
LFC recommends an eight percent
general fund increase to support
six new FTE to increase
inspections and compliance
increased hearing examiners and
fully funds the agency requests
for this program providing two
point six million dollars a
forty percent general fund
increase for twenty six at the
On the next page page three
you'll see my general fund a
high level that goes on ages
three or I it members have any
agency request the executive
recommendation and the LA
recommendation so that's all
from me for now injury would you
forestry division there's a five
hundred fifty thousand for nine
new firefighter F. E. and the
second recommendation does
include some federal money there
improvements and Services that's
needed at state parks statewide
and then again as Caitlyn
mentioned in the oil
division and so forth so stiff
you things I'd like to highlight
and for the rest I will turn it
over to secretary props.
and as you've heard from our LFC
and and DFA analyst
administering screen here.
near each other so my comments
today focus on the operating
budget.
At the slight took questions on
anything you may have so are
executive recommendation and our
kept it very lean over the last
few years I've not seen any
significant increases I'm in
years and as demands on the in
HSD have grown anticipating tens
we're focused on industry
oversight always primarily
through the mining and minerals
division and the oil
conservation division we're
focused on addressing climate
change with the statewide effort
growing so quickly in New Mexico
and finally fire response and
natural resource protection
managed by the forestry
division.
And the executive budget request
support the transfer of to re
purposed FTEs to created deputy
director and a climate bureau
chief however we would need
about fifty or sixty thousand
executive recommendation
supports contractual services in
operating costs and those
contract dollars would allow us
to continue our climate and
great modernization work
modernization advisory group for
FY twenty three.
In state forestry seven forty
one the overall differences four
eleven new FTEs including nine
firefighter positions and
administrative position to help
us manage the really complex
funding streams and paperwork
for firefighting expenses with
reclassify some other
firefighter position so it's
it's cover trade offs as I
reported to you before the state
is competing with the federal
government to hire wildland
firefighters and you heard a
fire fighters simply would not
be as competitive so the
executive recommended a ten
percent increase the lowest paid
fire fighters compared to three
percent and the LFC wrecked
In state parks our aim is to
increase staffing levels pure
and simple in the parks we did
not seek any additional FTE ease
we just want to try to fill the
ones we've got and while both
The two recommendations are very
very close for the mining and
minerals division the executive
recto does better support our
staff and the need to match
The oil conservation division
the executive recommendation
supports the agency's full
request for the OCD including
twenty five new FTEs and they
ensuring legal compliance to
protect human health and the
environment with the support
will continue to implement the
nation's leading natural gas
waste rules and certain plants
with our recently reinstated
the executive also supported are
requests for one time contract
dollars so that we can continue
to review approximately sixteen
thousand backlogs legacy
racks.
Finally in program support the
executive recommendation is
vastly preferable for EMNRD's
program support for the
need to be able to have a longer
runway to hire folks so the LFC
recommendation cuts programs
support by a further hundred
thousand dollars because one of
the sessions that I'm we're
Makes we've even shorter than we
are today in addition we
recently learned that our
federal and direct right for FY
twenty three is going to go down
that that also cuts in our
So I finally thank you that by
approving the executive
recommendation EMNRD would be
better positioned to increase
transparency improve industry
compliance and save time
processing permits purchase
Thank you madam secretary
Senator Gonzales you having hand
right.
Here are muted Senator.
nine sixteen where you have all.
All.
The firefighters.
Mr chairman and senator I
believe this would only in two.
Salary and not budget but.
was calculated off of the
information that they they gave
us so I am all follow up to make
sure but I believe it it's just
not worry.
so all and then you also
mentioned
And I.
You know the way you stated it
sounded like administrative for
administrative positions to help
with firefighting.
tracking firefighting expenses
are very complex depending on
who's responding and workers are
going and whether there on you
know whether we're gonna be
reimbursed in part for the
firefighting services on federal
governor would issue so it's
it's complex and we need another
person to help us manage all
that keep it straight for
auditing purposes it's often
spans multiple fiscal years in
one more part so little with the
for service.
They have their own program for
firefighting.
Years back you know the number
included benefit was the
straight salary.
And then also there was no tax
you know that's one of the
So well very well thank you
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you I don't see any other
questions
Many else's hand in.
And I'm gonna well I'm going to
surprise the secretary here
because she knows I love oil and
gas but I want to talk about
forced.
My concern is that we're not.
We're not managing our forests.
before you get water out and in
I think we do two things to our
forces we let them get overgrown
so whatever snow falls on hits
the trees and and then
evaporates often not much of it
water goes in the water tank.
And I also think that has
something to do with the climate
as well okay so you get water
Firefighters in botanists and
and I are we actually trying to
manage the forced so that it
will feed the with the the giant
exactly what our forest
management plan that was most
recently updated twenty twenty
is all about so some of the
positions that were looking for
this year with the for starters
sending projects they could be
helping landowners the projects
they could be you know related
to prescribed burning those
kinds of things.
acres treated in New Mexico's
forests and watersheds I hear
the the budget is of.
fourteen point five million
dollars.
Mr chair Senator chair I think
you know that's a small fraction
but the positions that were
looking for would help us
utilize millions of dollars and
rate we're going it's it's great
work it's really important but
it would take us a hundred years
probably to get caught up what
we need to be treating it ten
times the scale that we're doing
now.
But I think that the private
enterprise could help us
dramatically with this
You know we just have a pretty
one they can clear the
underbrush and and take out the
disease trees and and they can
do a lot of things and they'll
actually pay us to do that and.
a state and in oil and gas or
mining or other things
But but like oil and gas they
pay us a lot of money we give
a it can be economic development
but more important to me is is
that we can get the force to a
point where the where the snow
actually makes it into the the
Unbelievable fires waiting to
happen because of the Romero.
But they also if you want
affordable housing and we talk
there is there any part of this
plan that talks about private
enterprise doing anything for
forced.
Mister chairman Senator share
we do that treat those acres so
we oversee it with our foresters
and with our team but the work
is is contracted out plus we
expect there to be more
opportunities under the federal
understand that the contractor
doing that but I also think that
if we simply allow them we could
have a lot more activity out
there that's beneficial to the
state.
percentage of communities with
medium hi impervious surface
cover they receive technical
assistance what does that mean.
that was strictly but it's it's
an urban forestry measure.
Mr chair and our Senator share
Right addressing stormwater
runoff problems in areas that
have a lot.
This is.
Okay all right I think I
understand that now but that's
part of the healthy forests
water run off down the middle of
the street.
towns but they also help with
creating
more more state which cools
keeps those places cooler
there's some really interesting
science regarding
does have to do with the some
OCD a performance measures so on
here we talk about the volume of
flared gas and the volume of
vented gas what I find
that's that the evil of oil
companies intentionally spew out
and thus reduce their income
just for some evil intent.
Are we saying that it's fifteen
Is it counted twice or is it
just.
I'm just confused by the bye we
how the number can be exactly
the same.
I could be mistaken let's ask
the agency to and Andrew to
confirm but I think for FY
twenty one that might not it
measure to collect to establish
a baseline
for FY twenty one to compare it
to so it might be more of I an
because the measure was
implemented
on a timeline that wouldn't have
allowed the agency to collect
actual data for in the first
and then jump in and are you as
any other.
Mister chairman Senator I
believe that's correct as
Caitlyn explained it unless the
secretary would like to the
offering additional insight.
knew what we had our New wastrel
coming online and that the first
phase of that new rule was going
to be greatly enhanced data
collection and so we knew we
would have better numbers in
thousand nine hundred seventy
four
gas flaring incidents
yes flaring incidents and nine
hundred eighty seven venting
incidents so a lot more flaring
sure madam secretary senator let
me jump in
at it madam secretary were you
allowed to determine what the
baseline number would be or did
baseline we'll we'll change our
projections as your as you're
looking at me smiling in future
years and so it can be
manipulated in either direction
for director Santa are from at
that are complete R. twenty
twenty numbers because our
reporting lags every forty five
days so we don't even have all
is our but I don't really
remember a lot of our
conversation Mr chairman this is
Caitlyn again at the LFC and
that agencies expertise and we
wanted them to start collecting
the data and give us an idea of
what this number would be even
tools were available to them at
the time to provide us with a
number and I think that you know
I'm working all add.
The secretary may have numbers
look the way it does just
because of the timing of our
budget initiatives and when
performance measures begin to be
implemented.
L. in any accounting method or
so we put a projected higher
number correct me if I'm wrong I
don't have the exact information
but I think I'm right so why
would we not use twenty twenty
as a baseline and move from
so just try to start telling you
the numbers because often
members asked that in the
hearings what is it Mr chairman
think we did not have any data
to report
for earlier years and it was it
this was a brand new measure
that the agency was going to
had the tools in place to go I
hope that helps.
So.
Mr chair and madam secretary
the the venting and flaring
issue.
event gas in fact the the
producers don't want to do
either that because that's money
out of their pocket as well but
there are technical issues why
account for why and I do think
that it certainly in the
explanatory portion without
explain why some of that
happened no certainly there are
ignores the technical reasons on
why that happens in it in it
doesn't happen just because
people are lazy there's real
technical of issues with the
there's also.
in here says application to
drill permits approved within
ten days it says eighty seven
percent a disappoint six percent
Mr chair and members of the
committee and the volume that
our staff I mean we're now the
number two onshore oil producing
hire more staff to to get there
I'm not sure you know what the
the tent the magic of the ten
day back in the day whenever
that was established it was
before my time you know what why
percent over the last couple of
years so that's that's why.
In that makes sense to me Mr
efficient is that is that what
you're saying that would be part
of it yes Sir.
And then my last question here
energy conservation management
In my mind
issues here so we're going back
to San Juan generating station
which currently only two things
come out of that generating
the world don't come out of that
one.
And we would like to take out
the CO two as well does that not
meet this you know minimize of
regional and global emissions I
On the other it is a side note
if we turned all of the elect
all of our or our fossil fuel
powered cars in America into
electric cars we would need
Why do we oppose this war.
Mr chair I think we're less than
a position trying to propose
order so that's what they see in
the works for.
Well Mr chairman and madam
secretary I I think that this is
nothing at all will come out
a power plant
It's certainly innovative is
certainly what we need to power
all of the electric cars that we
Meets everything that everybody
says they want.
But we still hate it and we
hated because its coal even
though we have through
the global air emissions if we
can do it on the scale it's it's
San Juan generating station we
can do it at scale of China and
that truly makes the world
Thank you Mr chairman.
The question I have we we've got
I would like to you know and
they're pretty pretty big
increases in those two
categories.
Lisbon amen and.
And what category that they are.
Serving in and by that I mean
you know
The services provided and in the
other category I would like.
Essentially the same thing what
listed but.
And you can even give me just
the ne the pager tone would be
fine in many of these books if
Mister chairman Senator Woods
the a list of the line items and
we're looking at but there are I
believe.
I would I would say maybe two
hundred or more line items that
are included in the other costs
Adam Goree it's basically
the age the needs make apples
and the other other categories
we have a lot of individual line
items that fall under under
there
It's just a fact that so many
dollars there it just amazing
and I can see how it would be a
lot of dollars if you went down
For street.
Help the forced vision.
I noticed that you do have in
there that.
Do we not have a state
biologists to.
Understate forestry now Mr
chair.
she has more works and she could
do so we're proposing to hire a
second position to work on the
state by any program we have a
number of endangered plants and
Done have you got that
C..
Storage area picked out yet or
the the LFC recommendation did
include US C. collector position
as well and that would support
the reforestation center that we
announced an MO you yesterday
fires around the state so
EMNRD's role in that partnership
would be to handle the seed
collection and reforestation
piece of it all the partners
Appreciate that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Some water Senator I don't think
that I'm I'm excited to see you
know investment and are healthy
for us I think we need to then
it gray said Burnett I think the
state forestry division does a
great job.
So I like to see investment in
general Budget overview it seems
that all the agencies that are
coming before us want to money
so in order for me to better
understand who needs money I'm
general fund transfers doesn't
seem like an awful lot compared
to to some of our agencies and
in twenty two twenty four
million.
Yeah what's a little.
again in twenty one if I read
this correctly you reverted
three million dollars and and
this is an unusual with with
agencies so secretary don't you
come before us for more a thirty
percent increase.
Mr chair Senator Diamond I'm
really glad that you asked about
that because it's some of it is
our version of the budget we
we've shared folks out of state
or we've partnered with the Feds
or you know to fight fires on
federal land the starter on
Federal and those kinds of
things we were for millions of
dollars back to the general fund
reimbursement in addition now
that that will conservation
division has penalty authority
back we're starting to revert
we're starting to revert back to
a million dollars most likely
reverted back but we did you
know last year we did have also
impacts of a hiring freeze for
part of your with COVID and some
difficulties on that so there
reversions and I'd be curious as
we move forward and that's an
understandable explanation the
fire and and certainly with the
conservation division could you
send us a breakdown of how much
Madam secretary I I just had a
few basic questions.
And I'm looking at budget racks
and and everything.
Mr chair that's correct for the.
The pay and the expenses
associated with sending them out
of state.
Mr chair no for liability
but it's really good on that
still in fire season here but
it's really good training and
opportunity and frankly an
opportunity for the state to
bring in those this dollars
because they're basically
getting their salary paid first
I somebody else for the period
presentation and this many years
that had the executive and the
LFC and comparative in a
presentation which was a little
the executive we know what you
what your agency needs are let
me ask you about the the same
thing some of the you know
you're asking for a ten percent
the ten that you're looking for
it might Representative.
Mr chair
I appreciate how that sounds but
we're still not competing with
tough I mean they're really
bring it with the dollars and
partners to stimulus part it's
going to be an agency budgets
going forward and it's a
priority for them so we're we're
just trying to do everything we
the aggregate so I'm just trying
to stay competitive so so let me
ask you this so you asking for
an additional ten on top of of
if we gave you an additional
firefighting employees on top of
that correct.
Mr chair that's what we're
asking yes yeah I just want to
clarify that and what is that
number.
Missy if Matthew about ten
have sent them I remember the
aggregate that we submitted was
I think it's less than the two
thousand.
Mr chairman I have the the
thousand is what.
Ten percent was so if if that's
what the agency would be asking
and just so people know the
signing bonus with the Feds is
twenty thousand dollars per
person.
In yeah and so that's what I'm
trying to figure out I mean we
the federal level and and the
federal health care and the
options I mean how how how's
your department even gonna
compete with with the.
Four hundred thousand how many
employees in the forestry.
Mr Chairman there are people who
value living in the communities
where they live in New Mexico
things going for us in terms of
the the atmosphere and the
collegiality that we create I
know that's a soft thing to
report teaching but it is true
to Mexicans.
I'm also sorry Mr chair the
parental leave is twelve weeks
for us which is longer.
Yeah and and I'm just trying to
figure out if we're really
trying to hire people in New
Mexico.
in this goes throughout every
agency for trying to be
competitive we have to fix the
payments we have to fix the the
pay levels and what we're paying
eighty thousand dollar range
depending upon their experience
in and so are we really going to
get that done I mean that that's
the overall question throughout
every agency because of the
Are we paying rate is not we're
just throwing money in into a
pile to be reverted later let's
fix our problem so we can get
those people and insight
agencies and departments and
a teacher recruited in Texas was
getting to a six thousand dollar
signing bonus of five hundred
dollar living stipend for the
internet of their contract I
Mexico change I'm I don't really
have any other questions madam
secretary
I I appreciate your presentation
it was it was very insightful to
see an agency out trying to
in your honesty and and as we
move forward so we'll continue
to have conversations but we may
bring you back on the payment
is.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you.
Senator Campos are you there
this is Senator Rodriguez yes
yes I'm I'm ready and wanting
that are coming from the office
of the state engineer and the
Interstate Stream Commission and
then also we do have our
presenters and what I'm gonna be
doing is asking our presenters
to go ahead and introduce
so if you will please begin.
Mr chairman this is Caitlyn LFC
analysts did you want me to
presentation and thank you very
much for a for that information
please proceed thank you okay
thank you Mr chairman so this is
agency code five five zero
summary overall the LFC base
budget recommendations for the
office of the state engineer
exceeds the executive
recommendation by one point four
executive this is the LFC
reduced expenditures from the
irrigation work instruction
funds and improvement of the Rio
Grande income fund by two point
executive recommendation
includes two point three million
dollars or Senator mansions in
each of the agencies or
programs.
information on the amendment
allow us to go into more detail
and for now it just give them
program highlight mostly along
the lines of that base budget.
to use this funding our at a
reduced level the LFC
recommendation includes ten half
million dollars in revenue from
both of these funds at total for
interested in the details of our
trust fund projections and
current fund balances you can
purposes to address the HSD is
chronically high the right.
Andrew.
Thank you a lot of good
afternoon again Mr chairman and
state engineer the first is six
point two million dollar general
fund that is basically a revenue
million from those trust funds
in their operating budget so
does not completely I take it
away and then the other
component as that Caitlyn
mentioned with that two point
explain basically getting some
high priority issue such as
drought and climate change
developing the state's fifty
year water plan Indian water
will turn it over to the office
of the state engineer.
Thank you very much and as we go
to the office of the state
engineer again what I ask is
that the presenters identify
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Rolf Schmidt
Petersen I am the director of
the New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission and I'll be giving
the initial presentation to
relatively quickly with me today
for questions and other things
we have John Romero the water
rights director for the office
of the state engineer at chick
first who is our.
M. are HSD director who can
answer questions about that the
differences in the budget
recommendations and much more
detail than I think the rest of
us and I feel a little bit like
and and the presentation that
you have in front of you
Has a number of things that that
I'll talk about and really it's
six main areas of focus for
move to the the first one the
second page in there be the
first element which I think
you're all of acutely aware of
an and was a big part of our
important.
This element is with what we're
facing today with the drought
Really happy to have gotten
those two weeks worth of snow.
it's it is nowhere near enough
to get even a normal run off
right now and we're back in a
dry conditions and it didn't
provide any any real help this
in ten days amazing.
But but not everywhere well with
this increase and I'll talk
about a little bit more we have
I if the well let me back up
here for second if you look at
and then in green is the request
that we have in the executive
budget and the justification
work for F. T. in white is
that activity and so in this
regard.
We're really looking and we we
have with the act water resource
management statute.
our local communities and also
meet the prior appropriation in
the priority rights needs in
that specific area I'm doing
a number of other people faces
of John Romero staff is in
others and and it's unique to
New Mexico and it allows us to
make it through very difficult
that's really to help us with
that act the water master
support Water Rights backlog in
the and it Madam implementation
for modeling we have a real need
for more.
technical rigor in our modeling
also these river basins and then
a hundred forty thousand per
trust program has been doing now
for a number of years with
capital funding from the
legislature.
And so that's one main area that
we're looking at and with
In this
We I just John the has stated
had stated for a number of years
implement but they provide great
value Navajo Madam is a big one
with the Navajo Gallup water
supply project the Amit
settlement is another big piece
but in addition we have a number
of pueblos in particular tribes
with unsettled Water Rights lot
of them on the middle Rio Grande
and we have a of a large number
that are active that can see
negotiations at the same time
right now we're limited our
ability to do that and we have
most recently okay we get Pueblo
six middle Rio Grande pueblos to
do the same in order for the
state to represent itself and
its citizens in the effort with
the federal government we need
litigation to I. Essie to wrap
and and it it includes also
about three hundred thousand for
a dedicated contractual support
to help us with these
negotiations next slide on this
I believe next week of the
attorney general's office will
be presenting if you all up on
continue to support the AG in
those efforts they are leading
the litigation in this regard
and we provide support to them
the LFC recommended and we would
just tell you that that six
million we believe is is the
correct number and the
appropriate number and
technical trial in March and
And facing some other pushes by
the state of Texas in the middle
Rio Grande where there is the
requires a very significant
amount of support so in here
we're looking ultimately for two
FTE also the Interstate Stream
Commission that would help us
more intense every day lots of
requirements for that six
million as I mentioned for the
litigation for the Rio Grande
seven hundred fifty thousand for
Of being a small state in the
big basin with everybody else
having many more people and much
more support and the
negotiations and the discussions
settlement agreement this is
largely pumping of our Madam oil
fields which we stopped for two
months over the winter and we've
then also just maintain that
settlement which is provided New
Mexico tremendous benefits we
have an half a million dollars
Another critical long term
strategic element here we signed
we have a career president
technician president signed the
contract yesterday.
river in the face of drought and
compact issues plus the San Juan
Chama project which is the water
supply for Santa Fe and
Albuquerque and many others very
critical element.
we are currently working with my
canon of the governor's office
on a refined schedule related to
the fifty year plan that more
specifically addresses
recommendations and estimated.
Needs in costs going forward we
at this point in time it's just
the start we anticipating
recommendations that come out of
this.
The next element is capital
project management technical
support for dams the state kias
When it comes to infrastructure
we're looking across the state.
Simply having money that you can
money and perhaps not being able
to do it very quickly these this
request for additional staffing
organizations that get capital
funding and they have very
significant needs and they're
very dedicated to what they do
but they don't know the state
system they don't know what's
five individual contracts that
they're seeking to help.
Get projects shovel ready land
and permitted and designed so we
know the cost and we can help
need staff to be able to do it
and we'll need some contractor
support do it same with dams and
and same with a number of other
and I'll do this I'll be done
here just a second.
I'm there is a water data act
and we have a request in support
for funding for collaborative
collaboration and data sharing
large scale data projects that
like modeling and mapping that
allows data to be gathered and
held with meta data it can be
used to not just answer the
funding of one million three
hundred eighty thousand two for
HSD implementation of the water
data act which is a nonrecurring
special request and three
million one hundred fifty three
can modernize that system and
you can of a improve the data
management part of it you help
with the water data Ag piece.
I'll just end with the last page
which is long term budget
sustainability and trust fund
solvency.
you know I know there's been a
lot of.
available to us.
As the O. S. C. I. S. C. when we
are planning our budget in any
particular year well we're
situation we've always been in
is we are worried that we from
the chair system we may not have
enough money to have a flat
won't do it because we really
can't afford to lose staff I
think that's just the situation
that we've been in for a number
of years during my time here and
the trust fund pieces that we
can basically take that issue
off the table we can really use
these trust funds for what they
were originally intended which
Thank you very much questions I
just want to go to the other
panel members to see if we've
missed any information or
there's anything else that you
wish to add.
Okay we're going to Santo road
Regus never going to Senator
Woods Senator Rodriguez please
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the panelists are here
your presentation first John and
get everyone but under Hillary
were non diversion project.
let's go to that page for a
moment and then water
program
is this expanding recycling
program out the state or is that
just within a certain region.
help get him moving
well we're looking at even with
the Water Rights thanks program
such as up for storage and
and we use it at a later time
frame that's been done already
with the City of Albuquerque in
Cebu City of Rio Rancho and
other municipalities across the
state have been working with us
was just going to ask if you're
doing this together in
collaboration with local and
municipal governments
but it seems like you already
Senator share and then we're
going to the chairman.
Thank you Mr chair.
Question of.
Where we on this New Mexico unit
fund.
Board to me tell me about the
unit for Mister chairman Senator
Woods we're we are at this point
And in addition we are currently
negotiating with the bureau of
reclamation on a final payment
to New Mexico.
that could increase that amount
water trust board the did a
public process last fall we're
in the city they've they've
sought input from stakeholders
responsibilities for making
recommendations to the
Interstate Stream Commission for
funding and at this point time
our understanding is the water
where we sit now but what we're
seeking to do is recognizing
that funding amount be prepared
when the recommendations come to
The agency if I get this
straight Mr chair.
recommendations.
From the water trust board so
they have already communities.
process already been done Mr
chose are supposed to be shovel
ready the way I understood it.
Mister chairman Senator Woods I
don't believe there at that
seek to make recommendations to
the I. S. C. as I understand
their process The New Mexico
finance authority within and the
Stream Commission on those get
our input and at that point in
time make a solicitation for
proposals for shovel ready
projects.
And right now we're.
Okay I'll quit asking the.
caissons and how many watersheds
have we gotta judicata now.
Totally judicata.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
I'll defer here to that.
I don't have the exact number of
all the of the educations of I
address the fifteen or so was
you know the last count I I saw
but it's we have a few that were
were able to complete right now
but it's yeah we're we're we're
cleaning up a couple but the
server not complete.
Mr chairman and senator woods
does have a chart from a data
from the state engineer on water
rates beautification progress
and that in volume.
On the that in the eight.
Would you repeat that again K..
education progress that we
received from
the state engineers office thank
you very much going back to
center was.
general question would be on a
Judy cation.
When when when we have a.
Watershed at one time so we
would be finished with that.
And what is a process when we
get that educated.
Mister chairman Senator Woods.
There are a lot of historical
reasons hello Education skip
started and the defer watershed
and some of the basins state the
paperless rivers a good example
it started on a more haphazard
manner where a few private water
rights owners were challenging
of the basins the the the pueblo
or tribal water rights or the
large dominant water rates in
those basins that have not been
early once we get those tribal
water rates settled once added
to your second question
What rates can be transferred at
state engineers office and if
they have an adjudicated water
right that's that's what the
office evaluates if the water
rate is still in the process of
we don't let the status of the
adjudication prevent water range
from being transferred.
So it's a seamless process Mr
declaration of Judy cation that
can reckons and what I'm getting
at is the cannabis deal.
That's that's where I'm gonna
driving this boat from.
R. where where are you on that
it's.
Or certain times so how are you
determining.
That there's enough water for a
cannabis license I guess what
I'm asking.
Mr chair Senator Woods that's to
answer further would need
already answered it's easier to
do a transfer in an educated
basin because now we know
much easier because even for us
to do the evaluation we know
those water rights as an order
they own this much and it's done
There are a lot of issues
we're seeing a lot of
decorations coming in in non
judicata basin specifically in
We already had staff.
That decorations in those basins
for just normal stuff normal.
Irrigation farming ranching
educated create a problem
creates more work.
And that's why in our budget
request we have I FTE for Water
about five hundred applications
are ready.
Not to mention what's coming in
on top of that for cannabis so
yes it's it's it's an issue
a domestic well or any type of.
Marshall uses for domestic
purposes you only for your
household so try to get the word
out to people help them with
Actually no was Wednesday this
no the Wednesday of last week
and we're we're each of our
district offices answering
questions all the time we have
Fifty ten fifteen questions that
we've seen over and over that
are on there so yes there's a
lot of questions on cannabis and
I could go on and on but I I'm
One of these producers are
wanting to get into production.
And we're trying to finalize a
money on campus on taxation.
So
what I'm asking is.
What's the was.
And.
You've got a backlog.
Of those.
What's your time table.
these are just guys picking up
off the street.
These are highly specialized up
work either attorneys or or
Are those people out there.
When you ask for the money.
Have you got people.
Pretty sure that you can are are
little bit because we're we're
thinking that that we're going
to grow this stuff but we don't
have the water okay to grow it
so explain all that to me real
Unfolded as best I can
So we don't have a water right
you know going to be able to.
To produce any to water right
it's a crop its Indian Water
It takes a while I'll give you
an example Senate bill twelve
and it's on here we need staff
to help the Senate bill twelve
Unrecognized problems with that
that have come up so before when
you just submitted an
application and you have to.
It that application published
have to put it in our in our
website and we do we were doing
that already but it's way more
complicated we need staff ninety
just to keep up with this and
It's gets in the queue we have a
we have a backlog right now
about five hundred applications
those are the statewide there
for everything under the sun and
To review one of these
applications it takes anywhere
from depends on the complexity
and what you're trying to do six
to eight months maybe longer and
a while if it gets protest said
it could take.
Two years to go through the
legal process and get that
protest
graduates from the universities
in New Mexico at people because
we've we just hired an engineer
hydrologists geologists
engineers civil mechanicals of
X. understand Water Rights
understand water flow wells
stuff of that nature.
so will a lot of times will
attract people to our agency
from out of state in state.
And then.
We'll have some of the
municipalities tribes and
pueblos the Feds.
Private engineering firms come
having to be fill that position
that's why our.
Okay.
Mr chair.
Got it.
So if you could say the price of
one of those individuals.
Compared to what we're paying
today.
Give me a good guess.
I'll give you an example my
daughter graduated from New
Mexico state.
Just in December she's working
yeah I'm and I need to she's
working at Wilson engineering.
we can pay mid mid point for a
water resource professional one
and I don't have the numbers in
front of me it's it's close to
about.
In in thirty five thousand
like to be the first female
state engineer on the table for
she's too much and I'm pretty
office right now she's making
more when she should have to
and given raises as they go
along to at least forty five
fifty.
You know just and that's at the
entry level.
In the question I've got Mr
I mean you've got unfunded
vacancies here.
Is it the pay bands that that
restrict your salaries that you
Four five years ago the pay
bands are there and they're
good.
But it's what we can't pay
anybody our budget is restricts
classification it's fine it's we
just don't have a budget and we
try to spread out what little
budget we have a two more people
sometimes more staff.
And that's that's the problem we
eighties so we don't have people
that are making what they should
make in the agency what happens
a lot of people stay because
retirement and state government
is really good so once their
let me take some so the HSD have
the ability to take their
vacancy savings and increases
pay Maez or move them up to a
higher payment not all agencies
are doing that I'm kind of
and and get those people hired
in the right rate then in the
beginning so they're not
starting at the bottom they also
have the flexibility for vacancy
so at I think we're going to
middle level or high level where
they need to be and then then we
run those situations thanks
Arti.
Thank you Mr thank you.
lines except maybe not as in
depth here
It shows that we have on pro
tested under grieved Water
Rights applications backlog of
did we processed five hundred
and twenty two.
Actually that number's not of Mr
chair Senator share of the
numbers it's active for ninety
statewide that we've we this
last semester last of quarter we
we process an average I believe
it's twenty one and I'm not sure
those numbers you have those
it was in the forties over forty
forty two budget.
I tribute this time this you
know the holidays COVID and a
lack of staff.
But the average the numbers for
ninety seven it's not over five
hundred we've kept under five
hundred pretty it's hard because
applications come in every day
walk in the door in Albuquerque
or Los crucis Roswell depends.
So Mister chair and
thirty days why Sir backlog of
reason four hundred ninety seven
or ninety five okay so so one we
don't have sufficient staff.
Two we have to go out in the
actually a valid water rights
There's also the member I've
mentioned Senate bill twelve
just that alone is a seventy day
us and we given the notice of of
publication back to the
applicant and say take this to
the newspaper without water
rights County that that water
right is in its.
publication back within a few
weeks once we see others no
protest then we start working on
it and actually during that time
period we're working on we're
doing stuff behind the scenes
with you know sometimes it's
which I can do an impairment
analysis we have to have
hydrology look at this area and
model it and make sure that the
That you know maybe what
domestic well permits we get
those out usually same day
within one or two days come and
get your permission to do a good
but non domestic applications
That that's part of the process
as well.
Share your so I.
The to me it just seems like the
experts warn the conditions
exacerbating the region's long
term drought are likely the new
normal and the whole.
Thing of new normal has always
irritated me because will.
In in I do recall the I I don't
remember two thousand to two
thousand three someone are was
it elephant Butte lake and it
was down and you could almost
walk across the lake this is the
down since again but
But I was talking to of the
secretary of energy minerals and
natural resources I don't know
if you were around during that
tanks than most of this.
Goes away.
Of the in while it's two
separate groups I would I would
doesn't get down to the ground
it's it's absorbed by the trees
or evaporates off the top of the
trees and then after we burn
forced down which is what we're
going to do if it's over grown
of coordination or effort or
push that the state engineer can
have to say.
Geis whoever's managing forced
energy minerals and natural
and that's not really a question
but a request you know to me
this is this is the number one
issue in New Mexico will have
water.
So I think that if you're going
to get to the root of the
problem the root of the problem.
Is forced management in filling
up the giant water tanks we have
Thank.
Turn this my god thank you Mr
chairman I wanted to go on and I
just don't understand it on your
understanding is that.
We have ninety three million for
water projects this is one of
the water projects for that airs
on the settlement act and we had
federal money to build the dam
thousand three Arizona water
Selman Act was due to New Mexico
as part of a negotiated
settlement with sixty six
million you know basically
unit project or not no you to
project and and so the funding
from that has come to the
Interstate Stream Commission is
southwest New Mexico and Jeff
could talk about the the details
of those budget amounts right
now but we have that money and
it's available to New Mexico and
in southwest New Mexico make
recommendations to the I just
see for projects if we can build
a diversion project on eight of
southwest County area as
recommended to the Interstate
Stream Commission by the water
transport using those funds when
we come to the legislature we
Right from brand.
Have some investments some more.
And it's on air geisha works
construction fund.
The expenditures out of the
funds so Mr chairman of all the
for the different.
The top section.
Yes in the very top section this
is the table that is included in
the LFC volume three I believe.
unique because we worked on the
projections we have some
disagreements on some of the
numbers in the projections are
seeing these new projections are
LFC our hope is that we'll be
able to resolve
whether or not that line item
already captures the S. I see
investments in actually would
end up as you can see by the
numbers the ending balance
our and we believe it doubles it
to forty million dollars.
Will be chairman with the LFC
staff on that hopefully in the
Caitlin I'm I'm sorry I didn't
hear the last words that you use
it.
We like to make sure that
there's not something that the
LFC is aware of that we're not
as the
duplicated on this additional
line in the junctions of the LFC
but we're happy to work with
LFC to trying to resolve those
Jeff and some other staff from
the state engineers office
earlier in the fall to discuss
these projections when we
realized that they had
would begin including that
amount in our projections so
this is something that.
They did see several months ago
and this is the first I'm
from the research that we
already did into this Fund what
we have found is that there is a
balance that's held by the state
is an amount that
agencies expenditures come from
and that's when the state
treasury and then there are long
term investments and that gives
Chairman from in that makes very
good sense or trying to
understand it and respectfully
what I would offer as just basic
evidence that yes I see balances
the unrealized gains on those
investments are shown in the
table above the in the
projections that you're showing
improvement to the Rio Grande
income fund in share actually
show investments as assets that
the audited fund balance reports
and and insure so that's where
we just need to get with the LFC
to make sure that we are talking
aware of their we can work with
the LFC to demonstrate that
those balances are already
return David let me finish I'm
asking this question that we
can.
One everything show up inside
the share system but why is
But the treasures bounces shown
ensure there in the back of our
unit three don't include long
term assets so for example if
you looked at the shark sure
So I think it's a difference
between chair in the income and
the assets.
In HSD is saying they're double
County well.
concern but we will yet again
meet with them but miss one is
correct they've had plenty of
time to bring this information
to us and never did.
Well they've had a little
David maybe while you're here we
should note something that maybe
we want to see the fund balances
on all investments in the state.
And that we need to see the fact
city municipal through the
treasurer of the state
investment so we don't end up in
this situation but we'll figure
it out I just want to ask that
question thank you Mr chairman I
I share center.
The real brief I really like
what you just said about you
know fund balances for all the
funds I don't know if if David
ones need to be you know
recondition or whatever it is
that makes sense and so when we
see fund transfers that bill
automatically going to the
in this at S. I. C. and S. I see
money set there and we saw the
gains but we don't know what the
dollar amount is in the funds
because nobody's reporting what
David has something that on the.
So let's look at.
Page two hundred volume three.
Cash balance report short term
investments so we look at us I
see well if this is their
operating count ten ten million
dollars is clearly not including
Three about fifteen six line
irrigation works construction
fund minus five million.
office as part of the irrigation
or construction fund that's my
point this is cash not long term
investments.
Thank you Mr chairman I know
V. said this have an agency that
nobody knows that they have some
money invested and all the
sudden it shows up so we just
need to figure out.
Not not in last week we get a
report as I see but.
Respond Mr chairman Senator
Padilla.
Thank you when.
report that looks like this in
the back of the line three every
month.
In a matter of routine both
analyst in the members look at
FAA and we found about three
hundred thousand of truly Darman
accounts without any activities
so this that's why we report
Half full Cup some seven percent
full cups all over the place
that could be cool all come in
and all that I just I do that
with my business regularly and I
want to make sure that we're
state so we don't have that.
Correct okay we we have if that
in the investment return in
income it'll be in cash sure
balances so will want to look at
the accounts look at the income
and spending and reconcile the
wave rest.
Thank thank you guys.
figure out what's right so
account for right so you don't.
At.
You don't want any audit
findings either.
Yes tell me okay I can't see the
secretary they're not yes I see
him online have a large screen
but everybody looks kind of
small and.
Caitlyn one and Andrew Miner
analyst for this agency this is
code six six seven the
Environment Department I'll
direct you to volume two if
secretary Kenny to present I'll
just give an overview of the
some of the differences starting
with the agency wide summary
overall the LFC recommendation
over FY twenty two.
LFC recommended general fund
increase of one million dollars
or six percent well the
executive recommends a general
Both recommendations include
funding for the agency's X. to
expansion request but LFC is is
a personal recommendation that
at thirteen U. F. T. E. well the
the recommendations is in
federal revenue where LFC
recommends eight two point two
million dollar increase and the
executive recommends three point
eight million dollar decrease
increase in federal funds seems
more probable the LFC
recommendation also uses more
the HSD is self generated
revenue from various fees
priorities in line with LFC
guidelines such as recruitment
and retention efforts and three
classification of existing FTE
to meet more urgent needs in the
division a new climate change
bureau and and banded cannabis
and and zero.
LFC recommends four hundred
thousand dollars in general fund
The executive recommendation
exceeds the agency's request as
well by funding items that were
not requested in the agency by
the agency during the budget
Act also comes close to fully
funding the agency's
expansionary.
The recommendation is two and a
half million dollars for the new
level as the side by side
comparisons of the agency
requests the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation and this is
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members just real
quick just want to reiterate
three of the items major items
in the executive recommendation
and then also the expansion
requests again the executive
recommendation funds the climate
change bureau at about two point
industry so with that I will
turn it over to secretary
County.
Thank you of the Caitlyn and
about eight slide twenty five of
which are substantive in an
effort to move us along and and
talk a little bit about our
budget get to a discussion so if
line as well as our CFO Marlene
Velasquez
we have our
If any of our budget director
who isn't able to be with us we
have our program financial
R. funding which usually is
something we talk about so we're
all here to answer questions and
with that Mr chair I'm gonna ask
you see if Rebecca could share
Mr chair I'm they're going to
continue I can't the people
directly in the in the sense
Mr chair and members of the
committee I know that you know
our department but I know that
our department is broader than
how maybe you do know it so this
septic folks where the
actually I'm storage tank groups
for both leaking state
facilities state run facilities
as well as those that have owner
Mexicans who have been sick and
I working are exposed to radio
active materials there are
radiation control bureau the
most substances sliding one that
I tried to pack a lot of
information to see you have one
place refer to everything but
this is what I would call our
dashboard slide and just
funding sources we have
obviously one general fund which
we talk a lot about and in these
hearings but we also have a
hundred one hundred grand and
that you bill your time to in
the course of a period so it's
not just a general fund agency
it is by far the least of
education a least amount of
money if there are general fund
boxes the FY twenty three
executive requesting FY twenty
three LFC recommendation as both
Caitlyn and Andrew indicated
and educate indicated there are
some of federal funds are other
revenues that that LFC did sort
of.
Give back to the the HSD which
has been a discussion of four
point nine million return
reversions the general fund came
from civil penalties either
penalties that level the playing
field when industry violate a
the general fund for non
compliance issues and again
leveling the playing field the
value the efforts that industry
makes in complying with the law
even when bad actors don't
with some ideas which I have and
I will share with you about
attracting and retaining talent
but for for now we have five
hundred thirty one people we are
authorized for six hundred
ninety seven people see that
would tell you we have a seven
percent
budgeted vacancy rate so our
ninety seven that come into play
and that's twenty three point
six percent that pick up since
we last presented to you in
positions in active recruitment
forty of those are on SLO's
website the raster in the in the
round of interviews reference
checks it's such a reflective
our most recent rapid hires
we build all but one position in
December we sold about twenty I
don't have the number right in
front of me but I think it was
candidates who want to work for
the New Mexico Environment
Department
But here's here's what we hear
from people when they do meet
the New Mexico environment
department.
better pay elsewhere and on top
I've been with you all afternoon
and listening to the
conversation with chair with you
whatever those are that we are
about fifty percent less than
the department of labor's Hey
right or for that those series
no matter what happens given our
national labs get and the oil
and gas industry even the clean
energy industry that's been
developing there's always better
please.
Historical context Mr chair
members of the committee this is
what our budget has look like
over the years I'm not going to
going in a different direction
than where we had been
so I'm just going to skip over
that we can certainly come back
to if there are questions so
Mister chair and members of the
you heard from England as well
as Andrew that the we're both
it's an increase the base
request but largely it's an
change bureau as well as the I
had of this work that we have to
do to ensure safe edibles both
well so I can get into that a
little bit further
with respect to the first three
boxes you see here and P. five
six seventy five six eight five
level of service to New Mexicans
With with those three
programmatic areas.
In contrast in the back and we
can go to the next slide.
LFC budget recommendations
basically provide the NMED with
increased spending a party of
I'm sorry increased transfer
funds in other words funds that
have a dedicated provided
purchase the purpose
and have to sustain multiple
years worth of budgeting from
for not only increased levels of
service to New Mexicans we are
also compensate our employees
chair and and members of the
committee is that while at the
LFC is giving us a larger budget
than the executive if it's with
just going with the LFC
recommendation
the level of service that we
want to expand for New Mexicans
are providing that New Mexicans
just just won't happen
contingent upon passing the
pieces of legislation I we have
one person who's working on
climate dedicated full time in
the state of New Mexico the
Environment Department if if if
have even less than what you see
there are black the four hundred
thousand seven FTEs we would
have two hundred thousand
roughly at about three FTEs
working on climate and similarly
personal services and benefits
so
Let's move to the next slide.
Mr chair and members the
here that well there's a number
of things on here that we're
looking to provide robustly
again to help New Mexicans to
help our industry and move
things forward
hold other states accountable
for their ozone pollution that
blows into New Mexico at the
rate in which the proposed
funding is on the LESC side I
would rather succeed by not
them to do nine hundred twenty
thousand dollars worth the work
four hundred and fifty thousand
dollars it it just won't happen
funded and with that Mr chair
and members of the committee
of course we're going to ask you
to adopt the executive
recommendation
And I see Senator Steinborn
stand raised on the screen I see
Senator Rodriguez should raising
their hand Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you.
sometimes we think we understand
but then we look at in the big
picture the way you present and
that we have a lot more to learn
thank you very much I just have
that you already do you have a
bureau currently correct
secretary Kenny for the ham and
do you have what do you do any
Mr after going to be doing with
that.
Mr chair thank you Secretary can
if you can answer that Mr
chairman and Senator Rodriguez
could you.
department we are working on
issues now based on the twenty
nineteen bill that passed but it
is the account is working is new
asking for nineteen FTEs correct
for that for that here we're
talking about camping cannabis
at you having you're trying to
look at correct.
Mr chair and senator you are
correct we picked up the hand
work in twenty nineteen with no
program period in addition the
cannabis work is new and
therefore the.
Cannabis and hemp bureau that
we're creating is a new bureau
this bureau but really no
additional funding is kind of
like that and then funded
mandate you know you have the
are you establish an office but
yet no funding to operate it and
fifteen F. E. R..
Mr chairman and senator against
your correct
have climb it was cheap I'm
sorry and cannabis was two point
three million with nineteen
have to have Act funding for
that is contingent
on the legislation going to the
okay thank you very much for you
secretary good to see you happy
new year
quick question for you you
highlighted some of these
deficiencies and the
Some of the consequences of.
How.
Not.
You know how some of the task
basically you've been charged
senator Steinberg of course
happy new year to you as well
With respect to the adoption of
the LFC budget I'll put it that
way.
permit surface water discharging
service watered permitting
program in the state of New
Mexico currently that's managed
by the federal government out of
we would like to be more
responsible and more managing of
our water and surface waters
here in New Mexico.
contaminants that are in
drinking water
in our solid waste bureau we
would not conduct as many
the claim it efforts we we are
quickly attracting some of the
world's largest in US largest
companies are based on our
expansion of those jobs without
funding the climb a bureau
I think we're basically
signaling to those fortune five
hundred that were not the right
to implement some of our
Executive order and some of the
legislation without having that
funding
which is which would be.
know we are partner with R. O.
de and we're working with them
to ensure the food safety of
edibles in my neighborhood alone
you starting to see the signs go
up I'm sure that happening for
edibles our food and we want to
make sure that they're safe as
well on that.
You do well in our department
and we would be able to do that
for the out of this industry.
appropriations so would you kind
of just briefly tell us the
difference between the staff
that you would employ and they
would employ in.
doing different with I'm showing
different that's why we're two
different agencies if you know
stating the obvious where is
where we work on things like
we're we're making as natural
resource agencies but we have
different charges and we have
different opportunities within
that to pull levers that reduce
different roles with industry
that they don't touch
There's also boards and
commissions that are
administratively attached that
difference in how we address we
collectively address climate
there's functional differences
and in in sort of our mandate
and how we do things.
people inherently want their
their government to protect
their air the water their land
and certainly when things go
wrong is the first person they
point to to say Hey why don't
the state we want to live and
and our level of environmental
protection and public health and
so
I I will definitely be
advocating we dig into your
that is you know
Abandoned uranium mine link
legacy clean up which is just a
persistent problem in the state
and environmental legacy issue
for your time and thanks for
answering my questions that's
all I have Mister chairman thank
you thank you Caitlyn did you
have something to add.
Yes Mr chairman thank you I just
the LFC at recommendations for
special appropriations for the
environment department Fund the
portions of the request that
we're actually for nonrecurring
recurring expenses with
nonrecurring funds so the LFC
recommendation does funded the
portions of those requests that
about that Senator Woods and
then Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman.
There seems to be quite a bit of
In FY twenty two.
You got eight million eight
hundred and.
Twenty one thousand dollars that
you didn't.
Positions.
What a new hire for this
position.
Mr chair.
positions we're trying we're
we're at so let me come back to
the point that.
With twenty two special revenue
funds I can't have a the
special revenue fund and its
purpose nor can I have a federal
dollars let's say that comes in
from the food and drug
administration for our food
managing our payroll
to add up our vacancies multiply
that by item number and state
that could be used anywhere in
in our department including
those vacant positions I can
only use that money for that
type of work so we're very
inserted exchanged in in the
legislature through the we're
general fund your question I
think would be very relevant why
did you just move money around
not just simply not an option
for an agency like ours I also
mention your question Senator
it's it's a really complicated
payroll structure we have the
in some places and not enough
money in another place.
Mr chair and senator would
We have a hard time competing
with you know the national labs.
For for certain positions or or
the state engineer just moments
ago they can bring someone in
but that person can quickly make
more money for less work at a
different you know in the
So I I'm not I need a hearing
what you're saying I I don't
think we have too much money for
a in that in that sense I think
you say pay people more to
retain on is that a problem that
you have with the state
personnel office of not being
would I think when you look to
the it becomes a compaction
issue to some degree in times in
which our revenues fall to the
positions just to the cost of
living increases for the people
we have in other in times when
federal grants are high or
special revenues are coming in
DFA or anything to I want to
leave you with that impression
But it's the sort of yo yo a
fact of the way
looking retrospectively at and
what our budget had done or what
what we have
our budget has to be a.
So.
say compaction Mr chair Senator
Woods is in times we hop in
times of low revenues where we
bring in let's say an engineer
and then we can and then we have
experienced engineer and with
the with the state and it starts
to become a compaction issue
that we have to move everybody
up we may not have the revenues
And the secretary.
You describe the exact situation
that I was unable to vote for
It's hard to to.
Justify in my mind that we can
sustain that in the future.
At the other thing
Mr chair I'd like to ask we
we've got quite a bit of money
and contract services here.
was wondering if I could have a
list of of those contractors and
essentially a a brief statement
Woods.
Yes absolutely Mr chair Mr then
just say one last thing to
Caitlin's point which kind of
goes towards Senator Woods
pointed you just made as well.
do it LFC is point that there
funding the nonrecurring costs.
And your point saying are we
going to have money to sustain
our work force.
You know I I'm glad you're
special revenue funds is exactly
what makes sense here point that
if we're not sure we can sustain
that level of funding going
forward then including some of
order to develop like let's say
a surface water discharge
program they may be a person who
comes on board and as the as the
term employee and stays on as a
Mr chair Senator Woods I think
we're all agreeing with each
other I in some respect but
thank you for.
That opportunity to explain
that.
one on you there so I apologize
to you but.
You know it is a concern you
you're asking for to create some
some more departments.
expansion and you know we have
to think about how we're gonna
supported in the future thank
you Mr thank you senator share
and then we're gonna wrap up
this.
but what would it take.
To actually we we talk about
game changing events here so
we've got money what would it
take to just solve that problem.
I'm going to get back to you
with that with a number but you
know I think game changing was
what we did in terms of
it up but in terms of what what
it would take for us to clean it
up in the two areas in which the
defense department's
contaminated the landing ground
water
I'll have to look very
so next is a Mr chair of
produced water so we we've
talked at least I've talked a
lot about water today and and
I'm always confused why a
produced water.
there is there any way that we
could do grants or loans or
something to encourage
enterprise to find a way to turn
produced water into drinkable
then all of a sudden we solved a
bunch of problems down there is
there any idea that you have
that we could make that
economically viable.
Where we're continuing to look
at science based approach is
that would and fit for use
purposes of produced water as
and and in terms of brackish
water but we we have embarked on
a produced water consortium
effort that W. research has
your approval and senator
Sherrod can I ask Rebecca to
weigh in on where we are with
that consortium.
Good with me Mr.
deputy secretary and I just to
add it to secretary counties
introduction Senator share and
late twenty nineteen and then
barman Department teamed up with
sector expertise and engineering
department to fill the science
and technology gaps that remain
is currently being done at
increasing rates I'm which is a
very important
water re use application in the
state but we need the science
environmental impacts of using
treated water for various
purposes and that consortium is
I expect and they'll be
releasing their research plan
that lays out specifically what
the remaining research questions
are and how they're going to go
about answering those questions
a range of state agencies and
federal agencies that are
involved.
So more to come on their
research plan but there's really
at important concerted effort
under way that's nationally
Secretary deputy secretary.
From a technology point of view.
I know what I know what happens
I know you can do it because.
so the water came up out of the
well along with whatever
Hydrocarbons were in it and
whatever other stuff was in it
he went through this process and
touched it and I've used it now
it was an experimental model
they just wanted to show that it
worked but it but it work came.
federal money we have specially
but if you could give a grant to
New Mexico state to say Hey how
to how can industry actually
with the water let's let's let's
let them clean it up and help
them clean it up affordably but
the grant wouldn't be so that
government could clean it up the
That's what I think.
The next the the thing is the
the climate change bureau.
So I see on here what you've got
here is is clean fuel standards
oppose electric vehicles even
though is you know secretary of
I love oil and gas
But if you if we're gonna make
it's only two hundred and eighty
six additional San Juan
generating stations to power of
our fleet if they were all
electric vehicles.
thousand additional wind
generators that's all whole heap
of them.
but when I look at this the
clean car rules in clean fuel
everything else except CO two
and we have the chance to do
that right now and this is that
media then of clean car I mean
Senator shared just a Rebecca
just to close out on produced
water industry is part of that
and and has been actively
involved the whole time and
actually is funded some of the
generating or anywhere in in New
Mexico those those are
commodities the in which you
know people are valuing carbon
now and and the reduction of
Whether or not the longevity of
of
How the market is shifting
around financing I mean right
now from my discussions with
like hydrogen wind and solar so
the the the I can't speak fully
to the market based dynamics but
the market is favoring more low
funding low carbon sources of
energy.
Thank you and I appreciate that
Mr chair Mr Secretary
what we currently produce and
in in by the way I am real happy
about hydrogen of but
on the verge of really making
that happen if we don't get in
the way.
The next question those kind of
with this is is on one of your
measures here talks about to
Mr chair and senator share you
know what are we measuring or
that the national ambient air
quality standards that all parts
of the country have been the
five the size of the particulate
yes.
So but I'm sure you've heard me
and other people of heard me
according the American lung
association Farmington New
particularly its of then it's
number two.
Followed by the either next to
or near Casper Wyoming Cheyenne
Wyoming which also coal fired
replaces.
the the the methane cloud or
whatever it over San Juan County
the problem is we can't identify
where that methane clout comes
from we've been studying this
it's I think nature produces it
when it feels like it
otherwise we could point to aw
it's this well or it's this.
Coalminer whatever and and when
You know the the main reason
that we that Farmington doesn't
have clean air on any particular
day is because of a fire in
California or Arizona.
we as a state or as humans of
any kind can control.
So that measure is certainly a
measure that may be useful but
how you fix it.
The next this one I'm trying to
figure out we're talk about
reduction in non point source
Coming off of a creature gated
acreage as opposed to a a sewage
pipe somewhere is that to have
that right.
Mr chair that and Senator sure
that is one example.
Okay.
point source Madam loading and
the measures two hundred two
hundred what.
unpack with you if you know
separately or at a different
time
but.
But with respect to your
question Mr chair and and
Senator share
Is this the two hundred pounds
where did we come up with that
number is it is it because we
have two million pounds and we
want to do two hundred or is it
centers going to ask our W. jump
back in
but a lot of our targets in our
FY twenty.
Sh two.
Armand's measures that we worked
achieving our are those targets
in limitations based on our
staffing levels and available
funds to meet a certain
genesis of the two hundred.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
share the
river or stream restoration
practices that are already in
place or being put in place
through various projects across
approximate of load reduction of
sentiment that would be
generated by various practices
so we look at the existing
programs that are in place in
the state that are going to
expect to see in terms of
sentiment reductions in the
reporting period.
Thank you.
Okay Mister.
about so now I'm back here so
Madam nonpoint sentiment
certainly comes from burning
down of the forced and then and
then having the rain water wash
all it Madam down into the river
preserve our forests properly
managed not overgrown and not
burn down.
but that brings me to to this
last bit here just looking on
this what I have here it looks
And
do all thirty six of these of.
Are they in statute somewhere
did we did we pass a law saying
do these.
and LESC have agreed to as the
the performance measures for HSD
I don't know so if you have
the measures that are included
in house bill to have an
asterisk next to them in volume
two but other than that there's
chair is that if we do all of
this it appears to me that we
that we've lost balance in I do
want clean air and clean water.
take to a to a point where we
have then shut down.
Manufacturing we shut down power
generation including wind and
So Mister chair I would ask us
is it is a committee that that
we look at the balance of of
what these really mean or could
mean in the future if we don't
secretary I do agree with some
of the points center sure made
to I mean Wayne irrigation
Landon and product coming off
irrigation land is going to be
detrimental especially the some
food supply chain issues on the
beef cattle sheep whatever it is
that you enjoy the soybeans tofu
whatever it is it's all going to
come out of a field somewhere
on your slide in I'm sorry I
don't have a page it's LFC rex
are restricted I want to see a
list of those restrictions on
which of those funds are
restricted in what they're
restricted for I don't know if
Caitlyn kind review those and
and appropriated the money out
Supreme Court case.
Whether procreating body and and
so we get to do that.
So I want to see those
restricted funds and why what
environmental protection FTEs.
You're asking for an additional
seven FTEs environmental
protection program even though
you have forty vacancies that
are on field.
additional FTE ease for for
we're not filling those I
realize we have a pay band issue
in New Mexico I realize we need
to bring the base up we're gonna
start working on that that's
part of it.
Still roughly eight U. forty
vacancies and divided however
you want we know it's hard in a
gonna get harder tougher
environment to hire people but
additional FTE the other thing
is you have the baby bility to
go to DFA and ask for more
quests and the change some of
some of these agencies are just
not doing that.
And in our interviews with CPO
we're just not seen the skill
level pay then or the high rate
then and start from there and it
hello how we get that the agency
is gonna be some training but
I just.
the capitol because everybody
things of the trough but we need
to make sure I mean I want to
and I told you this and I've
told everybody every directors I
position more next year you come
back every funded those FTEs and
and you had a hundred and twenty
five vacancies in and funded
stamp out the same way
Representative of C..
That but I do I do want to see
those restricted fund uses
Caitlyn I think you're still
those funds correctly just in
case we didn't.
Other than just have a mental
I know it's late night and
committees can relate I will
tell you
whatever's coming I haven't read
any single bill haven't seen a
copy of any single bill I've
been question about bills and
and I have no idea what what the
Mr chair I I'm sorry I didn't
hear the question what kind of
things yes she kept saying she
wanted the generation that
generational change but that.
like New Mexico it's.
Bring us this I haven't seen
that in the executive director
for transformational change L. I
don't know what it's gonna look
like I really.
you're talking about reclaimed
well water well there's green
hydrogen right there in
southeastern Mexico that they
can put that water to use I
don't know if that'll happen but
but there's places where we can
especially with the environment
department.
Get Republicans in that want to
add to the bone and you get
Democrats that want to over feed
the trough and and and make
to survive in New Mexico and if
you put a lot of the
environmental burden or
governmental burden on him then
they're kind of force justice
and go away and land becomes
we will get back with you in and
that you know and then we'll try
to schedule some hi Division
staffed but I appreciate your
presentation remind me to get
the sharpie in the stamp that
Thank you for your time today
and and we appreciate it and
we'll have more conversations
that Mr chair I I I really do
legislators Caitlyn to Andrews
well I I do value our
relationships of please don't
read into the sharpie beyond
trying to change the to to make
protections and economic growth.
We would be fighting so hard for
the dairy farmers on P. I said
if it wasn't you know for for
some of those issues generally
bringing market based mechanisms
I I do appreciate everything you
said and I I take it very
seriously as well as all the
questions we had so thank you
and look forward to more
conversation share on hydrogen
members were done wrapped up
we're gonna start at nine
tomorrow we'll try to get some
balances scheduling but I'm just
trying to get ahead in in
committee and what we're trying
to do for next week in the
