Representative Eli thank you so
US senators chair of H. J. R.
eight asks voters to per
repealed the prohibition on
legislative salaries as well as
asking them to create an
independent commission that will
establish salaries this is it if
passed it would go to the voters
in November of twenty twenty
four.
And workforce for questions.
Anybody in the audience to
support.
Yes thank you.
We'll take up the service the
state governments come forth.
This Mike right right okay.
Well but no the person and then
let it go and you're good to go.
Right.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Tom Solomon I am co coordinator
with environmental group called
three fifty New Mexico and we
stand in strong support of this
of this measure it is long past
time that to New Mexico's
stepped up and paid the
legislators for the work that
they do
being a legislator I don't need
to tell you this but being a
legislator is really a year
round job in the only
compensation they get is do is
property while this well there
committees or the chambers are
in session and they get nothing
for the work that they do in
between sessions fielding
requests from constituents
working on legislation drafting
all of that stuff doing all of
that research and so providing a
salary to our legislators is
just fair and it would expand
the ability for many many more
people to serve and represent
the broad population of New
Mexico so on behalf of our seven
thousand members of the state we
stand in strong support thank
you.
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee was gonna with the
circle around the chapter
Representative your thirty five
thousand members we strongly
support this legislation we
believe the legislature should
be paid first of all and for the
only state in the nation that
does not properly compensate
legislators so we stand strong
support and we also believe that
the to go to the voters for
consideration thank you very
much.
Senator Pacific policy and the
policy director is tenants from
support of this bill as we focus
in and talk about representation
and how representation matters
for our state this bill will get
us there too clearly reflects
our needs of our communities and
have a representative democracy
thank you.
Thank you anybody in opposition.
Nobody has okay.
Question up Raul let's let's
have I just rules come down.
I listen to this in Senate rules
in there some constitutional
issues with it.
And so as we move forward we
need to know exactly what they
are in case we do draft
amendments to changes.
all.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I'm drones had Director
Legislative Council Service I'm
here for the sole purpose of
providing technical assistance
on the matter before you.
I do not appear in support of or
opposition to house.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House point resolution
eight.
Question we've been asked is
where subsection D. binds to
legislature's.
Well steps subsection B. of
section one of this resolution
is binding on future
legislatures it would be the
constitution through the will of
the people that would be
directing the legislature that
is already done in various
constitutional provisions the
legislature for example the
legislature shall establish or
the legislature shall exempt
from taxation for the
legislature shall enact laws to
prevent explains the federal so
this subsection would be another
example of the constitution
directing the legislature to
take an action.
However there is another
consideration corner the way to
do this.
That is the issue of a citizen
commission usurping the
legislative power by setting
legislative salaries and
requiring the legislature to
appropriate the money without
discretion regardless of state
revenues in any given year.
Subsection C. states that the
salaries are established
adjusted are limited by the
commission survey establish or
adjust to a set amount what
mandated appropriation with our
legislative
appropriated discretion.
Normally however the
appropriated power of the
legislature cannot be delegated.
Mr Chairman stand for questions.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative Representative
thank you so much for your hard
work on this proposal this is
long overdue and New Mexicans
have been getting short changed
on what they could be getting
for.
Or the service that they're
electing their hiring
so I just have a question to
your to your point Mr Burciaga
thank you for being here we.
We can certainly create pay
ranges for agencies that can
choose to.
To create employees and
In that context.
Could we not
then create a pay range or an
appropriated you know set of
parameters for a commission to
then choose amongst to.
To select the salary would that
not be a kind of a corollary to
what we already do in a way.
Mr chairman and senator
Steinborn if I understand your
question you're saying that the
legislature would set a range
that the commission would come
in and and set something within
that where we where we
appropriate a certain amount of
money and we get that just given
the latitude to like we are
doing what we would do with this
proposal we get a lot of to to
make the decision but we
appropriate enough money that
they have the funds to be able
to do it.
Argus would work that way Mr
chairman and and search time
broke up I think you you do that
already you you appropriate X.
amount of money for any given
agency they could spend up to
that amount but the way this is
structured the commission is the
one that comes in to study the
compensation and determine what
it should be set at.
And if I may Mister chair
Senator one thing that we had
initially done was was add guard
rails to the initial legislation
but it was just going to be too
long for voters so we want to
come back after the voters say
yes that we establish enabling
legislation to give guidance to
the commission.
Okay thank you.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
thank you representatives for
bringing the in work that you've
done and Mr Burciaga so the
question of whether there should
be or shouldn't the would be
step one is that correct well
with the voters.
I'm Mr chair Senator yes we
would just be asking them to
repeal the prohibition and to
the state and to create the
commission and then from there
what what would you envision at
the.
The various steps to an actual
salary I I you know I'm I'm torn
I just want you to know I'm I'm
at the moment torn on whether to
do this or not but what would be
the steps beyond the voters
deciding that that we that there
should be a salary.
I'm chair Senator there are this
issue has been studied for
decades and there has been a lot
of data that has that can prove
that can be shared with the
commission
to help guide them in that in
that process I know that
Representative joy
Representative Garrett and I
commissioned a study through in
the bureau this last year which.
And and thank you for that so
there's a lot of data that came
from that there's a lot of
studies that have come out from
the university of New Mexico and
in the last year to support the
data and so I think the data is
out there it's just a matter of
bringing the nine members
together to then.
US providing them with some
guidance for them to make that
determination states all over
the country have also been
debating this issue many of them
looking to increase some maybe
not increased so I think there's
a lot out there that the state
of New Mexico could tap into.
So so what thank you but I just
use what would be the steps of
the next what once the voters
that yes there should be a
salary then there would be a
commission established would
that commission have the ability
to say gosh you know we don't
really like what we're getting
out of these folks in Santa Fe
they should get no salary would
they be
authorized to do that from one
year to the next
Mr chair Senator yes ultimately
the way that I envision and is
that the voters if they say yes
that would be in November of
twenty twenty four in January of
twenty five we come back to the
session we we lay out all of the
steps if there's enabling
legislation that we need to find
some guard rails for the
commission then the commission
has all of twenty five to two
research decide make all of that
happened and then right before
the twenty twenty six
legislative session they are to
provide a report to the
legislature and we either I mean
it'll be impossible to I mean
that's how it would be decided
and
and the commission can
ultimately make that decision
that we can don't need of a
salary I mean that's ultimately
what we're trying to establish
here Mr Chairman representative
so just to restate so we could
do this the voters could
authorize commission to be
established and we could still
wind up exactly where the
legislature's right now because
they could say gosh you know
we've looked at all the facts we
what's the bureau research we
looked at other states and you
know we just don't believe that
there's a need for salary right
now is that correct chair
Senator yes.
beyond that in in in the bureau
study I participated in a it was
a very well done study Mr
chairman and members members
What else be on the salary with
the commission be considering as
professionals with baby
considering things like a staff
person to help you this is a
whole other full time unpaid job
for me thankfully I'm a you know
came out of poverty as a child
and built a business and I can
actually come and do this now
and it's been very painful in my
business to do this as well but
I'm on the fence because I'm
trying to figure out like what I
really need more than anything
else is someone to help do the
job during the interim primarily
so would they be and would they
be responding to any other
charges are questions the the
the commission chair Senator at
this point it would be strictly
salary of what we did this last
session with the the nine of us
who are working on this issue
for the last year and a half we
brought in this so there's
there's two other components
around legislative extending the
sessions which is in house joint
resolution two and then in the
feed bill this last year we
voted to do the study on staff
so it's not we couldn't put it
all together
because under the constitution
we're not allowed to do that so
we came in with the three C.
three P. Sprong I guess you
could say
and so it's all being worked on
separately thank you Mr chairman
and bless you representative of
ca that
so that's why I was going to go
next so beyond
You know so the salary I so
would they be charged with
establishing the parameters for
you know what the the
legislative session needs to be
extended I mean it really just
it does
we need some time to kind of
take a debrief and go home after
all the introduction here from
our constituents holding town
halls you know good out of the
grocery store get the what for
from you know grandma Betty on
whatever she saw on the news
about what those legislators
introduce what you know so with
with the could this commission
be charged any of those items
is.
chair Senator at this point it's
strictly to establish salaries
for the commission Mr Chairman
on staffing and then the
structure the the configuration
of how we legislate in length
and all that that was part of
that study I'm just curious why
that didn't land in in this
commissions lap also to give us
advice and whatever on this.
I'm chair Senator the way that
it was done is that
we we we we have to do it all
separately and so that is why
health joint resolution to is
out there
to to extend the sessions to
sixty and sixty days and to
remove the governor's scholar on
on on on the meanness of bills
on on on even years and so that
wasn't something that was that
was just something we were going
to put in statute if the voters
approved it and Mr chairman and
senator it doesn't require a
constitutional amendment to do
staffing there's nothing in the
constitution that disallows it
and again that's on the in the
P. Neville.
In the Mr chairman and and
representatives like I said I'm
I'm at the moment on the fence
on the matter I see the value of
it but what I really need is
help to do the work I mean so in
my business I don't ask unless
it's a volunteer I don't ask
anybody to do anything because
obviously compliment all that
kind of stuff so but literally
physically do all the work for
my Senate responding senator
responsibilities I simply need
some help and I do believe that
we need to tackle the question
of.
Do we even set blessing to even
set this thing up the right way
we need some more time to get to
our work and and be more
deliberative
and start and stop introduction
we don't have what I'll call a
hairy Bill B. dropped.
Five days or somehow magically
show up five days before and
then global session in terms of
can we get the rest of our work
done so all those things need to
be considered in my opinion
while we're considering salaries
and all there's those three
things need to be decided as
well thank you Mr chairman.
Etcetera what.
And we're just having a
discussion right.
I don't think the costs to
solutions of quite come for yes.
What's.
What was with that I haven't
seen the study that Senator
Padilla was talking about so if
you have a copy of that study
that we can look at real quick
was the copy this is this
Senator chairs that studies
about to be completed and so we
can send the of the PDF file
that we have electronically
that's already been drafted and
everything on the final
released is is going to happen
within the coming days.
In that Mr chair that was funded
by the legislature that study we
where we Senator chair
Representative Garrett and I
mentioned that study last year
with our junior money.
And Mr chair and senator every
single senator legislator was
contacted participate of many
did and some didn't but both the
Senate clerk and health clerk
sent out emails on behalf of the
study and she called everybody
as well the person from you and
who did the study so so Mister
chair and and representatives it
was a survey of one a study.
Chair Senator it was it was a
surveyed they surveyed all of
the legislators who participated
but they than they've made a
report that has that's going to
be public within the next couple
weeks.
In the next hours there were two
things to it Sir there was a
survey and there was an actual
interview I just want health
center so.
So there is a study out there
somewhere.
Along with the survey.
So Mister chairman to her it was
a survey and then there were
actual actually physical
interview with members who wish
to were willing to participate
so.
So.
I'd be interested to see what
did the survey I didn't
participate a apologize did the
survey asked the members Mr
chair and representative did the
survey asked the members the
amount of money that they
thought they should be paid.
chairs Senator not not
specifically no it did go into
detail around like per diem and
mileage and things like that but
I think it was mostly around
ranges.
But we're already done for
dating and mileage so.
They didn't have any comments
whatsoever on salary I would
think that's exactly what the
survey would cover Mr chair
Senator that's what I mean is in
terms of ranges it wasn't like a
specific number that they were
targeting it was in terms of
ranges of salary so what Mr
chair and and Representative
what were the Rangers.
I'm chair Senator I mean there
it it's not it wasn't it it's
not they didn't they don't tell
us how much we should be there's
no recommendation in terms of
the set amount what's being what
really what we've learned
especially through polling and
things like that is that
the public wants us to have an
independent commission to make
that determination which is what
I think most a lot of the
questions we're asking
motor New Mexicans already are
on with the pulling that's come
out more than seventy percent
already believe that we're we
get a salary and that our salary
seventy five thousand dollars a
year and still that right now
all what you see in the FIR for
this legislation is what we look
that is sort of a base salary of
fifty thousand and that's
because that's the median range
for New Mexicans right now.
So that there'd be.
Just outside yes.
Mr chairman this last question
that said guess is somewhere
around fifty thousand salary for
ever less religiously and the
we any of the state needs of for
a chairman or a speaker.
Or a the added duties those may
required it just be a straight
across fifty thousand.
is kind of what's being kicked
around right now.
Your Representative chair
Senators they're just there
isn't necessarily a number being
kicked around because that's
going to be left up to the the
the commission to make that that
decision the fifty thousand is
just the median income that New
Mexicans are are at at this
point what we what I've been
just what I describe the center
by the I. is that once the
voters say yes in November of
twenty twenty four we come back
in twenty twenty five during our
legislative session where we
make enabling legislation that
would be guard rails to support
the commission in making that
determination that would be our
involvement as legislators and I
think that is during that will
be the period of time where
numbers will probably be thrown
around I know that there's
conversations in the other
chamber where they people felt
like we needed to have a cap so
that we wouldn't go over certain
amount so I think in twenty
twenty five when we come back
and that will be the period in
which we can really focus on on
that piece at this point what
we're asking is for voters to
say yes or no on whether or not
we repeal the prohibition and
create the commission that will
then establish that and and the
reason I even bring this up Mr
chair and this is not a question
the reason I bring this up is
that the voters need to thank.
Kind of what we are thinking we
deserve to be a legislature and
that's why I keep coming back to
that fifty thousand a piece.
Figure but because we at least
need the voters to
Have some idea of what we think
we're worth Mr chair thank you
very much.
Thank you Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I know we talk about we're
the only non paid legislature
New World.
Who's the.
Who's the highest paid
Legislative Country.
Mr chair and senator the highest
rate legislature just became New
York state which I believe it's
a hundred forty six thousand and
second is of California which is
about a hundred and twelve
thousand with six paid staff
members and office in their
district.
And that the blue is probably
unique Mr chair and senator in
New Hampshire I think they
represent a little over six
thousand a piece in the house
and they get it's kind of like
the New England
You know old style town meeting
they have the Lois they they get
some per diem and they get a
hundred dollars salary.
dollars per year close to the
yes but in New Hampshire unless
knows a lot to go home every
night to because I think yes
like Dr an album right so it's
what we realized Mr chair and
senator is that we have to look
what's suit we can be an
important to iota there's two
but we have to do what's right
Mexico.
So as I look through this there
certainly are those those big
state that includes states like
Illinois as well Michigan
they're also full time
legislators legislatures.
And.
So I think the the higher you go
the more full time you get.
This New Mexico really want us
here two hundred fifty days a
year.
Chair Senator I mean depending
on the legislature the
legislator I mean a lot of us do
you actually spend a lot of time
in our communities with working
with constituents and so we and
in my case I don't I mean I wish
I could say that on on Saturday
at noon my time here is done it
if I'll go back on Monday and
and start.
I mean meeting with constituents
I mean it's it's an ongoing
thing anyway and then with
interim committees as well
it's it's we we pretty much do
this year round anyway.
So Mr chair representative I
know been doing this a long time
I also know that I hate it when
my wife asked me to go to the
grocery store and buy a gallon
of milk because it's going to be
hour and a half trip.
So.
But I go anyway.
But I volunteered for this I
mean I know what I was getting
into.
So I have a I have a business I
have a family I have provided
time all of that stuff.
What I'm concerned about with
full time.
People expect us to be here.
Full time their payments.
And.
I have used this phrase office.
The legislature rarely does it
for you we mostly do it to you.
And as I see the bills coming
through here I see more more
freedoms being taken away more
and more regulations and rules
and laws crushing small New
Mexico businesses in her Walmart
over Wells Fargo bank.
They hurt the local banks in the
her to local stores they hurt
the local restaurant.
And we're getting more and more
like that.
When I first got here.
There were lots of business
owners Democrats business
owners.
And they didn't want their
businesses destroyed they didn't
want their freedoms taken away.
So what we've done recently is
we've we've changed the paradigm
all all business needs to be
controlled because they're evil
we the people.
So we've destroyed most New
Mexico businesses now now we got
the big businesses which we
don't really control because
they're not here.
I miss the days when there were
people here that have been
successful outside of this
building.
That it had signed the front of
a paycheck and knew what it
meant to get there.
Because it's hard.
It's hard when you own a
restaurant.
When you're working all the time
and you're worried about making
payroll.
When you worried about.
Food costs in in all of the
other things that just naturally
come with the restaurant and
then you throw on all sorts of
other regulations and rules and
laws.
And then we come here the
collective we come here and take
all that restaurant owners
making too much money.
We need to raise their taxes.
If they sell their business we
deserve most of their money the
money that they put thirty five
years of sweat and tears and in
frustration and literally tears
and blood into their into their
business.
And I think what you're asking
us to do.
Just say no we don't want those
people.
We don't want the people that
have done that we want other
people.
Also find it interesting the
number of people out there so
our legislators sucks we need to
different people if it sucks
hire new people we have
elections for.
So those things really concern
me.
If we wanted to make some real
changes so that we could study
the the the loss better I think
we need to do that.
We could certainly introduce
bills.
And then go home.
For three years I twenty five
days whatever.
And talk to people home we don't
have to have a lot of do that
our constitutional change we do
that today if we wanted to we
don't even have to have a rules
change we just we just recess
for three or four days the
whole.
The one thing I think we could
do that would be most valuable
is limit the number of bills we
introduce.
So that we could study.
So we could figure out because a
lot of this takes a lot of time.
And to me this the the most
difficult part.
Is.
How many do we have on our
agenda today.
Fifteen.
Fifteen bills.
So I I I read the bills
sometimes I understand sometimes
I need help I read the analysis
from the minority of analyst
pool sometimes they understand
and sometimes they don't okay.
Of lobbyist will come in and
talk to me and say this is what
the bill says.
But that's not real study.
Study is when LESC goes through
and looks things to us we we LFC
is got a staff of people that
study.
L. E. S. C. has a staff of
people that study.
Clearly we still need to vote
and I think would be valuable
for us to introduce a hundred
bills and go home for three days
and let people talk about.
With our constituents know
what's going on and the LFC and
LESC and whatever other staff is
out there study so that when we
come back.
The people in Congress aren't
any smarter than us in fact.
I humbly would say most of them
are less smart than us.
But they have staff that
studies.
And I agree with Senator Padilla
that would be more valuable for
us to know what's deep in hidden
the the unintended consequences
of all these bills.
In most of what we do here now
it's fix what we did two years
ago two years ago we didn't
understand the unintended
consequences to Lee showed up in
a calmly costs now we got to fix
this because all of our doctors
are going to leave because we
understand what we're going to
do.
So now we're racing around in a
panic mode we're gonna pass a
bill in two days.
That might fix it might lead to
other unintended consequences
because none of us studied
because we don't know.
This will be additional yeah
this is good.
But if you.
Looking at their own little
thing.
Although it is really that but
again they're very parochial.
I think that's what makes us
professional.
The rate I think it actually be
counterproductive.
And I think it's
counterproductive because then
we're here and we're not apple.
We go to committee meetings
today.
And I know some of this is all
we need we need the people of
lesser means to to be
legislators.
No.
Yes there are some folks here
are some people that own
businesses here.
There are also people that.
Rich I don't consider myself
right.
But I think that that that we
risk some serious unintended
consequences if we don't think
this through right now and in so
right now we're pushing it I
know we did some studies and a
we did some talk about it but.
If this goes out there it passes
just like every other
constitutional amendment in some
of these constitutional
amendments have been a nightmare
after we passed.
And again.
All the voters.
I don't know and they're only
going to hear one side of the
story the advocates are going to
run a gazillion dollars worth of
apps.
The people that don't want are
going to run any ads at all.
So they get the full story they
won't know.
This ought to be discussed a lot
more.
Out there at the grocery store.
I'm not sure that when we say
that we need better
representation or different
representation I'm not sure what
that really means.
I think what it means is.
We don't like you we want you to
go away.
Okay.
Fine.
But I do think we lose
something.
If people are looking at this is
a job.
If it's going to be a job.
You have to pay us better if
this is going to be a full time
job.
Where we can't do anything else
my guess is that we lose two
three four probably five or six
members of this committee
because you can't pay us enough
to replace what we do.
It's not going to pass and.
Even if you think this New York
salaries not paid just enough.
But if we're here because we
love the state.
If we're here because we want to
help.
The people in our districts.
Let's different.
But I look at it most of the
chairs of most of the committees
in both the house and the
Senate.
I don't think you can pay any of
them no to make this their full
time job unless the retired and
they just want another hundred
forty thousand dollars.
Maybe.
But then you get same people you
get the retired people.
So.
I have real problems with this
concept concept of pay.
You want to pay me a thousand
dollars a year Hey my wife will
love you I won't care.
But.
It's not worth.
I don't think I I I really don't
think that we need to be a full
time provided.
Texas confuses me text only gets
like seven thousand dollars a
seventy two hundred dollars and
like that a year.
They claim not the full time
there there are a lot.
Stop.
So I don't know so if it's of
the big stated Texas can do it
for seven thousand certainly New
Mexico can do it for something
less than fifty four thousand.
Colorado I think does it for
forty eight hours on it does it
for twenty or twenty five order
like that.
In New Hampshire does it for a
hundred.
There's other states I can't
remember might off top of my
head they get paid a daily or
weekly rate while they're here
so not just for the and they get
per diem and a hundred dollars
or a hundred fifty dollars a day
whatever that is.
That might make some sense.
But I know that's not what we're
going.
I just don't see what the
taxpayers get what kind of
return on investment they get so
you pay me fifty thousand
dollars a second make me a
better legislator provided for.
Make my wife happy but won't
make me a better legislator for
all still spend an hour and a
half get a gallon of milk.
Making a difference to me there
at all.
I just don't see the arguments
that are.
That that are that have
convinced me.
That we get better.
That having volunteers that love
to state.
Could I do this without per
diem.
Maybe but I certainly wouldn't
want to the per diem is useful
to me the per diem make sense
because it's expensive to live
here.
For sixty days.
I agree with that.
The.
But I do agree with Senator
Padilla.
If we could slow down the number
of bills and we had somebody to
help us study those bills will
help us with just some.
Constituent services that we
have no right now I'm in the
minority office we've got a
great staff I don't need anybody
else I called up Deborah and she
goes with her separate us and it
happened again so that would be
any different of the diverse
Debra work for me once upon a
time and her daughter work for
me once upon a time our daughter
lives in Farmington electric
daughter better.
But it be the same so I called
up Tracy is a tracer fix this
and so she would do it.
The Debra can do it right from
here.
It works fine for us so this
constituent services part I
think we already have in place.
We have in place.
Because every time I call it
happens.
Whatever it is we need happens.
So having Tracy inform can
wouldn't be any different.
Except that I probably have the
buyer lunch or something like
that every once in awhile.
I just don't know.
I think there's things we can do
I think those things we ought to
do.
Paying us I don't think is is
the answer I don't think it
gives us anything different than
what you have.
I don't in my get something were
abundant and consequences.
In fact I'm sure will have
unintended consequences.
In where do you draw the line is
it a hundred dollars like New
Hampshire.
Or is it a hundred forty
thousand dollars like New York
by the way they're not very far
from each other capital fund for
future.
So.
So.
In outside of New York City by
the way New York is fairly rural
place have farms and stuff in
New York on.
But.
Of course we don't have a New
York City but the rest of the
stuff is similar to what we have
even natural gas there except
that they've banned it so
they're not doing their own
natural gas is not very much of.
Mr chair we go on four eleven I
just know that there's others
who I I.
For.
Matter phys.
Thank you Mr Senator Steinborn
talk I just think that we've at
least need to study this more
than just putting it on the
ballot right now.
We don't we don't know what
those unintended consequences
are just like we don't know what
all those indicate consequences
are we can do though.
Want to go to the constitution
you can't undo it.
Very easily anyway water work on
do it want to get to.
So I think we need to talk
about.
We need to talk about a grocery
store when you talk about a lot.
Thank you Mr.
Got a hand up former senator
development male this this right
one is the cost of the survey
and I don't know this is this
was done in December twenty two
ballot professionalism the
legislature so it's just
information that was emailed to
us about that.
I just want to know where it
comes from the it has salary
comparisons there's no page
numbers on the.
In late through it as salary
comparisons what they look like
the number of people
Representative.
Senator Diamond you're next.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
guys for per presenting this I
have I'm I'm really on the fence
about this I think I don't think
should be a partisan issue I
know that I represent part of
the party of you know fiscal
conservatives but I also and the
number of a legislator that's
been ranked the worst in the
nation at times and and it
drives me nuts when we have
presentations and people are so
hesitant to change we saw that
with CYFD we're gonna keep doing
what we've done we see it on our
side with with ideas of of
we're gonna reform education
whatever it is right if it's not
working.
Thank it can't be worse than
what we have right because what
we're what we have isn't working
but.
If if I take a moment to think
about.
Whether or not this is needed I
think the greatest sacrifices
legislators I'm sure we're all
different mine isn't isn't so
much financial but it's really
like to sacrifice during a long
session away from our family
right if I think when I really
sacrificing on here and we all
it was we wrap up this
legislative session have a lot
of people to think back home I'm
gonna have my sister who's
taking care of my mom for the
last two months and I'm not too
far from the amazing ex husband
who is trying to do his best to
do to get the girls hair looking
just pretty you know just
perfect for school you know
everyone has to step in we have
a lot of people back home
stepped in to pick up the slack.
That's difficult.
But I also I also really like
what you said that our job isn't
over when the session is on
Saturday Our Jobs and over so I
knew I was getting into when you
when you run the longest hardest
is going to be a sixty day
session and you're going to have
to have support back home to
pick up that slack but then
we're back the the the point you
made is that.
Our job is is an over in the
state my favorite part of this
job isn't being in Santa Fe is
my least favorite part is
legislative session I love being
back home and and every day
there's a constituents there is
we're gonna get home every one
of us is probably going to get
them parted with.
Legislative recapped the events
we're going to have you know I
try to make it into every
government class of community
events you know you it goes on
and on and on and if you're
really doing a good job you're
you're responding to every text
message for a missing passport
and connecting with that
Representative a veteran who
hasn't gotten their check if
you're really doing your job it
is a full time job and I'll tell
you what what I realize is
Senators we have several house
representatives but the Senate
district.
And when you have a it's it's
very visible when you have a
representative who steps in and
also works that hard because
when you don't have one and
there's a void it's it's trouble
said because I'm driving you
know two or three hours to
something because those people
deserve to have an elected
official there and so when you
step in to pick up the slack
sometimes you realize that a lot
of legislators leave session.
And they're done this is the
work they put it is just here
and I think that's wrong I've
I've I've wondered is it because
is it the legislators that
weren't competitive seats that
step up the state you know stay
after their campaign.
I've never seen anyone more on
his community then Senator
Padilla no is it is it.
What defines that what what what
allow some legislators is a
because they're so comfortable
to ever to have an opponent and
they don't do much back on it
sets me more money to people who
don't know who the
representative this whether
Senator at someone who's been
there ten twenty thirty years
that's upsetting to me that that
they're not connected enough for
their elected officials
And I also think at some point.
This allows more diversity in
the legislature we would.
We don't we don't know if that
is yes.
Here we don't just want to
legislative rule of attorneys.
You know who have staff
attorneys back in Kannada hold
the fort down and and after we
need people who represent really
ivory faction in New Mexico I'm
I'm I'm torn on this I think you
guys have done a good job of
laying out pros and cons on it.
But but I'm leaning more
towards.
We can't just be a voice of no
no no without coming to the
table with with another solution
another possibility on Avenue
and so I don't know what it
looks like but I appreciate you
guys looking into it I did take
the survey so I don't know how
many did people participated but
you guys got a good job I I am
still torn but it makes me
wonder if maybe if there is a.
This is what I can tell New
Mexicans there are several out
there that probably would agree
that they're getting what they
pay for right now.
And that's what I'm saying will
it step up will it make seats
more competitive will it make
legislators realize that this is
a job this job and if you're
doing it right you're doing
every day is will we have
legislators more legislative
body that is
This is just more involved in
providing our services for New
Mexicans because they certainly
needed so I'm I'm on the fence
but I appreciate you guys bring
this through and and clearly so
just a conversation thank you
Mr.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the.
To Representative.
Mr chairman and every one of.
Then the Mr seven.
Would here all I started this
what about eighty years ago ten
years ago.
And we have had different
proposals.
And we really haven't.
Per se you know we haven't made
progress but you know I think
more of what you see today of
what you see on the paper in the
journal we finally got an
awareness.
And there's a couple of things
that I just like to mentioned
and I could be here from the
very beginning else presenting
some bills.
I think the the number one.
The most most important thing
number one.
This I should have someone from
my district.
That would wish to be a
legislator through the process
of an election.
And they can afford it.
I mean that's wrong.
You know the other part the that
I like to mention by experience
and I can talk about experience
because I've seen both.
For twenty five years so I have
one County.
And then it was easy.
Now I have four counties that I
can never catch up.
I mean by the time I do this one
to this one is another one from
the other it's very very
different.
The other part the goals with
that.
Is in our area capital outlay is
a big thing.
And I remember very clear on
that representative Rick Miera.
He would say I haven't received
one request in my district well
I had like sixty request.
And the representative of the
late Larry love analysis same
thing so he would just put this
money to the the U. N. M.
engineering.
You know that's a that's a big
difference you know on.
The time that it takes analysis
and everything that goes with it
but
I want to be repetitious you
know I am of you know I did sign
to the legislation.
And the I just see that.
You know there's a lot of parts
that you know this was mentioned
by you know the parts that I
caught as I walked in the they
do need to be worked on and I
will be the first to admit it's
it will be a.
a yes so we just walk in and it
said.
With the part is the we're in a
point the that we really have to
look at it because things are
very different from even twenty
years ago to the volume now with
all due respect to whatever was
involved but I think one of the
biggest mistakes we've done is
on the pre-filing of bills
because the minute we start
that's that first day we start
we're behind.
Because we already have three
hundred whatever bill C. in up
to two thousand two or to go
through the process you know and
some of these things just still
had a lot of a lot of work you
know to wear anymore it's not a
thirty day or sixty day it
really has become a full time
that we work with this but on
the whole part is so we need to
work together on this and we
need to work to where you know
we can see all the answers to
but the important part is not to
discriminate that anyone that
has potential that wishes to be
a legislator they should be
prohibited because they can't
afford.
You know and I've known enough
at least in my time at least
five or six individuals that
have left.
Because they can't afford it.
You know and it's very
different.
So what with that Mr.
Thank you senator Byrd.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
appreciate all the hard work
gone into this
And I'm glad we're just yet
because I soon we get to the
point four percent say their
name on this I think the better
off we'll all be.
Years ago thirteen fourteen
years ago hi and a ram became
secretary of state she came to
me and so.
You know you I would like to
take on those my last two years
of my Senator as a rule you know
I'm running a business how much
time is it.
She's at my house sixty one
sixty session one here Thursday
session then a few meetings
throughout the year.
I tell you before I ran for my
first of my first campaign forty
to forty five percent of my day
every day was senator work and
I'll tell you right now sixty
five percent of my day every day
is Senate work so much so that
six years ago I had a higher
manager to run my business
because I couldn't I couldn't do
both.
So I see a lot of value.
In what we're trying to do here
but I have great concerns about
the structure and how we have
put this together for example
the citizens commission on
members and the only guard rails
that we have in this bill are.
Should broadly reflect political
cultural and geographic
diversity of the state I I agree
with that this.
That is so broad you know what
what it is who's going to.
We need a lot more guard rails
and I it's a term that we're all
using these days but we need a
lot more important and structure
to that commission.
Because I can't in the number of
times I should appear we're
going to do a statewide program
and in that building just in the
Rio Grande quarter.
And nothing upsets more than
people who are outside that
quarter to get short changed
using taxpayer dollars to do
things inside the metros and we
don't see a damn dime of it
quite frankly.
So I I have great concern about
the structure of the commission
who's going to think Commission
how we structure this
And then.
You know I see both sides of
this work not only we can get
salary but we still get the per
diem for today and the mileage
and all of that so really this
is taking us from you know
fifteen eighteen thousand
dollars a year up to probably
seventy eighty thousand dollars
a year when you combine the per
diem with the with the of the
salary.
Is that good or bad I don't know
why are we doing this the bottom
line it goes back to some of the
comments we've had around the
stable so far is are we going to
get a better legislature this is
that why we're doing this to get
a better Legislature more broad
diverse legislature.
Yeah I would I would say right
now I think we have a pretty
broad and diverse legislature
right now we have private sector
folks public sector folks with
people who who signed the
payroll checks every week or two
weeks or months and we have
those who work four agencies who
are paid by the government or or
local government or any entity
like that they don't have to
necessarily worry about all the
things are going to say running
a business or something like
that.
I see some real benefits this
but I have some great
reservations about that
I think we're in a good place
now.
I'm just not sure ready to vote
on this I think we need you've
done the study you've got a bill
here but I think the bill needs.
A lot of work I think the
commission needs to be to find a
whole lot more and I think that
We haven't talked about full
time hello as we were talking
earlier about the and the system
or someone who works with you
year in and year out.
And we all know that some of us
have a lot of work that those
folks to do some of us have very
little work those folks can do
just depends on how our our
districts are kind of divided up
and how close we are to our
constituents.
So
again I'm I'm not sure I can
support this as it stands right
now come like the concept but I
need to digest a little bit more
and have some more input on that
but I really do appreciate the
hard work that's gone into it
thus far.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Let me just say one thing real
quick regarding the commission
so when we first introduced the
legislation there was thirteen
pages because we did include a
lot of those guardrails but
because it is a constitutional
amendment it was suggested that
we we link we shorten that and
so we would come back and and
put in those guardrails later on
once the voters say yes and so I
just wanted to to to to to say
that.
I appreciate that because I was
not privy to to the original and
in terms of the staffing that
was and the feed bill so it's
separate from this bill but the
feed bill that we passed earlier
in the session incorporates a
budget for to study what
staffing would look like for all
of us and so that's being worked
on some really that so I
appreciate that too but again
we're not there that's my point
we're not at war have all that
data and we can actually put
together from the structure to
to make sure this is success or
it fails so thank you Mr thank
you before the second time
around.
Let me ask some questions the
constitutional issues have not
been dealt with.
Right in the constitutional
issues are.
The legislature cannot give
their forty two of the orders
for commission.
Systems commission established
salaries you can't buy in the
future legislature
and you can't.
This is commission to do that.
And it and so how do you.
When if we do to amend that bill
so you don't have constitutional
issues and.
Thank you chair we've been
talking about it for the last
couple days because it was
something that we left rules
discussing and and I mean that
is a the that's a P. that's
section do is something that
we're we're happy to
look into what whatever
consideration the committee
wants to find on that I know
that I will has provided us some
potential language
of on on some of that so I mean
it's not something that's not
something that we're we're tied
to
and so we we can definitely work
through that.
All one issue committee we don't
have any lawyer Committee so we
can't help you fix that right.
And so that that's one thing and
then.
if this were to pass me ask you
something.
What I'm we don't have your
study so.
That's another big issue.
we have a study and and senator
Feldman about it's I think it's
about.
Professionalism and the
Legislature shows that New
Mexico has almost a higher rate
of medium right than any other
legislature's says you know each
legislative employees about
three hundred and eighty four
thousand that's how many
employees we have that they base
that calculation off on so it
seems like there's a lot of
police what would the title be
if this was put on the ballot.
I'm the title would be
essentially what's on the.
On the the title of the bill
the.
The end to a half an annual
pulling that you just have when
you said you're gonna put this
title of the bill wanted to
point state.
So that doesn't specifically
address the bill itself what the
polling said was it first starts
with home do you do you know I
think about how much the the
question was how much do you do
you think that the legislators
make the question was seventy
five thousand dollars a year in
the follow up question was the
legislature actually doesn't get
paid but if they did get paid do
you support that and the and
and.
Blanchard yes or no and then the
question went on to support the
creation of a commission to
establish salaries and that is
the answer that was provided in
the poll for yes or no did you.
Pull any information it said how
many hours do you think is
salary legislators should work.
I'm not specifically no.
It Mr chair did ask how many
hours do you work.
So that we saw like Senator
Diamond said
what people are doing and by the
way all the pull questions are
in the document that will
provide to everybody hopefully
in the next twenty four hours.
That's it might be a little bit
late.
And and then let me ask you
this.
I mean a lot of people work all
over the legislature a lot of
work for nonprofits lot of work
for everyone do you think that
you're pulling says if you're
getting paid through nonprofit
through a state agency through a
contract with the state should
you still receive the
legislative pay.
Chair it wasn't that specific.
And then up.
We we you know we're double
dipping their return to work
right this is almost the same
exact thing where receiving
retirement but not till you
retire.
But.
How do you that you're pulling
do anything about retirement
retirement salaries.
I'm chair the the whole
specifically done by common
cause didn't address the period
issue but that is the converse
that those are comments that
have been brought up and and so
we we I mean we we we are
addressing those issues I'm a
legislator can still receive
para um if they what if we do
introduce a salary to the
legislature
but I mean as you mentioned we
don't actually receive that
until after so
but it's it's still we would
have to come back and within
Ebeling legislation to to change
it it decided that that's not
something that we wanted to.
To have and a lot of our
legislators.
I'm gonna use any of them but I
think Senator Gonzales maybe
receive social security so if we
got a salary how what would that
effective so security.
Mr chair Senator I mean that
that's those are some of the
those are some of the pieces
around the enabling legislation
we would have to address because
it is it is a small number of
people who are receiving social
security so we would have to we
would have to address that.
And then.
because like Senator Gonzales in
the increase with that at some
point we got to figure this out
in the state but but the real
question is are we take salaries
or do we change our per diem.
And that's the real question I
think that needs to be asked is
how do we really fix the problem
because.
He's a superintendent education.
Senator Campos works in higher
education Senator Steinborn
works on movies Senator Gonzales
Senator Rodriguez.
retired from state government
and city in the state and the
county
center what is a rancher Center
birds as a business owner
Senator Diamond as a business
owner Senator shares a business
owner I'm a business owner and
when I go in the grocery store
at the back of the.
Bank of the milk carton to
that's my forty five minutes of
Hey George Hey George right
what's happening that you do and
what's going on right.
And if I'm sitting in a
restaurant.
Well state in the Monday morning
at eleven o'clock in the
somebody comes up says I'm
paying your salary why aren't
you at work.
This is going to be issues for
legislators we as we move
forward in.
They think that we should be on
the clock twenty four seven and
we're not paid.
And you think that it's it's
only going to ask debate the
problem when they see this
eating somewhere
Steak house pick want bowling or
something and and they're saying
well why aren't you at work is
this what my salary is paying
for I mean this is this is a
slippery slope for me in meeting
people think that because we're
here that we.
Live elaboration the state
dinners I do my own laundry from
a more you know the.
I don't have people do that in.
I've got a by mail meals at
lunch right I don't the premium
that I have the main the not by
house.
And the per diem in the housing
summer is even higher because
Santa Fe increase their rates
almost impossible to have a
party and we get to children in
Santa Fe
I just think that the
constitutional issues.
Our problem and if you can't
resolve those.
I don't know how we're gonna get
by that right.
I'm not willing to.
Raise my hand to take oath and
then violate the constitution.
Which we do sometimes anyway in
the legislature
but I don't think this is one of
those things look less you can
bring some amendments and say
we're not going to violate the
constitution not we're not gonna
down for legislators to pay
increases let me ask on that
point what if the citizens
commission came back and said
we're gonna pay you five hundred
dollars.
But that really be just to the
legislature you're thinking
about.
chaired the Senators I mean
ultimately I mean that's what
we've that's what we've done in
this legislation is that that's
what was actually what we're
asking the commission to decide
on.
Yeah and they think it is I
don't have your report but I
have this one right thank you
scroll through this and said
this is a report done by the
university Mexico come over the
base name drugs and somebody
else and the average around the
country's just and they
represent this many people and
so we think we're gonna pass
legislators a thousand dollars a
year I think in Medicaid these
are is a hundred dollars a year
right.
And so they could set that based
so low that doesn't really work
for anybody.
I mean that's the issue I think
we have with setting up
assistance commission right.
Matter who we think they are
right and if they did it and
they say the Senate.
Eighty thousand a year and then.
People would be yelling and
don't Pam don't pan that's too
much right an eighty thousand
dollars a year and then
at what in our state if we're
and maybe rules for salary
legislators legislatures if we
take a salary from the state are
we required to join Karia.
This Mr Archuleta.
I mean we may be required to go
into a parent and then not have
our legislative retirement
because we are receiving pay.
Then we have to do with holdings
correct that rolled I don't know
if you know the string.
We have to do is hold by a
federal state right and then I
think we'd be required as state
employees than to join a pair
system.
And then we'd be probably in
eligible for our retirement
system because we have to
retirement systems that we've
been.
As I don't think you can have to
budget on a retirement system.
Unless we change a lot of our
favorite and that will really
make voters met I think.
I'm chair and and I would and
the staff they did give us a
memo early sometime last summer
less fall about that there is a
section in the constitution that
says that we can receive para
ana salary if this were to go
through but we would have to go
back through enabling
legislation if we decided to to
remove that are not I mean
that's I think that's the big
that's the big pieces with this
legislation is that if the
voters were to approve it in
November of twenty twenty four
we would have a lot of work to
do as a legislature to put in
all those guard rails before the
commission makes any decision
and so it's it goes to the
social security piece to go to
the pair apiece and it goes to
all the other questions around
like the caps or there are the
the minimum.
And so thinking forward where
the guard rails that would you
put in there I mean it's and I
mean I think that's in the
constitution now K. good
representative retired and and
she can receive our retirement
well serving the legislature.
Is that Roland is a salary
person that takes state money.
Can they receive three
retirement.
You know that answer that
question because you and I'm is
representative I don't know but
I'm guessing she may receive
BRB.
Eligible for for I think I know
how many years you've been here
but you're eligible for
legislative and then on top of
that you would have to I I the
way I see it you to
we knew that the payment parent
not receive it because there's
an employer employee
contribution and salaries and I
don't think we can get around
and the guard we could probably
do that for them that look even
more horrible for not holding
deductions and not paying in to
and giving three retirements.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee we did look at that
during the interim we did find a
memo on that some other
questions have come up since
then about that we did go and
look at some of the court cases
on that and I'm sorry I don't
have that information I can't
remember the specifics but I
believe Representative Rubio is
correct and that a lot of that
will depend on the enabling
legislation in terms of what the
commission can find in terms of
salary.
My expectation is that if
legislative towards par rate
they become state employees then
all of the required deductions
including retirement would
probably part of that unless
there is legislation to the
contrary.
And I think that become an issue
because you don't want to deny
somebody a benefit they were
twenty some years for and then
have.
Every legislator that receiving
retire retirement this work
twenty some years to get it and
then them fighting against
saying I want another retirement
in required to have this other
one in the constitutional
language that's an issue with
the guard rails and I think in
the future and.
We don't want to deny somebody
that's up here serving that I
don't know.
Maybe center and resources are
to retirement allergies areas so
but I don't want to hurt her
retirement placing.
We have guardrails that says you
can't get you know you can't
have three retirements and that
becomes a problem this
legislature I think than how
they set the range differently
because everybody works
different the legislature that
just say.
The chairs of finance right.
Then House Appropriations and
the service entrance are they
gonna put the to see a pay scale
going in there based on if
you're chair not the chair just
a member ID Committee if you're
vice chair
are there scout other skills
salaries that you're thinking
about and I mean that was that
we had something the citizens
commission and do presenting and
and share I think I mean I think
all of the the things that
you're raising our our reasons
why are we've never addressed
this issue because it is
daunting it is it is going to be
a hard left for the legislature
and the commission to come up
with because there are all these
questions I think what we are
trying to express is that it
whether it's H. T. R. eight or
not I think there is we are at a
time and a moment here in the
legislature where we have to we
we we we have to move forward on
this conversation and an address
a lot of those questions because
I think.
That's why it's never been
addressed in the past is because
I don't think legislators wanted
to have to.
Do that and and I think we're in
that moment.
I don't think for in that moment
I think you ask anybody who
served in the legislature
Senator Campos and sent
Rodriguez Madam servant I mean I
don't think they've ever
introduced a bill to do this on
their own it and they've been
here quite awhile we have this
debate on the on pay raises for
elected officials I mean you
know what you're signing up for
right and you know what it's
going to cost you and then
people get here and they realize
that it takes a lot of time it's
a lot expansion they can't
afford it
believe me my wife lectures me
everyday when and not home and
she told me
being gone for sixty days when
you come home you better not
start yelling at people and
workers because stuff to get
done you're the one that's been
gone anything that's not that is
your fault because you weren't
here and and so that specific
role every ever looked at how do
we increase our per diem right.
How do we cut down on interim
committees because nobody
showing up to interim committees
I mean everywhere you go I think
three times in Gallup this year
I had to go run try to make a
quorum for an interim committee
and legislators show up to
interim committees and analyses
a little bit different but they
show up in and then they
disappear but LFC only pays you
for the days that you are
actually there hi how do we.
Raise that.
Per diem.
That mileage but per diem how do
we raise per diem and say if
you're on a three day interim
committee your per diem rates
going to be this and then we
come to the session state how do
we go above the federal per diem
rate and make those adjustments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee right now the per diem
is set by the constitution at
the R. S. E. R. S. actually
doesn't so the per diem anymore
the general service department
of the federal government does
it would require a
constitutional amendment to
allow the per diem.
To be up up raised by.
Whatever would be in that in
that constitutional provision
Or to Senator at at some
percentage of that
in terms from committees that is
a decision of the Legislative
Council are some of the interim
committees are statutory and are
required to meet some are
created by the Legislative
Council and could be up to the
council to either reduce the
number of combined some of them
or reduce the membership on on
some of those accordingly.
And.
So on on interim committees we
have to follow the
constitutional guidelines for
per diem I got a little confused
right there.
Mr Chairman yes the constitution
right now states that
each member of the legislature
shall receive per diem at the
IRS per diem rate for the City
of Santa Fe for each day's
attendance during each session
of the legislature.
And then pretty M. expense and
mileage of the same rates are
just right.
For service at meetings required
by legislative committees
established by the legislature
to meet in the intro so in both
cases of session in from
committees that rate is based on
the federal need just the right.
Do we know that was put in the
constitution.
And then I think the state
employees get a per diem at a
lower rate but they get
reimbursed by receipts.
Mr chair they often have access
to state vehicles and state
credit cards.
PRC is proving that one.
Maybe one too many Pringles
stops.
Mr Chairman that provision that
section ten of article four.
At is actually been in place
since the constitution was
enacted but it was amended in
nineteen forty four nineteen
fifty three nineteen seventy one
nineteen eighty two and nineteen
ninety six and usually it's been
to increase the limit
Of the per diem.
It was I mean I think set I
think the last time it was at
the Santa Fe per diem rate.
Raul is there any way the other
way to trigger something in the
legislature that says.
Reimbursable receipts plus plus
expenses plus per diem.
But up getting the
constitutionality of.
Mr chairman and and members.
It has traditionally been
interpreted that you receive per
diem and that a per diem rate if
you look at it in the federal
government the way they've laid
it out it's for accommodations
and meals and incidental
expenses and that's what makes
up the rate you get right now.
The tricky part is that our
subsection C. of that section
there's no other compensation
purpose our allowance so the the
per diem is presumed to be that
reimbursement for meals and
accommodations and then you're
not allowed to receive anything
else.
And that's what has the what
that's why it's been
interpreted.
In the constitution the
constitution.
Okay.
I wish this is a little more
defined I I don't I really don't
know how to fix this
constitutional moment I mean I I
don't know if there is a fix
for.
And and you hear members saying
at I agree to it right I mean
there's people that we we signed
up to serve right in like
Senator Diamond kids are all
luckily my wife was at home
taking care of my kids and
Raul was throwing them out of
the elevator whenever they came
on we can.
And they have a lot of fun here
right but it is hard on a person
raise a family it's hard on a
single mother it's
Representative Lujan sitting
there it's hard for a person
that that is merry to leave that
it's hard for us to leave our
businesses.
We have to travel more miles I
think
Senator Woods has to travel to
further stir Senator Burt.
Or or maybe Senator Steinborn
those miles of those hours to
travel right even during the
interim committee met just it's
a lot of time and that time
between.
Gallup and Santa Fe on I. forty
when somebody's are tipped over
and you're saying that for for
three to four hours and.
It's a lot of time to a lot of
stress it's a very this is a
very stressful job people
realize that they think that we
just come up here we introduce
bills are not indicting here's a
lolly pop and you go home I mean
this is a very stressful job
with me when we have highly
contentious bills.
And and tempers flare people
want what they want and then you
got to throw the lobbyists in
the make because they think they
run the show.
But they really don't elected
officials do
and in the stress of this job is
I think harder on people than it
is a lot of other things and I
don't know how to figure this
out I mean sure I would love
this come back and say you know
what I'm gonna budget everybody
for two thousand dollars
additional money for
reimbursement for reimbursable
receipts but the constitution
doesn't allow me to do that.
The constitution I think in the
section that we really needed a
man is a per diem rates.
And say here's your reimbursable
receipts I'm not a good iron let
me tell you.
So my clothes go to the dry
cleaner right I did I in my
shorts to.
I hear you I want to note that.
But I I at.
Senator I'm adults in.
But I mean the those are those
are some of that cost right a
dry cleaning.
The other night I went home I
had a frozen banquet dinner was
with macaroni and cheese and and
and people think they don't
think we live like normal people
right.
But we do
and so I really don't know how
to fix this constitutional
amendment up meeting.
I believe in what you're doing I
believe we are not just.
Center right somewhere but we
want to fix in our premium scale
because that's the hardest
costuming you could burn up a
vehicle traveling interim
committees if you're on for five
committees here and that's our
problem is everybody wants to go
to internet committees because
they need to offset some per
diem costs then they're not
there will have a quorum for the
show for a day and then status
quorum and they're gone in it's
just a mess I think reducing
interim committees and making
committees.
With a lot more
but I don't know how we fix
this.
This problem
In this in.
Michigan bring some amendments
to Senate finance that.
Shows how you can fix the
constitutional issues we cannot
bind a future legislator how we
can not.
The restaurant on the.
Monday at ten o'clock and you
may be talking to worker in them
that come up and say I'm paying
your salary you need to go to
work.
You know that those are some of
the political issues but.
Senator Steinborn and thank you
all Senate let's go Center
Rodriguez first she has went no
no she hasn't met versus and
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
yes and thank you Representative
is for bringing your role thanks
for your work you know that I
would just maybe go back a
little bit to the ironing I use
my hat my dryer and I shake my
clothes and then I go to with
anyway thank you
up I was just thinking about
this.
Jacob because right thank but I
was just thinking about this
whole thing too and in really
there are so many questions that
need to be answered by that is I
see this as the main purpose for
enabling legislation so the
enabling legislation sets the
framework by which we can
accommodate and look at these
questions get the information
and address them and it doesn't
say all right I don't think
it'll demand or require anywhere
that this commission that you're
looking at putting in is
mandated to come up with a
certain a certain framework it
just means.
Can legislators get paid
commission can you look into it
and and what can we do to what
extent and what are the
parameters within this
legislation that we want to work
together on that's about it if
it can't be reached well it you
know if there some no consensus
can be reached then it won't be
done but if it is reached I
would hope that all the answers
have been there are there are
there is one thing for example
on the question of having to do
with what does it do additional
security what is a due to
anything else it.
It is it will be if it's a
salary and so we we leave the
the per diem along okay and so
because that's set by the
federal government we don't have
a we don't have any say on that
okay we just piggy back on that
so funds leaving that alone so
then if we do
the salary for legislators to
this commission's recommendation
and that's salaries personal
income that's why it's called
salary it's not called
reimbursement is not called per
diem it's not called I and it's
not called up anything mileages
just called salary which means
that it is taxable income and so
you are responsible with the tax
liability now the social
security for example would it
has threshold if you get so
security it's not taxable up to
a certain amount you pass that
threshold and that's where
you're going to get tax because
if you have personal income from
various sources he's going to go
and buy passed that threshold so
it applies like any other
personal income that you would
have
and so I was just thinking about
that but all these questions
that are coming up now about the
constitutionality and how it
will be done someone you know
perhaps they do need to be
addressed in if we're going to
proceed with this however I
think that this enabling of this
commission what will love work
on a lot of these once we enable
that that framework to be worked
on I've been here twenty eight
years and truly it never crossed
my mind to because I didn't
think we even had an option in
all in the twenty years that I
have served here
You know I I remember many years
ago when we passed legislation
that allowed for some retirement
change for legislators and this
was many years ago there was one
particular change the generated
quite a bit of quite a few
emails and phone calls and so on
and even then there were people
in the at least in my community
then out of this happened
statewide that we're emailing
saying you know you're not going
to give yourself a retirement
are you you're not going to
augment your retirement in that
way your public service and so
it's those kinds of things that
that may come up but you know I
I see that there there is the
there is a need to do something
different than where we are
today for various reasons as of
been indicated that you know
perhaps more of a bigger pool of
people who may want to run but
also in my district you know I
have all my constituents here so
I hold full time office I cannot
fit my constituents and my
personal office here in my
little office in the in the
interim so I have full time
office in the lounge that's
where I come in so if you see me
in the summer all the time here.
Other than when I'm in
committees and I serve on
several interim committees to so
we travel when I'm not traveling
I'm here so I work all the time
I I'm not part time legislator
at all and
You know now that this came up I
thought full use you know maybe
someone just maybe maybe
legislature can finally you know
get get some salary but at the
same time it's not to benefit
the legislators specifically but
it is to benefit the public I
would like to see it that way
because then the public may be
able to you know to to look at
this whole thing differently
just written as we're getting
more candidates to run in and
people to be able to stay and
and and do it without the extra
stress that that is that there
all the time because you have to
go work or because you can't you
have to work part time and full
time and you can't make your
your payments and then you have
a family and and all of this so
there's lots of things to think
about that I truly do admire
your tenacity in doing this in
in your extra work that you have
done to get this to where it is
today and I thank you very much
Mr chairman that's all I have.
Thank you for your so I'll be
brief
This is really just about
fairness.
And you know all session we've
been hearing bill after bill
about how people need to be paid
for their work and they need to
be paid competitively for the
work if not at the top of their
profession some pretty
respectable if not high salaries
for public servants in New
Mexico.
We never question their public
service when it comes with a
paycheck.
This is a really hard job to you
know I I congratulate busy that
that are very successful and you
know you don't need an extra
time to pay your bills but we
should think about all those
that they could never do this
job.
Without being paid like most
people in reality.
We should because really we're
being very exclusionary and I
think at our past we do things
when we think about other people
and not just have effector
cells.
And you know we've got single
moms who have been here in the
audience today are in the
audience.
Who I know and and I work in the
nonprofit world
it's tough it's tough juggling
responsibilities trying to make
a living while also having the
opportunity to do this job that
we really love to do.
But if you really you know when
you do not have.
When you are not
What we're looking for.
A fluid for lack of another word
you have to take away from your
public service duties if you
have to make a living which I
guess even even people who make
really good incomes but like
you're saying Senator you have
to take away from your business
because you got to do this
you're having to make those
choices to
now there is some people are
just totally retired right and
they have just total freedom of
their schedule and I've got all
the bills covered but the fact
is is it to me never miss hit me
more than never more in this
last year.
Because they were committees I
could not go to because I was
having to work.
And I was just like this is
outrageous who who is you know
my constituents I'm pretty sure
want me on the job and I think
all of our constituents to.
But if we're not there.
Who's the one setting the agenda
for New Mexico.
It's it's it's special interest
filling that void.
The people with the money they
can't afford to be there.
And then I don't know I I think
just New Mexico of course get
short changed what we do as good
of a job as we can with the
hours that we can put into it we
can do a better job if we had
more time and I think the
public's way ahead of us on this
Mr chairman I have to say I mean
this is my fifteenth year in the
legislature when I first got
elected I served on a
Governor Richardson's ethics
task force and I remember we had
governor Crothers sharing it
with another.
And I mean we were talking about
this then and people knew that
it needed to happen and there
was bipartisan support I mean
you know leadership usually
people are at office.
But.
and I think the public thinks
that were already
So I don't have any staff.
And this is a heady do that job
and this is really tough
So I think this is just about
fairness to to allow people just
the fairness of paying them for
their time whether or not
they're doing a good job or not
I think that's what elections
are for
And supporting.
Supporting people who who really
need that income in order to be
able to do the job.
And and I think as far as the
constitutional issues Mister
chair I mean we've got some of
the best lawyers around that we
trust implicitly in in this role
Legislative Council Service and
others and I.
I would just say you know we're
talking about constitutional
minutes of this constitutional
issues you know we should look
at it and and make sure that
everything we're doing here
Legislative Council can tell us
we believe this is this is that
sound
but anyway I just think this is
way past time there will never
be.
there's never a wrong time to do
the right thing that's for sure
so anyway I think this should
happen now.
And.
I hope we support this
initiative if not for us to the
next generation of people coming
in I think I don't know who said
it but I think this is really
about an investment in New
Mexico.
That's all I have to say thank.
Thank you I mean I don't think
elections's screaming toward all
people can decide where they
want to run for an office or not
and if they do their homework
built they'll figure out what
the pay is or what the premium
is we're gonna go down to the
floor all right now because
they're called Sliq were about
forty minutes late to go to the
floor and then when we come back
this afternoon we have a break
up the formal.
Wrap up a few bills.
For the day.
