Here.
Here.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I have
with me today actually I'm
wanting to see king it's hard
and Martin.
And she is my expert witness we
pass the
the kera Act of two years ago
the comprehensive addiction
recovery act and
Our
the act is intended to be a
source of supportive.
care for pregnant people
affected by substance abuse as
well as coordination of services
for parents caregivers and
family members of newborns and
this bill addresses
administrative gaps in the
program and bolsters Services
and safety net it provides for
infants and their families
codifying and clarifying the
collaboration of various
agencies on whom the it the
programs success depends and I'd
like and Billy Martin two said
two words chair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Emily
Martin I am the director
protective services at CYFD
house bill four thirty four is
the upcoming outcome of a years
long effort of the part of all
of the state agencies department
of Health CYFD ECECD.
And that are most directly
involved in the care and
protection of young children to
improve supports available to
them to ensure their well being
and their ability to thrive
specifically this bill it moves
most of the functions of the
comprehensive addiction and
recovery act or cara from CYFD
to the Department of Health in
keeping with the public health
model it also adds ECECD as one
of the three agencies along with
CYFD and the department of
health that have Karen
navigators to connect families
with resources and services it
requires that plans of care be
sent to depart the department of
health instead of CYFD.
Clearly differentiating between
the notification of that part to
the Department of Health of a
baby born with a plan of care
and the reporting difference of
suspected abuse and neglect to
CYFD it requires the state all
of us to conduct a family
assessment on families who have
failed to engage in services or
otherwise deemed to be non
compliance with the plan of care
it requires the department of
health to update rules that
provide guidelines in the care
of newborns who exhibit symptoms
consistent with the premium with
prenatal drug exposure or fetal
alcohol spectrum disorder.
This bill also requires that the
data collected which is so
important by the NCOs managed
care organizations identifying
service outcomes of each plan of
care be reported to the
department of health and shared
with the family and with the
providers that are engaging with
that those families.
This bill alongside house bill
four sixty one as well as the
governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham's executive order
together brings not only the
state agencies together but is a
true community and comprehensive
response.
They are set for an entire
community all of us deciding
that it is all of our
responsibilities to address the
care and safety of children and
families that together we will
create an equation to mitigate
as much risk as possible to
babies children and families and
madam chair I should have said
but it doesn't change our
introduction we do have an
amendment has not been passed
out because let me give you the
number.
Okay.
This is everybody has one I'll
confirm it to a two numbers.
Excuse me madam chair we do.
We were told that excuse me
Madam we were told that we would
hear the bill without the
amendment if we didn't accept
the amendment.
I'm not sure the amendment
number is two five eight six
four point two.
And
So.
I'm not sure what's going on
here madam chair but to it's the
your call as to what happens
with this but I think you should
know what is proposed because
it's clarifying and a lot of the
introductory marks depend on the
amendment itself on that point
madam chair we did we decided
collectively to not accept this
because it's not fair to the
community or anybody else
because nobody had a chance to
see this within a twenty four
rule thank you.
Here we have the right to not
accept that because it has to be
in within twenty four hours and
it was not.
Thank you madam chair can we get
somebody that's an expert on
rules to come down to make a
decision on the Senator Garcia
please thank you madam chair.
let me just say that the twenty
four hour is a custom but it's
on the golden rod it's not in
the rules but I think the
important thing and this is for
all of you to understand is that
the analysts and the members
understand.
Yes.
Okay.
The
On page one line fourteen we're
striking
the making appropriation on
fourteen and fifteen.
I'm so that's number one and
number two is so strict on line
fourteen strict
after nineteen seventy eight and
then the
online fifteen strict probation
online nine.
Excuse me page six if you'll
turn to page six.
On page six page nine this is
the page.
This is so.
On page nine line six.
After that.
Start the remainder of the line.
And strict line seven through
care.
And insert in lieu there is.
So you see the managed care
organization is an entity that
is under contract is just a
change in definition of
the.
Managed care organization on
page ten.
Line eight.
Strike after a reasonable amount
of time.
Because that's in definite
language and there's clarifying
language to tighten that up.
On.
Line.
H. line twelve after the
incident.
Insert if the family has failed
to engage in services the state
shall conduct a family
assessment so when this when
there's a failure to engage the
assessment occurs there's no
vague reasonable amount of time.
On and now we're down to number
six on page ten line twenty.
Strike.
And a person with.
And insert a Lujan there the
early childhood education and
care department for the
department of health and here
we've heard from many of the
actual stakeholders like
Representative how to be as a
does some of these
who engages with the department
of early childhood education her
department that they can be very
helpful and then on go to page
fifteen.
And here is where we're striking
the appropriation to Charlie as
we made as we indicated and the
title itself so you're striking
Page fifteen and.
Restricted of section five.
And then section six is
remembered to section five.
So that is the sum total of the.
No I think madam chair the miss
Martin's remarks included the
amendment language so I don't
think there are any with any
further comments were ready to.
So.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair ready for
questions.
Sir.
Thank you thank you madam chair
okay so we're gonna go through
this ammendment since.
Questions on it okay so on line
one.
On page one line fourteen after
nineteen seventy eight
restricted remainder the lines
were taking out.
Making an appropriation is that
correct.
Yes Representative chair
representative aren't.
Students I didn't want you to
Mrs the amendment has been
adopted.
I do it yeah I understand I do
questions on that's what I'm
asking so we're taking out
appropriations is that because
it's already in the budget or we
can explain to me why we're
taking out the appropriations
portion.
Madam chair representative lord
we're taking out the
appropriations as you yes we
have the funding within our
budget and because this bill
brings three state agencies
together were able to identify
not only the funding within CYFD
is budget but also department of
health with the opioid of opioid
settlement funding and the early
childhood education departments
okay Madam chair representative
so you're saying that according
this you need two point five
million and that's already going
to be in the budget for this
but.
Yes ma'am.
Okay this okay page nine one
six.
Restricting the remainder of the
entire line.
The.
So what I'm going to do is not
going to be out.
And we will have a five are on
so you can get on line the board
of the.
The bill.
I.
hello good morning it's very
loud members of the committee I
appreciate you taking time with
us this morning my name is R. A.
lamb and I work for the
department of health and the
policy director there I am here
with Aerion Coronado she is an
epidemiologist in the director
of the maternal and child health
program at D. O. H. I want to
say a few things about the need
for the the this bill and the
changes that it's proposing all
of these agencies are working
together to really improve the
functionality of the the car a
program car is relatively new
program it's been around for
about three years but it's it's
shared between several key
health related agencies in the
true purpose of this program is
to promote the safety and well
being of newborns have been
found to have been exposed to
substances I want to reiterate
that because it's very important
that we keep this is the central
priority of the work of this
program to really keep
babies who have been substance
exposed safe and to secure their
well being.
UHS collected data for three
years with the intention of
evaluating the program and
making recommendations for the
improvements to this program
this bill seeks to codify those
recommendations the most
effective and evidence based
approach to supporting this
difficult space is with the
swift and strong public health
focused intervention.
Share.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is a lot of
dances I am here to support this
bill from the Human Services
Department I'm the Medicaid
medical director I just I've had
a lot of experience with car at
because from my former life
before I was in this job and
then professionally I'm happy to
talk about the Human Services at
roll I do think that this bill
cleans up some things that may
be very concerned about card to
begin with as far as
As a provider.
the the clear language that.
We still call CYFD and notify if
there's concerns of nickel Act I
think it does a good job they
are and I also think that it
closes the loop as far as when
we can't access families at the
end so just kind of speaking of
someone who had serious concerns
about this bill and feels that
this bill the new bill does goes
a long way in fixing some of
those corrections and I'm happy
to answer questions about the
NCOs HSD thanks okay.
To have a good morning chair
members of the committee my name
is Mike about city and I'm a
policy manager with both futures
and I know the importance of a
community health worker in and
the navigator in our family and
I really like that about this
bill I used to work as a
community health worker for ten
years at First Nations community
health source and I know that it
takes a lot of trust to bill to
maintain and also to understand
the historical and current
knowledge of what it takes for
our families that are impacted
by this system to be able to
trust and enter into these
spaces
I also appreciate the non
proponent of approach that has
kept our families from receiving
services and additionally the
growth and development of
community health workers and
navigators has been a proven
approach across the state I've
been privileged to work with you
and Ms echo program to help
Bill continuous Education of
best practices culturally safe
practices and using traditional
knowledge keepers as experts in
Albuquerque alone I was a CHW
navigator and I worked with
thirty other organizations so
many of the organizations work
with an array of impacted
families I was able to and thank
you very much.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists for the
hospital association we stand in
support of this legislation
would you think that this is a
good move we think it will
increase are effectiveness in
terms of delivery of care and
and and and ensure that we're
doing the right things for the
hospital standpoint so I'll be
brief we stand support thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Janis Gonzales I'm the chief
health officer for the early
childhood education and care
department just want to point
out a few things about the bill
this program I've been involved
since the beginning when it was
developed and it was developed
based on public health
principles and non punitive
approach because that is what
the evidence says gives us the
best outcomes for mothers and
babies ECECD is currently in the
process of hiring our own
current navigator and care data
analyst because we really do see
this as a multi agency effort I
do want to point out that the
plans of care or for babies born
exposed to a wide range of
substances it's not just opioids
it's all substances that illegal
or legal or illegal that could
affect the baby's health
and so our home visiting early
intervention programs are
crucial to the success of this
work we have worked hard to make
sure they have the training they
need to successfully support
families with a history of
substance use or current
substance use.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Dr life just because I am
seventy four years old I have
been a social worker for forty
years in New Mexico and I am in
support of this bill simply
because this bill brings to
focus the notion that we can
organize ourselves and instead
of blaming each other we can
move forward in an organized
manner this bill allows the
professionalization of social
work it allows the
professionalization of providers
to be able to find the most
needed services in an organized
manner it provides for
administration it for price for
transparency it provides for
data which is badly needed in
the state of New Mexico in order
for us to make the decisions
that we need to make in the
future I can stand here and I'm
as old of those mountains over
there I can tell you and
probably a little bit older I
can tell you that this bill will
set the foundation and the
formation to be able to move
CYFD in the direction that it
was originally intended to move
I was there I was there for
licensure.
Thank you madam chair.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Lucy
that temple as I am a policy
director with bold futures but
today I want to share my story
just of a family member and
loving and T. two of my nieces
were born exposed because my
sister was struggling with
substance use at the time of her
pregnancies and it is resources
and connections like these that
have helped my family and my
nieces to be able to be
successful in life in caring for
them and loving and caring for
my sister while she went through
her recovery and we believe that
this is a much better approach
of being able to support
families that are struggling
with substance use in our state
which is a lot of families
verses the punitive approach of
you know just reporting and
incarcerating more people so for
those reasons I ask that you
please support this bill thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Barbara Vigil M. cabinet
secretary of children youth and
families department I ask for
your support of house bill forty
three four thirty four it is an
improvement it is designed to
improve our care program that
will enable us as agencies not
only CYFD but ECECD and
department of health to work
together collaboratively to
improve it this particular
program and I ask you for your
support in favor of this bill we
will work together to continue
to improve the system of care
for our babies who are born drug
exposed thank you.
Here.
Madam chair representative this
is a very Leigh Cloutier the CEO
of the pandemic sanding also
program the children's advocacy
center and they are he's at the
center and I sent is support of
the sales and the work of
Secretary legal and we Martin
and communities of the movie
meeting route the state to push
for accountability and improve
services thank you.
Thank you.
That
is opposed to the field as a.
Thank you chairman and committee
members my name is Maryland back
and I'm the founder of New
Mexico child first network we
was here before you in twenty
nineteen when this bill
originally passed it was
actually our concerns about
forth the non compliance that
had missed in this entire bill
originally secretary the help
just that this is an improvement
once again this is not data this
is children there are concerns
with this bill why after page
nine page once again as the non
compliance issue of this plan
I'm glad to see the pod sponsor
bringing this forward we have
been raising alarms of this
program for the past four years
we knew when we bought this
forward in twenty nineteen there
would be issues the houses
specifically said there was no
follow through there was no
accountability from the LFC
report themselves we know at
least nine infants died on plan
of care is in the first year you
have the D. O. H. report we know
this is not working and I wish
if this was actually a plan that
they have been spending the past
few years on but some of at
least one of the following
accommodations in the D. O. H.
report was there and I just want
to say that Senate bill one
fifty unanimously passed the
Senate just this week to amend
the non compliance data and we
should consider that thank you.
If there's.
So who is.
Going to the.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for being
here today I thank you for for
looking at my recommendations
and and many of our
recommendations and and adding
those in as the amendments there
is one component that I am
concerned about that we we had
spoken about and that is
Once the care coordinators
I engage with the family and we
know that in the past many
families did not know who the
care coordinators work and and
that concerns me how will they
be engaging with the families
and also when we added in ECECD
basically the early childhood
programs and home visiting
I don't see an M. D. T. that
pulls back around or a meeting
that that communicates with
everybody and it's the
communication that I fear will
break down if it's not in there
so if it's in there please let
me know if we've missed that
that would be my concern.
That in turn on it the Spartans
will address the question.
Madam chair of how to me thank
you so much for working with us
and we we walked have absolutely
addressed the concerns that you
have brought.
Within this program there is a
portal that the when the plans
of care are developed by the
hospital in conjunction with the
at MCO care coordinator that
they go into a portal that are
then will be with the three
agencies and HSD will be shared
and we'll be able to follow up
with that family if there if the
family does not engage and
there's a concern we will
immediately with the navigator
program or that additional
navigators that still allows for
be able to immediately follow up
with that family engage with
them not through just a phone
call but through an actual face
to face visit to ensure that
family is working together and
providing a warm hand off to
those service providers now some
families are mothers babies are
already engaged in services and
so what that means is that what
this will be able to do is we
can update that plan of care
it's a okay so maybe it wasn't
so oxygen treatment that was
needed because you're already
engaged with the individual
counseling and NA NA NA or a a
services that are working really
well and we can amend that and
provide that information and
share that information with the
providers that are working
directly with the family as well
as D. O. H. ECECD and CYFD.
So madam chair and
Representative can you tell me
is this is this portal New and
we'll providers have access to
the.
We madam chair we can add
Representative talker mail we're
gonna DO H. this conversation.
And also early childhood care.
Education okay go ahead and.
Good morning good morning madam
chair representative so my name
is Erin Coronado I'm the
maternal child health
epidemiology program manager
with department of health my
unit is.
In the process of continual
evaluation and data improvements
to understand the status of our
families who are being served
and how we can improve the
family service through this
collaboration and integrated
data as well as accountability
through all our departments.
Janis Gonzales and the chief
health officer.
I'm the chief health officer for
the early childhood education
and care to.
I thank you madam chair should I
rephrase my question is should I
do that again okay thank you so
much and thank you for joining
us so my madam chair and
representative might my question
still is
I have worked in early
intervention now for twenty five
years and I I did not know of
a portal is this portal new will
providers have access the people
who are boots on the ground who
are literally working with these
families or know that these
families of fallen off of
services.
Madam chair representative how
to me on the portal has been
developed when this bill passed
we began developing this this
portal it is not new thank and
we continue to improve and build
on that as of right now I don't
believe providers have the
ability to look what's inside
that portal it the NCOs C. Y. of
T. and T. O. H. have access to
that portal currently but the
long the the goal is that along
with the building of the the C.
with system at CYFD within the
next two years that providers
and different state agencies can
all access that information
related to to the Kerr family.
Madam chair representative so if
we're looking at two years my
concern is now and I wonder if
we could not put in a mandatory
NDTV monthly with these families
so that all providers can
communicate with each other I
think my biggest frustration as
a provider was that everybody
had a piece of this and nobody
knew what was happening and as
you all know we lost a child in
Sapporo and I never want that to
happen in my community again and
we need to have communication
consistent constant
communication with each other
and we do in fact have NDTV's
with with our our.
Losses it loose we have it with
CYFD but the piece that's
missing is with care
coordinators because that's who
needs to know and that's my
concern because in this bill it
does say that it is it is the
care coordinators who will
report.
Non compliance and they're not
part of our conversation.
Thank you madam chair.
Excuse me madam chair and
representative of how to be on.
On page is not intended.
We did.
The amendment.
Well the intended to the bill
and not the excuse me the bill
itself.
Adds.
Compliance with the plan of care
should be determined by the
families care coordinator.
For comprehensive addiction
recovery act navigator.
And then the noncompliant so
reported by care coordinator for
the navigator when there are
concerns and then we added in we
took out the.
Amorphous after a reasonable
amount of time and added
that.
It's a families build engages
services the state shall conduct
a family assessment right that
does that address I'm not enough
familiar enough with the
sequence of events to know
whether that addresses your
concerns Madam chair
representative might my biggest
concern is that it relies on the
care coordinator and we don't
have a mechanism for them to
talk to the boots on the ground.
And so how will they know the
noncompliance because I can
often tell you that care quarter
families don't know their care
coordinators and providers have
not spoken to the care
coordinators.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm first madam chair lady allow
the other to departments to
respond and then make a
suggestion go ahead.
To Senator yes thank you madam
chair Representative Hotmail I'm
currently in the portal
providers are the people who
initiate the planet Kerr so at
the hospital level at delivery
right so that's always been the
case in the portal the
connection between the care
coordination and the really
important follow up and
compliance fees is a big need
around the navigation and that's
a big role for the connecting
the navigators currently active
part in it help work with the
navigators at ECECD and their
respective care coordinator
leads with the managed care
organizations to understand what
the needs are in the community
level referrals and community
based connections with home
visiting with nutrition programs
with violence prevention housing
etcetera so this coordination
and collaboration really
strengthens that piece at each
department to the navigator
linking back to the just charge
and social workers in the
hospital system to the next
provider and the health history
through the department of
health.
Madam chair and Representative
Fajardo mia I I totally agree
with you on the value of the
multi disciplinary team I've
been on in many multi
disciplinary teams midwife and
they're very very important I
also wanted to add that ECECD
does have funding to make
improvements to the portal and
that and we are working on that
right now and we also happening
for the next fiscal year to do
the same so we do recognize that
there are improvements that need
to be made in the portal and
that more people need access to
the portal such as that you.
Thank you madam chair
representative I can only say
that you know at and and insert
that we have to meet
would it would save so many
Providers who are frustrated
with the system families who are
frustrated with the system and
children and we have to have a
mechanism to be able to see to
communicate with each other and
that's the component that I see
is still missing and I I
respectfully request that that
be added in there thank you very
much Senator may I ask question
Representative how to build on
point I think we're trying to
look for I don't think anyone
objects I would I would hesitate
to put a monthly required in
statute but I think regular and
then I rule you can make the
because you need to see what
works and we have obviously
challenges geographic distances
and so forth in New Mexico all
those certainly some of these
things can be amended
spiritually but if you could
perhaps as and I think Miss
Martin is working on it but if
you could also be looking at
where the regular needing
requirements should go.
Thank you madam chair so so are
you open to an amendment yes yes
that's my understanding from.
Thank you for that thank you so
much.
So madam chair the the amendment
I would suggest is that they
must meet.
to to
To be able to provide data and
and follow up from individual
with.
And madam chair we would like
doctor are a lot of not talked
about a lot of dances from HSD
who is that.
Expect.
madam chair Representative
Fajardo me out just wanted to
speak from the Human Services
department about some of the
things we're trying to do with
care coordination
so first thing we are some of
the things you're talking about
we can do in a letter of
direction we can do it a
contract amendment and we are in
the process but we we've been
communicating with the NCOs and
are sending out a letter of
direction we're care
coordinators are going to be
starting to going to the
hospitals to communicate with
car all car and members in
person stateLee so that is a
program that is like we did it
should be we have that signed
off on it basically but we've
written it so I because I agree
that they care coordinator is
mostly telephonic at this point
and that is something that's
been happening during COVID and
it's really can't be that way
anymore
so I think that that's a very
reasonable amendment but it's
also something we can do in a
letter direction for contract to
say that there needs to be some
kind of a close look they need
to be community coming to
meetings we already do that with
some of our other programs like
for example care coordinators
are involved with children in
state custody who are out of
state they already have an
interdisciplinary team they meet
once a I month so so you know a
friendly amendment and happy to
make those changes.
Thank you so much.
Chair.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so I have some
questions
And I just wanna say right off
the bat.
Our program.
We're not being able to follow
through and make sure that
mommy's our state.
Percent so I have some questions
based on the plan of care based
on what's being changed in this
bill so the first question I
have can you define engage with
this engagement disengagement by
hand of this piece of paper or
make a phone call or does that
mean something different please
define in.
madam chair I believe in it this
Martin continue but engagement
is not referring to
the
Provider.
Offering services it's about the
family part.
Madam chair representative lord
engagement does not mean having
a piece of paper to summon
engagement means that they are
involved and participating in in
the services
that are being offered by the
service provider it is it is a.
Relationship not a transactional
service okay Madam chair and
representative of so when you
say engage if you're going
through this list any twelve
step program is listed on here
and on the plan.
Would engage me that you
somebody is calling them
somebody's going to make sure
they're going to those things
what exactly what engagement
mean and how often would there
be engagement with that person
Madam chair representative can
you tell me what page you're on
I'm on the plan of care.
Looking at the second page White
House on.
So would engage mean that you
are calling them are you are you
having meetings with them how
you finding out that they are
engaging in any of these things
say twelve step
Are they going to substance
abuse counting how are we
engaging them to make sure that
they're actually doing these
things.
Madam chair Representative.
Engagement for department of
health evaluation and
recommendations has meant that
there is a clear connection to
in a sign coordinator so if the
family doesn't know who that
coordinator is or isn't familiar
with their plan of care that
they can't be considering gauged
they also have to have said that
they have receive services that
they wanted to in the planet
Kerr with the navigator and with
a follow up
The survey interview that we do
with the families to understand
their level of engagement they
have to be able to explain what
that service is how it's been
helpful to their family and then
another component that we have
used is and to establish their
level of engagement with primary
care.
So using Medicaid claims looking
at the actual information
industry of that family where
they actually demonstrating that
they were going with the primary
care provider that they were
engaging in preventive care.
Madam chair representative when.
So I know they get this form.
And they fill out this form.
When the mom leaves with the
baby who is in charge of that
infinitely.
Madam chair representative.
No I'm just asking Madam chair
representative I'm just curious
about this plan of care what I'm
trying to figure out because
parsonage complete disaster with
their babies I'm trying to
figure out when that mom leaves
the hospital and she says oh
yeah okay I got I got it and
they do the stuff.
Who is in charge like if
somebody had a question the
minute that mom left who would
be the contact person who's in
charge immediately of overseen
this mom and.
One of the yet.
I'm trying to figure out with
this if there's going to be any
difference between this and this
and what's going to be different
we're trying to find out who's
of this cut straight when this
mom eight instances yes family
do all these things.
She walks out the door.
If a nurse or anybody had a
question anybody have a question
about anything about that baby
who is the car.
So your question Madam chair
representative floored is that
other people who aren't
necessarily involved in the
in the the care program have
questions who do they contact.
If a nurse or anybody had
questions or anybody that
questioned what I'm trying to
forget is anybody responsible
for that family when they walk
out the door or is this a gauge
McKenna happened months or weeks
later after this parent eight
windows in the engagement starts
windows everybody all of you
guys when you guys all involved
with this babies at the minute
the mom walks out the door.
When does that process happen
chair representative thank you
madam trying to understand.
Adam chair representative.
The first thing that happens
when somebody leaves the
hospital in the portal there's a
lead at the department of health
currently that checks daily more
than daily essentially but every
day
What that person's.
Identity is then their first
step is actually to contact the
person who created that plan of
care in the portal.
And simultaneously every day
somebody at the children youth
and families department the lead
for Kara at that department does
the same thing and the signs
these people who are being
notified to the department of
health to Human Services
Department and to all three
departments there.
To where they're going to be
receiving support and then with
the early childhood department
early education and child care
department there is the
reconciliation across the
navigators who currently work to
see that that family is being
supported and that everyone's
been assigned their respective
navigators so currently without
respect to how the improvements
might be made in process that's
how people are supported
immediately on discharge.
Also madam chair this but would
like to the showers from the
department of health to.
If you want to do it.
I'm sorry thank you madam chair
representative lord I I I want
to clarify that when a parent
when when a mother gives birth.
If there are safety concerns
from the hospital what this bill
does is also clarify doing a
plan of care is not the same in
notifying the department of
health is not the same as
reporting abuse or neglect a
plan of care is is a.
Public health approach to care
for that baby care for that
mother care for help the care
givers whether that's the mother
the father the grandparents a
foster parent when that baby
leaves the hospital it is not a
safety plans if the hospital has
concerns for abuse or neglect
they are making a report to CYFD
to step in substance use alone
is not a safety threat okay then
chairman that that was my next
question so we do not consider a
drug addicted baby going home at
the drug addicted mom.
To be abuse is that what I'm
understanding that.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord
Anyone who has a concern at any
time about any child in the
state can call statewide central
intake so that's that's just a
given.
You
chair representative I I want to
find important clarification.
The Kara of federal and state
legislation requires plan to
care for any infant who has any.
Screams substance exposure to.
The addiction and expose are are
very different things sometimes
there one in the same for that
infant sometimes they're not so
the vast majority of people that
we're supporting
either because they were
screened verbally or because
they were screened universally
and found some toxicology is
different from a neonatal
withdrawal or neonatal
abstinence syndrome so I just
want to make sure that people
understand we are we are
responsive and required to be
responsive to all all these
situations.
Okay Madam chair representative
It just seems to me that if a
parent and I understand drug
addictions a horrible thing and
where I get concerned and also.
In this plan of care.
And the steps being taken as a
look at twelve step which is not
have a very high success rate
and then I look at substance
abuse counseling and I don't see
any length of treatment I don't
see them giving medication I
don't see how it's assessed on a
C. cognitive behavioral therapy
which is the main form of
treating this what I see is and
this is what breaks my absolute
heart is that I see here it's
who have a drug addiction
problem who seriously needs help
and in New Mexico were totally
missing the boat on this that
means helping that pair in the
most intensive way.
From that minute when they walk
into the hospital and not saying
okay here's a paper please make
sure you go to these things and
then they're going through a
system where and then may not be
reported as abusive may not may
or may not be reported at CYFD
and then I'm seeing days before
anything is going to get done on
this and then all this kid is
going home to a house with a
parent who still doing drugs and
I just I want to vomit honestly
at this moment they don't
understand.
Why we are doing more sense can
continue my questions are how
many plan to care have been
issued since the car act that
was passed in twenty nineteen
Madam chair representative Madam
chair Representative Lord I
think you've got up a form for a
plan of care which isn't the
bill and and that's why I was
confused and I I'm figuring out
what it is that you're looking
at now but madam chair I don't
know if anybody can answer that
question really quickly I cannot
this we just this bill is not
going to cost.
This bill is to try to improve
the program.
Right madam chair representative
that's I'm getting opportunities
to answer my questions of how
we're improving this to make
sure that when a mom walks out
the door that I can be assured
that if I voted for this that
the minute she walks out the
door there is this huge system
on that moment not days later
when the of the baby's going
home into a drug infested home
sick can you tell me how and
what the plan is in this bill
that is not gonna take days it
is going to be an immediate
treatment plan.
Madam chair representative there
have been over thirty two
hundred plans a care establish
since inception of Kara.
Madam chair representative how
many children have died as a
result of the failure of this
law.
Fulfill your I'm sorry madam
chair was a question how miglior
what died as a result of the
failure of this care law that
was passed.
As a failure of the law the
answer is LFC answered nine.
So there's nine chilled okay if
you have them madam chair if you
have the answer I appreciate
just giving it to us thank you
I'm going to answer.
So the question has so what this
is law change that when the baby
leaves the hospital.
Addicted to drugs who is
responsible for that child.
Madam chair representative lord
the bill does strength in the
safety net in a in a couple of
ways
The the main one is putting in
that that extra middle layer of
support with the family
assessments because
Right now.
If someone can report a family
in the hospital to see what I do
and and then they they can get a
safety plan or they can do the
plan of care or they can do both
but
the family assessment that we're
talking about in the in in the
amendment would be a middle
ground so if someone left the
hospital with a plan of care.
Not a safety plan but just a
plan of care and did not
engage in services then what
this bill says is that that
family this not engaging we'll
get a safety plan is.
We'll get it.
We'll get a family assessment
test which is now like a middle
layer and is going to find
another
safety net for these families
and babies okay pandemic and
Representative thank you for
answer that was a questions
trying to get it so.
How long when they're not
engaging before there will be a
factual family assessment and is
that going to be in person or on
the telephone.
Madam chair that was what we did
in the bill to make certain.
That there's.
The bill as written on page ten
line eight said after reasonable
amount of time.
We struck that and we do Sir
did.
With the exact words with.
Mentor which which amendment is
that Representative it was
number four for.
And so then.
Your inserting if the family his
family to engage in services the
state Chuck conducted family
assessment that means that not
after a reasonable amount of
amorphous time so that was the
amendment was trying to make a
precise.
Okay chair representative are to
send more questions on that so.
The baby bop with this of the
Mongol some of the baby and then
how long before we decide.
That they are not engage in how
many days are what's the
timeline for that.
Madam chair and Representative
I'm I'm gonna say right now I'm
gonna let the experts answer but
we don't generally put that kind
of information those data points
in the law.
Two one is so you have please
please expand on that chair with
experts.
I presented the current process
is to.
The following up.
With that family the same day
the plan of care is made.
And the current process is that
within.
Several business days then
assessing that this family can
either not be found or there's a
concern because there's no
history or some other sure that
might be easy to recognize that
there is follow up in engagement
at that point.
Okay managers Representative so
there's no there's nothing.
There's no X. amount of days
it's just whatever that person
is overseeing it would decide
that they think would be the
appropriate amount of time.
Madam chair representative the
as we said like there's a really
broad range of.
Individuals who receive plans of
care and the services really
need to be individualized the
cases need to be looked at
individually
and so we really feel that
details like you know how many
days and.
Everything specific like that is
better to be put in pool that
rather than in statute and I
think that.
It was referring to that that
those kind of details are
usually done in rural and it
does say in here that the
department of health will be
issuing rules thank you I
appreciate that answer Madam
receptor expert so is it just
the family assessment is.
Madam chair representative lord
dot family assessment would be
done in person.
Madam chair representative would
that be is it that this there
any time that anybody goes into
their house to see who's living
there what the conditions are
like and want is that.
Madam chair representative lord
yes.
When and when it does that
happens when they do the family
says amended terror Census up
some point somebody's going to
go into that house Madam chair
representative lord yes and then
chairs that are based on non
engagement or assistance
something that's going to be
done at some point.
Madam chair representative board
that would be standard with the
an action of this bill.
Okay chair of so I think I'm
coming down to my last question
so let's move that it considered
reach out to me that works for.
As with the core create court so
I care coordinators they had a
car baby hospital twice the
parents were caught smoking
federal hospital I didn't know
you could do that twice a
hospital nurses call CYFD and
they were told because a baby
was safe in the hospital at the
time the call.
It's called committees they
seemed unsubstantiated known
investigation.
The nurses were also concerned
because the parents were
homeless
the nurses called me and spoke
with them.
And their frustrations the
child's discharge.
Because after forty eight hours
no one could find the parents of
the child no one had a follow up
done with CYFD so under the
current law and this proposed
law.
So what is H. B. four three four
three four do anything to
address this issue.
Madam chair representative lord
it covered into confidentiality
laws currently prevent me from
talking about any type of this
case specifics of what I what I
can say is when there are
concerns for abuse or neglect or
safety concerns regarding not
child.
The hospital all of us are
mandatory reporters and should
be calling that into statewide
central intake for an
investigation to be completed
and.
Connect that family to services
and part of that part of a
safety plan may be that a child
comes into the custody of CYFD
no matter what that plan of care
follows the child whether that
child is with their parents
their grandparents or a foster
parent.
Thank you madam chair
representative to continue on
with that what happens when C.
with details hostile to
discharge a drug addicted in fit
on the plan of care and it looks
like those not full
participation in this.
In the discharge and nobody can
find a pair to the baby to
provide follow up what is the
bill going to do.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord.
We can come up with any number
of scenarios that.
Might play out the bill
tightens up.
Considerably the
The ability of all of the
departments that are involved to
make certain that families are
engaged and children have a
brighter future so if a family
can be found there are a variety
of.
I know I've.
I've Representative older
children in the system who.
How of school ended well that's
not in this criminal term who a
lot I at first first somebody
heard that was from
CYFD worker but someone who
actually we we really couldn't
find the thank you
but nobody ever stops looking.
Madam chair representative I'd
like to add that placing.
The lead agency under department
of health gives us a public
health authority which is
different than some of the other
agencies and you can also to
consider some of the methods
we've used to find people who
are perhaps infectious and don't
realize it or you know need to
be tracked down and people need
to understand that the severity
of the gravity of the
information in the and the
support that's required so I
think that is one thing that
this would change in terms of
public health authority.
So madam chair I I could sit
here all day asking questions
on.
Issues with you.
Point break my heart reading the
stories break my heart this
planet Care breaks my heart
because this is like.
So also said the US questions
but I think like with the twelve
step I think we need in mid
there's a problem and it's a
huge problem that's why drafted
so many bills that we're laser
focused trying to fix exact
issues and I think this is the
first step of saying yep we've
met this is a disaster and we
have to fix it I don't think
this is there I think it's a
great start but I want to be
sure for me I cannot vote on
something that I if I don't
know.
That that mom steps out the door
that that baby is safe and
that's all I care about and
that's why crafted so many bills
to make sure that that baby is
safe when they walk out so as
much as I want to support this
bill I can't it's not enough
it's just not there it's a good
step admitting there's a problem
is a great step moving forward
but it's got to be a lot more a
lot more for me to say I feel so
comfortable that I feel babies
are safe and I don't even with
this so thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank you Representative Lord we
are going to
Representative Thomas and then
to Representative Jones thank
you madam chair
Representative I just want to
say straight up that this.
To have so many agencies
involved my concern is that
you're creating a situation
where a child the baby is going
to fall through the cracks.
Babies who are born to addicted
moms.
Are very difficult they take
care of.
And I'm not sure that this plan.
Addresses that.
And I'm just not sure that are
K..
So I.
We we talked about Madam chair
representative a family just as.
As I understand it the family
assessment would be done.
Down the way.
My question is why isn't the
family assessment done.
Immediately.
And.
Also people for doing.
Madam chair representative
Chavez thank you for your
question and thank you for all
of our communication and work
together to address address
issues and concerns that you
have had
the family and at the when that
child when the child is born in
the hospital part of that
determining if a plan of care is
is needed is an assessment that
assessment is happening
immediately what services are
needed what medical
interventions are needed for
both the mother and the child
and the father all of the care
givers in so that is an
assessment in itself developing
that plan of care the next step
will now be if that family does
not engage in those identified
services that a second
assessment is done with the
family at their home to to look
at the family home listed plea
and what's happening are they
already engaged in services that
were not part of that plan of
care in that plan of care
potentially could be addressed
as a living document because
families change situations
change and that family
assessment would be done by the
by by all of us I very much hear
your concerns.
Regarding too many agencies
however however the more
agencies the more people that
are surrounding a family the
better the outcomes that we see
that is why M. D. T. approach a
multi disciplinary approach
works with families whether it's
on the criminal side that care
giving side we have wraparound
services that bring an entire
community together so the more
people that surround the family
rather than just one entity the
better outcomes we have for
families I I I to madam chair
representative is.
If if there is a very complex
and we're just in case the
hospital doesn't have to this
is.
The hospital staff don't have
to.
Avoid calling statewide central
intake.
To get CYFD to come and look at
whether the child is and
potential danger but this is.
An effort to improve the
assistive we've had in place for
several years by bringing in
agencies and requiring their
collaboration there are.
It is our belief that with this
legislation there will be less
likely hood that children fall
through the cracks and when
there's no structure that
provides collaboration that's
where the danger occurs that's
what we're trying to improve
with this bill.
So Madam chair representative
who does the assessment in the
hospital.
Madam chair and representative
The majority of the babies.
Have Medicaid coverage which
means they have an MCO care
coordinator assigned and the
care coordinators are required
to do health risk assessments so
those assessments are different
than what we're calling a family
assessment but they are done.
and and the coordinators connect
with the families within the
first twenty four hours is that
correct and I'm I'm I'm sorry I
was presenting a bill I'm gonna
ask people to be very brief we
need we are on our first bill
and we're getting towards the
end of the session so brief
questions brief answers please.
Madam chair representative.
Yes that managed care
coordinator cert coordinator is
the first thing they do with
that family is a complete risk
assessment in the absence of
care coordination if someone's
not covered I just can't get it
that's with the navigator step
in and complete that assessment.
Madam chair representative this
isn't a question this is the
COVID I don't hear the word
social workers anywhere in this
social workers need to be doing
the assessments not care
coordinators not not not anybody
else social workers have got to
be doing the success.
So my next question is
The in terms of
Do you H. being the lead agency
how many social workers will be
H. D. O. H. have assigned to
this.
Madam chair representative that
applicators who are hired at
department of health will be
social workers.
The that begs another question
madam chair Representative will
they have.
Licensed social workers.
Madam chair representative yes.
The if there is a field and you
may or may not be aware of that
Madam chair representative
Senate bill one fifty.
Of.
How how we can solve that bill
and this bill It doesn't sound
like they're both the same.
Madam chair representative
Chavez at.
This takes.
Additional step it brings the
agencies together and not it is
not one entity making those
family assessments and not it
there's data reporting in this
bill there is sharing of
information.
We are looking at it adding in.
and he approach to this bill as
well and so this bill takes it a
step further and continues in
the non punitive approach that
care has been designed to take
rather than an investigative in
punitive approach that often
people that come in contact with
CYFD field and and taken take
into account.
Madam chair representative you
know I I think that as a state
we need to take a.
I'm not even sure what we're to
use eight eight much more
Specific global whatever
approach to child welfare we're
not doing that.
And to me it feels like we put a
bunch of agencies together and I
I know that yeah we've had
conversations and and I know
that everybody means well and
you know the well being of our
kids but I.
Some of this just still makes
me.
Thank you
I'm going to say right now that
we will be meeting tomorrow
morning and to get through our
agenda so it will probably be
since I'm announcing it now we
will put the agenda out at ten
o'clock tomorrow morning to get
through the rest of the agenda
so I will go to Representative
Jones.
Thank you madam.
And thank you Representative
Chasey miss Martin and others I
I share the same concerns
Representative had a hero Travis
lord have have mentioned already
and especially from my
experiences in our and with drug
addicted babies I've worked in
the Nick you.
I'm gonna wait until you all can
listen to me.
Okay did you ask a question we
were I was just getting started
so I'll start over that madam
chair and Representative Chasey
this Martin and others I share
the same concerns that
Representative harm you and
Chavez and lord have shared with
us
I I want to go back to the
beginning and talk about the
Care Act the Care Act is a
federal mandate is that true.
Madam chair and representative
Jones yes although it's a state
law as well yes of so it it
began as a federal mandate to
each state and and so each state
was as I understand it.
Was expected to develop their
own plan their own care of
planned to deal with with that
drug exposed drug addicted
infants and a and their families
and.
To help those people so I I
looked up last night the other
of the other how the other
states are doing and I found
that there is a lot of them are
are.
Approaching this in a different
way I know we talked about a lot
about the plan of care that was
that the connection in the plan
of care at that the goals and
the accountability that that
should be in a plan of care of
that Representative harm you
talked about and and
Representative Lord as well and
also.
All of us are concerned about
the reason we're talking about
the plan of care is because it
is it's the center of Care Act
as I understand it and I do have
I have this New Mexico planted
Care that we've developed it's
it's very sparse and what it
consists of is just a gathering
of information basically and
it's not even very specific
information which really
concerns me
As a as a nurse who has a lot of
Nick you experience with drug
addicted babies and winning
those babies off of of
narcotics working with families
and to make sure that those
babies were safe when they went
home I I find this so incredibly
an adequate I I was shocked this
plan of care that the the babies
leave the hospital with.
there's no goal.
There is
There's there's no way to
implement it on paper anyway and
I and I know you know I
understand that everyone has.
Has the best interest of these
babies and in in mind but but
there's no way to even track
that is actually happening and
and and the lack of goals is is
is so concerning to me I looked
up.
A Nevada for instance this is
this is Nevada plan of care.
They have extensive information
that they gather on for the
families
it's several pages
it includes toward the end which
every nursing plan of care
includes it includes a.
Most family strengths and gold
post discharge family strengths
and goals so what are their
goals we we don't even address
that with a dress loss in our
plan of care and it also it
includes the monitoring
providers and who those people
are actually going to be
In touch with and we're going to
be following them and so I'm I'm
really concerned that we don't
have any of that and this bill
the president either the bill so
how I guess my question is.
I know we all want to fix this.
So how is the bill really going
to address the like boots on the
ground concerns that we all have
about about taking care of these
babies in these families.
Madam chair representative Jones
I think probably I would have to
look at the Nevada statute I
don't know if the Nevada statute
includes all of the pieces of
the intervention plans but what
New Mexico is trying to do with
this bill and there is actually
think which from Senate bill one
fifty included in the amendment
that we may and that was
amendment number five and that
was the
Immediate conduct a fairly
assessment without engagement so
what we're saying here now is
would be much more specific
about the collaboration
partnership of the other
departments so
We
This is our attempt to make it
much tighter and much more
thorough but we're not going to
put all of the details into the
statute because that's going to
vary with families families are
different.
So you just referenced that Sir
you just referenced a correction
in the the amendment can you can
you repeat that again so the
Fifth Amendment we did was on
page ten line twelve we inserted
if the family has failed to
engage in services the state to
conduct a family assessment
that's language from Senate bill
one fifty because you would have
asked about that so okay I see
that madam chair and and at
Representative I see that it
says after that period and so
what what period would that be.
After the period insert.
If the family has failed to
engage in services.
You're referring to the
I'm.
To in line twelve.
After the period in the sentence
okay but if the family while I'm
sorry I thought Madam chair
representative I thought that
was a reference to the time
period of time in order to
Graham yeah I miss
So I guess I get the concern
that we all have this is where
are the the specifics you
yourself just mentioned a moment
ago that we need structure and
so the structure that's been
missing I I believe is what may
very well have cost the loss of
these babies and that were that
were let out of the hospital
with a care plan
with the care plan according to
the Care Act and I I don't see
that this is really the anything
in this bill is really
addressing the actual specifics
of caring for each baby.
And bring success to the family.
other questions.
Let me just go back to this as a
nurse we want to see evidence
based
outcomes and and the evidence
shows that.
We're failing so how does this
bill bring about evidence based
outcomes we have a portal that
that providers so having access
to like we said we have
We have vague language that
doesn't require us to really get
down to the to the specifics of
help these patients are
followed.
So I'll just move on ask us
again
About the hospital because
that's that's my expertise I'm
concerned what you said about
the hospital and and the
assessed the initial assessments
I know it takes days sometimes
weeks to win these drug addicted
babies off of their narcotics
and they do they are sent home
and that that with terrible
high risk.
issues.
They have trouble with the
gastro.
Issues that vomiting diarrhea
they they cry all the time their
parents who may or you may still
be taking drugs themselves that
is such a high risk situation so
how is that address from the
hospital.
Madam chair representative Jones
this bill requires the the
department of health to update
the rules and guidelines for
hospitals to care who care and
exhibit symptoms consistent with
with prenatal drug exposure and
fetal alcohol syndrome thank you
for that so we this bill.
Requires the hospitals to change
their practice.
Required madam chair excuse me
Madam chair representative Joan
this bill requires that deal
which updates the rules and
guidelines for the hospital
managed care organizations and
providers.
And where do you find that.
Is.
Just to be clear madam chair
while they're looking they're
not going to you're not the see
the rules you just gonna say the
requirement.
Yes please
Madam chair representative so
launches looking for that I
would also just like to point
out that the you know the if a
baby is very ill or or again if
there are
serious concerns about the baby
safety.
but like the case that we heard
previously you know those really
fall outside of what this bill
is doing and outside of the plan
of care that that would be a
situation where the hospital
would want to report a statewide
central intake or make sure that
they're that the medical follow
up is in place you know those
things are are outside of really
what we're talking about here
with these amendments so
really the important thing is
that these amendments to
strengthen what we have
currently before we had the
plans of care it was either
reporter CYFD or nothing nothing
else was done or given to the
family and and so these plans of
care while they're not perfect
they do you know bring together
a lot of different
agencies and supports and
services for these families and
and that is what we're trying to
improve here.
Well well they're looking for
this back to the plan of care
for the planet Kerr.
Support services there's a box
to check for current referred
declined are unavailable.
Hi I I don't know how that fixes
anything and it doesn't unlike
Representative Lord said twelve
step program childcare
children's medical services
domestic by.
There's no follow there's no
plan there's no full there's no
implementation there's no
there's nothing here this plan
of care that that lets us know
that this is really going to
happen for this baby Madam chair
representative the plan of care
is a list of the services that
are offered it doesn't address
those issues that you're talking
about and the bill does not
address the plan of care
important that you're referring
to.
Right I thank you for that madam
chair representative I I guess
that's where I'm following I I'm
just really having a hard time
with this because a plan of care
is something that every patient
I've ever taken care of has to
have you have to have a plan of
care involves gathering
information identifying a
problem
of coming up with the.
A plan for addressing that
problem goals and then and then.
Re reassessing to see if those
goals have been met so that we
have evidence that what we're
planning on this planet Care is
actually working so so none of
that exists here and all we have
is a list of providers that
don't have contact necessarily I
just feel like I don't know how
this bill addresses any of that
and and the plan of care is
truly the the the central piece
of the Care Act the plan of
care.
Madam chair representative
that's what I care is.
Is to initiate the care where so
the managed care coordinators do
what you're what you're
describing.
Once they receive the product so
the form is to establish the
plan to keep.
So while they're still looking.
How do how do the other
providers know about the planet
Kerr this within CYFD that we
don't have access to.
We found the earlier question if
you had and I think that's
what's really important is on
page three lines eighteen
through twenty five.
It has the date the department
of health in consultation and
collaboration with Medicaid
managed care organizations and
so forth
shell update rules promulgated
pursuant to this section to
guide hospitals birthing centers
medical providers and so forth
so the rest of that
H. three what H. three lines
eighteen through twenty five and
Page four lines one through four
yes that's where it gets out the
requirement of the departments
to
To issue excuse the department
of health to issue new right
rules and rex for their NCOs and
please update try to focus you
on the fact that the problem has
been the agencies have been
silos this is saying you need to
work together so that we don't
have.
Children falling through the
cracks it gets rid of the
bureaucratic mindset of that's
not my department in fact one of
the dictates of the cavernous
litigation is for department of
health and CYFD to collaborate
to resolve issues so we're
trying to fix some of the
problems with this bill.
Okay thank you for that madam
chair representative.
So with that what that goes back
to Kevin just and.
Who's collaborating now.
Just clear if if this passes
madam chair then CYFD Department
of Health Human Services and
ECECD will be working together.
According to this legislation
okay I I understand you know
that that it's good to have
different entities involved but
but the lack of specifics and
how they're going to do that and
how they're going to actually
get some some evidence based
Outcome that actually benefits
babies and keep surveys alive as
as as what I don't really
understand I just feel like it's
so vague I I can't.
I can't support it the way it
is.
So thank you very much Senator
us.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam leader
I know we're short on time so
I'll keep my comments brief but
I just wanted to say
when the car bill first passed
you know I really appreciated
the approach because it was
grounded in research the very
best public health research and
as an old public health nurse
was very happy to see that and
you know I think that one of the
reasons we went to this approach
was because it really encourages
parents to seek prenatal care
and you know at the end of the
previous approach which may have
been more punitive.
Really discouraged people from
seeking back care and you know
we know that prenatal care is
essential to healthy pregnancy
outcomes so you know I I really
have appreciated the approach it
was it was a very challenging
bill at the time when it passed
originally and some of that is
still some of those concerns are
still present but I think you
know part of that is just
the challenging sometimes
following the reserves that
maybe does it doesn't
necessarily jive with what we
would expect or or like to have
happening you know we don't want
babies who are born with drug
exposure we don't we don't want
any of these realities but these
are realities that we have to be
guided by public health
so you know I'm I really
appreciate that many of the
groups that were involved in the
initial bill are still here
because to me that tells me that
you all have have made these
changes sort of with that input
and with that that grounding in
what is beneficial for people
who are truly working with
people on the front lines
and if the data sharing that you
have on page three I think is
going to be a game changer
although you know it is
difficult is as Representative
Chavis mentioned madam chair and
Madam leader to get these large
agencies to coordinate you know
we've done it in Santa Fe County
we have an amazing program
called to innovate connect and
not only can providers log in
and say I'm referring you to
these five places the receiving
providers can log in and say
hello I'm Santa Fe food bank I'm
expecting I referrals from Santa
Fe recovery center today and so
I hope that that's the vision
for this and that that kind of
you know I want to save not just
warming and.
Up like a hot hand off they
really are I'm sending you here
they know you're coming they're
gonna be expecting you and if
you don't show up we're getting
you may get a call to say Hey
did you Mr appointment let's
reschedule you
I think that Representative how
to use a suggestions for a multi
disciplinary team are really
worthy of consideration and I
hope you all will consider those
at that before the next
committee I think that bring
some specificity
and finally I would just say
that there is to some of
Representative Jones comments
there is an entire section of
the New Mexico administrative
code dedicated to the plan of
care so that might that maybe in
parallel with madam chair and
brought leader that Nevada
example that was brought forward
because it is
you know ten sections of
thirteen sections of the
administrative code.
Title eight chapter ten part I
that goes into detail about who
is responsible for what what are
the timelines water the of roles
and responsibilities what are
the goals of the plan of care
how
at so you know reviewing those
although this bill is
in my mind encapsulating the
high level goals and objectives
and empowering the departments
to share data in a way that they
have not done before the
administrative code which I'm
glad will be updated as a result
of this bill really goes into a
lot of detail what happens if
someone doesn't go to services
what happens if the MCOS don't
participate or don't do what
they're supposed to do or what
happens if the navigator
you know is that not able to
contact person so I just want to
share those observations I think
we can always do more work in
this area because it is one of
the most difficult but I really
think this bill is a step in the
right direction and is positive
so so thank you leader and madam
chair.
bringing this forward
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to move for it to pass as of for
As amended yes first house bill
three point thirty four as
amended.
Second.
Hey Monica to take.
Thank.
Representative Kate.
Yes Chavez.
Yes with explanation.
Representative Ferrary yes I'd
like to explain.
Yes an explanation.
Representative Jones no with an
explanation.
Representative Lord know the
explanation.
Us.
Yes
Representative Vincent no.
Vice chair Herndon yes and madam
chair Thompson yes okay seven to
three thanks.
Have a pass and I'm gonna ask
you to keep your explaining your
vote there were so many of you I
didn't keep track of all of them
so I know we start with Chavis
Ferrari and then I skip somebody
in Jones but please keep it up
to thirty seconds I will.
Madam chair representative I
voted yes I'm I'm still
comfortable with this bill I hi
voted yes in the hopes that the
sponsors will get together with
the sponsors of SB one fifty and
you know figure out of how we
can make this bill better thank
you Representative Ferrary.
Madam chair I voted yes because
I think this is very important
and I've seen how the silos of
come down and so many different
issues like for food insecurity
how all of our different
agencies have done a wonderful
job of working together to solve
problems but I also want to make
sure that we Fund the different
agencies especially D. O. H.
with the salaries that are state
workers
it and agencies deserve and to
make sure that they can fill all
of these different things that
we're asking you all to do so
thank you so much Representative
Hermio okay here's the name I
missed
thank you for bringing this
forward this is a start and I
hope that those amendments are
in there and this is this is
begun the conversation of change
so I appreciate it for the for
that matter thank you.
Representative Jones thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and all of you
who contributed I just like to
say that I want to.
I want to clarify that because
I've heard people talk about.
Unitive measures toward families
who are struggling with drug
addiction and I I in no way and
aligning any of what I've said
with anything punitive I don't
think that was part of the
discussion at all so I just
wanna make sure that that all of
us and
as included are aren't involved
in.
And the helping these families
and helping babies and and I'm
looking forward to
Making progress there and I I
also you know I'm on board with
the amendments that we've talked
about.
And in spite of the voting
against it so thank you
Representative port.
Thank you madam chair
representative of my problem
with the bills it just doesn't
go far enough or fast enough and
engagement home visits are not
swift enough I want more
immediate help for.
I can't pass a bill with there's
a possibility that more babies
me die thank you thank you okay
just a couple of quick
announcements you have to pass
that did I do this seventy seven
to three okay I'm kind of like
still in the committee where I
was just in and with that thank
you so much we are going to we
have been excused from the floor
and tell the beginning of third
reading and I have been asked to
do
Representative Chavis is House
Bill three eighty five next
because she has a position here
who needs to get back to
Albuquerque for a surgery so um
thank you all and then we will
after after Representative Jones
I mean J. Travis gets through
them we will we will go back up
to four sixty one.
Sorry for the confusion go to
committee okay okay right over
here okay.
Will someone take responsibility
to text Representative Chasey
when I okay okay we've got a I'm
just afraid that.
Okay okay.
So.
Yes.
I don't think yeah I don't think
we're gonna get there seven
bills.
So.
Thank you.
Thank you.
And we don't know where because
it's on the fly which is what we
get to at this point in the
session
hopefully.
So we will go to
House Bill three eighty five go
ahead Representative Chavis
thank you madam chair
representatives house bill three
eighty five proposes to make the
non solution solicitation
Grimmett agreements and
unenforceable it sets out the
criteria were by the provision
would not be enforceable and it
also proposes to strike which
that required a one year
interval between the allowable
says look solicitation date and
the employment termination date
and with me I have an expert
witness I will ask him to
introduce himself and speak a
little bit more in detail about
what the bill does
can you hold the microphone.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to talk
today my name is serration in
the Garo I'm a practicing M. D.
here in Albuquerque New Mexico
my wife and I moved here
approximately a year ago we've
been trying to actually move to
New Mexico for about seven years
but made it last year.
I am a cardiac collector
physiologist so my specialty is
actually abnormal heart rhythms
and sudden cardiac death.
Me and my wife is a family
practitioner but we're very
happy to be here.
And I'll keep my comments brief
I know it's been a long morning
New Mexico has a health care
shortage if you're healthy.
New Mexico has a health care
crisis or catastrophe if you're
ill.
The non compete provisions were
an excellent start in the state
and actually ahead of the
federal government by several
years unfortunately it doesn't
address the critical issue about
the provider shortage currently
if you're a physician and you
choose to leave your employment
in New Mexico there's a high
probability that you'll actually
leave the state because of the
non solicitation clauses.
With the non solicitation
agreements for example which
even I signed if I left my
practice this agreement would
forbid me from even talking to a
patient if I saw them in the
grocery store giving them my new
address for one year after I
leave for example I can't just
ask for a list of my patients
and start of practice
the next week like I could in
Texas.
In fact I could be sued for that
and to put this in context the
wait for a cardiology
appointment for wait to see me
unless you knew we are had
myself on number knew a friend
of mine would probably be four
months if you had to just go
through the front office the
wait for primary care physician
can be six months my wife's
panel was full within eight
months of moving to New Mexico
the wait for a spine surgeon can
be nine months.
And the lord forbid if you need
to behavioral health or
addiction consultation may just
die waiting for that
appointment.
Health care non solicitation
clauses or punitive to the
people of New Mexico and I'd
like to explain why the people
that are going to suffer the
most by physicians not being
able to take their patient list
with them if they leave are
going to be the most vulnerable
it's going to be the elderly the
grandmothers the grandfathers
the elderly aunts and uncles who
may not have the sophistication
to spend three or four hours on
Google to find out where the
physician went the vulnerable
and the elderly are going to end
up in the E. R. some of them
will die.
Again the only people that'll
suffer will be patients for
example if I left in the patient
called asking for me they would
be told my whereabouts are
unknown we don't know where he
went and given my specialty
there's a good chance that some
patients may not make it to the
next appointment and may not
make it to the next wave of the
different position should they
look.
There are three relationships
protected and actually co to
provide into law it's the
relationship with your physician
through HIPAA it's the
relationship with your lawyer to
attorney client privilege and
your relationship with clergy
and there's a reason there are
good reasons for this these are
all extremely important
relationships that work in the
long run.
Continuity of care I think we
all know is just critically
important if you're a sick
person.
The amount of testing and re
testing that's done that leads
to further risk often in
patients who have to switch
physicians is quantifiable and
has been well studied.
So elimination of non
solicitation clauses and health
care provider contracts will
help keep physicians in New
Mexico if they could take their
physicians with them they can
practicing.
I suspect that there are some
that will say that this is anti
business it's not.
I'm staunch capitalists but
there are some areas in which I
think we have to motives aside
from the macro perspective the
seventy five thousand foot view
this is actually a pro business
bill it keeps physicians who are
and providers were many economic
engines on their own here and
their support networks in their
dollars here in New Mexico some
business interests may look at
this negatively but some simple
mathematical modeling will
likely show that the net
attrition of providers will
balance out in the long run if
physicians can stay in New
Mexico when they leave an
employer for example ten leave a
to go to be ten may leave see to
go to a and I may leave a and C.
to go to be nobody loses in the
long run.
To summarize elimination of non
solicitation clauses for health
care providers protects the most
vulnerable about us in the long
run the people of New Mexico
benefit the hospitals benefit
the employers benefit and all of
us benefit in the long run with
greater access to health care
thank you thank.
We are going to be very brief in
public comment today is there
anyone here in opposition.
Anyone on zoom in opposition.
Okay anyone here in support.
Okay anyone on zoom in support.
That really limits the public
comment so we will go to the
committee and I'm gonna read
okay I'm gonna remind people to
be brief and please be brief in
your answers we have people who
have been sitting here for hours
to hear their bills and we
really want to try and do as
much as we can thank you madam
chair representative I've look
at questions for you on this one
okay I see both sides I'm
struggling right now I I
normally.
Because I've worked in the
medical field for a long time I
would hate for someone who set
up a practices their clinic in
their blood or blood clinic and
that person leaves and opens up
next course and takes all the
clients that's where I'm
struggling with however from a
personal experience my doctor
left who kind of love and I
can't find her and when I called
they said she left that was it
and I had such an intimate
relationship with her I don't
want to see anybody else I don't
like sorry.
Basis listing he's not the same
as mother when she babies
mentions first passion caring we
had a great bond.
So help me in my head.
Work through this issue
Representative madam chair
Representative I'll defer to my
experts thank you.
Madam representative so if we
try to model out the shortage
right now with primary care
physicians and specialists here
in New Mexico for example.
If you're a small practice in
one of your providers eight or
if you're a large practice in
that state one of your fifty
providers leaves the gap in
access is so high the trying to
prove economic harm would be
difficult if you go from to
physicians to one you can't
suddenly absorb all those new
patients when there's already a
four five or six month visit so
if you look at it from a macro
view and I try to model this
There's no net loss to any
particular physician's practice
I think it's absolutely fair to
say Hey I brought to and I spent
this X. amount of money bringing
here pay me back.
But
I think as a net no one's really
hurt for example let's take a
very large hospital provider
perhaps that has two hundred or
three hundred physicians.
Eventually if ten people leave
one place and go to the next
next year maybe ten leave that
place and go back so as an actor
I don't think it actually hurts
anybody.
Insurance and and the kind of
group in that because if it's a
doctor I want to go see I'm
still trying to find her what I
do I will go to wherever it is
that she went to discuss.
I can understand what you're
saying that it's a it's a loss
they go here they go there I
still struggle with if you took
the time and you made a name for
yourself and it's this.
Get a little nervous about
some that have helped us so last
question part of support this is
because as Mexico and we have
such are outrageous shortage
this apply to all
physicians chiropractors
podiatrists the primary care
physicians apply to all of the
members adjustment.
Matter Representative and I have
reminder to keep it briefly
brief chair representative Madam
chair representative.
I think in New Mexico was ahead
of the curve and allowing
independent practices
practitioners to should apply to
physicians to yield to all
independently capable
practitioners meant to represent
I probably will end up as part
of still struggling with that.
Orders do I'm still struggling
with this but I haven't heard
anything back from anybody in.
Probably more towards supporting
it right at this moment thank
you madam chair representative
Representative cakes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this fort I think I have read
the bill and because I too have
not heard anything negative from
my constituents I will supported
I will see that my instinct is
not to support it I have you
know spent much time and
resources building
systems within the community and
if they are able to leave
quickly and take of clientele
that isn't helping build
structure as well but because
the medical community relies
upon your payment through
insurance and that actually
it gives a a better fair grounds
let's say from for all the
medical provider groups I feel
like that this is.
A good bill so that the
individual providers can be able
to do what's best for them and
thank you thanks for pre for I
will entertain a motion.
Okay second.
Okay is there any opposition I'm
don't be mad at me your okay
Monica please call the roll.
Chavis yes Representative
Ferrary yes Representative how
to Mayo yes.
Representative Lord.
Know the explanation.
Representative.
Yes seven to work by a vote of
seven to one you have to pass
Representative Lord is no solid
no I just I'm I'm still I'm
gonna do this and.
I might change my mind in the
next maybe thank you for
understanding that we're going
on to house bill four sixty one
children's and family Rights Act
And we think text yes we we will
if the experts could come up we
kind of got involved in forgot
to text Representative Chasey
but she's across the hall so
come on up and and get
comfortable and then we couldn't
get moving this initiate hits
the door.
I don't know.
So until we get Representative
Chasey here Representative
Ferrary is going to pinch hit
and let madam secretary no
you're going to you're going to
be that you're going to be there
and your you want I want you to
go there and.
Secretary you stay there and
only where I need to be made
right there.
Do we just have.
This is what happens as we get
close to the end of the session
where we people are supposed to
be in eight places at one time
instead of usual three so.
So.
We are now on house bill four
sixty one Representative can you
just give us the gentle
Madam chair thank you
There it is
The house bill four sixty one
calls for the creating of the
office of children's and
families rights within the CYFD
with the purpose of providing
independent and objective
recommendations to the
department this office has the
authority to administer the
grievance process provide me
mediation services and help
navigate available services
within CYFD and find Civil
Rights consultations and with
that settlement tiered like to
introduce that madam secretary.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Barbara
Vigil and cabinet secretary of
children youth and families
department we stand before you
to ask for your support your
support of children youth and
families department and the work
that it does the children and
families Rights Act is a
comprehensive bill that will
strengthen the policies the
practices and will help promote
the well being safety and
permanency of all children and
use this act creates the office
of children children's and
families rights it creates the
child welfare innovation center.
It creates the provider Advisory
Council.
And under the direction of the
child welfare welfare innovation
center this act will promote
child safety science and
evidence based evidence informed
practices to strengthen the
capacity the resiliency and
transformation of New Mexicos
child welfare system.
Let me touch on the first
portion of the act the office of
children's and families rights
office.
This particular bill will codify
the work.
In the office of children's
rights it is it would create an
independent office of office of
children's rights of lawyers and
advocates while attached to the
Department it will create a
separate statutory obligation on
the part of this unit within
CYFD.
It will streamline this office
will streamline the grievance
processes to independently
investigate and report and
respond to grievances and
complaints from various
participants in the public child
welfare system and it will make
findings and report
recommendations to the
Department.
It will administer these
grievances provide mediation and
dispute resolution navigate and
find information to the
grievance.
It will also provide Civil
Rights consultation and
recommend improvements to
systemic issues.
More importantly however it also
would require an outside law
firm to conduct an independent
audit of the grievance process
and produce an independent
report on how the office is
performing with respect to
addressing grievances it
receives throughout the year.
The second aspect of this bill
would create a provider Advisory
Council.
That would be seven members of
this provider Advisory Council
that would collect.
And communicate community
service providers concerns.
This provider Advisory Council
would make recommendations
regarding CYFD services policy
cross agency collaboration
workforce issues gaps in
services and the administrative
burdens on our providers
throughout New Mexico.
And finally this providers
Advisory Council would provide
an annual report of its findings
and recommendations with respect
to the information it receives
throughout the year to the
Department secretary and to the
child welfare innovation center.
The third part of this bill
would create an independent
center that would provide
outcome evidence based
culturally responsive
evaluations and recommend
recommended solutions on ways in
which to improve our public
child welfare system it would
advise the department on
policies and practices
develop performance measures and
strategies for the department.
Recommend improvements to
systemic issues recommend
improvements to workforce
enhancement and development it
would also create a pipeline for
social workers to the to the
agency it would advise the
office on operation and
performance of all aspects of
our our our protective services
work within the department.
And more importantly it would
provide an annual report to.
The secretary of the department
to the legislature with respect
to its findings throughout the
year to the governor the courts.
And that report would be public
information the department would
be required to respond to that
report its recommendations how
it intends intends to address
the the the challenges that are
identified within ninety days
and a follow up report by the
department within six months
what's important about this
aspect of the work of his child
innovation center would be it
would provide the legislature
with meaningful evidence based
recommendations on how our child
welfare system can and should
improve.
And that would report would be
in June it would enable them the
legislature through the interim
committee process to take that
report take the department's
response to that report develop
meaningful legislation to
address the issues that are
identified.
And finally members of the
committee madam chair members of
the committee the the bill also
creates the child advocacy child
and family advocacy boards these
boards are required under
federal law.
And the boards would be a
minimum of three boards would be
created to to address ongoing
basis regarding CYFD matters.
And families.
And that would be to specialized
local boards one that would
address the Indian family
protection act and one that
would protect fidelity's or
serious incidents that occur
this particular structure the
board would fall with under the
child welfare innovation center
this particular structure would
replace what is currently known
as a substitute Care Advisory
Council structure so with that
madam chair
That's all I have will stand for
any questions thank you madam
chair thank you for starting
with help me I'm right next door
and my committee's meeting right
next door and and so I I ran
over here as soon as I heard you
were ready for us
let me just tell you that I
practiced law in this field as a
court appointed attorney and
three different counties in the
thirteenth judicial district I
served as in doing so I served
as guardian of items for
infants toddlers children youth
attorney for those fourteen in
over responded internet for mom
and dad a grand mother and great
aunt who are the guardian might
be I did that for eight years
the.
First thing I want to say is I I
know that every there's not a
single person here or in our
legislature who doesn't want to
do better by children and this
bill is not the bill that and
all the problems this is the
beginning of a dialogue.
And trying to learn from the
experts but when we were
reflecting on what how best to
start I.
I went through the eight well
from.
In twenty thirteen when the do
you have a health system was
decimated is when I started
practicing law in this field and
I just as I was reflecting on
our efforts to try to improve
things this year I was also
reflecting on my years as a
legislator and although we
didn't have a lot of money as
perhaps we would comparatively
say we do now when I first came
here in two thousand eight the
bottom dropped out with the the
housing crisis nationally we
started cutting budgets like
crazy we had to come back into
special session in two thousand
nine we didn't get a budget done
in the thirty day session it was
so painful so we started cutting
departments agencies services.
We were called climbed Act money
from school districts and it
wasn't a good situation and then
in twenty thirteen to have the
behavioral health system
basically so shut down I had I
was representing children whose
parents were working hard to get
them back at home and they were
on waiting lists for court
ordered services and so it was
too late everything it was it
was really bad and then we so we
had quite a lengthy period of
time and we still haven't
recovered or build up a robust
behavioral health service system
but then the pandemic really
exacerbated that I I had
children who I representative
who would say to me
this pandemic is ruining my life
and like six years old and it
was tough it was so hard on them
and
What I see with this bill and
with the the four major
components of it is not the
answer to everything I had I did
able as an attorney to contact.
So when anyone within CYFD and
didn't have to be at an outside
person although I'm not against
having an outside
person or entity that oversees
things but if I could have
gotten anyone aside from the
county office manager or wait
until I could get in front of a
judge it would health and I
could have I I I I honestly
believe that I could have called
someone who at the office of
children's and family rights and
saying look my client.
Has children in custody she
never gets notice of any parent
teacher conferences of any well
child checks that's contrary to
all the rules the county office
manager in one of these County
simply didn't care.
But I have no one to call.
So I think just as a as a former
practitioner in this field that.
This these things would have
helped if we could get these
started and I know they're
started under the governor's
executive order but I don't want
them to disappear in three years
if we have a different.
So the legislative Advisory
Council is part of it because of
our concern about and I think we
were talking informally and
Representative Marian Matthews
pointed out that KPTV J. use me
peanut butter and jelly but now
it's P. B. NJ family services
how helpful they've been quite
frankly when I had a case if
there is guardian Adlai item or
responded internet and it's got
to the point were P. B. NJ
family services were contracted
it meant the case was going to
end well because the of the
level of.
Expertise and commitment of the
the folks in that agency and.
But during.
During our and lean times.
Those kinds of services were not
offered statewide so we want to
be sure by having the provider
Advisory Council
that.
We are hearing from providers we
know what they need and they're
everywhere it's not just on the
Rio Grande quarter because it's
really not fair and it's it's
certainly isn't equal it's not
equal access to justice for the
children or their families with
the child welfare innovation
center I think we have an
opportunity to join with all the
critics and all the supporters
and everyone say what can we do
better and
please advise and we were.
We really want to.
Again and expertise from the
From the providers and I want to
say that we have consulted we've
had tribal consultations and
input from those with lived
experience which means either
former respondents in the cases
former foster youth who are now
adults or they're still advising
us whether they're adults or not
because they have they have a
lot to say believe me and then
We the children and family
advocacy boards really do meet
the federal requirements.
So with that we stand for
questions.
We're going to go to the
audience anyone in opposition.
Okay I will take three comments
so please come up quickly and
I'm gonna make you stick to one
minute.
Trying to reach eight hours for
my one and.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
secretary B. how with all due
respect I'm Shelly Bucher
licensed master social worker
with over thirty years of social
work experience focused on child
welfare for over twenty of those
years my work has involved with
CYFD I have seen CYFD begin new
initiatives without well thought
out implementation you just saw
an example of that with the
car in the receive millions of
dollars without substantive
change not even the cabinets
agreement is demonstrating CYFD
can do what it said it would do
I have provided you with written
information that house before
sixty one duplicates existing
resources and it silences the
only voice by law in New Mexico
to hold it accountable this bill
will not transform CYFD it will
not result in better outcomes it
will continue the status quo by
adding more reports to toppling
piles of reports that not that
have not resulted in change you
do not transform a dysfunctional
agency by preserving the status
quo and you certainly don't
transform a dysfunctional agency
by silence and the only boys
created in legislature thank you
thank you.
And please if I'm it this the
next time around if if you want
to speak get in line it rather
than waiting for you to thank
you chairman and madam Committee
persons and everyone in the
committee I just wanna thank you
we support the idea of this bill
however it's being introduced as
an
a way to get in front of the
independent and objective
outside monitoring force of the
ombudsman I just want to call
your pay attention everyone to
page two line fourteen the word
independent than page two line
twenty four is created in the
department so just because you
use the word independence does
not in fact mean it is
independent and so the office of
the children right I think
everyone agrees is a great form
it is relatively new there are
I'm clear results in recent
firing of the first appointed
director per the LFC they do not
publish their work plan the
reports are not public there is
inherent conflict of interest by
working under the leadership of
the department that they are
investigating thank you thank
you.
We will go to zoom and take two
comments Lucas Frank and then
Allison Endicott can you on this
go ahead look as.
Look at your muted.
My apologies my name is Lucas
Frank good morning community
members the New Mexico attorney
and resource center and I were I
I rise in opposition eighty four
sixty one and in support of the
H. eleven H. eleven presents a
better option for New Mexico
because H. eleven research
really independent office
overseen by the AG's office it
has the ability to issue
independent decisions regarding
complaints HB sixty one is tied
to CYFD in only allows of the
could mean finding issuing
findings recommendations society
age eleven creates an advocacy
community within the office and
it is non partisan because it is
a point I very cynical there's
eighty four sixty one reason
advocacy community in which all
members are appointed by the
governor hopefuls with this New
Mexico is asking its leaders
were meaningful independent
oversight of complaint filed
against why if we do eighteen
eleven find that independent
oversight agency for sixty one
does not thank you thank you
right at time Allison go ahead.
Thank you are you able to hear
me yes.
Okay thank you Allison and thank
parent and the legal director of
advocacy Inc we are the largest
provider of
Presentation in the eighties and
system in New Mexico and while I
believe that it is still has
some excellent ideas they are
not since I was in a way that
will actually change many of the
issues we are already seen CYFD
is not capable of policing
itself it is a misnomer to call
an independent assessment
previously noted I would support
Israel it which taking entire
offices children and families
right to make that truly
independent FY FG as well as the
office and innovation I don't
believe that the eagles intended
can be accomplished within the
agency that already has all
these reports etcetera that it
creates and at all.
With the intention of protecting
CYFD not necessarily needing the
last time the thank you so much.
Okay we will go to the committee
I have Representative Harper
meal and then Ferrari.
Thank you madam chair a
secretary and and leader Chasey
for bringing this forward I know
that we've had many many many
conversations on this and and I
I really focused on your analogy
of the house and the foundation
and that we really needed to fix
that and when I thought further
about that I think these are are
wonderful tools to use inter
agency to to bring about the
change that that your vision is
showing us however just like we
were working on the foundation
of the home I know because I've
had to do it with my home that
we do have outside independent
regulatory agencies that look at
us for that and although I stand
in support of this because it is
an attempt to clean up your
house and get things in order I
still believe that an outside
independent system must must
exist so that all children and
families can have that
independence thank you.
Thank you and I totally spaced
out going to support I'm sorry
everyone.
In twenty seven places in my
brain so anyone here in support.
Okay if you absolutely must
speak please come forward and
I'll take three people.
I'm not trying to dissuade you I
just want to get get get movin.
Hey thank you.
Would you madam chair members of
the committee my name's
Elizabeth Groginsky and the
cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico early childhood education
and care department standing in
strong support of house bill
four sixty one this bill would
comprehensively improve the well
being safety and positive long
term outcomes of New Mexicos
children and fit and youth the
bill would strengthen the
state's child welfare services
in several important ways these
include formalizing legal
protections for children and
families in the foster care
system developing an independent
process to advance data driven
innovative quality improvement
strategies and engaging a wide
cross section of family support
juvenile justice and child
welfare providers to inform
statewide policies and practices
the innovation center would also
be informed by child and family
advocacy boards that would
conduct case specific reviews
and evaluations of child
protective services we urge the
committee strong support for
house bill four sixty one thank
you.
Madam chair my name is Alvin
soleil I'm gonna take sort of a
neutral stance as chair of the
social work workforce task force
we have I had the you sat madam
secretary Miss Vigil common
present to us I would point out
to the committee for any reform
to work the workforce is
critical to have a consistent
work force and to have a
qualified workforce and I'd like
to see that strengthened in this
bill professional social workers
we when I met with you many of
you this summer and reported
there is clear evidence that
social workers do a better job
stay longer and I hope that that
is considered in this bill for
workforce thank you thank.
Good good morning madam chair
members again my name is Dr you
life just because I also
involved with the work force we
are neutral regards to speaking
for workforce however we speak
for ourselves I've been here for
forty years as its and mentioned
before we have and we have never
been reached out is the
profession of social work in New
Mexico as have we recently been
reached out by the secretary and
almost every member in her
leadership in regards to CYFD we
strongly support what it is that
this bill is doing it needs to
pivot CYFD needs to pivot we
need to pivot into social work
would be dependent of licensure
we need to pivot into hiring we
need to pay the making sure that
the process see the dynamics the
evidence that community the
administration of this bill is
such that it follows the social
work system to be able to do
right questions were asked this
morning on the other bill
questions the social workers can
answer answer you directly and
quickly that is what is needed
right now I am out of time thank
you thank you and secretary only
taking three sorry Alice
I'm sorry but we are trying to
get.
Yeah.
Okay and on zoom we have Kerry.
Reporter.
You could you please move closer
to your Mike we're having a hard
time hearing you.
That's worse.
That's a little better just
speak really loudly.
Alright.
How the program and its impact
Have
in the border YFB.
Well accountability in their own
thank you thank you.
Okay Representative Hermio I am
so sorry to all of you for my
scatter brained this but still
on special it so Representative
Hermio we finished okay
Representative Ferrary that
Chavis Jones and lord thank you.
Thank you madam chair and leader
Chasey and madam secretary
On the provider Advisory Council
this the governor appoints this
council but and I see a cross
section of the providers but I
don't see representation from
the families you know shouldn't
they have someone included where
and I'm not sure if that's
number six resource families but
I think to have the input from
the families that are you know
being affected by
the different
Guidelines in the different
things that are adopted would be
good.
madam chair and Representative
Ferrary I agree.
The thought is on the provider
council is that you one of the
people who are providing the
court ordered services.
So but I will say as I mentioned
before we had in addition to
folks with lived experience from
New Mexico can and
gold futures we had
we we did get input but I would
not if we can figure out a way
to.
the resource families refers to
foster families not not those
with lived experience but.
I certainly don't think it would
hurt to look at that section and
see how we make certain that
the needs and experience of
families is included.
So.
Madam chair and I don't have
something right off the top of
my head but that the reason they
were there is that they are not
providing the services that are
court ordered
there's a a model that we tried
in Santa Fe County and then
Valencia expanded it where there
were former
parents who were former who'd
been respondents or they have
been not not suggest parents but
adults who had been either
foster children for they had the
to respond in the case who are
also working with the NSW social
workers to help support the
family so that was a good thing
but it's
In that case that person
actually once providing services
so maybe we want to just add
that in.
So madam chair and leader Chasey
and madam secretary if you could
in the next you committee will
talk with you about it too madam
chair thank you very much thank
you Representative Chavis.
I.
This major that.
Madam chair representative how
does this bill is not about.
The work hiring and workforce
but it is about trying to figure
out how I think for seven
hundred.
Is it more than seven hundred
six yes this short in the
department according to the LFC.
I don't think it's that hi I
know we have currently about two
hundred and fifty vacancies it
changes from day to day in
protect of services division but
madam chair and and
representative of Majority
Leader Chasey and members of the
committee with respect to
developing our workforce that is
a fundamental aspect of system
improvement and we are open to
not only sharing our workforce
development plan with you and
others and with this so working
in tandem with the social work
task force workforce that work
will continue in addition to
this bill but this bill through
the innovation center will
enable us to assess whether what
we're doing makes sense on
evidence based
perspective and so in response
to your question Representative
Chavis and I'm sorry but I do
need to interrupt but I think
that we this bill would enable
us to assess how many social
workers do we need and in what
positions I think the
advertisements that you're
looking at are for workers to
help support the social worker
function within the agency thank
you madam chair I'm madam chair
one I carried in twenty nineteen
of the differential response
bill and that actually does
require the department to hire
analyst this would ever possible
and we did it late into one
implementation on that because
we knew they weren't available
this is a systemic issue on
NSW's they're needed in the
district attorney's office in
the public defender's office in
the schools in the.
The school nurse and social
worker there needed in hospitals
they're they're needed
everywhere and we are not.
Supplying to our higher ed
programs.
So.
Madam chair representative.
I think that we've been a little
slow to react to it I think our
reaction has been to
not higher licensed social
workers and really not be
aggressive in terms of figuring
out how to do that and figuring
out how to build capacity within
the schools of social work so
the other question that I have
is on on is with regard to the
the councils that.
The setting up the advisory
councils so my first question is
some of these advisory councils
have not met in the past.
How how do you plan to rectify
that with with this legislation
Madam chair representative I
don't know why we haven't had
this before.
There are other types of of
Groups that need to court should
meet but this is not this is
new.
Madam chair representative I
understand that my question was
up advisory councils in the past
have not met with regard to CYFD
so how are you going to change
that so the Advisory Council
that you proposing in this bill
will in fact need and function
the way that you're intending
them to function.
Madam chair and representative
Chavis the bill would require
the provider Advisory Council to
work under the child welfare
innovation center it would then
have staff and support to
convene the council to do to
help of complete its task under
the law of what it is designed
to do provide input to the
center and then that input
within B. of prepared in in a
report and presented to you so
we think the structure the
reason Advisory Council
sometimes don't actually perform
as required under the laws
because they don't have the
necessary staff and support to
fulfill their obligations we
believe this is different and
will indeed be successful in
reporting informing convening
and and reporting out its work
thank you for so Madam that the
and the vision for these this on
going dialogue to improve the
system would
Would be regular reports to the
legislature to regarding the
effectiveness of policy and
helping us inform ourselves with
homes.
Madam chair representative on on
page
actually for I usually out the
legislative Advisory Council
there's only one social worker
identified here can you tell me
point.
Madam chair of Representative
Chavez the the items listed are
provider you council show
include seven members from the
following service provider types
and social work is named so that
would be a consideration in the
membership is to have someone
from the field of social work
serve on the provider Advisory
Council.
Representative my thought was
that maybe we need.
And madam chair I I just want to
say that when.
In working first in Santa Fe
County then also ability County
what ever my client got a court
appointed social worker.
Not someone you want to do
because the the client off
automatically get workers from
CYFD but when there was a
quarter point is social worker
that case went much better there
was either a faster family
reunification or there was a
faster
Trip to guardianship or adoption
because the social worker made a
difference for the particular
client is it was a responded
about the social worker
but that case result much better
and and save more state
obviously safer it was safer
K. and
up much better outcomes I I I
couldn't agree with you more
there if we can't get enough of
them I I'm gonna remind folks we
are going to be called to the
floor at any minute so if you
can keep your questions and
answers yes and no if that's
possible okay couple more
questions
in terms of the office of I
don't remember the name of it
now where poor people can help
file grievances the children's
and family rights for children
to do so what about parents who
have been accused of abuse do
they have access to this
department and how will you
guarantee because this really
isn't an independent department
independent from CYFD
how you guarantee that those
parents will not be retaliated
against.
Madam chair and and and
Representative Chavez the the
idea is really to ensure access
to file a complaint against CYFD
in an office it's created by law
the office of children's rights
and it doesn't matter whether
you're bio parent resource
parent use a child the guardian
Adlai item as as Majority Leader
Chasey mention the access to
file a complaint must be made as
a requirement in this bill by
law to the office of children's
rights while it's
administratively attached to the
Department it is truly an
independent legal office to
assess those complaints and
resolve them and perhaps more
importantly that work will be
audited by an outside law firm
who will it be examined all the
complaints coming in and how
they were resolved and report
back to you the legislature at
the end of the year.
And then my last question madam
chair representative is how we
integrate the social work task
force into all of the work
that's being done I I and I
don't have a real good sense at
the cap that that's happening
right now.
Madam chair and representative
child is the work of the
independent social work task
force is something that's
ongoing within CYFD is you heard
from from the leaders of that
task force we are working with
them independently of this
particular of legislation or any
any other aspect of our work we
have a workforce development
plan that I believe there you're
familiar with that it requires
is to really develop our
workforce on the number of in a
number of areas this particular
bill through the innovation
center the innovation center
could certainly access the input
from the social work task force
and make recommendations to the
department about how it might
improve the access to social
workers in our in our agency so
while it's not detailed here in
this bill I believe that it
provides an opportunity to work
with groups like the social work
task force of and and integrate
their ideas and best practices
into the recommendations made
through the center to see why
FTE.
Thank you madam chair have a
number of other questions but I
will okay thank you
Representative Jones.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey and to
secretary
I I'm trying to.
Just make sure I understand
this.
This does H. before sixty one as
as per has it
It's proposed to address the
complaints or grievances of a
child or parent that the.
And is that office housed inside
or outside the CYFD.
Madam chair and representative
Jones it would be
administratively attached to
CYFD yes however it and it would
be independent by virtue of the
law to do its work so yes it
would be within CYFD but
independently
authorized to do its work under
the law it's currently within
the department.
It's it's currently within the
department asked me.
Okay so the children and
families Rights Act
so what is new about that then.
What we're doing madam chair and
representative Jones is that we
are codified.
So the offices in the child's
rights is.
And if they have a grievance or
complaint for CYFD still housed
within the agency.
I've I find it difficult to
imagine the agency is going to
be able to monitor and provide
the best feedback to itself.
Madam chair representative Jones
the work's going to be audited
by independent law firm.
Is there there will be in that
that that there were there.
Excuse me their recommendations
will come to us.
Is that how often with the.
Madam chair representative
Janice that's not part of the
law the the work will continue
its continuous so
that's the kind of thing that
would be rules rather than
statute.
Do we have any idea.
Would it be a weekly.
Madam chair and representative
Joan yes annual.
So while the work of the office
of children's rights is
administratively attached to it
CYFD there is no
by being legally authorized and
then charged with doing this
work it creates what we believe
a separate legal independence
from the department to do its
work as required by law under
the act that work would be
audited by an in outside law
firm and report would be issued
once a year both to you the
legislature and CYFD about what
the law firm believes is working
well within that grievance
process and what is not and how
we can improve there is no
incentive for us not to be as
responsive and accountable to
the people who are struggling
with in the system and to figure
out ways in which to improve
there's no incentive on our part
to try to.
Color that or not see what's
happening it's our intent for
the people that work within the
agency at all levels to do the
best job we can understand
what's working and not working
and there's the best way to do
that is to have a robust
grievance procedure that is
created by law through this
through this piece of
legislation are.
So who would be responsible for.
S. office that would do the
audit.
That's a good question I believe
they would be in our if PED
issue so we would probably have
a committee of various
stakeholders I'm looking at what
is the school work that we're
asking this independent law firm
to do and and and how it will be
sickle selected I imagine it
would go through that normal a
request for proposal process.
So I know that we were thank you
for that madam chair and to.
We were all excited about the
help that
The independent nature of the
ombudsman that we all but one of
us voted on voted in favor of
just the other day and and so I
I really believe
In in any agency really that
that that outside the truly
outside of.
Entity would be a real benefit
and is this a conflict with that
Fund.
Madam chair representative now.
Okay thank.
Madam chair gonna be so quick to
make it has been.
Madam chair representative I'm
just gonna I'm just gonna
benefits of thank you
representative this spirit great
questions according to the to
answer that according to the
children youth and families
department secretary only
hundred seventy nine of the
eight hundred forty nine current
social workers positions being
held are licensed social workers
so that's to answer question I
think we need a lot more social
workers
and we already have the
innovation center NMAA.
Do and they're ready reporter
Kevin just monitors and I fully
support HB eleven because it is
outside an independent
nonpartisan and my biggest
concern is there is page two
twenty four creating the
department I never think that
the foxes should be guarding the
hen house so for that I will be
supporting the bill thank you.
I will entertain a motion.
Choose to pass madam chair
secretary it.
Monica what you take the role.
Yes but I'd like to make Madam.
Representative Travis yes with
an explanation.
Yes and explaining.
No never explain my vote.
Madam chair yes I.
But it to pass and we have
Representative Kate.
Chavis first I'm K. and Chavis
with.
I like thank you very much for
bringing for this will and madam
secretary and leader I have the
utmost trust in the two of you
as individuals and we as a state
desperately need to do something
and that is why you have my yes
vote I have spent a career
creating quality processes and I
have never created one with the
review that is in the side what
they're reviewing this is a
flawed and I will be also
supporting house bill eleven
because of that but I don't know
what's going to pass in this
legislative session and we have
to do something in this is
something so thank you.
Representative yes yes thank you
madam chair representative you
know as I stated before on the
previous bill you know I I don't
think that I think that there's
there could be some additions to
this bill I also agree with
Representative Kate in terms of
the independent nature I think
it needs to be a little bit more
separate in terms of being able
to
make recommendations and really
move the recommendations forward
you know we have a history in
the state of of the child
protective services being under
the federal consent decree for
twenty years now we have Kevin
just right what are we doing
wrong and I think we need to get
to what we need to do that's
right for the kids of our state
and I think that there are so
many experts in our state that
are willing to give advice and
support that I would encourage
you to begin taking that advice
and support thank you.
And our meal.
Thank you for madam chair
secretary and and leader Chasey
thank you for bringing this bill
together I just want to clarify
that my support of this does not
at all indicate that they do not
support a an independent office
of children's advocacy thank you
and much luck.
Thank you.
So I'm we do we will meet
tomorrow morning at ten o'clock
in our old small room three
fifteen and we will have house
bill five twenty seven three
seventy six three oh five.
Four fifty one in five hundred
and I'm sorry if you traveled
We just can't control the clock
thank you all and we're in
recess.
