Madam vice chair Herndon and
madam chair Thompson.
I'm here so we will go ahead
with committees of the two or
Senate bill seven the rural
healthcare delivery fund
Representative I'm.
In annex I assume that you're
there so that we're both here
and thank you very much madam
chair and I also in rules and
I'm going to ask if I can do my
third bill later so or you know
after all these but anyway the
rural health care fund delivery
fund is a bill from the
executive and it is a fund that
is being created to assist
hospitals and health care
services in rural communities it
is set up of the regional
request was over two hundred
with two hundred million the
house Appropriations did put
some money in and the Senate is
going to put some money in so
won't end up being two hundred
million that it will be
maybe eighty to a hundred
million that's ends up in this
fund this fund is intended to
encourage rural health care
systems hospitals and outpatient
clinics to start and expand
services so by that I mean
perhaps there have been no
behavioral health services
perhaps there's been no physical
therapy or medical
transportation and so in our
area is that of don't have the
services if the hospital or
healthcare system a patient
clinic is prepared to expand
they can do so and then with the
help of the Human Services
Department identifying that it
is viable and sustainable in the
community they can offer support
in particular the support comes
when they are operating losses
every hospital has to turn in.
Reports annually and probably
quarterly but anyway they have
to turn in reports and then of
course there's the iris report
that shows operating losses
expenses and revenues and based
upon that the department of
health in the Human Services
Department analyze whether or
not these hospitals would be
eligible to receive these funds
today of course with me is your
house sponsor Representative
Gail Armstrong and also from the
governor's office is Gina
diplomacy who is the health
policy adviser for the governor
and the acting secretary of
Human Services Kerry are me ho
and so at that with that I stand
for support opposition in
questions.
yes I would just like to add
that you know rural New Mexico
is suffering right now with the
loss of doctors and nurses and
just needed expansion for things
like home health care hospice
and transportation is the
senator mentioned.
And and as far as I understand
it's not just for hospitals it
would be for clinics I have to
clinics and in capturing County
seven thousand square miles and
they could expand this would
help them to be able to expand
with behavioral health and other
issues that are needed and it's
only the it's actually evaluated
to see if the need is there in
the community as well which
would probably be pretty easy so
with that we stand for
questions.
would you.
Okay Kerry.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think it just you
know Sir reiterate that point of
our R. Sanchez here and thank
them for bringing this bill
forward most of our providers in
rural areas are really sort of
struggling just to keep doors
open and an expansion of
services it is not even on the
table so this really allows us
through sort of grant funding to
put that on the table for them
and really make it possible to
bring and you behavioral health
services prenatal services for
communities where we have we
have obstetric desert's here in
New Mexico and so I just I you
know I want to reiterate those
points which is this is really
designed to cover those first up
to five years when providers
really need to sort of come up
with a sustainable revenue
stream and we would be very
focused on sort of that long
term sustainability and helping
them build that so that after
the grant funding is done we
have a sustainable sustainable
programs in New Mexico thank you
we stand for questions.
That will thank you this and is
there anyone who stands in
opposition of this bill.
Seeing none we will go to the
zoom is there anyone who stands
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Right back to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
this legislation.
Well okay so let me tell you
because we have a number of
bills and a limited number of
times I'm gonna ask for at least
ten of you you'll have a minute
to come and stand and and speak
in support.
As.
That among yourselves who will
be the team.
Thank and you will each have a
minute up to a bit of the
administrator will be timing you
please proceed good morning
madam chair members the
committee Kerry robin printer in
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico Medical Society we
know that building out our rural
health care infrastructure is
incredibly important for health
care delivery throughout the
state we've worked very hard
with the sponsor and on the
administration in order to make
sure that start up costs are
included in this bill
independent providers are
included in this bill
independent clinics are included
in this bill so we urge its
passage we think it's really
critical to it to make it out of
the committee thank you so much
thank you.
That.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is David Roddy
on the health policy director of
the New Mexico primary care
association our clinics serve
three hundred seventy thousand
people in ninety communities
eighty percent a rural
certainly expanding services in
today's financial conditions is
very difficult and we appreciate
the Sanchez we stand strong
support of this bill we
appreciate the Sanchez efforts
to bring people together we will
certainly work very best with
the Human Services department to
make this bill of of a very have
a positive impact on New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Kathy Elliott on the
rate lobbyist for you and quite
counties currently Union County
is already considering doing
expansion with their hospital in
the dental world because they've
got such a severe lack of
dentists in the area quite
County right now has a already a
planet designed for New Hospital
and their current hospital is
being considered for new
behavioral health center so this
particular bill would help both
counties so much I know
everybody in the rural areas
would be very appreciative of
any help you can consider thank
you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee Jason
Weaks registered lobbyists from
New Mexico Hospital so ciation
we stand in support of this
legislation want to thank the
sponsors and the governor's
office for bringing it forward
we think this will be a big help
particularly for some of our
rural rural members in terms of
building up behavioral health
and other critical services we
urge the committee to pass it
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyist for a desert
states physical therapy network
we represent thirty of private
clinics around the state in the
case of rural communities it's
very important to have these
kind of services available
specially for proposed surgical
care so this will help of
dramatically and we urge your
support for this thank you thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Anna
so the with the General Services
Department the health benefits
bureau is one of the bureau's
within the wrist Management
Division of the General Services
Department by transferring this
bureau and consolidating these
services through a
reorganization.
It was like that was the wrong
bill.
Thank you for the next bill.
It
is the first in line.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and I rise
today on behalf of two clients
one Molina healthcare of New
Mexico and also McKinley County
McKinley County in rural New
Mexico it could release a
benefit from this bill we we
really appreciate the
administration and the sponsors
for leading the charge in terms
of helping our rural health care
network and Molina healthcare
also stands by these efforts
because they are important and
we need to help the people in
rural New Mexico get adequate
health care for that reason
madam chair members the
committee we support the bill
ask your support and thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Denise Baca and I represent
the New Mexico association of
health underwriters and
personally I'm a an insurance
brokers so we represent employer
groups we have thousands and
thousands of individual clients
I reside in Pecos New Mexico
which is obviously rural
and part of us Senator Stefanics
is a district.
And we are in support of this
bill rural health care is so
important and we see clients
everyday who have trouble
accessing care so we fully
support this bill.
Thank you.
So we'll go to the now closed
though to see if there is anyone
who stands in support of the
bill.
Thank you Terry Dodson you have
one minute please.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am a three thousand
and I am a volunteer advocate
for a a RP of this potential
increase in funding for rural
healthcare will obviously
increase access for our senior
citizens who live in these rural
health care areas and it's
critical to their quality of
life so for this reason A. A. R.
P. sense in support of Senate
bill seven thank you thank you
not me to.
The chairman members of the
committee my name is Gabrielle
Dietrich and I am the executive
director of nami New Mexico not
just the stand strong support of
this bill because we are well
aware of the officials access
for behavioral health support as
well as all kinds of supports in
rural areas and we applaud the
efforts of Sanchez this bill to
take care of this issue with the
through the sun thank you.
You Diane talks.
It looks like that Diane has
lowered or Diana you speaking.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee this
line costs are Representative
that turns military family
caucus we see a very strong
support of the bill we hope it
gets passed as you know our
veterans are throughout the
entire state of New Mexico and
so many of them can't get up to
the VA for services and we just
don't have enough help to
providers or services in rural
areas so we hope that you have
disability thank you thank you
and now we'll go to the
committee I first see
Representative pada meal.
As a rural health care provider
for twenty five years I can
honestly say that you had me at
hello this is so needed and and
we struggle with that every day
in Sapporo and and all the areas
that I serve so thank you for
bringing this forward this is so
important thank you.
Representative cakes.
I thank you madam chair and and
thank you as as well I I really
feel like this legislative
session's theme is increasing a
medical services for our our.
Voters in in in the state and
and this is one of many so we
have we have several rural
medical provider bills currently
we're providing increase tax
incentives for medical providers
in rural areas now this bill if
this passes will be investment
in infrastructure as well as the
many different classifications
and expanding to be able to have
nurse practitioners and
pharmacists be able to provide
services so thank you again for
bringing this for.
Thank you Representative Thomas
thank you
Madam chair Senator
Representative I do have a
couple of questions in terms of
we know how great the need isn't
in the rural areas right so is
there
Any kind of a priority that's
going to be established in terms
of who gets the requests one in
terms of determining the need
and how all that need be
determined and then second.
will this what will well part of
that
a priority also look at smaller
entities or are you know large
corporations of the to be
included in this and then
actually I just thought of
another question in terms of
sort of transparency in terms of
how the money is spent will they
be giving us a report back and
then also you know looking at
the viability of the project.
Thank you in the past we've had
the acting secretary of Human
Services answered this question
since is the Human Services
Department that will be
implementing the program so
Mister may hope.
Madam chair representative
Chavis thank you I think I got
all your questions about all
start with the first one which
was I think around
prioritization of you how we
make decisions so there is
language in the bill you know on
page three regarding how
courage is prioritizing grant
awards based on the health needs
of the state and locality and
the long term sustainability and
feasibility of the service this
is the other really important
components we will also be
making sure that and the there's
language in the bill about this
making sure that those providers
are serving Medicaid patients
and monitoring their
participation in Medicaid that
there really participating
Medicaid providers and so we
will need rulemaking as part of
this program that is why this
bill is here partly eyes so that
it's not just an appropriation
but it's a it's a rulemaking you
know a program that really a
subject to promulgation and
transparency and so we would
definitely be considering sort
of what are the gaps and needs
in the community are there
behavioral health services
nearby or not and I think
there's gonna be a lot of need
and so we'll have to really look
at how we do prioritization
through this grant program your
second question I believe was
around large corporations and
so I think the way I was
thinking about this and there is
language in here about operating
losses not incurred by parent
corporations but really around
the providers themselves sort of
in the locality however you know
we did want to have some
flexibility in the bill to allow
for a larger provider group for
example
that's in an urban area to have
to open a mobile service that
would serve a rural communities
so there is some flexibility
there
but you know really we're not
we're not going to be covering
operating losses a parent
corporations through this bill
and there's language in here
that sort of requires
reconciliation of claims to make
sure that those were really.
Encouraged by the provider and
then I think your third question
is around reporting they don't
believe that there's language in
the bill specific around
reporting but
you know we would be doing this
in full transparency and happy
to share any results with us
with the legislature.
Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Representative
I welcome any attempts to
improve health care especially
rural health care they have a
lot of questions
What we're talking about
expanding care the first thing
that comes to my mind is is if
if we're expanding to behavioral
health of step tricks and all of
these
New services where do we get the
nurses that work there you know
of course that's that's my my
focus so I feel like somehow to
have how how are we going to at
the same time are we balancing
this out with with actually
finding providers the physicians
and nurses and I know that's a
big question that that how do we
really address that it's that's
not specifically this bill but
but.
Addressing that depends on on
the the success of this money
you know actually being used.
For patient care so I mean do
you have anything to say about
that thank you madam chair and
representative
you know as well as I do we're
both from rural New Mexico and
that is going to be an issue of
course but is as you heard and
some of the testimony expanding
dental expanding transportation
so it may not only be about the
nursing staff it's about other
staff behavioral health
specialists
home healthcare and hospice yes
but I think.
If we offer it they will come
and there's probably possibly
more than likely people in our
communities that don't want to
commute to Arizona in catching
County to work or two from magna
Lena to Sapporo to work so I
think we have people in our
communities that are more than
willing if they have the
opportunity I'm madam chair and
representative I just spoke to a
lady that just became a
A what for a child to the
pediatrician she doesn't have
the means to be able to open.
Yeah trick
My experience talking to me
sorry about that of that and so
this would actually help her
open an office of pediatrics in
her rural New Mexico community
and so it's things like that
that we're opening doors for
that that people may not even
realize that we have on and as
our friends and neighbors.
Good point I hope there's a lot
of that yeah
thank you madam chair and
representative the other thing
is money I'm I'm noticing there
is that forty million in the
budget for this but I heard a
lot of other numbers discussed
eighty to a hundred million and
can we clarify that certainly
madam chair and representative
Jones the Senate finance
committee takes House Bill to
and they
Change the numbers and and then
they of determined with the
governor's office how the
governor wants to put in her
money that she's been a lot and
as we know that we divide up the
money between the house the
Senate and the governor in the
executive branch for spending
and so that's how more money
gets in if there is a major
difference between the house and
the Senate then there does of
end up being up a conference
committee between the house and
the Senate on the budget to
actually.
And together negotiate and come
to agreement so that eighty two
a hundred million was mentioned
to me by the chair of Senate
finance yesterday it's not a
concrete number because the
house bill two hasn't come out
yet on our side.
And that just add to that madam
chair and representative I I am
the lead member on probation for
the Republicans and I should be
in that conference committee and
will advocate for.
The most we can get right okay
thank you so much thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative for thank you
madam chair thank you senator
and representative Sarlo force
from streaming last night.
Best ball game.
So I just have some questions
for clarity if I'm understanding
this bill correctly this is for
operating losses but not for the
initial set up like they could
come to somebody and say okay
three ninety eight you can come
and say that this would be that
to show that there was a losses
are Madam chair representative
this is for start up costs.
As well that was included week
we felt strongly to include that
madam chair representative
because of the instance that I
just brought up to you about the
pediatric doctor that couldn't
really do this but they have to
exhaust all other avenues
federal assistance loan
assistance every other Avenue so
they do need to exhaust other
avenues before they can apply
for these and receive the start
up costs that makes sense chair
representative center because I
was trying to figure out I know
that there's a huge expense from
having been married to a doctor
that those huge expense to set
up the stuff in the beginning to
when you're desperately trying
to get loans and borrow from
family and doing as much as you
can to set up.
So at what point and I didn't
see that specifically in here
at what point.
How do I.
The this tenderly.
Sometimes is going to be
practices that set up in a place
that doesn't make sense.
For the.
It's not the right fit for lack
of better word how at what point
do you say you know what this
this is not working we're not
gonna help you out anymore.
I'll defer to our witness our
experts here I thank you madam
chair Representative Lord that's
a really good question I think
we would want to make sure and
that's why there is language in
the bill about the long term
sustainability and feasibility
of the service I think at the
Human Services Department were
experts we know kind of what
works where and we would want to
sort of make sure that you know
maybe a community wants to
restart its obstetric unit but
you know they're only gonna have
you know twenty births a year
that doesn't make sense maybe
the better solution is to help
them bring prenatal care to the
community or tele tele services
and so we would work with them
to make sure that it really
makes sense in that it's a model
that makes sense for that
community there's also you know
we would really want to make
sure and I should just reiterate
there is language in house bill
two very specific to Medicaid
rates and a big infusion of
Medicaid reimbursement rates to
support providers that is part
of an overall strategy to
attract providers existing
provider so you know we would be
looking at working with them on
their sustainability model on
during those first five years
really make sure that they are
accessing the revenue that they
need
and that they're really going
after that so that the grant is
really designed to support at
long term but that they have a
way to get there and so that is
really the intention of this
program just to sort of really
work on those first five years
when they need that
sustainability stream and help
them find that.
manager centered Representative
out.
Leading going on to that I know
that that you have to take
Medicaid I saw that numerous
times have to benefit is there a
certain percentage or that they
just have to be making an
attempt to take some Medicaid
patients madam chair.
As far as I know madam chair and
representative there's no
percentage but I just doesn't
for instance in the I have a
health care clinic in the
beginning the area and but they
were really struggling until we
talked about it and we said you
really need to have someone in
your office that helps sign
people up for Medicaid and and
to help access that for the for
the people of New Mexico that's
not the only Avenue their self
payers there's insurance but
they do need to be able to take
Medicaid and not at a certain
percentage.
Representative expert of the
other question is chair center
Representative we you guys have
enough staff to handle all this
of of looking over this because
this is.
This very very detailed very
specific you can have a group of
people that have to understand
that the
demographics of that area and
understand I mean you have to
really really see the bigger
picture and make those
determinations of yes this is
what we need this doctors a go
getter they're doing what they
need to do they're doing
everything that we feel versus
somebody who may not be doing
what needs to be done or doesn't
so how so are you guys prepared
for that to have the staff that
chair Madam chair representative
lord the original bill Heiser
language in it we're addressing
the administrative workload we
had originally request three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
which would be Mashable us we
would have a total of seven
hundred thousand dollars.
To really staff to adequately
and get contracted expertise
because we do have a contractor
that does like hospital cost
report we would need to do
similar service have you know
experts really review this cost
reports make sure those
operating losses were incurred
other we're paying out the
correct amounts and so we would
want to build that out as part
of the appropriation of you know
we would sort of anticipate some
administrative support for the
Human Services Department thank
you madam chair center
representative first thing I
thought of it that is very
intricate there's a lot of
moving parts in this and there
there's also having to make a
decision at some point is this
feasible this is not in the how
does.
Areas how does that work out of
somebody's just it's not the
right fit how how do you handle
that how do you tell the clinic
with.
Madam chair representative lord
I think you know the Human
Services department we work so
closely with providers now we've
got great relationships with
providers I think we would
continue to work with providers
to see how we can get them
support maybe the grant program
would it be the right program
other maybe other technical
assistance that we can offer you
know maybe it's something else
and I think you know we would we
would be happy to work with
providers we do that today to
really sort of see you know what
really what really they need and
so I think we would do that in
the event that there's a
provider that's really wanting
to do something that doesn't
seem realistic we would try to
help them get to a place where
maybe the program is more
realistic that could be funded
or see if there's some other
strategy that we can use to
support them thank you madam
chair and representative
Representative CENIC
Representative at.
Dose of reality out last
question have on this Madam
etcetera etcetera so I'm
understanding that it's counties
are under one hundred thousand
or fewer I was gonna ask you how
many counties that would be but
I'm trying to say that would be
not I that would not be eligible
chair Burnley okay this upset
the big group of them except
that I okay madam chair that's
all the questions I have the.
Thank you madam chair I just
answered one of my question
right there so the is this
competitive money Madam chair
representative and since.
Will defer to the secretary at
Madam chair representative
Vincent it's it's we will set up
rules for the program it's not
really a competitive grant in
that except that there is going
to be just one pot of money so
it really depends on how many
applicants what the interest is
we would definitely have to
prioritize those you know if
there's more applicants than
there is funding we would have
to prioritize those and it would
become sort of a competitive
program based on you know who
has the strongest chances of
succeeding and really sustaining
those programs in those
communities and based on the
need but Madam chair
representative center a.
Whenever you start looking at
people writing grants especially
in small communities requests
are so competitive and if you
have an excellent grant writer
you're probably gonna get the
money if you don't have access
to a really good grant ready
you're probably not going to get
the money and how would we make
sure that everything was good
across the board as far as rural
places and making sure that
things are distributed like they
need to be distributed.
But I'm just Madam chair
representative incident I think
yeah that's a really good
question and I think we can set
of criteria for the program that
really looks at data so this is
not just about who has the best
written application but really
about data driven decision
making you know how many
providers are not community what
other services are there is this
really filling in need how what
is there here mix look like is
so we can have a very data
driven process to ensure that
it's not just about the fanciest
application but really about the
need and focused on that.
Thank you madam chair
representative and senator so
the other thing I was gonna ask
is you know A. B. in in rural
America been there forever and
twenty years ago being involved
in emergency medicine when
somebody would come to your
hospital and you had to fly him
out.
The that was bothersome you know
because
You're wasting time you know I
wanted to make sure things were
good at home and we had a great
hospital and we do have a great
hospital and I was visiting on
this particular bill with the
person that runs our hospital
and I was really on the fence of
this bill I'm not gonna lie full
disclosure
just because it help with new
programs and nothing with the
programs are in place however
I'm not gonna tell you what he
told me buddy he throws three
programs out there that would
benefit our.
Area.
Really benefit our area and one
of them and hopefully he's
listening one of misdiagnosis I
have more people call me about
dialysis because feel so high
and it's hard to provide
dialysis in either they're
having to travel to el Paso or
Los crucis or they're having to
go to Roswell.
And when you think about the
impact on the family the way
fuel is in your prognosticated
to eat by the you know it's a
long trip and have to go through
dialysis and I have to drive all
the way back so I am going to
support your your program and
I'd like to make a motion for
the past I can't tell you just
talk okay sorry Madam chair just
just a quick response madam
chair and representative you
know in the in the trying times
of inflation and everything else
I think and the the strings that
are are choking down our our
health care systems and the
people that are trying to access
them I think that it's truly
employable that people diversify
and I think that it is it's
something that this gives them
an Avenue to diversify thank you
madam chair.
We have a Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair
on behalf of Representative said
I just like to move forward to
pass on Senate Bill
the committee says.
Representative.
Maybe turn your Mike on.
Yes we need you might I can't
hear you thank you for that I
just the clarification you know
as we this is a follow up on
Representative Jones's of COVID
about nurses and behavioral
health specialists so my
question as part of this funding
are you working with aborted I'm
I'm sorry with the school of
nursing when individuals
graduate to incentivize them to
stay in New Mexico and then we
when we look at individuals who
are studying behavioral health
sociology psychology to stay in
this state and then also to
offer them internships in their
later years in study whether
there to Ph.D our senior here in
this study have you considered
that aspect of how you continue
to make this program even
stronger
so madam chair and members of
the committee absolutely first
of all the department of higher
education we have could continue
to fund them for of nursing
graduate programs so that that
graduate students in nursing can
continue and be supported by our
state we besides the opportunity
scholarship being fully funded
again and there was with another
part of your question I was
going to talk about internships
the internships but no there was
something else incentivizing the
nurses in our tax in the tax
package is coming forward there
is going to be I understand I am
we invest anything between the
house and the Senate yet but I
understand there's going to be a
rural health care tax credit
that's in the bill for our
persons this year.
Thank you thank you very much
and have a program that will
help us grow our own is that BA
M. D. program so that doctors
would actually stay here so with
that I'm going to go to
Representative Ferrary for the
motion and Vincent for the
second Representative Vincent
for the second Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and like
to make a do pass on a committee
substitute for Senate bill
seven.
If it's set.
As a secretary.
All right thank you it's been
moved and seconded that
For a committee substitute for
Senate bill seven it they do
pass motion is there any
objection to the motion.
All rights in no objection to
the most revenue path thank you.
Thank you madam chair I have the
next bill all right thank you we
have Senate bill sixteen create
health care authority
department.
Do you have any experts yes the
same experts and of
Representative Liz Thomson Liz
caucus here is presenting this
bill.
Hey your presenting on her
behalf yes I am all right thank
you so
madam chair members of the
committee a Senate bill sixteen
is again an executive of bills
this bill would take up the
Human Services Department and
create a health care authority.
During the first year the health
care authority would well during
the interim the executive would
pull together DFA General
Services Department at the
department of health and others
to create plans for how this new
department would develop might
November there would be a report
to the interim committees by
January there would be a plan
that would be presented to the
legislature by January of twenty
four so this bill
of would focus on bringing
together all the health care
services where we could
consolidate purchasing that
includes pharmacy purchase of
medical services include more
persons in the state who are not
covered by health insurance
under health care access so with
me today I have the experts the
health policy adviser for the
governor miss Tina diplomacy and
the acting secretary of the
Human Services Department Kerry
are may help and I don't know if
secretary Pat Allen is here yes
okay when it comes that way here
and this is the secretary of
health Patrick Allan.
And would you like to see some
sure madam chair members of the
committee first thank you to the
sponsors for supporting this
initiative I just want to you
know you might way asking the
question why are we doing this
and what we want to do is
establish a single unified
department that's responsible
for health care purchasing
regulation the oversight and
policy right now we have
These responsibilities and
duties at different agencies
across state government one the
Human Services Department
another it General Services and
then within the department of
health we're really trying to
have a single unified Department
in order to create efficiency
consolidate health purchasing
and I'm not just R. health
benefit
procurement process.
Thank you.
Three three three madam chair
members of the committee I just
want to say that you know what
really excites me about this
bill is the ability for us to
consolidate to leverage data and
technology to measure
performance across the
healthcare systems I think we
can deliver more and better
outcomes to New Mexico through
this initiative and then
exercising our purchasing power
to control costs for all covered
New Mexicans including state
employees public school
employees and public retirees
whose health care costs have
continued to increase over the
past decade with little focus on
affordability and premiums and
then filling being able to fill
the coverage gaps to sort of
minimize where we don't have in
charge New Mexicans and really
kind of insure that we have
sufficient programs to cover all
New Mexicans as so those are
really exciting and I would just
say that you know Medicaid has
been a very good job with cost
controls over the years we have
a very low inflation rate we
don't pass those costs on to
covered lives we cannot do that
and so we'd like to see what
innovations we can leverage
through through that to really
sort of exercise better cost
controls across the market thank
you and secretary of thank you
madam chair members twenty
Patrick Allen secretary of the
department of health I just want
to amplify one word that the
interim secretary army use and
that's leverage that's really
what this bill is about by
consolidating purchasing
regulation policy making around
health we're able to leverage
those tools for better outcomes
for New Mexicans the cost is one
of the things we look at but
there's so much more that we're
able to deliver in terms of good
outcomes in terms of of better
health outcomes better quality
for for care and by being able
to gain this leverage and
agreeable to more effectively
use the tools we have to deliver
those better outcomes.
We would stand for support
opposition questions.
Thank you is there it would go
to the audience is there anyone
here in opposition to Senate
bill sixteen.
Please go for.
And it would do.
Is the microphone.
Good morning madam chairman
thank you Committee.
As a local insurance
professional who resides in it
in a district and a member of
the national association of
benefits and insurance
professionals I'm writing it I
am urging you to oppose Senate
bill sixteen the creation of the
health care thirty department
for the following reasons the
Human Services department
handles a lot more than just
health care child support
welfare medical assistance
behavioral health services
medical transportation
developmental disabilities
incarcerated individuals health
needs at secretary fall under
the department's purview
therefore the Human Services
Department describes them
perfectly the name change will
serve to confuse citizens of New
Mexico the health care authority
is too broad of a name the bill
currently reads to take away the
control of the office of the
superintendent of insurance
overall health insurance
products rates filings
regulation of health insurance
carriers and the many duties
that are required to maintain
and regulate the health care in
the state ultimately these are
the experts that know what
they're doing when it comes to
these vital functions the bill
indicates changing powers and
duties transferring functions
person money appropriations well
which ones exactly the citizens
of New Mexico wants to specifics
will this take away authority
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance if
so who will they be transferred
to doesn't the way it currently
reads written given the
governor's authority over all in
health care in the state.
According to Senate bill sixteen
the secretary of the HCA
Department can hire all
employees within the scope of
Lana point with the governor's
consent a director for each
division who will serve at the
pleasure of the secretary this
logically and historically means
that every time there's a change
in leadership in our state in
the secretary and the director
of each of these divisions will
be brought in which causes
disruption loss of expertise and
history and presents challenges
and leads to frustration on the
part of the consumers in the
state in areas that are already
complicated in the healthcare
space.
My experience in the health
insurance industry has taught me
that the main source of
confusion for consumers is how
to access to manage benefits
through the state of New Mexico
this bill I believe would add
confusion on our recommend that
it be amended for specifically a
study so that those groups can
come together and bring the plan
as it was stated thank you.
Thank you.
I'm sorry sorry Daymon battled
of the nationals of.
We're going to the zoom is there
anyone in opposition to the bill
ONZM.
Okay seeing no hands raised.
Are they.
Other than support do we just
the.
Please stay at.
Echo for.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
picking me.
my name is Dennis of with the
General Services Department and
I'm here in strong support of
this of this bill one of the
bureau's that is proposed of
being transferred is the health
benefits bureau of the wrist
Management Division of the
General Services Department
every year we face the
deficiency in this bureau and
health benefits this year it's
ninety six million dollars it's
a growing deficit what's work
it's not working and so we're
strong support by transferring
this bureau in consolidating the
services through a
reorganization we're hoping as
everybody has stayed today that
of the left we would be
leveraging the buying and
provide affordable health care
for public employees so thank
you very much.
Thank you.
And going to the as soon I see
Richard Mason as your hand up in
support.
Yes all right.
You madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Mason
and I am a member of the health
care committees of Lincoln
Mexico thank you representative
of strong support SB sixteen
thanks
once again for what the league
this has a number of positions
and a call for effective
management including cost
management board ation of health
care this would result in health
care be provided to a range of
numbers of New Mexicans.
SB sixteen percent of the
structure in place to accomplish
many of the calls put forward by
as of the expositions so we
stand in support of SB six state
thank you.
Thank you all right I see no
further hands of the so
Representative the rate ski
we're going to the.
Committee for questions thank
you madam chair good morning
senator
I just wanted to walk through
the chain to the pieces that
were being added and removed
from the new health care and
forty so I see that
We're now how describing the
office of the secretary edition
early and then commute
Senator and experts say we the
the DD Division is cut is that
coming from D. O. H. to.
that H. CA I guess is what we're
calling the staff and it is that
just overseeing the waiver or
their service contracts services
also in that division so madam
chair
First of all when I apologize.
If the house because I.
I see has that raise their hand
into it to proceed.
Experts here into the.
I can barely hear you yeah I can
probably go ahead I would be the
that would be the entire program
that would that would go over
and there are there are lots of
ways you can think about this
kind of a consolidation but one
of the things that everyone
seems pretty unanimously to
agree about I do as well as that
because development
developmentally disabled
Services are almost entirely
paid for by Medicaid it really
makes sense for those services
to be delivered in partner in
close partnership in the same
agency with with Medicaid that's
the general thinking funds
historically madam chair and
representative it was there.
Program the spurs were actually
centralized.
Thank thank you for that madam
chair and senator secretary
And then the.
Health improvement division
which you might just describing
the difference between the
facilities that are regulated by
that division verses at are
there any facilities regulated
by ale TST currently.
So madam chair and.
Thanks their shared regulatory
jurisdiction across multiple
agencies the our our division
that does regulation it is an
extension of Senator Medicare
and Medicaid services and and
those regulation of facilities
that includes of facilities for
seniors but it is not a hundred
percent overlap and so their
share jurisdiction across those.
So.
With the transfer madam chair
and senator David.
D. O. H. would no longer be
regulating facilities that would
be no shared between the H. CA
N. A. L. T. S. T. R. thank you.
And then
I the final thing I just wanted
to highlight will two things
that state health benefits
division madam chair and senator
and experts as well as the that
is public record budget office
or something like that
budget committee.
The that then would allow the
this new newly named department
to maybe.
Do a little bit of reform in the
waiver for curing.
Benefits for state employees and
look at some other options for
health that's being implemented
is that maybe part of the future
of that movement Madam chair
representative absolutely that
is one.
How to save money.
Could I add just a bit to that
quickly I think one of the other
benefits.
Madam chair representative thank
the the one of the other
benefits we get is right now
everybody's out kind of in
implementing their own strategy
individually and we're able to
do now with this with this kind
of consolidation is have a
unified strategy across those
different purchasing streams and
so one of the benefits that we
should be able to get us to stop
driving providers to distraction
over time by having different
ways of thinking about paying
for counting the the different
services that we deliver across
these different funding streams
madam chair and senator and.
Madam chair that that's
wonderful the costs have been
just going sky high over number
of years and I think it's well
overdue you madam chair I hope
that we the move of the health
policy commission to the H. C.
means that maybe it'll be
reconstituted because madam
chair and senator we certainly
can we miss that
finally I did not see any
change to OSI the superintendent
of insurance is I just want to
confirm that that's correct
eight I don't think this is
this reorganization madam chair
Senator Woods change anything
about the way the private health
plans or other you know life
Gasol any of the other products
would be regulated is that
correct Madam here.
Madam chair representative to
Penske members of the committee
that is correct OSI in their
functions remain okay they will
regulate insurance and.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative.
The lord.
Yes thank you madam chair.
okay thank you madam chair
Senator experts I do have some
questions because as I was
looking through this on the.
Fiscal impact report this quiet
if you I mean there's a lot a
lot a lot a lot a lot of
questions so I'm just gonna go
over briefly for time's sake
madam chair and senator so I
want to make sure it says the
bill proposes that the governor
be given authority to issue an
executive order to further.
delineate organizational
structure power and duties so
she's going to be the one that's
going to oversee this process is
that what I'm understanding
managers Madam chair
representative or that's correct
and I'd like to cite that in the
past of four other governors
recently have the executive
orders and creative departments
the aging long term services
department was created the
cultural affairs department was
created Veterans Affairs
department was created in the
Indian Affairs Department was
created under a past governors.
Thank you madam chair Senator
expert so
I'm looking at it because what
I'm seeing the overall picture
as I look through this is it's
not a simple transfer there's a
lot of stuff going on in my
concern is.
Do we have.
This is a lot I mean there's a
lot of money and there's a lot
of stuff happening I mean I'm
looking at personal money
equipment contracts I. T. risk
resources who is going to be the
main person responsible is it
just going to be the governor
would assume not who's going to
be that person that looks over
all the minutia there's going to
be a lot.
Chair and senator an expert
madam chair and representative
what I'll start and then I'll
defer to Mr Bassey first of all
by bringing in the departments
to deal with financing the DFA
and.
D. O. H. there's gonna be some
expertise at the table to to
talk about the intricacies of
actually doing this and taking
large steps or baby steps in
terms of creating this and I
think that the that the idea of
taking the time over the year to
plan this out allows the
executive to look for the
expertise whether internally or
externally for this but I'm
gonna turn this over.
Madam chair representative lord.
We're pulling together the
stakeholders of the agencies
that are involved we've got to
fabulous resources to really
help pull this together sitting
at this table one with
secretary Kerry army ho and then
secretary Department of Health
pan Allen who ran the health
authority in Oregon so he he he
will be in very important
resource for us to you know
garner has experience in doing
that the the goal is really to
pull these agencies together
let's put the plan together will
report back to the governor will
come back to the legislature
with our plans we make sure that
well as an understood in that
you know will be very
transparent about that process
thank you
madam chair Senator and and
Representative so I know the
question FIR just for clarity.
Is transferring the employee
group benefits program from GST
would reduce the GST budget by
twenty four point six million in
contracts and four point to the
committee going to be how this
is going to reduce because I'm
looking at the overall picture
of that we're spending quite a
bit of money how does this
reduce that madam chair so madam
chair I think we have the
secretary general for.
C..
Madam chair US senator
Representative the it's going to
be reducing General Services
departments budget but the
budget's going to be transferred
to this new authority.
Okay explained to say that one
more time to make an more times
the budget is going to be
reducing the General Services
departments budget is going to
be transferring to the health
court health care authority.
Okay thank you mentioned expert
Senator okay so.
When looking at the performance
implication Mr is like a J.
normais Task.
Have a question about this
conflict application this is
just be sixteen would transfer
the division of health
improvement to the Department of
Health.
To the newly created health care
authority department that move
would place DH I in the same
departments Medicaid D. H. I.
overseas a license of hospitals
long term care facilities
oversees enforcement of to.
Disability Medicaid providers to
UAH notes that if SB sixty is
passed D. H. I. realizations
would need to be revised updated
repealed replaced.
So one of kind of getting at is.
So much by new shows far as I
costs to I mean there's it is
like one of those things we see
an outline it says these things
but within it there's twenty
other things underneath it.
So I do have concerns about that
also
It says here on page five of the
F. I. R. Syzran middle to
section eight you should mention
child adolescent and adult
mental health and substance
abuse use disorder services
within see why if do does that
need to be amended in to that
based on this F. I. R. for less
than a minute I don't see an
amendment in there to satisfy
that.
The south of chair
representative this bill has not
been amended to date and if it
does we are not afraid of
concurrent cell if you decide
this is necessary.
Okay thank.
Mr fussy.
Sure madam chair Representative
Lord and members of the
committee just a moment so this
bill really what it does is it
it puts out the framework for
the organization of the health
care thirty and renaming the
Human Services Department and
the work that's going to be done
in the interim to bring back to
the legislature with the plan
as addressed earlier so what
we're the DH I regulations that
would come in the next session
with a bill amending all the
statutes are related to the
health care the wording would
address what's called out here
about the regulations in the
division of health improvement
so that comes next year as it
relates to
The
Okay so should state contract
for behavioral health services
to members you're asking that
the child adolescent and adult
yes it was the first Sir and
madam chair and senator experts
that was part that they'd set
and section eight if we talk
about with the C..
There.
And chair Representative Lord
and members of the committee yes
in any given all of the statute
changes changes would come with
this new bill that will be
bringing next year after the
plan is being devised madam
chair and.
Senator sites once sources.
It's nine at the costs both of
us I think it was one of our
representatives.
Nibert that's what it was I'm.
So madam chair and senator
I guess the bigger crowd the
question I have when I'm looking
for all this I'm looking at the
FIR but then within each thing
like I said before there is an
outline and there's all these
little things when we look at
the budget for all that does
that include all the little tiny
minutia or is it just kind of
looking at the overall broad
picture we think this is when a
cost because I look at all the
things about the I. T. switching
things over and.
The software services and all
the little things that are have
to go into this is that you know
it says right here tackle stuff
technical stuff this require
additional I. T. development
administration support positions
to be created recruited hired
retained does that include all
of that in the budget madam
chair and senator or is that
we're just looking at more of a
broader picture.
Madam chair representative I'm
going to defer to Mister
blessing thank you Madam chair
representative lord members of
the committee so is the as of
the bill is written in that's
why we have the department of
finance and administration as
part of this we would be
transferring over those budgets
along with those
responsibilities and duties into
the health care authority.
Chair Senators a huge bill with
a huge undertaking so for right
now I'm not going to spark seven
ton more questions on it.
Do anyway so that's why into.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair.
I am I have a question about
about that will there's a
precedent I believe we can look
at which which would be the.
We are nation we did of the in
two thousand three of the Public
Education Department and
a similar type of.
Yes.
The and the and I think we can
see you know if there's evidence
that that really hasn't worked
for us and it might not have
been a good thing to consolidate
all of that power and that
because of this they are our
kids have not benefited from
that based on the results we've
seen
I'm really concerned about this
I I guess it's kind of a maybe
an ideological issues as well to
consolidate power with the
executive regardless of who the
executive is and take away power
from yeah.
For people who maybe understand
the issues a little bit better
I'm I'm not opposed to the
intent would and I think for an
agreement on that but but the
other thing is as a as a new
legislators I I I'm I share this
with the with my colleague here
I don't fully understand this I
don't feel like I can I can
support it and and get behind it
based on what I don't know and
and then there's the ideological
issue of consolidating power
with any executive the which I
which I do have an issue with so
so I appreciate it that I I
won't be able to vote for it
thank you thank you madam chair
all right thank you
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair and and
committee and and
I it is it is a complex piece of
legislation that I think we're
all trying to wrap our arms
around
So I I've worked within the DDS
di in the DO H. world before and
so I have always been time that
the medical assistance division
is drastically different than
DST which is drastically
different than
these other.
Areas you're rolling up so let's
let's let me just kind of go
through it.
The decision is to roll all of
these up into one cabinet
department so that you can
purchase in a more efficient and
effective way in because all the
parts do their separate parts
but the cop to gather.
That is that is that the vision
I'm sorry I'm overly simplifying
but I need it because it's a lot
to put my arms around so madam
chair and representative K. that
is the objective here the goals
and objectives are cost savings
better services more services
more people covered by access
okay so then it thank you very
much madam chair and and
representatives and and senator
so if this bill passes this
gives you the four eighty to
actually right the plan in which
you will bring back to see how
the services are manage the
still have a director the still
have a cabinet secretary they
still out there they're not a
direct line to the executive
correct.
madam chair and Representative
I'm going to but Mr Blasio for
that Madam chair representative
Kate's yes thank you so then I
will just say I know this sounds
like so small maybe to you and
to detail for this but I have to
say it out loud when we is a
state decided to start rolling
in our facilities over to
General Services they did not
have to follow the state
purchasing which hires
individuals with disabilities I
hope if this bill passes this is
something that we re adopt and
prioritize as a government as a
state that we must model the
hiring of individuals with
disabilities and all of our
agencies thank you.
Thank you.
If there's no those members of
the committee with a question I
have a couple for you madam
presenters Mike my question
centers around the concept of
cost savings what do you have to
combine these up agencies so
these groups to have cost
savings because of with the
state of New Mexico buying and
purchasing for every single
aspect.
Please explain that.
Why do we need to is that the
question right because what with
the cost savings occur even
without the combination if we
are vying for the state of New
Mexico and we would be tied for
a group of of organizations what
they have to be combined in
order to have a cost savings
madam chair thank you for the
question right now each entity
has the it's forty to act
independently.
And not they're not required to
act together so I act for
example the interagency of
purchasing collaborative which
is the New Mexico public schools
Albuquerque public schools the
retiree health cares and the
group of benefits with state
employees they all go out to
R. F. P. together and purchase
but they are not required to
purchase the same thing they
just go out together to to do an
RFP they look at the best of
presentation but each entity can
put in separate budget they're
not required to all to do the
same thing the department of
health is separate from I back
the aging long term services to
Pat department is separate from
I back in D. O. H. HSD so
everybody has their own
independent is already and the
executive is looking to gather.
Other to require the purchasing
but as Mr Bossi said this first
year is creating the plan.
Thank you and the question was
raised that that was going to be
some confusion regarding the
department of health's role and
what is going to be that there
Roland what how you can avoid
confusion can you explain that
thank you madam chair and I'm
going to defer defer to our
secretary of health thank you
madam chair members
health will continue to operate
the state public health system
will continue to operate state
facilities including the
veterans home behavioural health
institute of those kinds of
facilities and and those offices
that we operate those locations
that we have will continue to be
state of New Mexico locations I
think I think purchasing eighty
is what's going to be
consolidated primarily
in delivery of services to do it
DDS is a very already talked
about I don't think there's a
lot of opportunity for confusion
about what the what the
department of health continues
to do as we consolidate those
purchasing functions.
Thank you thank you looking at
the reorganization into a
presented here why did you ask
for an emergency clause.
Madam chair I would deflect to
Mr plus you.
Madam chair I I don't believe we
thought we would need an
emergency clause this bill
really jealous spells out
renaming the Human Services
department of the health care
authority and pulling together
those cabinet secretaries
agencies across state government
in order for for this this
planning here in the interim.
Hello my last question to you
there was one opposition raised
by Daymon dollar so he really he
listed a number of items that he
was concerned about may I just
ask that if you haven't done so
that you please have a
conversation with him talk about
his concerns I think that would
be important.
Thank you very much we
appreciate that
I have a motion with respect to
this bill.
House and Senate bill.
It will.
All right thank you very much we
have a a motion for do pass on
the second send bill sixteen.
Of it is there any opposition
would you please call the roll.
Yes for two passed.
Representative Chavis yes.
Senator Ferrari.
Yes Representative how to meal
yes Representative Jones no
Representative Lord no.
Representative Sapan ski yes.
If instance now.
representative Thompson.
And madam chair heard and yes.
Sixty three by a vote of six in
the affirmative and three in the
negative you have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair now I have
to ask the.
My third bill seconded rules
both I'll be for okay let me do
this I'm going to ask Senator
Hickey would you mind differing
your time to allow your Senate
colleagues to move forward.
It's pretty quick all right I
think it suits I'm the committee
as well.
Thank you I'm sorry I madam
chair this is a hopefully for
you all will be a simple bill
this did pass the Senate before
you go we're looking at of the
Senate substitute for
I'm sorry we're looking at this.
Senate bill one oh six as
amended the pharmacists and P.
A. S. S. health care
practitioners yes managed care
and it actually one of the
amendment by colleges so I'll
explain the bill very simply.
This adds physicians assistants
pharmacists and psychologists to
the health care practitioner
definitions.
For the purposes of non compete
clauses.
We have passes in the Senate and
the house in prior years
unanimously and I just never
received a floor vote at the
final house and with me today I
have the positions assistance
and the pharmacist and the
psychologist did ask to be added
in and that is what the
amendment was so it just include
them in the definition of health
care practitioner.
Is there anything that you're
experts with students at the
this Lisa a burns has that story
but I don't know if you want to
hear it or not because
so we'll we'll the the for the
story for right now okay and it
make out we have Mister Tinker
from the pharmacist is Lisa
burns from the of decisions
assist.
All right thank you anything
else was sued yeah all right is
there anyone in the audience's
States about position to Senate
bill one of six as amended.
Is there anyone else soon who
stands in opposition to Senate
bill one of six.
Is there anyone in the audience
is that the support of Senate
bill one oh six as amended
please come forward.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel for
the New Mexico psychological
association and we had asked the
senator to add psychologists to
this bill and just for brief
history on it we've done this a
number of times where we've had
health care providers come to us
and say these non compete
clauses are real problem with
our health care shortage so
someone finishes out there term
but then the non compete clause
will say well for two years you
can't work for for anybody else
so this is very important to
help address our health care
provider shortage in all areas
thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else of the
states in support of this bill.
All right saying that I'm going
to the committee is are there
any question.
I see no questions that are
raised that take a motion Madam
chair I'd like to make the
motion for do pass for Senate
bill ten one of the six as
amended is there seconded the
motion thank it's been moved and
seconded for two passed of
Senate bill one oh six is there
any opposition saying that you
have a due thank you.
Members of the committee.
Thank.
So we're going to Senate bill
thirty five.
The committee substitute for
Senate bill thirty five.
This is the committee substitute
the Senate bill thirty five
anesthesiologists assistance
changes we have Senator Martin
Hickey would you please
introduce your.
Your experts in the field.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representatives for hearing
this bill I hope to make this
quick so you can catch up this
morning but it very happy to go
into debt to anywhere
I have I cosponsored
Representative Dixon here with
me and I have Lindsay dheas and
Cassie Lang house who are
anesthesia assistants who can
assist with any technical
questions that you may have
essentially madam chair we've
been talking about this morning
to shortage of providers in New
Mexico that applies to providers
and anesthesia in all of its
aspects you previously heard to
Senate bill eighty for the C. R.
N. A.'s and that will help
attract flee a few more but that
still's gonna go nowhere near
the void of anesthesia
assistance the anesthesiologists
hearing aids in the state as a
whole this bill basically
capitalizes or not capitalize
but takes a sunset on the a a
bill that Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
wrote ten years ago because it
was a new program in the state
to some degree and primarily
located at New Mexico State
University of New Mexico
for training purposes the there
was a ten year sunset the the
the the and is it the anesthesia
assistants have proven to be
valuable assets in the operating
suite and have extended the
ability to do anesthesia as they
are required to work within
anesthesiologist are there in
this in in the operating room
when the patient is induced and
again when the patient is coming
out being excavated and move the
anesthesiologists is there the
anesthesiologists does
supervised three but it sixteen
other states that.
Have these programs they've all
gone to for and so we're asking
you to go to for in this bill as
well as to sunset as well as to
eliminate the sunset
the anesthesia assistance and
stay with the patient if there
is an emergency the
anesthesiologist is within a
stone's throw and is able to
come into the operating suite
the operating room because of
working in the same pope suite
the
the other provision in the bill
is that it limits the anesthesia
assistance to to the class a
counties there are five of the
five large counties that you
know about in just clarifying
that and then to finish up want
to say that we've been working
on this all summer and myself
and Senator Padilla a co sponsor
this in the Senate and we work
through any potential conflicts
and we are both supporters
Senator Padilla today would be
here but obviously we're all
stretch all over the place and
actually the two bills eighty
and thirty I did go together
into committees and the Senate
and we we've already heard AT
and now representing thirty five
and if you pass the second and
go to the floor and eliminate
the sunset at the having the
sunset in place would really
hurt a number of hospitals
around the state and their
ability to do anesthesia one of
those being the one right here
in Santa Fe who have really
depends on this was University
of New Mexico you know that
unless my co sponsor or experts
have any brief comments I'd like
to make I stand for questions.
We'll go to the audience is
there anyone here in in support
of a committee substitute for
Senate bill thirty five.
All right I will are just in to
make a very brief caught maybe
one of them to make a very beat
COVID an anesthesiologist and
the.
And of course a fellow senator.
But it chair members of the
committee nine years ago I
brokered an agreement between
the anesthesiologist assistants
and the certified registered
nurse anesthetists supposed to
be a ten year agreement.
this will go to fact right after
ten years and this is the
natural expansion that will
happen as a result of what we
put into place about a decade
ago so that we could get some
experience with the
anesthesiologists systems there
been absolutely no problems over
the last decade.
Thank you very much thank you.
Madam chair representative thank
you for hearing this important
piece of legislation I speak to
you as the president of the New
Mexico society of
anesthesiologists as well as an
anesthesiologist and intensive
is here at Christus in Santa Fe
I move to New Mexico three years
ago and all I've been hearing
ever sense is that there's an
incredible shortage of providers
we have mentioned this and and
and the last two pieces of
legislation as well this piece
of legislation not only allows
anesthesia assistance to
continue working in New Mexico
providing vital care to New
Mexicans but it also also a
model that anesthesiologist want
to practice in and will retain
that many anesthesiologists we
have worked over the last few
months in gaining support for
this and all the classic
counties as I'm sure you've
received in your folders there's
support and San Juan Christus
three crosses anyone on
and I I would love to stay in
the state and provide excellent
care to New Mexicans thank you
very much would you identify
yourself Dr guy ask you Michael
guy of ski thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Chris aren't I'm an
anesthesiologist I also manage
Lee the largest Department in
the state of New Mexico I do it
my entire career to take care of
New Mexicans alongside
specialists in anaesthesia
professions residents nurse
anesthetists and anesthesiology
assistance and without them we
are unable to take care the
health care needs of New Mexico
I believe this bill is a right
step forward to make sure that
we have the health course the
health force that we may need
for the future of New Mexico
thank you thank you.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Abigail more of a
practicing CA and Albuquerque
New I wanted to just due to
support SB thirty five as it
would help keep anesthesia
providers and other healthcare
providers here in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee care robin Berner
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico Medical Society we
stand in partnership with our
anesthesiologists and are in the
CCL need assistance and urged
passage of the bill thanks thank
you going to the soon if there's
anyone here to speak in support
of the bill raise your hand.
First a C. Jose sterling.
Yes ma'am thank you thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I want to thank you
again and speak in support of
this bill my name is a sterling
I'm from surgeons and I know
that you guys are always
inundated with making difficult
decisions but this is really
something that will affect the
health care they were able to
find in New Mexico and it's
something like everybody else's
mentioned here right now as a
step forward and how it is that
we can really grow and develop
an integrated model of
anesthesia Care releases the
anesthesiologist the decision
assistance on the registered
nurses as well to provide
excellent SCG care please really
consider this is going to be
affecting the way that we can
provide care thank you thank
you.
And I don't see any other hands
up so I'm going to the committee
Representative Jones.
I just want to say thank you to
all the anesthesiology.
You are appreciated and I hope
that we can all support this and
and I hope you stay and thrive
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Kate madam chair
and like to make a motion for do
pass is this second on the
motion Representative Vincent is
there any opposition to the
motion hearing that you have a
new path congratulations to.
Senator we say for sure and and
I got another very quickly.
Thank you.
I would never want to Senate
bill eighty one immunization
information certification.
Senator Hickey do you have in
support I did.
But I I I I I'm fine thank you
madam chair and representatives
again for allowing me to
represent this other bill this
bill
In summary does a very simple
thank you for the immunization
allowing physicians assistants
and certified nurse
practitioners to certify that
immunization is detrimental to
the physical condition of a
child we do we we have one of
the best immunization rates in
the country in New Mexico it's
really to the people on
Department health are here
anymore that they have done an
incredible job there are however
and my.
expert is here now they have
done incredible job but there
are those who have religious
convictions and they have and
they are allowed to have
exceptions been growing a little
bit but there are real medical
exceptions as well allergies to
eggs that a lot of these
immunizations are produced and
or certain genetic
Diseases that that wouldn't be
good for the individual you know
given the shortage of primary
care physicians all over the
state but also given really the
excellent training the physician
assistants and nurse
practitioners have
they are very able to determine
that there is a valid medical
reason to exemption from
immunization and we just want to
include them in the list and
I'll ask my effort if she has
anything else.
The new single this year I thank
you I'm just a girl for the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council and just a brief story
about how this came about a
nurse practitioner called me
from a rural area and and had a
long term family as her patients
and with the a minor child and
she didn't know she couldn't
sign those immunization except
exception forms so the the child
had to be referred to a
physician that it never seen her
knew nothing about our history
knew nothing about her
background to sign this
ridiculous for not ridiculous
back to sign this form that
nurse practitioner should've
always been included on and this
is something we've been doing
for years in the legislature
finding these areas where it
says only a physician can do
this when in reality other
health care providers could do
it also and this is just one of
those hopefully last areas where
and then PED can't sign a form
for their own patient thank you.
Thank you anything else that
they Hickey of Senator.
Dr Hickey is fine madam chair
of it that's a things are fine
anyway in terms of titles I I
would hope that you would pass
is very common sense bill all
right thank you I'm going to the
audience is there anyone here in
support of Senate bill eighty
one.
Sen no hands up going to the
zoom is there anyone on some in
support of a Senate bill eighty
one.
Okay going back to the audience
is there anyone here in
opposition to Senate bill eighty
one.
Going to zoom is there anyone on
the zoom in opposition to eighty
Sen ability what state line I'm
going to the committee of any
questions no questions I'll take
a I will take a motion.
And madam chair I'll make a
motion for do pass a second and
we have a motion and a second
four do pass is there any
opposition to the motion sensor
Representative being that.
Just give you all kind of titles
Senator dot the you can have a
new path actually it's an honor
to be called Representative.
And you almost did it last night
why that was a great game thank
you so much.
Yep.
Thank you thank you very much
are we going to have to the
committee substitute for Senate
bill ninety two pharmacists
scope of practice is the Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino here no okay.
He Cetina R. T. C. Pino is able
to be here it is easy I do not
see him in the audience.
I was asked to present the bill
all right would you please go
ahead and present the bill.
Yes in my experts are Dr Sharan
the crack in in in detail
Tinker.
I see dealtaker I do not see the
doctor he sees the doctor is not
here.
Okay I'm sorry I can't see with
my small screen very.
So thank you madam chair
at.
As a committee substitute for
Senate bill
ninety two is to expand the
pharmacists open practice and by
adding pharmacists to the
professionals available for
patients seeking care this could
help to mitigate the access the
difficulties experienced by many
New Mexicans and UNM points out
that those holding the doctor of
pharmacy degree are under
utilized but highly trained and
not only in medication
management but also dizzy all
the need for quality and many
other disciplines required for
an item here of the physician
assistant degree and during the
COVID pharmacists were working
the front lines in testing and
management of the pandemic
and with the New Mexico facing
you know shortage of healthcare
providers this is according to
the New Mexico health care
workforce committee of twenty
twenty one annual report of New
Mexico there's an average of
five point one seven primary
care physicians per ten thousand
population but with this
expansion we can make it so that
there's other services that
pharmacists can find and with
that I will ask our expert Mr
Dale takers to add more
information.
Madam chair members of the
committee and there are there
are just a couple of things I
want to point out this bill was
amended in the Senate in the.
The committee substitute to
require protocols that
pharmacists might might have
developed to the board of
pharmacy to be approved by the
medical board one of the issues
was
how much authority pharmacists
would be given and I want to
make that clear that the medical
board does have authority over
that and so that was an
amendment and early on in that
committee there was an agreement
with the medical society and and
I I believe there is not
opposition to this bill in those
areas so they the committee
substitute again clean up some
some of those areas the primary
purpose of this bill is to allow
pharmacists to do cleo Wade
testing and treatment along with
those tests clear waiver is
federal program comes through
the FDA and and it establishes
certain tests that can be done
for patient care in a in a
community pharmacy setting so
I think with we get take out the
language that related to
insurance coverage because
that's already dealt with in the
office of the superintendent of
insurance and so that part of
the bill came out in the
committee set up without stand
for questions.
Thank you.
I will go to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
Of the of the committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety two.
Would you please come forward.
And you will each have one
minute.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez and the executive
director of equality New Mexico
the statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization and we're on the
verge of ending the HIV epidemic
within my generation something
that most folks don't know is
that if you're HIV positive in
your on regular medication to
have an undetectable viral load
you cannot transmit the virus to
someone also if you're HIV
negative and you take prep pre
exposure prophylactic medication
every single day you have the
more than ninety nine percent
efficacy rate of protecting you
from contracting the virus when
you're exposed to it all that is
required to prescribed Pappas to
note that you're HIV negative I
can walk within fifteen minutes
of multiple directions of this
building and get a rapid HIV
test and know that I'm HIV
negative I however have not been
able to access my prep
medication for seventeen days
because they currently have to
wait for an appointment with the
nurse practitioner or a
physician so that they can make
sure that my HIV test comes up
negative which is not necessary
because the deal which will
train someone for less than
eight hours to get that test at
a multiple locations I am
incredibly Health Care literate
person and they regularly do not
get my prescription refilled so
on behalf of LGBTQ people
especially bisexual and gay men
who are not as health care
literate as a professional adult
like I am and who live in rural
communities I implore you to
please pass this bill because
this will include this will
increase access to lifesaving
HIV prevention medication for
our grand transport all over the
state This Is health care access
legislation and it's L. G. B. T.
Q. liberation legislation thank
you.
Thank you madam.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee I'm Pat
block registered lobbyist for
Walmart we support this bill I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing the Medical Society in
board together with the
pharmacist to find a middle
ground we feel like the language
amended in provides the adequate
side boards to make sure that
any additional authority that
the pharmacist take on and
treatments and testing that they
administer is agreed upon by
everybody so we urge you to
support this bill thank you
thank you we're now going to the
zoom is there anyone else in
support of the legislation.
Sendo hands is there anyone in
the audience was in opposition
to the legislation.
I see no one and going to zoom
anyone in opposition to the
legislation.
I see no hands are the any
questions Representative been
sent the Representative Jones
thank you madam chair.
And Representative and Mr Tinker
so the the thing I I like
everything that I hear except
for
I have not read that amendment.
the substitute that you have so
the only thing that I have is I
have full confidence in
pharmacist.
Matter of fact a lot of
confidence and pharmacist
the thing that I want to know is
I want to know that they're
regulated and they have a scope
of practice and they can't
operate outside of the scope of
practice Madam chair.
Madam chair representative
mentioned that act which I think
Joanne was Representative
Representative.
Thank you to taking the answer
thank you okay.
Absolutely that the protocols
will be developed through the
practice committee the board of
pharmacy then they will be
submitted to the medical board
and and any work that needs to
be done will be with the medical
board so there are plenty of as
Mr block said that the the guard
rails are there so absolutely
that protocols will deal with
that that's all of got madam
chair thank you Representative
Jones.
Thank you madam chair
I I have some concerns about
this I mean we've talked about
this type of thing before and we
sing the other bill concerning
expanding pharmacists ability to
treat patients
I was.
You answered a lot of my
questions about the HIV and I
appreciate that a lot it.
Change my mind on that piece but
I'm still a little bit concerned
about a urinary tract infections
what is there a limited
I'm okay I'll tell you what I'll
back up a bit just say with
urinary tract infections I know
that they can present in so many
ways
how is it that you are you
responsible for diagnosing that.
And and treating as well yes I I
would like to make it clear I'm
not a pharmacist I'm not a
health care practitioner so but
I am the representative for for
pharmacists Association in New
Mexico but yes we we that's why
we agree to the medical board's
supervision because we can't
take something to the medical
board that's going to endanger
patient care they will not
approve it and we have
experienced that in the past
when we when we maybe ask for
too much they turned it down and
so we had to come back with more
and it was changes and we've
done that in the past with other
protocols we we currently have
six approved protocols that are
in place and have been this this
a story was passed in two
thousand one for pharmacists
issue protocols and in that time
we have never heard a complaint
of pharmacists stepping outside
of protocols out of their out of
their boundaries but I do want
to point out the medical board
has that authority so they'll
look at the protocol and
determine whether
UT eyes the authority for you to
guys is appropriate to what
pharmacists can do
we get put in the term I'm
complicated at the request of
the New Mexico Medicaid medical
director
at because it's a defined
terminology for them I can't
tell you what it means and what
the limits are that for her and
when she presented and other
committees was very clear that
that defined term did but limits
on what pharmacists can do for
you to you guys my understanding
is but pharmacist will do is is
it's really at sect yes
Representative and if it gets
outside.
I love the pharmacist cope then
they'll do referrals else
they'll send the patient to an
appropriate providers.
They do that now.
Rather rather scopes.
Okay thank you so the patient
would come madam chair
expert.
Representative.
Yeah she's out there somewhere
so the patient would come to the
pharmacy and actually be tested
and potentially treated correct
yes that's correct okay so the
patient comes the pharmacy with
symptoms and you test and the
test is negative you what do you
do at the.
And I I can't tell you what that
protocol will be my
understanding is that there are
potentially false negatives yes
and this others a protocol for
when the the pharmacist would
feel that that that might be a
false negative that that'll be
between really the.
In the development process for
the protocol with the medical
board I'm not exactly sure what
that will be okay thank you
madam chair and that could you
explain to me how the medical
board is going to set up these
protocols because it I just
thought of three or four more
questions about the U. TI for
instance when you test for you
TI and its positives typically
we set up a culture so we know
which antibiotics to treat with.
But the I don't know that that
would happen in the pharmacy
Madam chair representative Johns
the protocol gets developed by a
a practice committee with the
board of pharmacy that's the
first step.
They will come together and
decide we need a protocol for
pharmacists to be able to do you
T. I. testing
and once they determine what
that is they will submit it to
the medical board for the
medical board's approval
I I would like to point out that
these protocols have been
approved in six states and there
are seven states including New
Mexico looking to advances
practices well it is a federal
clear away yes procedure play
away means clinical laboratory.
Innovation administration
something just under the FDA and
it it's been in place since
nineteen eighty eight
pharmacists have been able to do
these tests for years they can
currently do them they just
can't treat for them and that's
what this bill does is still
allow pharmacists to provide the
the patient care without having
to send the patient back to
another provider and delayed
care.
I see yes thank you so madam
chair and I have one more
question
how does hit the play into this
you that when the pharmacist I
mean when the patients come into
the pharmacy do they.
Do they sign those forms and is
that expected the same it would
in a facility yeah Madam chair
representative Jones hit hit the
is a requirement for every
patient care providers
I would not be able to look at
patient records because I'm not
hippa compliant provider so I
wouldn't get to know that but
the pharmacist and the patient
have a responsibility under hip
and and in terms of whatever
documents are required by that
they would require patients to
sign that there is like patient
consent form on all of our
protocol us and the patients
signs that consent form it
provides a lot for the patient
to tell the pharmacist to their
primary care provider is so that
providers can be notified that
the pharmacist did find here
that notices provision is part
of all of our protocols and so
when the patient provides that
information that provider is
notified of what the procedures
and and I can tell you not every
pharmacist is going to do this
we have almost all pharmacists
do immunizations vaccinations
now that that's been a over
twenty year process of getting
pharmacists trying to do that
most technicians do
immunizations now because of
COVID
about four hundred pharmacists
do.
TV testing I think that's one of
our protocols so the numbers
very I'm I'm assuming under this
not all pharmacists will take
the additional training will
require for them to be able to
to do these prescribing
processes.
Well that brings up another
question
How do where do they take those
training madam chair Madam chair
representative expert where do
they take those trainings our
association provides the
training pretty much mostly
there are some other agencies to
provide training there's a for
example are on contraception we
find most of the training for
pharmacists in New Mexico but
there is an organization and
Colorado I mean in California
that provides that training
and.
Those training programs are
approved by the New Mexico board
of pharmacy and and reviewed by
the New Mexico Medical Board.
Okay thank you I'm done.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative are there any
other questions.
Madam chair of make motion for
to pass.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino before we
go forward with that close is
there anything else that you
would stay at madam chairman and
members of the committee I can't
think of anything I could add to
it Mr speaker will have already
told you he's the expert on this
matter all right thank you very
much all right Senator Vincent
Hughes had I'm sorry
Representative Vincent if you
have a second to the the second
I'll second thank you all right
is there any opposition to the
motion.
And then you have in the past
thank you.
The.
Share thank you.
Unless bill for today is the
committee substitute for Senate
bill one oh seven as amended
custody hearings within seventy
two hours.
Good morning madam chair you
ready for us we are ready for
you wonderful thank you so much
Thank you for allowing us to
present a committee substitute
for Senate bill one zero seven
we do have a an amendment.
has that been.
It is.
Thank you do we have the
amendment to the committee
system.
Madam chair the amendment does
three things up before you go
forward would you please with
the tool to the.
The point two two five nine six
one point two I thank you very
much of let's wait for the
substitute to be distributed.
Thank you Senator would you
please proceed explained in the
substitute of the amendment the
amendment yes of course madam
chair members of the committee
the amendment does three things
the first thing it does is that
it provides that with the
department.
As a child in their custody and
they're going to file a petition
in court.
That they will simultaneously
inform the office of Family
representation and if the child
is an Indian child they'll also
simultaneously inform the
child's tracked.
One of the things that we've
been able to identify.
In this process the officer
child Representative out of
federal presentation I has
responsibility to advocate on
behalf of the child.
At these hearings.
And and work with the family.
But one of things we've been
able to identify as a lot of
times they don't get that
information for two or three
days.
And it's a very short time
frame.
So
so if they simultaneously send
it that will buy some invaluable
time.
The second thing that it does is
that one of things of this bill
provides is enhanced review.
Every time a child has been
removed from all return to that
home and removed again.
In the bill set within six
months or extending that to a
year.
And the third thing as it
strikes section three from the
bill.
My striking.
Excuse me Mr he section three
from the bill the fact is that
the.
That the ten day hearing.
We reserve reduced to three
days.
That we then went to five days
with the five day continuance
goes back to ten X..
I mean I have a motion to move
the
the proposal says I so.
Is there any discussion on the
amendment.
Having no discussion on the
amendment.
It's.
Were you introduction I'm.
Okay thank you.
Yes no it's amended you have
mended Committee sensed correct
so madam chair what this what
this bill does now.
Is that like I said it it.
First of all let me just explain
we we came into the session with
a bit of a sledge hammer.
In the first committee.
Are now friends at CYFD.
We've always been friends.
Kate got up and oppose the bill
and we actually got out of
activity nine zero.
But then afterwards we got to
have some conversations.
And and so.
When a child is removed from use
in the collecting the soldiers
of the business cases.
The current law says that the
case worker has two days.
To fight it also placement.
Or to file a petition court.
Or to return the child.
That's not a lot of time.
However these have to be done
quickly.
But in talking to the parliament
and talking to some of the rank
and file folks.
We realized was the biggest gift
we can give them is the gift of
time.
And that is to give them a third
day.
So what we're doing is we're
extending from two days to three
days.
The time for them to just to
determine if they need to file a
petition and those are all to
replacement or the Josh return.
That those three days are
extended to five days.
If we're doing the enhanced
review.
If that child was returned to
the home.
Has removed again within a year.
Then that case has to be
reviewed by somebody above the
level supervisor.
Along with the judge's court
attorney and we give them five
days to be the case to make that
determination.
Because what we're trying to do
is we're trying to fact those
out latter cases.
We've had some cases where
children have been.
Thank you for the home returned
thank you for the whole returned
as many as sixteen or eighteen
times.
All the research says that's not
good for the child it's not good
for the home no matter what else
is going on.
So that's what we want that has
overview with a little bit of
extra time for them to do the
work.
So that's the first thing so the
first it does three days in most
cases.
Five days with the man's review
and it creates an enhanced
review.
The third thing then is it has
now with the amendment the
simultaneous.
Notification to the office of
federal presentation and the
jobs tribe if the child is an
Indian child.
And then and and so and then the
hearing still takes place within
ten days.
But now it's going to be more it
meaningful hearing.
Because everybody's gonna have
more information by the time
they get there does this solve
all the problems it does not.
However this is very targeted.
To to work within the resources
of the department which are
limited.
We have the magic wand.
We get the next hundred eighty
social workers.
Because we don't have a magic
wand.
We're finessing within their
current situation.
In order to work on these abuse
and neglect cases and make sure
that these children are safe.
That there's a more thoughtful
review.
And for those kids go back and
forth to make sure that those
cases really get eyes on thank
you.
Yes of course and actually if
you don't mind we're gonna have
them introduce themselves to the
public comment.
During public comment.
If we could
Okay good.
My name is Maryland back I'm the
founder and executive director
of New Mexico child first
network this is a priority bill
for us New Mexico remains
actually the most extreme out
wire in the short term
placements stays and so these
kids that continue to come and
this revolving door of trauma
and we just think that the
Sanchez representatives it's
bipartisan and then also the
department in the advocates this
is been just a real I'm
collaborative efforts since day
one of the session and I think
we are here before you to
present a very good bills that
will have immediate relief on
some of our most vulnerable
cases so we're here to support
it thank you.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Emily Martin I'm the director
of protective services that CYFD
I don't think I have anything to
add from what Senator Ivy Soto
already stated this bill really
has I thank him and all of the
sponsors for working in
listening work with us to
understand what the problems are
what challenges are work our
staff face and more importantly
our children and families face
this as he said this will not
solve all of the problems that
will not solve our short stay
here issue and full but is a
huge piece of the puzzle into
addressing short stairs as well
as repeat maltreatment so thank
you very much.
I will go to the audience is
there anyone here in support of
of a committee substitute for
Senate bill one of seven please
come forward.
And you will have one minute.
Madam chair.
Hey I have a booming voice I
have to be careful about madam
chair members of the committee
Karen Canaday with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and while we
have not seen the committee
substitute we support everything
that has been said by this
entire our panel here we believe
very strongly that these most
vulnerable children really need
to be protected and they need to
be protected from has one of
your expert says the revolving
doors we really appreciate these
efforts and we really appreciate
that it is targeted and it is
very micro focused because
that's what's needed at CYFD
because there are so many
different examples that they
face thank you.
Thank you.
Hi I'm doctor Diana Trujillo I'm
the independent clinical social
worker and I work with children
youth and families in the
behavioral health services and I
just wanted to speak in favor of
the bill of having that
additional time in the up front
is
Works along with that
individualized planning process
that CYFD is implementing of
which helps collaborating with
the family so this gives us
enough time to help and and
identify underlying needs that
presented and allegations of
abuse or neglect or how they
came into contact with CYFD
with that additional time excuse
me to to make these assessments
we could help determine what
needs we can support the family
with and sustainable needs so
that way they're not coming back
and we're closing cases and.
Hope that includes my time I'm
sorry.
Thank you very much we
appreciate that going to the
zoom is there anyone else stands
in support of of Senate bill one
of seven.
I see Beth you Leah.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Julia director of the office
family representation advocacy
which will provide legal
representation for all children.
Well well legal system beginning
on July first.
Representation and advocacy
or or persistence in support of
SB one of seven as amended
thanks to the sponsors for
working with us to read all that
protects the safety with extra
time for investigation and
review and analysis taken into
custody within walking or
or previous criminal
investigation at the same time
the bill also ensures that.
Public private work contact
information to the trials and
responsibilities and to the
prior so they are able to
provide meaningful
representation and input the ten
day custody during which is part
of a proceeding in these cases
so thank you very much the
Sanchez thank you for that.
Thank you.
Center for the hands of the zone
hello to the committee are there
any questions Representative
Jones thank you madam chair I
just wanna say thank you for
making together on this this is
this is great I mean I'm
emotional so I know it's it's
one step but it's a step in is
to help our kids and and I
really appreciate it glad to
have the opportunity to vote for
it.
Thank you I don't see any of the
committee courses I do have one
question is Senator
Representative when we when you
talk about the decision is a
decision to file a petition I an
alternate place with the talent
to return the child to the
parent where is the child doing
this three day period.
Let me let me.
Turn the expert on.
Madam chair the
Law enforcement has the
authority has the sole authority
currently to provide CYFD with
emergency custody so when law
enforcement whether any time of
day provide CYFD with the
custody of a child
we immediately place that child
in of a licensed foster homes or
with even more importantly in
our policies lift this up is
that we are looking at relatives
immediately and working on
licensing those relatives from
the moment we identify them so
that children are going with
their family first and foremost
for their can't can care givers.
Okay thank you for the
clarification so I just need to
go back for a moment there was
them
A confusion about whether or not
ask for opposition to this bill
in the audience was there any
opposition to a Senate bill one
oh seven a committee substitute.
All right I'm going to the of
our to the zoom again was there
any opposition to the Senate
bill a committee substitute for
one oh seven as amended.
All right seeing no no comments
there any other comments from
the committee no man charged for
two passed Hey this is the most
important passes their second.
I can't all right there is a
second and the most important to
pass at the second.
And what is your motion can you
state the.
The last.
Madam mover do passive SB one oh
seven as amended.
Committee substitute Committee
set to do.
There's a motion for a new path
for the committee substitute for
Senate bill one oh seven as
amended and there is a second is
there any opposition to the
motion.
Sen opposition you have a pass
thank you all.
Committee is now in recess until
Monday morning at eight thirty
AM.
