Presentation and I will be
limiting public comment on the
abortion one since we heard a
portion already and we had a lot
of public comment so we'll start
with house bill one fifty four
Representative we go ahead thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee did the committee
receive my amendments.
Yes okay so I I would like to
Have these amendments include
included.
I made a motion to it discuss
the amendment okay go ahead
Representative Vincent Belcher
I'll make the motion that we
hear the amendment.
Okay.
The circle head okay and madam
chair also noticed the amendment
wasn't covered in the title and
I know that something I can fix
them down the road or with a
friendly amendment of some sort
but as far as the bill goes
Madam chair representative
representatives when we
establish a cannabis Act.
What we're doing now is trying
to kind of clean up the areas
that we missed and the problems
that are happening specifically
that two bills are going to be
presenting deal with children
and trying to clean up what we
call
and that this bill for the
delinquency code and it what
what it would do is so at this
point it's a civil penalty and
any child to is caught with
cannabis and drug paraphernalia
goes through magistrate court
the problem is is that the
schools and these different
entities that deal with children
and I would consider the similar
madam chair representatives as
to minor in possession of
alcohol and so we choose statute
and if you go through the
statute you can see that they're
often crimes that are a legal
for children but they are then
they're not even call crimes are
called delinquent acts of
delinquent acts that are illegal
for children but not for adults
so what this bill does is is
handle similar to like a minor
possession of alcohol it adds it
under the section aware now you
can look at that is that and I'm
gonna go to page four of the
bill where it talks about now
when a child possesses cannabis
or drug paraphernalia which is
still against the law for a
child to possess it's it's
actually in the cannabis statute
that we have some options to
help these kids so what's
happening is as schools are
seeing these children and I'm
not talking the young young ones
I'm talking you know you're
teenagers
and the older ones and they're
coming to school high and
there's not a lot of other
things that the schools can do
with them you can't call the
police we can get them services
that refers to the civil code
which they have to do some a
little bit of training and a
little bit of community service
and then.
sent on their way and I think
there's a lot of misconception
that marijuana is not bad for
kids as like alcohol in a
controlled substances but spent
a lot of research shows that
marijuana for Children can lead
to school difficulties problems
with memory concentration
increased aggression car
accidents use of drugs or
alcohol risky sexual behaviors
we're seeing of underlying
mental health conditions
including mood changes suicidal
thinking and increased risk of
psychosis interference with
prescribed medication and then
get continued use can even cause
more problems and the long term
use of marijuana can lead to a
cannabis use disorder the same
breathing problems of smoking
cigarettes which is costing
coughing wheezing trouble
physical activity and lung
cancer decreased motivation or
interest and can lead to a
decline in academic or
occupational performance lower
intelligence mental health
problems such as schizophrenia
depression anxiety anger
irritability moodiness and risk
of suicide so more want to get a
very long term consequences for
juveniles and so what this bill
does is if there is a juvenile
who is found to be in possession
and there of the certain age
obviously if a child is six or
seven and they get their hands
on it but that's a whole
different deal together that
we'll be discussing in the next
bill but it gives the school a
chance to get them into CYFD and
and get the services they need
so juvenile probation can become
involved they can refer them to
law enforcement or to need the
GPO and then the JPL can meet
with them they can handle it
unofficially they will do a
preliminary inquiry with them
they will see what their family
situations are is as a child I
just messed up one time as a
child is coming to school high
five or six or seven times is
our family problem do we need to
get this child possibly in the
system to where we can order
them into residential treatment
or server.
This is for the family and a lot
of that all happens before
there's even a decision whether
to take it to a level of filing
a delinquent act or what we call
a petition which is just sending
a child our juvenile court and I
rerelease a prosecutor would see
petitions for minors in
possession of alcohol or
possession of marijuana and less
it was a five six referrals and
we really needed to get this kid
some help in the only way to do
it was to do it through a
process like that I would remind
the court that any of those
records are also sealed as a
juvenile and the point of this
bill is to help children we we
can't let our kids just be going
to school getting high we've got
to give our teachers the ability
to deal with them and we've got
to help them and we did look at
we've gotten feedback from lots
of schools and all the schools
bliver talus Santa Fe house
Hobbs
let me know four oh Rio Rancho
we've we've just been reaching
out and they're all having
problems with kids coming to
school high and being high in
school and so this is what the
intent of this bill is trying to
do is to really allow schools
and in CYFD to get involved and
give services to these kids so
we can stop them in their tracks
we for the become adults become
addicted to it there was
something analysis of this was
going to detain more use I ate
one hundred percent disagree
with that I rarely saw use
detained for anything but a
violent offense most most cities
don't even have general
detention centers in my area and
they were to drive three hours
to take them to a juvenile
detention center and they would
basically
you know not do it because it's
just too far of a drive and it's
just not a serious crime so if
you if you get to.
I would even say if the crime is
it's called a delinquent act
it's not called a prime so we
felt that they should not be any
different than if you were to
possess alcohol as a minor when
you turn eighteen under the
statute that we've re re re done
you will go through the civil
system of a fine and some some I
think it's community service we
also keep that in the bill to
help and some you know I think a
class is what it is so we do
differentiate between eighteen
to twenty one year olds when
they're adults but we have to
get a hold on our kids and we're
having issues with packaging or
having issues with schools and
and people this is just
something we need to tie up and
protect our kids and give them
the most resources possible and
so that is the intent of the
bill and with that madam chair
of stand for any questions.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience anyone here in
opposition.
You want to speak.
Come on up.
Do we have a Mike.
You can come up to yeah you
could come up and sit.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my
name is terra mark Intel and the
deputy director for the children
youth and families department we
do have some concerns with this
bill
specifically that we feel that
it's more harshly penalizes
juveniles than it does those
that are eighteen to twenty one
years old
as mentioned of you know if we
look at alcohol use of the of
juveniles the agency currently
has the ability to
Individually assess each each
our client that we may receive
consult with behavioral health
services and then try to
determine the most appropriate
services for those youth.
As we do believe that it would
increase referrals if you look
at our data prior to FY twenty
two
Cannabis use at made up about
ten percent of our overall
referrals after FY twenty two is
about point two percent of the
referral so we do expect
caseloads to increase and of
course we also have to consider
is caseloads increase its effect
on disproportionate minority
contact
potential for increased
attentions and also increased
referrals the reason why
increased referrals is
concerning is because currently
our juvenile probation officers
have an option that within a two
year period they can handle up
to three cases informally and so
if you increase referrals that
could
Remove their ability to handle
as.
Those informally.
And.
And lastly at there's a concern
that there's no identified
resource or entity that's
responsible for providing
The mandatory sanctions so this
additional requirement would be
imposed on the individual
communities are the department
to provide resources that meet
for those
To meet the evidence based
educational components that the
bill requires thank you so much
we will go to still fill up with
Cape.
Yes you hear me OK right.
Yes I want to voice my
opposition to all.
Of marijuana use all the shop
should be closed down this is a
crime to allow this of.
Drug to be sold it's against god
almighty
of the you must vote to
stop the use of marijuana and
the selling of it.
That's my Oprah that you stop
doing this.
Thank you.
Emily Kaltenbach.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee we called him up
with the drug policy alliance.
we stand in opposition to this
bill.
The language in the the campus
regulation act around this issue
of you was very intentional not
not to further criminalize young
people I do understand the
intent of the sponsor and that
we need to health approach but
I'm getting services for young
people through the criminal
legal system is not the Avenue
in which we should do that we
need to built out prevention and
education treatment and factor
based education in the schools
around cannabis we kids I need
services not criminalization we
need to create a safe space for
them in school where they can
seek out help without the fear
criminalization I also just want
to agree with that the comment
that was made about in
increasing Act there are
the increasing kids in the
committee goal system even if
they're not detained they now
have a criminal record and that
plants people for the rest of
your life their life and I just
lastly would say that this
language tracks with in New York
state cannabis laws well thank
you madam chair next is bill.
Hello my name is bill airy a I.
R. Y. Schardin put my full name
on I would just like to say
that.
The strikes me that it's
incredibly naive to think that
without some some form of civil
penalty or the threat of it the
young people are going to
somehow seek out safe spaces or
school counselors of to advise
them on the best way to deal
with marijuana it's a peer
pressure element that drives
kids to gauge in this having
heard the long list of potential
life changing physical mental
and emotional problems that can
arise through marijuana use with
young people including by the
way cognitive cognitive of
trauma that occurs with young
people
having heard all of that how can
we do anything other than try to
instill some measure of civil
Committee are for young people
caught using marijuana we have
to make it strong enough it
overcomes the peer pressure on
thank you thank you bill okay
that was a little mixed bag so
we will go to the audience for
support.
Hey come on come on up if you
want to speak.
And you get one minute I should
have said that before.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is JD Vasco's.
And I want to remind you that in
twenty twenty.
You passed a law legalizing
marijuana.
And our governor said all sign
it.
If our children are protected.
Now look at the numbers look at
the psychosis that is coming to
us as a result of passing that
bill.
I'm in favor of what ever
treatment might be rendered our
children.
That it may go against.
That horrendous bill that you
passed in darkness nobody was in
that building but the governor
was outside in the sunlight
shining sunlight shining hers
signing away the goodness that's
gonna come from marijuana with
the with the representatives
behind clapping their hands so
now we're here.
And I would suggest this the
every penny that you have
acquired thank from marijuana
would be spent in treatment.
anyone else.
What's the speak if I could turn
off my.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Lauren hill
on the senior director of
operations for Clovis schools in
support of the bill as a tool
and resource for us to use in
dealing with juveniles under the
influence and cannabis
possession.
The it had an increase of thirty
two percent in schools from
August to February first
compared to last year so I feel
that that shows the need for
some additional tools in this
bill being one of those tools
thank you.
You.
Anyone else want to speak in
for.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is at the
heart and executive director of
right to life committee in New
Mexico and I'm here in support
of this bill because right now
in our state our kids we have a
number one suicide rate in the
nation already.
I have worked with kids from all
I've taught school in and it
also depends is an
administrative and it is known
that when they begin to use
drugs the money is altered the
Economic those decisions affect
most kids have the attention of
a toddler it's been taught that
as well we need to be able to
tell these kids no bigger saying
to us please tell us no please
stop please support this bill
thank you so much.
Health.
Go ahead.
Good morning madam chair.
Representative my name is
crystal good tears on the
director of health related
services with Clovis schools I
works directly with the school
nurses and the mental health
providers and I just want to let
you know that with this bill it
we still create a safe space to
talk about any abuse with the
drugs or or anything like that
so what we are trying to say is
that you're not to bring these
drug products to school in be
using this ensuring these drugs
at school but there is still a
safe space to bring your issues
and concerns with the substance
abuse thank you.
We will go to soon we've got
maybe.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you for taking my call
this is Marcy many I am standing
in support of this bill.
we just have the program
just say no to drugs and that
was supposed to be the more
thing but now it seems like you
know this big thing of like oh
yeah we should be able to do
drugs and the adults and the.
Legislation that passed that
bill they are the ones
responsible for this and maybe
we should put some criminal
charges and those who pass this
because we can see the numbers
have substantially increased we
should also hold those the
campus people for selling drugs
to children and get allowing
them to get into their hands
that's just Representative
reprehensible thank you thank
you.
We have
The net because steel.
Chair and members of the
committee thank you yes there
has been studies numerous
studies shown that the use of
marijuana actually inhibits the
person so I'm growing up that's
the last thing we need
is a bunch of ads for life and
New Mexico you know part of life
is teaching your children how to
grow up and how to be a citizen
a good citizen a law abiding
citizen of you know our state
and this is just I think was
another tactic to dumb down the
community and our children and
we need to fight against that
and realize that and look at the
big picture I thank you for your
time today thank you okay we
will go to the committee I have
Representative Ferrary.
Try this with job.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative right
I think what you might have
implied was that we penalize
youth with for alcohol
possessions and we don't.
That is not what we've done in
our state we penalized people
who provide alcohol to people
younger to use.
This is counter to everything
that we've been trying to do and
to penalize youth and have this
on their record or for them to
miss school
it this is just a really
not science based or anything
you're making it so that even
people who are under eighteen
would have even further
penalties than those between
eighteen and twenty one so this.
Bill is not a right to go we
need more prevention we need
more
Of behavioral health counseling
in the schools and programs that
will help
students realize the harms as an
underage person because as their
brain is developing these are
some of the things that affect
their development for judgment
and critical thinking so
penalizing the students is a
terrible thing to do and I do
not support your bill.
Madam chair can I comment yes
and Representative I I
respectfully disagree because it
is against the law for a child
to process alcohol into our
twenty one years of age.
When you're eighteen to twenty
one if you go to the statute you
have mandatory things you have
to do however if you're under
the age of eighteen and you're
possessing alcohol you go
through the delinquency system
and it's not penalizing them
it's helping that we're trying
to help these kids before they
get into the adult system if
there's an alcohol problem were
there something that needs to be
done and and everyone keeps
turning it is penalizing it's
helping them these these
children go through a referral
to children youth and families
and when they go to the referral
the GPO sits down with them and
they talk to them is their
problem in the family do you
have parents who were involved
in the system and what can we do
to help you like a a you don't I
would save ten percent the time
you see these go through
juvenile system criminally
because there's nothing else
they can do but actually get
them into appropriations so that
we can get them into a treatment
program if it if it reaches that
fact of madam chair I got an MIP
I was a district attorney for
eighteen years I got an in my P.
and I think they could tell
right away when they brought me
in as an unofficial referral
that I was going to be fine and
that's what this process is to
do is to is to pull these kids
out see do we have an issue this
is the same with marijuana when
you legalize marijuana you still
made it a crime for a child to
possess it it's it's just like a
minor possession so if you're
under the age of eighteen you
basically are not allowed to
possess it so going through
magistrate court and making them
do it a class in and maybe some
community service is not
addressing the root issue for
these kids what if you have a
kid who five times as come to
school high has no parental
involvement it brings these kids
to see why FTE so that they can
talk to them and say how can we
help you how can we make you not
somebody who's going to screw
your life up or or basically you
know being that I'm per day
because the.
The study is behind it that it's
not good for kids so I
respectfully disagree and think
this is helping kids avoid the
system is not penalizing them
it's helping them if there is a
situation where you've got a kid
coming hi to school six or seven
times yeah I I think that most
people who understand this
situation would want them to go
through the juvenile system
where they have a probation
officer and attorney and we can
order them into a long term
residential treatment program
and make sure they stay and make
sure they get clean and then
they come back out in the
productive children again so I I
disagree we're penalizing them
we're helping them and when this
act was placed in place we
disregarded what was going to
happen to kids and so I do
believe this is the right way to
handle it's how we're handling
it with alcohol it's how we
handle it with many other crimes
that are listed because just
because you're under the age of
eighteen doesn't mean that it's
a legal it's legal for you to
process it and it just thrown
through civil court like it's a
a traffic ticket we're ignoring
all these things that it's doing
to our kids and we we as
legislators have got to protect
our kids and if we can give them
the services they need that's
what we need to do so I
appreciate your points but I
respectfully disagree and I'm
going to ask to please keep
questions and answers brief we
still have four more bills that
we really need to get through.
To get yes just your floor thank
you
If this bill were going to
have.
Penalties for the people who
find.
the cannabis to the student or
are allow them to you know get
it from the home then I would be
for this bill and Madam chair
representative of their bills
out there that are it is legal
to give juveniles.
Potter more work at one of our
cannabis is under the cannabis
Act so those bills are already
in place all support them but
not this.
Anyway Representative Travis.
I think.
I also.
How do we.
I do that legislative office.
I didn't realize I didn't have a
Mike I think everybody heard me
though so I'm not gonna repeat
myself but I also do want to say
that I agree with the comments
that CYFD maybe and the person
from the drug policy alliance
this is not the way to deal with
issues that you've raised
penalizing our kids and making
making it a criminal activity
there's other ways to do this I
do not support this legislation
thank you madam chair
representative just a reminder
for members we are not allowed
to use the handheld so
Representative insect.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I'm gonna support should be a.
Because I like what you're
saying the kids have to be held
accountable and we have to be
tough for our kids we've gotten
so soft as a society on our
children that my dad told me a
long time ago whenever I was a
kid if I catch you smoking
marijuana I'm not gonna tell you
what he said he's gonna do to me
any put that fear in my brain
and I'm I'm not a marijuana user
I never have been.
It's not that we're penalizing
children.
But whenever they are caught.
Not obeying the law.
And a police officer pulled him
over madam chair and
representative and they are in
possession of marijuana what
happens
madam chair and Representative
at this point they would be
issued a citation to go to I
believe it's Manchester court
they would be ordered to take up
for our class and do some
community service.
Thank you madam chair you we're
not talking about they're going
to prison they're not doing none
of that we're just gonna hold
them accountable and we're going
to get him back on track where
they belong madam chair chair
representative that's the
current state of the law what
we're trying to do is get the
more accessibility through the
system for treatment and family
services and while I agree that
you can make a referral CYFD you
can't order a child to do
anything and if a child needs to
be ordered into a treatment
program if it really gets to
that point you have no ability
to make them go to that
treatment program thank you and
madam chair representative.
Have you talked to school
superintendent all Madam chair
representative I've talked to
schools I've talked to juvenile
probation officers and they all
said this is be a great tool for
them to help kids in the schools
help them not deal with so many
time consuming issues in the
schools where they can refer
them to the juvenile probation
office juvenile probation
officer says that they can they
can help with the situation
Council parents and do what they
can to get these kids on the
right track this is what we did
prior to this law at B. and M.
enacted and we help kids all the
time you had a drug problem with
marijuana this isn't new we work
penalizing we weren't student
leaders selected them out
because of their race
I I just don't buy that argument
I never have bought that
argument we're getting the kids
they help they need the help
they need and help their
families need before they enter
into the criminal system it does
not ever meeting the charge is
going to be filed it is a
referral and then if that that
kid will not work with them or
the kid cannot get better the
family beats Services kid starts
running ways come to school high
every day it gives us an option
to help this kid and you'd be
surprised how many parents
actually come up to me and say I
want my kid in the system
because it's the only way it's
going to go to treatment to get
better the only way so you're
taking all those options away
from them because we're afraid
that we're penalizing kids we're
helping kids.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I wonder why those
superintendents believe the way
they believe is a data driven.
And then at Madam chair
representative we've got so many
emails from superintendents and
schools and they will talk about
what a problem this is in their
schools and they want to help.
Senator the ones dealing with
the children it's easy to sit up
here as a committee and for
people to make comments when
they're not dealing with this on
a day to day basis thank you.
And madam chair representative.
Just since everybody's listening
and I have constituents
listening back home.
I want everybody to know that
I'm color blind not literally
but I don't look at your skin.
I don't look at your skin I
never have when I ran on an
ambulance and never looked at
somebody's skin color to see how
is going to treat him.
And it's it's very offensive to
me when I hear that and I know
maybe it does exist but it's
never going to exist with me so
the other thing that I want to
ask Madam chair representative
is.
Have you talked to police Madam
chair representative I've talked
to please I work with police
this again is another tool to
help kids get him off the
streets it's another resource to
help kids it's not it's not the
cops are going around looking to
bus kids who are possessing
marijuana that is not their
intent but they come across it
in the schools at least are
superintendent can call and get
help from law enforcement to get
them to see why do it and see if
there's something we need to do
to help thank you and madam
chair representative I heard
CYFD and I know we're we're
working day to give CYFD all the
tools that they need and I know
that the referrals are going to
go up but it's worth it if we
can get him into the system and
there and we have to add more
people to see why if the it's
worth it because those kids are
our future and we got to keep
them on track kids in my opinion
they get off in the weeds very
easily and as a cowboy guy when
you're driving Katelin one your
cals go off you got to go get it
you don't just let him get off
the we've got to go get him and
bring him back on the back with
the so that's that's the way I
believe.
Madam chair representative.
I've talked to merging sea
Services and I asked them about
the marijuana and and how the
calls are running and because of
the potency.
Because I wanted I was kind of
naive when it came to marijuana
marijuana when they used to grow
it I guess it was just of of I
don't know it's just marijuana
but now they cross bred it and
there's all the different
strains and now the potency
levels is way up and because I
live in a tourist town people
come to town they will let their
hair down the smoke this joint
they do the instead of just
taking a couple puffs off of it
they do the whole thing and they
go into a straight panic mode.
So much that they call nine one
one and the calls have gone up
now are people gonna die from
it.
Can I remind you to stay on the
bills what we I'm on the bill
madam chair I'm on the bill
madam chair this is very
important my constituents back
home and what I'm saying is with
the potency of it.
our our children are getting it
our adults are getting it and
you know the adults at least
they're thinking I don't want to
try that again because it was
just too much so that was their
one and done our kids.
I want to know what
What types of services.
Do our kids have available to
them if they do get caught with
marijuana
Madam chair representative we
got a couple bill's going and
one of the packaging and one of
the school safety hub right now
that we're trying to up those
resources to help kids and and
Education Committee but right
now if if under this
Representative under this bill
if if they were to get caught
with cannabis we could get them
to be talking to counselors
outpatient treatment family
counseling if there's issues in
the family that all of them need
to deal with if we need to go
into a residential treatment
program they can go into a
residential treatment program
they can go into different types
of teen courts and and things
that can just you know give them
the support that they need in
order to and it's also then
maybe you know CYFD does of a
plan and it makes them make sure
they go through with it and to
say the referrals are gonna go
up of course our referrals are
going to go up there can be no
different than what they were
before we passed it because this
is what we did before we passed
it and our kids were safe they
were rarely going to court on
this issue but we were treating
them before that time and I'm
sorry if the way FTEs referrals
will go up that is part of their
job.
Reminder to please try not
things Madam okay Madam chair
representative I appreciate to
bring this bill because I think
our kids were safe thank you
thank you Representative the
pesky.
I think we need to act on the
amendment so I move to table the
amendment.
That.
Okay Ralph to table the
amendment.
Representative K..
Representative Chavis.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative had a meal.
Representative Jones I needed.
Representative Lord.
Hands.
This to table.
Representative fences no.
Okay.
Madam vice chair again yes to
table you madam chair Thompson
yes.
To.
So by a vote of five to to your
amendment is table back on the
bill
Representative Representative
Ferrary madam chair I move to
table the bill that.
Okay take the role please okay.
Representative Kate.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Ferrary yes to
table Representative Hotmail
Representative Jones.
I'm sorry I'm so okay what will
pause the vote I didn't see your
hand I'm sorry.
I'm sorry use.
Yeah I need to okay.
Reminder to keep things brief I
will turn.
I Madam chair and a
Representative Reese I really
appreciate you bringing this
bill I think it's clear that
since we passed to the the laws
to legalize marijuana here in
the state that the use of a
juvenile a juvenile marijuana
use has exploded and I know as a
pediatric nurse I've seen that
that the research that's that's
come from that shows that brain
development and the ability for
children to function
has just.
As decreased because the brain
is still developing and for us
not to have any kind of
parameters or any kind of helps
in place for these kids that are
specific to this marijuana use
that they have so much peer
pressure to use is is really so
wrong I know we have we have so
many single parents that are
That need to have the help of
the legal system to really
enforce this with their kids
they I I see this as not
punitive and I know it there is
a difference between
criminalizing and a delinquent
act as you stated many many
times here today in spite of it
keeps coming up that it's we're
criminalizing these kids it's
not other record it is is
something that helps children
helps families and I see that so
is it true that there the
records are sealed up until
eighteen years of age yes madam
chair and Representative Jones
do Raul records are sealed.
Okay so what is the difference
between.
That and what happens between
eighteen and twenty one because
I heard someone say that maybe
we should increase the penalties
from eighteen to twenty one so
the eighteen to twenty one
provision in the statute just
basically requires because are
now in adults going to
magistrate court and they take a
class on I guess more want to
safety and they do some
community service they're
considered adults at that point
and so it's a civil penalty and
that's what happens with them at
that point.
Okay
Okay I finished okay I'm sorry
about that Representative Jones
I didn't see you so much if you
can with the roll call vote okay
Representative John.
Could you repeat what we're
doing at all no.
Representative Lord
Representative pants again.
Yes.
Representative Vincent no.
Non vice chairman in this Madam
chair Thomas yes.
I voted five to to your bill is
been tabled.
And then you're up again.
Right.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
representative sis's H. B. one
fifty seven I would like to
introduce and my experts larger
hill senior director of
operations at Clovis schools and
Krista good tears says she's the
head nurse for our schools this
bill
Is that we probably have some
handouts and they're of pictures
did everybody received those
okay and we actually put him in
a diagram this bill is basically
talking about the re packaging
to make it this type of product
not entice you to our small
children as you can see from
these diagrams
and these different products it
looks like candy and serial and
things of that nature and so
when a kid in a younger kids you
know and H. a toddler six seven
they see these types of
products whether it's in the
schools which we have found so
much of this in our schools and
I'll be referring to my experts
for that
they naturally go towards them
because they look and imitate
what's at a product that's out
there that kids think is
actually something they can have
so what we're trying to do in
this bill is make it to where
the packaging laws are being
changed and one thing it would
require is that there be an
opaque packaging
with that opaque packaging you
can't see what the product is so
a child would not be able to
actually tell what it looks like
this we're in the shape of the
candy bar or gummies that say
grape grape grape or cherry
cherry cherry also it cannot
mimic the brand design name
local color or anything of that
consumers that some other
consumer has it would make it a
friendly to a child the labels
can't resemble cartoons symbols
or images or licenses of other
products
and then there would be a
warning label including a
pictorial representation that
that it's not safe for children
and so these are drugs that have
been found in.
All of your schools and I have
gone to the dispensaries and I
have looked at these types of
products and I don't see these
and everyone of I do see candy
bars that look like candy bars I
see gummies that clearly you can
see they look like a committee
I actually I think IT
distributor was appeared to
spend million I watched him give
a another legislative member
pack of gummies and the the the
one side was clear look like
dummies in the other side
heather warning labels on it so
what's happening is these little
kids are grabbing these cereals
whatever these are high potent
marijuana concentrations and
they're taking these to school
and because they look like candy
or they're eating them at home
and there ended up in the
hospital and emergency rooms and
they're getting sick and this is
a very big concern of ours the
civil penalty for doing
something right now like this
under the cannabis violations is
is basically a civil penalty
the gate would believe it falls
under twenty six two C. eight
where they look at their license
and they can find of up to ten
thousand dollars they can do a
plan of correction and they
compose any other type of
sanctions they want to spend
their license one thing when I
did talk to the dispensaries as
they said it would not be
expensive to change the
packaging to opaque it just is
going to take us three or four
months which is why put the date
out to August so would give them
time to actually change the
packaging and they could still
put their products under the
under the cabinet but this type
of packaging would not be
allowed no I've met some of this
is probably coming in from other
states and this is going to help
us really quick determined you
know where some of the stuff is
coming from and some of the
stuff is in our local
dispensaries and where I've
talked to people in dispensaries
and so they've seen you know
lemon drops just anything you
can.
Think of us out there and
associate streamlined danger
straight kids if a parent that
opaque packaging does happen in
a parent does leave this out for
their kid we can still charge
the the parent with child abuse
for leaving a product like this
and offer child the dangers of
life or safety so we can still
deal with the parent and a
criminal role if necessary but I
would like to defer to my
experts and what they've heard
from other schools and what the
problems they're having in their
schools.
Madam chair representative so we
reached out to superintendents
in nursing staffs across the
state last week after a previous
bill earlier in the week just
some comments from those other
school districts definitely seen
an increase last week sent sent
a student by ambulance to the
hospital is that eight an entire
receives B. species cereal bar
six sections the potency comes
back into question about one
serving multiple servings the
students are not able to
distinguish that and they're
being transported via EMS rope
oreos sour patch and then the
nicotine it's being disguised
it's actually T. H. C..
That's from health services
coordinator another school
district tex mex tex mex laced
with THC transported by EMS.
Michael district here in the
state also seeing that
implemented a drug testing
policy for students so service
to say that if it's happening in
a micro district attending all
across the state.
Seeing increasing cannabis
related products gummy bears
made to look like children's
candy on the suckers and some
chocolate bars.
Have experiencing very
occasionally younger students
bring cannabis gummies from home
and wanting to share them with
friends.
Typical snack contained looks
like a typical snack but
contains THC and then another
one right into our schools
answer is a definite yes an
increase in cannabis use a
particular this particular
district has one alcohol drug
and substance abuse counselor
but to many students involved in
under the influence for that one
council as one of our largest
districts in New Mexico thank
you.
Alright to Chris Harris.
Good morning madam chair
representative again my name is
crystal could hear some of the
director of health related
services for Clovis schools
thank you for allowing me to
speak today I've been a nurse
for ten years for those years
have been in the school setting
allow me to share the hardships
that we've been experiencing
with the increased use and
possession of cannabis products
on campus Canice cannabis is a
schedule one drug it is the same
category as heroin and I think
that we need to remember how
serious that this usage is for
our children.
I have brought it displayed this
was created by the creek county
DWI task force and I think it
just shows the shocking
resemblance these imitations I
think as adults it's hard for us
to distinguish the difference.
As adults it's hard for us to
distinguish the difference
between what is has TCN white
doesn't so this I am very
thankful that was shared with us
but this is what is that our
kids finger tips at what age
were your children when they
recognize the golden arches of
McDonald's if your children are
like mine it was before they can
read.
We as young children they
recognize in the trust signs and
symbols and things that they're
familiar with unfortunately
edibles and vapes have been
found on our school campuses at
an alarming rate this is not
just a teenage problem we've
been seeing this at the
elementary to.
Ingestion is often intentional
but sometimes it's accidental
this information may not be
surprising because the day after
cannabis sales became legal in
New Mexico a story came chair
bureau Sandoval county reported
one of their schools had to send
twelve children home after
ingesting gummies that was
shared by cost me we have found
cap cannabis edibles and mimic
original brands that often
contain potent levels of THC
experts recommend that first
time cannabis users use one to
two point five milligrams and
like Mr hill was saying most of
these serving size candies are
six hundred milligrams so it's
six hundred times what the
recommended dosage said these
kids are unaware and they're
using it and their overdosing.
Our first hand experience was
with the student who eight
Romero says you can see here
there's a nerd rope
Representative it did have six
hundred milligrams of THC in the
student was unable to walk
unable to talk and able to set
up and stay awake not to mention
the projectile vomiting that
comes with that that our school
nurses are having to sit with
and deal with and.
Warning labels are often
inconspicuous in comparison to
the colorful bubbly fun of the
package we need to increase
awareness to help stop these
products being made in a way
that is appealing to kids this
year we have had forty five drug
hearings in these are just the
kids who actually been caught
with that we know that there's
plenty more we still have four
months to go these forty five
drug hearings I want you to know
what that looks like featured
school administrators being
pulled away from their
leadership duties supporting
teachers educating now they're
having to ride up investigate
reports on each of these drug
situations imagine one or two
police officers being pulled
from the street having to come
down and write a report in it
investigate where this came from
who they shared these products
with
there's also no consequences
these kids know that when the
police come that they have no
accountability nothing to
You know they may be suspended
from school or get some sort of
a consequence from the school
but they otherwise will not face
any other consequences.
EMS has been called to campuses
because school nurses they're
dealing with this and sometimes
we don't have the resources to
help them when they are having
difficulty breathing so we are
exhausting our health care
professionals in a time of were
added unprecedented shortage
school nurses are being pulled
away from students who have
health needs like diabetic care
as much because they are in
their offices with multiple
students doing drug assessments
taking away from those other
kids with serious health
conditions.
Our administrators and school
personnel need help with
hundreds of different cannabis
products on the market in the
demand for the breeding of a PO
instruments schools and
communities need a more
proactive approach our first
encounters with edibles are
district experience we reached
out for help we wanted to inform
our communities make parents
aware in it that's reports like
these were made this is not just
a Clovis problem but like Mr
hood read multiple nurses nurse
leaders across the state have
shared their concern and their
frustration because we're
overwhelmed we we don't know
what to do the curry county
prevention office shared their
last year Survey data
identifying the only fifty
percent of our middle and high
school students perceived using
smoking marijuana or eating
edibles once or twice a week is
harmful twenty point nine
percent of high school students
reported riding in a car with
somebody who was under the
influence of marijuana I think
it's safe to say none of us
would want our kids to be
driving in a car he's with
somebody who is impaired by
marijuana or any other projects
and like I said twenty point
nine percent of them are saying
that is what they're doing
passing house bill one fifty
four and one fifty six is the
first step in the right
direction to keep our kids safe
what are educators get back to
the job that they love and
ensure brighter future for our
kids Madam chair representative
so I stand for any questions we
will go to the audience anyone
in opposition.
Anyone on zoom in opposition.
Hey saying none support.
If you if you feel like you have
to
Thank please come forward.
At one minute and that I'm gonna
be tough with the one minute.
Here's the thing we have our
children that should be a
priority it especially in the
state I have noticed that we
don't put our children as
priority and we have a lack of
education we have a lack of
education with drugs we have a
lack of education on the
consequences of of sexual
intercourse we have the the lack
of education when it comes to
what abortion is and what
options people have on all of
these levels we need to put our
children as a priority and
that's where our state lacks is
putting our children as a
priority because they are our
future they are important for
our future and we don't put any
importance on teaching them and
helping them grow as adults.
They don't have brains that are
developed thank you.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to say that there's precedent
for what these fine people are
doing do you remember Joe camel
cigarettes that were.
Marketed to children and do you
remember that this was cause for
legislation that you cannot
legislate you cannot share Joe
camel.
B. B. attractive packaging and
that's all these people are
saying is let's be reasonable
learn from what we have already
learned and stop marketing drugs
to our children thank you madam
chair representatives.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Kerry robin
printer on the registered
lobbyist for public charter
schools of New Mexico we think
that all of the provisions that
exist on direct advertising for
tobacco for sodas is something
that does really help the
schools make sure that we are
not incentivizing juvenile use
we think that this bills
important to move in that
direction for cannabis as well
so we do support the legislation
we think it's important thank
you so much.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
So the wind reap the whirlwind
that's what we're faced with
today I had an opportunity to
talk to a marijuana merchant the
other day and it was her dream
to take her little shop and
convert Santa fe's breweries
those huge tanks into soda pop
soda pop that will go into our
children's stomachs and wrecked
their lives this bill is
absolutely important and I stand
in favor thank you very very
much.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico kids can an education
nonprofit here in New Mexico we
stand in support of the
legislative legislation this is
really about leading and school
administrators and others sort
of be able to easily identify
with these are in the school
that we are educators are
juggling so much here in
education they really need to
support to minimize these types
of incidents on campus so that
our teachers our students can
focus on learning so we stand
and support thank you.
madam chair members the
committee my name's Alan Sanchez
on the executive director of the
New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops and we're here
not to impose but to propose and
we think this is a good start
start looking at some of the
remedy in this and we encourage
your support of it thank you.
We will go to zoom I have three
people on soon Marci may.
And you get one minute.
Thank you consummate thank you
for taking the time I am also
going to reiterate that
they prohibited of Joe camel
because it be it was a cartoon
to promote tobacco and here we
have our basic of goodies that
kids love to have
the ropes and stuff like that no
there's nothing like a testimony
of seeing a dead child of the
two people should be take a look
at because this is what's
happening to our children they
need to be protected and this
just need to stop and the
legislation that passed these
bills needs to be maybe that the
zoom on a text for every child
that gets in the hospital for
testing the questions thank you
thank you.
we have Emily Kaltenbach.
Emily.
Okay I'll skip over.
You the net because steel.
madam chair members of the
committee I am in full support
of this bill it just makes sense
as a mother of four children
anything that would harm my
child I put away and I just know
that you know it's one of those
things where the here the rapper
and they know it's County so it
to use marijuana used to when I
was a juvenile and thank god for
the court system that I went
through and got straight all the
way to weigh DDC it changed my
life completely so I am grateful
for that however I think just
like guns and scissors and
everything else it should be
locked up and it should be
evident that it is dangerous for
children and not a tractive
thank you thank you
Emily Kaltenbach.
You need to and you Emily.
And we we.
Thank you.
We can.
You're
state
Her and let's go to Loretta
chaos.
Go ahead Loretta.
All right at.
Okay let's go to bill your airy.
Can you hear me hello yes we can
hear you go head to read a.
Okay I'm so sorry I had it off
and then it came back on but I'm
gonna I sure do appreciate you
all having this meeting
I understand the people from
Clovis I am originally from a
scandal.
And small towns and a lot of
help.
when I left home it was it was
coming in.
And the thing is is we must
protect all our children I'm an
anti of twenty three nephews and
nieces and I don't want to see
him go down the hill.
Thank you.
bill.
Thank you bill area and that
will be the last one.
Go ahead.
Representative thank you for the
opportunity to speak to this
issue I would like to just
suggest that we need to also
think about the potential
insidious nature of the
packaging in the presentation of
cannabis in this way it's clear
to me that there's an effort
being made to bring in young
strippers for cannabis and to
indoctrinate them and and to get
them using campus at an earlier
age as I said before in other
other discussions similar to
what the tobacco industry did
and certainly what the alcohol
industry did to try to draw in
customers in an early age so I I
just I would stand in favor of
this this bill and I ask madam
chair and representatives that
you give it your full support
thank you.
Okay Representative Chavis.
Okay so we have a motion for to
pass in the second are there any
questions from the committee.
Madam chair.
Yes yes.
Thank you.
You get questions we moved it.
Okay so.
I was looking at those labels on
their chair representative
that's amazing.
That those look like products
that are number drugs and that a
young child would now even.
I can I just looking at those
labels and they look exactly
like the product with some small
little market in on there so I
understand and and madam chair
to just you know this actually
brought this up last time last
session about this bill implies
to bring it forward because.
There's always this big push
with tobacco and stuff to make
sure that it's not extended
children and that was my concern
is that the marijuana business
the cannabis Business has.
Civically targeted and and
mentors are I guess what I
understand is.
I look at that and look at some
of the products and to me that's
specifically marketed towards
children because what adult
unit.
It's it's disturbing actually to
see that so madam chair
representative of it what have
there been other states that
have made a stand on this do you
know about the labeling and
marketing of these products
Madam chair representative I am
not sure I've just seen it in
our local you know local at not
local papers but state papers
that this is a problem all one
for and that they wanted to
address so I haven't looked at
other states I was just focusing
on New Mexico yeah chair
representative so I was looking
here at the department of health
responded they said multiple
states have experienced
increases in children consuming
cannabis edibles and twenty
twenty more than seventy percent
of the calls related to
marijuana edibles of the poison
control center under the age of
five yes Madam chair
representative this is getting
our young young kids very very
sick and.
Right so when I when I'm looking
at is I'm trying to apply this
other things I know that we want
certain things locked up chair
representative that we want
certain things put away and I
don't understand why it would
not be applicable to cannabis
because we got children that are
overdosing to me it makes sense
because I'm sorry if you're
getting stoned.
And do you leave your bag out
and you go to sleep or whatever
it is I'm sorry I'm not going to
get stimulus smoke pot that your
business is legal but I'm
talking about if you left it out
it was accessible to children
that's my main concern is that
those things look exactly like
this if they were in a ball or
play there's no way that a child
I I mean I have a hard time with
the gummy part because it looks
just like a regular you know the
little teddy bear shaped edible
candies so chair representative
with that what would happen if
this were to pass would that
make that that they can't do
labeling on things that they
have to do mandatory labeling or
would it be that they can't do
certain shapes because this
shape but that the county the
little bears is is problematic
part madam chair madam chair and
representative of it would
address all those things that
can be enticing to kids even
your gummies you know I if you
go in it'll say like cherry
cherry cherry or grape grape
grape or whatever and it's going
to I mean they can put him under
the counter how they want to put
it under the counter I guess in
that situation but has to be
opaque when you're selling it so
that the kid can't see what's in
there that of a parent Lee sat
out and accessible to a child
and I think that's where you go
down a criminal route of placing
a child in the situation that
endangers our life and health
which is negligent child abuse
so there is an option to
prosecute a parent for
prosecutors but this is mainly
we really are trying to protect
these younger kids who are just
you know think it's candy cereal
whatever it is and grabbing it
taking it to school we're
finding this in our schools
mainly and madam chair
representative I was trying to
think if I were back in school
that would have been something
that would have been very
prolific and that there are
those things would ended up in
the schools I'm also thinking on
the lines of there's a big push
to lock up fire arms to save
children that we're going to go
down stay on the bill it is
mentioned I'm going.
Our arms are not on the bill
well it ties in with this so
we're gonna lock up firearms it
should make sense that we would
want to make sure that these are
not accessible to children as
well would you agree with that
mentors and yes.
Madam chair representative so.
When I'm looking at is I'm also
looking New Mexico has had a big
increase fifty percent of calls
and pediatric pediatric cases
for overdoses was ten years and
I'm reading the word overdose so
I'm looking at chair
representative this is eight
overdose situation this is an
over action this is actually
really happening right now real
time so what we're trying to do
is we're trying to stop children
for trying to save our children
from overdosing and when this is
this something that's going to
cost taxpayers money and if
you're in a lowincome situation
and you don't have health
insurance now you got to pay out
of pockets got a committee your
resources it's not fair to
people who don't have the
resources to get and can't
afford it it's not fair to any
of our people in New Mexico
especially if the parent is
let's say negligent.
Could happen Act accidental
could be either one that they
leave that out and the child
gets a hold of it to the school
now you have all the children
chair representative taking
those at school that's not fair
to the other children's we're
not like those children but the
other children is where so to me
I totally understand this and I
wouldn't understand why it would
be supported Madam chair
representative because this is a
way to stop our children from
overdosing at such a higher rate
right now you know we have
enough problems right now
mentors of the federal which I
just found out the fed also
actually worse than what we know
in New Mexico I just got that
from a law enforcement officer
yesterday is way more
problematic than were even aware
of so I think anything that we
could do.
To stop enticing our children.
for this guy I'm I mean I'm
reading right here chair to
roled Representative two year
old agency New Mexico's
hospitalized after eating part
of a chocolate bar and here's a
problem as well chair
representative these are very
high doses products I was
looking.
At a soda can with marijuana and
it hurts cannabis and that was
like this is like ten servings
if you're not paying attention
as an adult I mean it should
have a warning to do not drive
your car up recovering machinery
because that's a whole lot of
dosage so is there going to be
anything or maybe
I guess that would be applicable
chair representative would there
be anything like having bigger
signs about the amount of does
the gene in there as well Madam
chair representative we we
definitely want to label to say
it's dangerous for for kids and
and we've even talked about if
you remember the young campaign
back in the day you know for
your kids where basically they
knew not to touch a household
products have that green sticker
you know just anything we can
think of to so kid maybe appear
could save you see the sticker
on something you know you don't
you don't do it that's a very
inexpensive way to do it but it
will you'll just have a warning
label on it and it would just be
opaque but you do make a great
point represented the THC
content these products are so so
why it's sometimes six hundred
times the amount of what of
regular person would take the
administration's soccer's those
suckers you take two looks of a
soccer hi the suckers are
totally wrapped in clear plastic
in a sector something a child
will go for right yeah chair
representative that is a problem
with their soccer Sir Senator or
chocolates and the top of our
state or also very great the
little squares is supposed to be
the dosage not the whole bar so
that's also problematic and I'm
also looking at tobacco
cigarettes and has the warning
right on it and it should you
know the Drano product plastic
bags I mean to think about
plastic bags because that was an
issue I don't know why the kids
were putting plastic bags I knew
it was you were putting them in
the baby's crib that's what it
was and then the children put an
amount on it and suffocated so
even that came with the warning
so madam chair and
representative I completely
support this because I don't
feel it does anything to the
cannabis industry whatsoever
people that want to buy cannabis
are gonna continue to buy
cannabis to grow cannabis this
is specifically to make sure
that we're trying to protect our
children yes and chair
representative I've spoken to
the cannabis industry if you
notice there was no opposition
to this from the cannabis
industry they just wiped out a
later date this to take about
three months to implicate opaque
packaging it would not cost
anything and thank you madam
chair and I appreciate that
because I can't see why there
would be any opposition because
it's just we're trying to make
sure that children don't get a
hold of this and it's a
responsible thing to do so Madam
chair representative I very much
appreciate this because I had
brought this up before the last
session I'm glad that you more I
move forward and that's all the
questions I have thank you
Representative just a reminder
that we have a two passed motion
on the table Representative
Jones wanted questions but
look ever a minute.
I can feel Representative
Ferrary thank you madam chair
I'm wondering why women are all
of the can pass administrative
rulemaking that we need to have
the bill madam chair
Representative I don't know we
just took this upon ourselves as
a problem we were having and
hearing it was a problem across
the state and so we took it upon
ourselves to bring forth the
spell so I I'd I don't know that
there is a as you can see the
law is how it is but when I talk
to the dispensaries there they
don't want to be sued either let
me just put it that way this is
a safety measure for them to it
shouldn't affect their business
so I don't know why they're not
reading it forward I have not
spoken with them
we're just bringing it forward
as a safety issue it and redo in
the statute of Madam chair
representative is there a chance
that by your having these
explicit
requirements of that things
could change and if they aren't
in this that they could be
excluded
Madam chair representative I'm I
I guess it's always possible
that we were really careful to
pretty much get everything in
this bill that we thought would
correct this problem again
speaking to many dispensaries
said and I have toured the
facilities the big producing
facilities where the brownies
with the nerds in the all the
clear packaging of rice crispy
treats it's all happening so I I
don't I can answer that question
for you we might have to come
back and amended again down the
road but
right now this is what we're
seeing.
Madam chair representative I'm
just thinking that if we leave
it up to rulemaking of.
Of the cannabis control division
of R. L. D. their regulation
licensing department that they
could
probably cover everything to do
that Madam chair representative
possibly but they haven't
reached out to any of us he had
to this has been a problem
that's been in the news and you
know we'd be happy to work with
them down the road but I think
every day we wait on passing
this legislation is another
child in the hospital thank you
madam chair that's all
Representative Jones yes thank
you madam chair representative
revenge for I'm just curious
because I don't quite understand
how would this legislation that
prohibits certain packaging be
enforced.
well so basically if it's
reported to madam chair
representative if it's a if it's
reported that this packaging is
out there we can trace it back
to a dispensary in New Mexico
there is and I wrote it down I
thickets of my last I'm there at
the penalties for it are
basically
that cannabis regulation
industry they they go around and
they you know would go check out
the dispensary and then they
would say okay you're going to
be provide you can be fined up
to ten thousand dollars we can
just warn you and you can fix
this or we can suspend your
license that's a very they if
it's reported it came from that
dispensary that then they could
go in and do their own
inspections and the I guess it's
under the cannabis act that they
will go and inspected and deal
with the situation okay so madam
chair and thank you it's not a
pet it's not criminal penalty
yeah it would just require it
like a report from the public
yeah in the report and then then
there's lots of options to
cannabis regulatory board can
look at that and then decide
what the appropriate remedy as
okay I I would also madam chair
and Representative I don't know
if it would prevent that they
could probably be sued civilly
to I'm not sure if somebody
either.
Thank you I think it's a great
bill I'm totally in support
thank you Representative thank
you we have a motion to four do
pass I'm not sure if we got a
second I think it okay is there
any opposition.
Seeing line you have to pass
thank you for your.
And next up is house bill two
ninety two.
When their own house bill two
ninety two medical cannabis
safety sensitive position
Is the Representative ready for
presentation thank you madam
chair please proceed okay so
House Bill to ninety two came
started when I got a call from a
friend of a friend who is a
firefighter and he we talked
about PTSD and how was pretty
much inevitable that doing those
kinds of jobs and it's going to
be tough on the psyche and he
asked if we could include
cannabis for some firefighters
and what he told me that really
struck me was our our our bosses
tend to encourage us to Drake to
do deal with the stress and I
thought whoa that's probably not
a good plan so I will leave it
at that that now.
I will let the my witness
introduce himself.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Representative my name is we go
to another register lobbyist
Representative firefighters in
Albuquerque's would you please
Michael thank you.
Microphone available to that I
witnessed please.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative Representative is
my name is Miguel Teman
Representative firefighters in
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county nine hundred professional
firefighters
thank you for letting letting us
bring this to the the for the
table today let me start off by
saying this is not a firefighter
bill this is not a bill to
specifically just for
firefighters this is just to
amend some language in a in
statute that it was written very
loosely and it will affect a lot
more employees in the state and
just firefighters but I can tell
you is as an expert witness of
why it'll positively affect our
population so much
and that is in and let me also
reiterate that this is not about
recreational marijuana this is
we we've been discussing and and
that in the previous bills
cannabis quite extensively in
this is specific to medicinal
marijuana a prescribed by a
medical doctor
to anybody who's who's using
medicinal cannabis for medicinal
marijuana to treat whatever
symptoms are elements that they
have in our population that
happens to be PTSD quite often
because of the trauma saturation
that are firefighters you were
twenty five year career
it also we also have hi I mean
every single I I will tell you
they have sleep deprivation we
work for forty eight hours at a
time we have ninety six hours
after we go back we do it again
a lot of people working more
overtime than they probably
should and our sleep regulation
of sleep cycles are are very
unhealthy it's just part of the
job we also use like
Representative said we use
alcohol to cope it's it's
historical S. historically part
of the culture and the fire
service and is out on the has
almost been
normalized at but we've also
lost many firefighters to
suicide to do you I
into lots of other things that
because of the.
The over use of alcohol so if we
were able to change the
definition of safety sensitive
employee
to head to more narrowly
identified with the the National
statutes are which are if you
carry a firearm or if you need a
CDO
that would benefit loss of
employees in the state to be
able to use recreational
marijuana for the things that I
just said
it doesn't mean that they will
have to do that so changing the
New Mexicos this this statute
Albuquerque could still say
we're gonna keep our substance
abuse policies status quo
Clovis could still do the same
Los crucis any county could
still have the substance abuse
policy that they see fit
but what it does do is allow the
definition to be changed because
in in in our opinion this is
going to be an ongoing
conversation of how we can allow
our membership that have been
diagnosed with PTSD that have
been prescribed medical
marijuana for the elements that
they have to be able to use it
in a responsible way on their
days off the testing has changed
so with there's there's now
The blood tests that you can
recognize.
Within three to four hours the
department I work for
Albuquerque still uses your
analysis which isn't as accurate
so we changed the policy in this
this bill does isn't any
intended to change policies just
changes the statue but if if
eventually were to change the
policy and be able to use some
of these modern day testing
policies and allow members to to
to use medicinal marijuana in a
capacity that helps them become
better firefighters to help them
become better service to the
community they'll be less likely
to to use alcohol on a regular
basis and to cope and we have a
more healthy far service we have
a whole more healthy workforce
we have a more healthy
community
I know this probably a lot of
questions so with that I stand
for questions.
Thank you very much is there
anyone let's go to the audience
versus anyone in the audience
who opposes this legislation.
Please stand up and come toward
the funds to take the microphone
you have one minute for your
presentation.
Am I still.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee again
my name's ten or more can tell
I'm a deputy director with the
children youth and families
department
a majority of our staff and
juvenile justice at particularly
in our secure and non secure
facilities
are currently considered safety
sensitive positions they don't
carry firearms and they don't
drive commercial vehicles these
positions are tasked to provide
for the care and rehabilitation
of adjudicated youth these youth
may have substance abuse issues
severe mental health issues and
violent tendencies they respond
to emergencies the required to
transport youth and they must
also take decisive action to
protect the safety and security
of our youth our staff at our
facility thank you for your
time.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
mechanical contractors
association
we sense of concerns about the
legislation I think in the
fiscal impact report regulation
the licensing department talk
about specifically in the
construction industry you know
you have crane operators they
don't need a CDL license and
when we look the electricians
would not fall under you are not
required to carry gun have a CDL
license so there's certain
positions almost almost all
positions in construction where
safety is a paramount concern so
worried about when their screen
operators to lecture shins other
types of people and you know hi
places that this may cause some
issues so so we do have some
concerns about legislation.
What else is speaking about this
legislation.
Could not I'm going to the zone
if there's anyone on soon who is
speaking in opposition to the
legislation please raise your
hand.
What are the two people who wish
to speak will first go to Marci
may this may you have one
minute.
Thank you for taking my time I'm
calling in reference to an
opposition to this bill because
because we know that the
cannabis stays in the system and
and it and it decreases your
ability to make quicker
judgments young people are want
to do this on their off time
they need to realize unlike
alcohol that does kind of pass
through the body quicker at the
cannabis does stay in your
system for more than one day
even looking at working at a
local hardware store
people who are operating heavy
equipment especially for the big
stacks that go up to the ceiling
you make one mistake on there
that's fatal that they can be
very fatal this thing needs to
be looked at I know I appreciate
our firefighters but you know
that they need to pick out a
different chill race of of their
drug or have extra time that
they're not on the clock well
that is still in their system.
I start state.
Thank you miss may.
We are going to feel very.
Chairman representative thank
you for the opportunity to speak
on a post I'm opposed to this
this bill one reason primarily
and that is the message that it
sends to our communities and the
message it sends particularly to
young people if adults are able
to engage legally in cannabis
ingestion for.
The radically health reasons I'm
concerned that that message is
inappropriate we we do
everything we can I'm I'm a
parent of five children I have
fifteen grandchildren we do
everything we can to discourage
tobacco use alcohol use
Prescription drug use only is
necessary and of course
marijuana
and so the concern I have is
that this legislation sends a
message that it's okay for the
fire department other people in
professions are.
Struggle with PTSD.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
I have gone to the audience
again is there anyone who's
speaking in favor of this piece
of legislation.
All rights and all hands I am
going to propose soon is there
anyone else who is speaking in
favor of this legislation house
bill two ninety two.
Rachel camera I don't see a last
name you have one minute.
I just wanted to
state as a nurse and then a
professional who has worked
with.
Thank you I think it's important
to allow these options and I
know that there's several safety
nets in place of but it is not
something that is in the system
and act while on duty I think
that's watching
Co workers.
Other people because I think
it's very important to it X.
wireless option thank you.
Thank you.
I see no other hands those will
not go to the committee for any
questions Representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Miguel
appreciate Q. shown up today and
I knew that you and I would end
up finding a way not to agree on
something.
So I want to tell you I want to
ask you some questions and.
It's hard for me to have this
conversation because in my
former career I took safety very
very seriously.
And I wanted people of my
employees.
And I'll give you an example if
somebody called nine one one and
they were having a heart attack
I want my people dialed in razor
sharp and give that person in
our community every possible
chance that they have to
survive.
And when you.
I just I'm sent here been
listening to the testimony.
And I keep thinkin.
There's a big people.
First all people.
The short people.
There's heavy set people they're
skinny people everybody's gonna
metabolize things differently so
how do you find a baseline.
Of cannabis that they would be
able to use.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative we don't have to
reinvent the wheel so there are
many departments out there
including Vancouver Pittsburgh
New York City fire department
and I've already done this
so I would rely on doing the
research on their policy in
terms of what that level of
impairment that you're talking
about is I do appreciate the
concern I know I think we both
share in the importance of being
razor sharp and a safety
sensitive position and like I
said before the I don't think
this has anything to do with
impairment on the job just like
alcohol we have to not drink a
certain amount of holes so many
hours partnership starts there
will be the same level of of
meticulousness to address that
safety into this issue in the
policy once is addressed and and
let me remind you this doesn't
change the policies so my mic my
friend and my my friend then
labour back there that was
worried about some crane
operators they don't have to
change their policy either all
this doesn't change the statute
that allows the policy to be
changed if the the news because
in the county so see fit.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Are we saying that they can only
have saves five milligrams of
marijuana.
In order to report to work is
that correct Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative the
actual level would need to be
reserves but yes there would be
in in in the policy that would
be certain amount that you
dislike just like with alcohol
if we have a result suspicion
okay the officer would been
Call the deputy chief of of
human resources and start the
reasons this process and they
would be able to be above a
point oh two one on duty so that
level whether it's five
milligrams or or whatever it is
defined and like I said we would
reinvent the wheel would use
other larger departments to to
model the policy after but the
idea that would that would have
that safety net in.
And madam chair representative
just because we're talking about
people in general if I show up
to work.
And I'm have an extremely bad
day and I think I need ten
milligrams instead of five.
Who is going to monitor that.
Madam chair representative thank
you I think it's a great
question and this continues to
be addressed in our profession
development our officers are
chief officers they're the ones
that monitor our our
firefighters and in in in any
other instance of supervisors of
the one the responsible for
making sure that people are
impaired to work so just like if
someone came in smelling of
alcohol I'm a captain in my
department I would recognize
that I would have a conversation
along with because of the safety
sensitive issue we go down the
route of reasons suspicion but I
would always also make sure that
he was going he or she was going
on their life and they don't
need behavior health resources
maybe refer to EAP because to me
as a you as you president
beyond negotiating contracts up
here Santa Fe driving for
legislation the most important
part of my job is taking care of
the people of my members and
lots of our members are
struggling and the model of
using alcohol to cope is
historically been that really
bad
and from the data that we've
seen medicinal marijuana
medicinal cannabis is not as
that so I I do understand the
statement in a kind of a fear
behind this kind of different
way of thinking but we we've
we've passed laws that make it
legal for medicinal marijuana
and now we pass laws for
recreational marijuana I do
believe that one day in the
future at a federal level it
will be passed and it it makes
sense to have to be ahead of the
game and and develop some of
these policies beforehand so
that the members are taken care
of and more importantly the
constituents and and the
citizens of take care of.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I'm just.
I'm sitting here trying to my
brain is just run a thousand
miles an hour because.
I can't imagine somebody using
cannabis or alcohol and
performing in duty it just
doesn't make sense to me and
maybe I'm old school I don't I
don't know but.
If somebody told me that my
pilot was under some cannabis
because he was have then you
know kind of a stressful day I'm
not going on that airplane.
And if the traffic control guy
is and they say that that's a
really big responsibility if I
know that he's is she is taking
cannabis just account until the
day up I don't know if I want to
be in the air that day so.
For that reason I would I would
be able I would be able to
support this thank you.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate your comments
Representative Vince and I think
they're all very part and I also
would not be on want to be on
that plane I wouldn't want to be
driving a fire truck with
somebody who's impaired with the
alcohol or cannabis or
prescription drugs that they
should be taking water operating
this this kind of machinery so I
think this is something this.
For their days off fort using
the responsible way and I I just
also want to say when my dad
found out I was using candidacy
scared the the Adam is well and
I come from the same kind of
background so I do believe this
is something that's a different
pin the that our child our
children conversation this is
these are prescribed medications
just like any other prescribed
medications use in a responsible
way not on duty
To help our members but thank
you for your comments and
concerns I appreciate it thank
you madam chair.
Representative pants again then
we'll go to Representative Jones
thank you madam chair and madam
chair
I really support what you're
trying to do I worked on the
original it is hearing
compassionate use act it's a
very important lofty
I think this I just would make a
technical suggestion I think
this definition that you have a.
The sensitive is just a little
bit too narrow.
So only carving out.
there are only including
position positions that are
hired to carry a firearm or
operating a commercial vehicle
seems like it's leaving out a
few categories of occupations
where
There would be a legitimate
concern.
So I just the FIR suggested a
couple of definitions amendments
and I've been communicating with
a couple of experts on that our
medical cannabis line and sounds
like they feel like those
definition that suggestion I
just including
That a legitimate medical
explanation for a positive test
of marijuana metabolite so
include possession of medical
cannabis card we do that but I'm
curious to get your thoughts
madam chair and madam chair and
expert.
So thank you madam chair and
Representative pants Keefer we
are open.
We are open to making this bill
the best that it can be I really
do have concerns about the
alcohol I mean people have
demonized cannabis but
we we New Mexico is not losing
thousands of people here to
campus but we are to alcohol
through D. W. I. A.'s I mean I
lost a very dear friend son at
that I heard about in this
committee from alcohol use so I
think it's just a way for us to
to move away from alcohol but we
we are totally I will put Miguel
in charge of talking to a to the
folks and and getting the
definition tightened up before
next committee.
Madam chair madam chair I would
appreciate that because I think
that it will kind of comport
with the rest of the the concept
of of how we address medical
cannabis in a professional
setting.
Thank you madam chair thank you
we'll go to Representative Jones
thanks to.
Representative.
My.
So I just need some clarity
here.
What problem is that we're
trying to solve with this
legislation if you can be quick
on that okay Madam chair
representative Jones we are
trying to solve or maybe not
solve but improve the treatment
of PTSD and move away from
alcohol as the solution to
cannabis which is our.
Less harmful physically.
Okay thank you so so I mean I
know there's a social.
A social norm this is alcohol
relieve stress but is there
somebody else that's encouraging
the use of alcohol because I'm
not aware that you know for
these positions that anyone
legislatively has a key has it
has encouraged the use of
alcohol for PTSD madam chair and
Representative Jones it's not
official but as I said that the
man who called me about this
says that in his.
Experience that leaders in fire
departments encourage the use of
alcohol.
There's no legislation around
madam chair but that that's and
I believe Miguel also touched on
that that is part of the culture
and we're trying to get away
from that culture.
Madam chair and representative
thanks for the question it the
the answer is it's it's in the
culture it's always been part of
the
you get off you have a couple
drinks the bodies that turns
into drinking two days off that
turns into drinking three days
off some people drink four all
four of their days off and then
going into work forty eight
hours very proficiently in New.
Very regularly drink it turns
into a standard in a norm so
it's not it's not recognize
anywhere but it's it's part of
the culture and history of the
fire service and I believe it
law enforcement as well and I
believe there's some other
industries it that have similar
cultures.
Thank you and I I do have an
understanding of that being in
health care being a nurse I know
we have we see the same patients
you guys seem for bringing to us
so and I understand the stress
involved in that kind of a
a career and it can be
overwhelming but I wonder why we
instead of moving in another
direction rather than it not
moving toward building impaired
with drug use either alcohol or
other drugs why we wouldn't move
in another direction to to to to
deal with these kinds of
problems that wouldn't
It would mean that we're
impaired on the job or otherwise
on our time off so have there
been any efforts to increase I
mean to increase other methods
of a dealing with PTSD for Madam
chair representative thank you
for the question is a very
permanent one and as the
president of my local I'm very
involved in every possible
modality system resource that we
can have to address behavior
health mental health substance
abuse for firefighters and I
think there's other people to do
that and other other populations
industry but we have Boeser peer
support team we have invested in
a clinical director for
department to address
behavioural health issues is
certified as a P. substance
abuse professional for that
reason because of his abuses so
so perf this is so profound and
and our department in our
culture we have a chaplaincy
that is very robust we have
critical incident stress
debriefing
we have educational requirements
on an annual basis so to answer
your question we're doing as
much as we possibly can this is
one more tool in the toolbox to
let and and I and I I appreciate
your your comment on on impaired
but we we really this really
doesn't have to do with being
impaired on the job this is
using just like you if you were
prescribed Percocet for pain we
we expect firefighters to not be
using Percocet when they're on a
forty eight hour shift but they
can use Percocet to to manage
pain on the forties off if they
have a prescribed medication was
medical cannabis is we should be
allowed to let them use that on
their days off and not be
impaired to work but on their
days off in in madam chair and
representative we have another
bill that will that will
strengthen the peer support
Do you think that this takes
away and anyway this legislation
takes way and anyway the
discretion of the employer.
I mean limit let me clarify that
so so how at what point would an
employer state I think you're
impaired would it be after
someone has suffered because of
your actions.
Madam chair representative the
payment would be based on just
like alcohol so there are signs
symptoms of impairment
and if if we educate our fire
officers and our frontline chief
officers to recognize that just
like we do alcohol bloodshot
eyes
staggering slurring of the words
some of these are super similar
so we educate our fire officers
we educate our supervisors to
recognize these and then they go
down the route of of reasons
suspicion is no different and an
alcohol.
Thank you for that and I I madam
chair representative I just I do
know that alcohol cannabis
they're very different in the
way they were are metabolized
through the body so the alcohols
could be gone for you know you
could still smell like alcohol
for the day before but there's
actually would be no sign of
that if tested cannabis on the
other hand
you may not see.
Specifically see any signs of
that but it can still be
impairing the person I I just
have a hard time with this I'm
sorry I can't support.
That.
Representative Kate
Representative Kay thank you
very much madam chair and
representatives and and and and
thank you expert witness
hi of very much appreciate your
advocacy for the for the men and
women that use of are
representing might
My question I want to know more
about the blood test so this is
very exciting I've been watching
the the technology developed in
the last ten years
I have run businesses in where
we have strict
drug free workplace policies and
I've sent ploy use for for you
know suspicions of under the
influence for individual things
but have.
Often felt like as the I am not
a medical provider and if a
medical provider prescribed
cannabis how could employer
protect themselves what kind of
testing is it affordable and is
it available thank you.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question I think
it's a very part and one and and
heavily involved in every
conversation and discussion of
this this this goes to
currently you are your analysis
can detect cannabis for
approximately thirty days after
use a saliva test can detect
cannabis for approximate twenty
four hours after use and a blood
test can detect T. C. for for
three to four hours after use so
those are the standards that we
would be used in this
conversation I would have in my
instance with the City of
Albuquerque subsidies policy
director in terms of the policy
that we would create to address
how we test for this and in
honestly the blood tests are a
little more expensive but if we
were to say do less random
testing which is the amount of
random testing we do is has a
price tag to it and focus on
just reason suspicion and use
blood tests that's to me more
responsible.
Thank you so much madam chair
and representative I agree
hi so are the blood tests
readily available and are and
our facilities that were doing
drug tests now.
Thank you madam chair
representative currently in the
City of Albuquerque the city I
work for it's the here now are
the analysis that the standard
quo so in terms of the red a red
ability of blood tests I don't
have the answer to that but if
we were able to to get to the
point we're talking about policy
that would definitely be one of
the big conversations thank you
very much madam chair and
representative that that what I
hope that's the next bill that
you're working on because the
urinalysis is a waste of money
and and and we really want to
make sure that people aren't
under any influence when they
are performing safety and I
appreciate you advocating for
the individuals who keep us all
safe and so thank you very much
I will be supporting this bill
madam chair I may add that there
are already twenty three states
that apply medical cannabis
usage exception for safety
sensitive position so as Miguel
said we we won't have to
reinvent the wheel.
Thank you very much would like
to Representative Ferrary.
Here.
I didn't have my.
Time I'm sorry.
Madam chair may make a motion
for do we have one more person
calling to speak may payment yes
Representative Thomas thank you
madam chair I'm just going to be
free for support this.
Following a whole number of
waste.
Thank you.
Madam chair in making this
mission for do pass second
summary.
a motion for the passage of.
Would you please call the roll.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I.
Yes.
Representative and no.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
It.
Read about if you have a.
Both these.
Correct thank you.
Thank.
Thank you
for.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I am going to be presenting
house bill two thirty six this
morning and I have a expert when
this with me Marian Dan Deming
when I'm done speaking issue
also affects it can additional
comments speak up a little bit.
Yeah that's right that Act.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I will be
presenting house bill two thirty
six this morning and with me I
have a expert witness Marian
Deming she will make comments
after hi speak briefly about the
bill.
House bill two thirty six
requires the department of
health to convene the staffing
advisory committee to establish
nurse staff to patient ratios
for New Mexico hospitals the
stabbing Committee will be made
up of hospital administrators or
chief nursing officers in the
public and private sector and
frontline nursing staff who
provide direct patient care.
Currently for other states have
proposed legislation such as
this that would require hospital
patient ratios Washington Oregon
Massachusetts and Connecticut
currently California has had
staffing ratios for at least
twenty years.
Studies show this safe staffing
ratios have a positive impact on
patient care at outcomes nurse
job satisfactions and savings in
health care costs.
One study reported that patients
and nurses in the quartile of
hospitals with the most
favorable staffing levels.
Had consistently better outcomes
than those in hospitals with
less favorable staffing.
Patients in the hospitals with
the highest patient to nurse
ratios had twenty six percent
higher mortality rate the nurses
in those hospitals were
approximately twice as likely to
be dissatisfied with their jobs
to show high burnout levels and
to report lower tier eight
deteriorating quality of care.
Nurses are leaving the
profession in droves and many of
them site working conditions in
the form of high patient ratios
nurses want to provide quality
patient care to all their
patients but we hear more and
more stories of nurses being
assigned for too many patients
and they can care for the fear
for their licenses the fear for
their patients lives.
We haven't taken the necessary
steps to ensure the nursing
staff in our hospitals are able
to do with the best providing
quality care for their patients
H. B. two thirty six sixty
change the conditions that
nursing staff are forced to work
under and improve the health of
patients and in the end our
communities you will probably
hear today from the hospital
industry who will tell you that
they can't possibly implement
ratios for all kinds of reasons
but what they're really telling
all of us is that they are not
willing to change the status quo
provide safe patient care
improve working conditions for
nursing staff and save precious
healthcare dollars it's time for
us to do better.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives my name is
Merion Deming on a registered
nurse for thirty nine years
going on forty
and I'm here today in strong
support of this bill because I
think it provides a mechanism
for moving forward to deal with
the current crisis of shortage
of beds I care givers the
current context is a direct care
staff that is stretched beyond
any kind of reasonable limit and
this is worrisome for all of us
the community the legislature's
legislators nurses patient care
tax and the community
my perspective on this issue has
been shaped by my many years in
the field of nursing I obtained
a B. S. M. from UNM in nineteen
eighty four and worked in acute
care pediatrics pediatric I see
use and general pediatrics for
many years after that
I began doing home care work
when I moved to New Orleans in
nineteen ninety three and during
that time in New Orleans in
almost thirty years spent time
also working as a legal nurse
consultant for a large
malpractice defense firm
so I have lots of stories about
how
a lack of sufficient staffing
results in poorer patient
outcomes but the data is clear
from many many sources that
work.
Force that is overstressed
overtaxed has that any number of
issues meeting the standards of
care that they know they should
be meeting
results in many more injuries to
patients in excess costs to
hospitals and certainly in the
moral injuries that occur when
we know that nurses in
particular have a value a shared
professional value that says we
we know what kind of care we
should find and so that injury
occurs when people are not able
to do what they need to do what
they know that patients need so.
I've also written Sienese and
Sammy from a risk management
perspective for one of the
largest insurers in the state of
Louisiana with a focus on how do
we prevent risk how do we
prevent injuries to patients so
I feel really strongly about
this issue and that's why I'm
here today I think the situation
calls for an all hands on deck
approach with all the
stakeholders involved we've been
here for many years as a
profession asking for help from
our employers from the
legislators from the public in
helping us to meet the standards
of care that we know are helpful
to patients so just to reiterate
a couple of points there's
incontrovertible data
which shows that a workforce
that is caring for too many
patients working too many hours
under incredibly stressful
conditions are not able to
provide safe care so I feel this
bill takes a first step toward
addressing those problems
there is also cost savings
associated with hospitals
facilities that are better
staffed
regardless of the size of the
increased costs of hiring more
people.
the outcomes for the patients
are such that it demonstrates
the cost savings.
and
as a representative Chavis said
nurses are leaving the best side
in much greater numbers than
ever before and it's because of
the work conditions at their
tasked with on a daily basis and
I know there are lots of people
here who can speak to that more
directly than I can but from my
experiences both as a supervisor
and a supervisor State but
always an employee I can attest
to the importance of the
management.
That values the contributions of
the frontline workers and
listens to their concerns
Sitters their ideas and is
responsive this bill
will do that and if I could just
close with a.
Short little story I ran into a
woman last week actually
watching the Superbowl in a we
were traveling.
And I ran into a woman and we
ended up rooting for the same
team and then as we were saying
our goodbyes she asked me what I
did for a living and I told I
was a nurse and she said
nurses and nurses are angels and
my first thought was obviously
approved that we're just human
beings and
but that was her perspective and
then she told me that she's
spent six days in the hospital
in the ICU with COVID and her
husband has spent eighteen days
at the same time and she said I
was terrified and every single
nurse who came in my room had a
note of encouragement of a smile
for me behind the masks and all
the protective gear and they're
the reason that I survived and
that the reason my husband
survived so you can't tell me
that nurses are angels because
to me they are and so
My perspective is a little
different
we're under a huge amount of
stress I see it every day I'm
still abstracting medical data
from COVID to us
I meant to retire in twenty
twenty I have not because
there's a need for people to
work on this issue still but
sometimes I have to shut down my
computer and walk away and I
have the ability to do that
because I can see in the
electronic records that I'm
reviewing.
The incredible work and stress
this being done.
Sep with that I want to thank
you again and.
And it back to Representative
Chavis.
Thank you madam chair with that
we stand for questions.
so we have at fourteen minutes
to get through this bill we
might be a little late on the
floor so I'm going to seriously
limit public comment so if I
will take five people for for
and against
to speak so we will go we will
go hold on hold on hold.
If you don't know what so what
we will go to opposition first
and we will have five people if
you could please get up here
quickly.
And I will be with a one minute
time you got it good morning my
name is Christina Salazar I am a
nurse by background in nurse for
eight years I'm a representative
of the New Mexico organization
of nurse leaders president elect
currently and I'm here on behalf
of the cheese chief nursing
officers in the state to really
shed light on what we know is
already a fragile health care
system we know there are six
thousand open nursing positions
in the state and realistically
as a Los crucis resident myself
I think this is very concerning
for our community on what this
means for Dona ana county
residents on you know if units
close if we are not able to find
the you know care that a patient
needs and they have to go to a
Paso which is already happening
in our community New Mexico
residents will not be service in
our community that's a big thing
for me I'm a nurse I we care
about quality The New Mexico
organization of nurse leaders is
very big on trying to find a
solution but for us this bill is
not the solution the solution
comes from the work force and
how do we build more nurses and
working with our education thank
you thank you.
Yes I just like to say I think
in this legislation deserves a
lot more than fourteen minutes I
have fourteen minutes.
I have.
I personally have fourteen
minutes worth of questions to
ask about this.
So I I don't know how you want
to deal with what to the public
comment and then we'll recess
and that will come back for
committee debate on Monday.
Go ahead yes thank you madam
chair thank you committee my
name is Frank Corcoran on the
CEO just your Vista hospital on
to the consequences I'm also a
nurse I've been a nurse for
thirty two years I see both
sides of the issue in our world
we like to do acuity based
staffing agency we have the
right nurses the right skill set
with the right patient at the
right time and we need the
flexibility move back and forth
I don't believe we need staffing
ratios I think we need more of a
work life balance quality for
nurses I think we need more
incentives to attract more
nurses to the state we're down
six thousand the schools are
putting out about twelve hundred
so we're in a deficit we all
bring in contract labor from
other places my roles as CEO I
try to track them and retain
those nurses and I've been able
to hire several nurses from
other states once they get here
in Las Cruces New Mexico so I
believe we need to work on those
sort of issues verses ratios
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Troy Clark the
president CEO The New Mexico
Hospital association and I would
actually share the gratitude in
the reference to angels of our
nurses I think there is a
misperception that was stated
earlier that we stay in a
different position that's not
the case our caregivers our
greatest asset health care
industry I think what our
differences on this one is
looking at what is access to
care.
One standard for the entire
state with different communities
having different situations with
different situations with each
patient the very minute by
minute are best handled by
experienced nurses making those
decisions not a single ratio
that set.
For a statewide average.
Looking out and protecting our
patients to be able to have
access to care would we have
many hospitals throughout our
state there are over eighty
miles away from each other.
When we have patient demand for
care that exceeds what our
staffing levels are that means
would have to turn away patients
time thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce respectfully
oppose H. B. two three six we
all have the shared goal of
increasing access to quality
health care in New Mexico data
shows as you heard New Mexico's
short six thousand nurses and we
need more we agree our
healthcare workforce it's
extremely strange with the
shortage of all types of health
care professionals in fact in
January twenty twenty three New
Mexico chamber of commerce poll
showed that seventy one percent
of New Mexico voters and those
in their households have
experienced long wait times to
see their primary care physician
or specialist in the last year
this proposal although well
intentioned may actually work
counter to the goal of
increasing access to health care
for New Mexicans mandated ratios
will prevent real time
flexibility and few patients can
be seen unintended consequence
and so this labor mandate could
lead to reduced hiring and
layoffs of other important team
members twenty first century
hospital teams thank you and I
forgot so we will go to the
audience for a show of hands who
here is in opposition.
Okay.
Support.
Okay so we're we're gonna have
five minutes of public comment
for support
And I'm sorry for this I try to
keep our committee moving and
now okay I was on six and gonna
go fast because the people
behind me are really important
my name's Julie on a coup by
Representative The New Mexico
trial lawyers association we
support this bill because we
need to pursue evidence based
solutions to incentivizing
health care instead of promoting
misinformation about medical
malpractice there's an
incredible New York times video
it's five minutes funding it's
nurses talking about the real
problems we have in our health
care system it's a sad video we
support these measures to
improve the quality of
healthcare and push back against
profit driven and insurance
driven health care.
My name is Adrian house up in a
nurse for twenty five years and
I'm standing in support and I'm
actually going to not make was
my comments because I've read
most of you in the hall and
share my thoughts I'm gonna let
my colleagues who've taken time
off from work on the phone on
breaks trying to get more of get
the attention that is needed for
our staffing that is not being
paid by Arsene knows or CFO's or
any other organization so thank
you today for considering and
hearing us we appreciate you a
great deal and thank you
Representative shop as for
bringing this forward.
And I'm sorry we we only will
have three more and I'm very
sorry about that but we have to
get to the floor so go ahead hi
there my name is Jenna Mexico
brought up in a registered nurse
New Mexico for five years or
work in critical care.
Just wanted to point out that
nurses are leaving they're
leaving because they can't
safely take care of their
patients perhaps if we create an
environment where safety is no
longer a concern nurses will
come back to the bedside I
worked in a unit for several
years I love ten months ago
since me leaving eighty five to
ninety percent of people I work
with are no longer there those
nurses are still in New Mexico
they still want to take care of
patients but right now they're
afraid to watching your patients
suffer and you can't do anything
about it because you have for
other patients I other patients
who are equally suffering.
You can't show up for that you
can't your concern about them
we're concerned about your
license.
It's not fair we're asking for
help for us for this bill to be
passed because we want to care
for patients that's why we got
the degrees we got it's what we
show up.
We support this bill thank you.
Members of the committee my name
is Jessica point out I work in
the pediatric ICU at UNM
hospital I humbly come before
you to state my support the
house bill two thirty six New
Mexico safe staffing at safe
staffing promotes to objectives
patient safety and healthy work
environment for nurses as they
say in in the in an emergency
situation on an airplane please
put on your own oxygen mask
before you help others I have
worked in conditions I have not
been able to get an adequate
right until five PM my workday
starts at seven PM nurses make
mistakes almost exclusively my
errors have occurred when I have
not had the opportunity to take
a break.
Each of you should have a copy
of an editorial that was
recently published in the
critical care nursing journal in
it the president of the
institute for healthcare
improvement specifically states
health system leaders must add
issues such as the well being of
the health care worker to their
agenda such as rebuilding and
sustaining safe staffing.
Amid thank you.
Good morning staff my name is
Carl Fernandez I'm and Edie tech
with district eleven ninety nine
I'm on a union member I just got
off shift this morning I go back
to ship on this morning I go
back to ship this not I just
want to say that I and and very
much in support of house bill
two thirty six during the
pandemic I did work as a CNA and
I did have to take care of
thirty patients during that
time.
Twelve of them were intubated
ICU level patients and during
and it was one of the worst
things that I've ever dealt with
I still am trying to go to
school to become a nurse but
really do hope that you guys too
passed house bill two thirty six
all of us are in you know we're.
We're just struggling and we
need the help thank you thank
you.
Okay so Representative Chavis
and expert do you have.
It go ahead.
I just want to yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee I I would I want to
just reiterate that the nurses I
mean the idea that
we've been hearing the same
things from hospitals for a long
time we need the flexibility we
can't set and and you know
mandatory ratios.
And I would just suggest that
the impact of that is that
nurses are expected to do more
and more and more and more and
that also is not a safe
situation and I would advocate
that if you don't have
sufficient bedside staff to care
for patients than those budget.
Should be closed so the
flexibility that people talk
about being built into the
system should not be the
incredible stretching as of your
direct care staff that's not an
answer it's not a safe answer so
this represents a way for the
stakeholders to come together
and come up with solutions
rather than just piling on more
work onto an already crisis
level of of that site
caregivers.
Thank you as I said we go to the
floor now
and we will come back for
questions from the committee and
I really apologize to folks we
didn't get to I'm just going to
do with a political plus here
this is why we need longer
sessions and we need a year
round health and Human Services
Committee so that we can take a
deep dive and have staff look at
do research for so again I
apologize I wish things were
different but this is what we're
doing right now so we will do
this first thing on Monday
morning eight thirty in this
room to get to the questions
from the committee okay so we
are in recess.
