We do not have a quorum yet. So
we will start in the
subcommittee until we get one
more member. So representative
Fernandez, go ahead.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the, of the committee, Madam
Vice Chair, I do have an expert
witness who's participating on
Zoom and his name was uh Mr.
Phil Harris.
So Mr. Harrison, if you could
raise your hand so that they can
find you and put make you able
to speak. Go ahead,
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The, the
bill in front of you is House
Memorial 15, House Memorial
Field 15, um.
Is raising the awareness of the
challengers experienced by
people exposed to radiation and
encouraging the United States
Congress to support legislation
to expand compensation under the
Federal radiation exposure
compensation Act.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um,
This memorial has, uh, there's,
um, it.
Uh, has been
A memorial that has been carried
through this.
Body, um, since the early 1990s
when the uh when the the um
Congress initiate the, the, the
RICA, um,
Federal
Uh, amendment and, and, and I,
I, and I, I am carrying this
from people in, and, and I do
wanna acknowledge my
co-sponsors, uh, Representative
Derek Lin, Representative Wanda
Johnson
Lindstrom, representative Obeda,
and, and also representative of
Garcia, I, I also, I want to
acknowledge the many other uh
um.
These ships that have carried
this memorial through the state
of New Mexico, um, the
significance of this is, is, is
that.
As you know,
Uh, during, uh, the, towards the
end of World War 2 and going
into the Cold War era, um,
Uranium mining and also nuclear
uh development in New Mexico was
prolific and many of our people
all throughout uh New Mexico,
uh, were involved in this
buildup and uh and we're, we
were the reasons, you know, uh,
at that time, uh,
Well we're not informed about
the dangers of the radioactivity
that came from this industry
and, um, and, and Madam Chair,
um,
vice chair, members of the
committee, um, my both of my
grandfathers were miners and
millers at a uranium mine and
the only memories I have of them
is taking them to their um.
The, uh, doctor's appointments
and, and seeing that the
suffering that they had, but I
also grew up attending what we
call uranium meetings and we
had, we, we called them uranium
means because uh because we were
dealing with uh the, the ongoing
issues of, of, of these um
uranium mines on Navajo Nation,
and also the trying to help our,
our, our relatives navigate the
process of applying for this.
Radiation exposure Compensation
Act and uh
I want to turn it over to my
expert witness, um, and I do
have another expert witness. His
name is Perry Charlie, if, if
he's also on.
Doctor Perry Charlie.
You could raise your hand.
Uh, just for a brief statement.
Mr. Charlie, you are muted.
Is the nose.
Mad and on and on.
Yes.
Mr. Charlie, would you like to
make a brief statement?
Oh, I'm sorry, yes, I thought I
was just being uh recognized.
Uh, good morning, Jane.
I'm calling, uh, I'm zooming in
from the club to New Mexico.
Uh, and the four corners area.
Of San Juan County, and I am a
Navajo citizen. I spent the last
56 years as a scientist
following the trail of the uh
impacts and the adverse health
impacts and environmental
uh damages uh of the Manhattan
Engineering District and the
Atomic Energy Commission. I
would like to say that uh very
briefly that um we still
continue to face many
injustices.
Uh, that was rought on by the
federal government and their
procurement, uh, programs under
the MED and the Atom Energy
Commission.
And we have by far have many,
many abandoned uranium mines.
And 4 mill sites on the
reservation, one of them, uh,
under the MED program and the
Atomic Energy Commission sits
over here in the uh right in the
middle of uh.
Shiprock, New Mexico. Um, it
has, it's, it's still under, um,
Close surveillance and
maintenance by the US Department
of Energy. We do have another
one in uh uh in on the
reservation, but it's in Church
Rock, Arizona. We all know the
history of the uh the spill out
there. So definitely the impacts
of uh einizing radiation, more
specifically, low level ionizing
radiation continues to, uh,
impact the Navajo Nation.
as well as other citizens
adjacent to these uh
To these, uh, abandoned uranium
mill sites, so, um,
We have the Navajo Nation has
struggled for many decades, over
80 decades from the legacy of
past nuclear industry. By far
the largest volume of low level
waste in the United States,
that's uh in the millions of
cubic yards, that was mine
contained the, uh, contains only
low uh concentration of
radioactive material.
So there's a big uh question as
to uh maintenance to
transportation to existing laws,
uh, disposal practices on low
level radioactive materials and
waste. So this is what we're
facing, uh, the waste comes
from, as I said, from nuclear
energy and defense uh in this uh
industries medical facility to
the
that
Um, public for comment.
OK, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Charlie. Um, so,
If you are on Zoom in
opposition, raise your hand.
If you are in the room in
opposition, raise your hand.
OK, I'm pretty sure Mr. Charlie
is not in opposition, so, OK, if
you are in the on Zoom in
support, raise your hand and
I'll come back to you in the
room and support.
OK, so we'll go to
Camilla
People
It
Feebleman.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
thank you so much to the sponsor
after working on legislation to
ban the storage of high level
nuclear waste in the state. It
just becomes so ever apparent
the human toll of the nuclear
industry from the point of
extraction that's being
described here, um, to the use
and processing of uranium.
For whatever purpose to
ultimately the storage, the cost
is just too great and this
memorial recognizes that and
asks and calls on us to take
responsibility for the harms
that have been done. So we
joined the sponsor in supporting
this memorial. Thank you. And
can you please introduce
yourself for the record. I am so
sorry. I'm Camilla Feibelman,
director of the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter. Thank you.
So we will go
the Committee for Questions I
have Representative Ferrari.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, representative
for bringing this forward. Um,
we, um, have been supporting
through our radioactive
hazardous materials Committee
interim committee, um, asking uh
federal Congress to support
this, and they've had great
efforts in doing that for our um
citizens of New Mexico as well
as other states, and so, um, I
think this memorial is
important, as you said, to have
this every um
every um year that we can, um.
And so you're also including, I
believe, the downwinders who are
part of the RIA. Is that true?
Madam Chair, Representative
Ferrari, yes, because uh it's
this impacted more than just the
um the Navajo uranium miners.
We're talking about the uh
residents around the Church Rock
area, um, the grant mining
district.
Uh, the Torosa Downwinders.
And as well as uh uh the folks,
the workers of the Manhattan
Project.
That's terrific and um.
I'm so glad that we have this
and also I'd like to make sure
that you um consider being on
the radioactive hazardous
materials interim committee. I
think you'll be a great voice
for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I just, my first job
where I got a real paycheck was
for um
Conico when they were in Crown
Point, New Mexico, when they
were
They were the drillers who came
to see if there was uranium, and
I got breast cancer at an early
age, and I wonder if those two
things are, are connected, but
thank you for bringing this.
I'll go to Representative
Eleanor Chavez for a motion. Uh,
Madam Chair, we we do pass. I'll
second.
So we have a motion or do pass
on House Memorial 15 by
Representative Eleanor Chavez in
the 2nd by Representative
Ferrari. Is there any
opposition?
See none
You have it to pass.
Thank you. Thank you, members of
the committee.
OK, if those are some of you may
have come in after we announced
that we are rolling HB 500.
At the request of the sponsor,
next we'll go to Senate Bill
283.
Whenever you're ready, Senator,
and if I call you
representative,
sorry.
I won't be offended.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. This is my
first house committee. So I'm
really excited to be here.
Uh, today we have Senate Bill
283, which is an important step
to bettering the lives of
children in CYFD custody.
This bill seeks to ensure that
children in the department's
custody who qualify for certain
federal benefits actually
receive these benefits.
Currently, if a child in CFD
custody,
qualifies for Social Security
benefits from the death of a
parent, CYFD might apply for
those funds as the child's
designated payee and keep them
to reimburse the department for
the cost of the child's care.
In most cases, judges,
attorneys, and the children
themselves never learned that
these benefits were applied for
or received or how they were
used.
In 2018, New Mexico received
nearly $8 million on behalf of
children in state custody who
are entitled to SSI or other
federal benefits. According to a
report from congressional, the
Congressional Research Service,
which was prepared for members
of Congress in 2021.
About 11% of children in New
Mexico foster care received
federal benefits that year.
283 will help ensure that
children who qualify for such
benefits are able to save them
for current and future uses, and
this bill also requires that
before the children leave
custody of COFD that they
provide the child with financial
literacy and planning tools.
This bill is similar to one
you've seen before, which is
House Bill 364, which passed
unanimously out of this
committee and was sponsored by
Representative Anaya, who is
also a co-sponsor on this bill.
And I really do appreciate you
taking the time to hear our
Senate bill this morning. I have
Sarah Cracker here to help
answer any questions and with
that, we'll stand for questions.
Thank you, Senator. Um, so if
you are on Zoom in opposition,
um, please raise your hand in
the room in opposition.
OK, seeing no one on on Zoom in
support. Go ahead and raise your
hand and I'll come back to you
in the room and support.
If you'd like to speak to the
center.
I guess.
It's like
OK, so we will go to Marilyn
Beck on zoo.
Thank you committee members and
um everyone, Madam Chair and
thank you to the sponsors for
bringing this forward to be very
brief. This is an excellent
bill, and we just absolutely
appreciate um the sponsors for
bringing this forward, and we
can't wait to see the governor
sign this bill. Thank you.
Next, I have Anne McKinney.
Good morning. Good morning,
Madam Chairperson, and I am Anne
McKinney. I live in Albuquerque,
New Mexico. Proud resident of
New Mexico for 40 years now. I
am a child welfare advocate. I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and
all in support of it. I think it
is much needed and a wonderful
thing that we can do for our
most vulnerable children, the
children in foster care to
assure that they have a brighter
future and
Attain financial stability.
Thank you so much.
Thank you and finally we have
Nat Dean.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and sponsors. I
am in excuse me, I'm in support
of the bill and because you have
a very long agenda. I will leave
it there. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Nat. Um, so,
questions from the committee.
Uh
Oh, OK, seeing no questions, I
will entertain emotion.
OK, so we come on
girls.
So I have a motion for a do pass
on Senate Bill 283 by
Representative Eleanor Chavez in
a second by representative
Anaya.
So is there any opposition? OK,
seeing none, you have a due
pass.
And go tell your colleagues how
nice we are on this side. That's
all I tell them.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. OK, next we
will go to uh HB 347.
And there's the sponsor right
there. So whenever you're ready.
You can begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm here to
present House Bill 347, um,
which is an appropriation to
support practicums for
behavioral health and addiction
counselors. I was approached to
carry this bill over the interim
by Marcia Martinez, who's also
my expert, um, this bill
presents a laser-focused
approach to increase public
safety, as well as workforce
development, and I am very proud
to carry it. Um, there was a $10
million ask, um, in the budget
for the higher
education department, um, to
provide uh financial aid for
behavioral health um behavioral
health provider students or
addiction counselors. Um, I'm,
I'm sure you know that when
those uh students are serving
their practicum, they do not get
paid, and that is um something
that actually dissuades some of
these students from getting
their practicum because they
need to work, they need to have
money to support their families
and themselves. Um, so this
would provide a stipend uh
during um this.
period this period of the
practicum, um, when they're
working under the supervision of
a licensed provider, um, that
usually lasts for about a year
until they are qualified for
licensure. Um, my expert
Marshall Martinez, who's the
executive director of equality
in New Mexico will explain how
um we got to this approach.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
and thank you to Representative
Ortez, Chairwoman Ortiz for
carrying this legislation. So,
um, equality in Mexico is a
member of an 11 organization.
Public Safety Coalition, those
organizations include Olay, New
Mexico, the transgender Resource
Center, and I need to vote, bold
futures and secuunitario,
Albuquerque Healthcare for the
homeless, the ACLU of New
Mexico, New Mexico coalition and
homelessness and the Center for
Civic Policy. And we began
working on um proactive focused
public safety measures last
March immediately after the last
session ended.
Equality New Mexico's role in
that process was to convene the
LGBTQ roundtable is a roundtable
of roughly 71 statewide
organizations who center, serve,
um, or work with queer and trans
people across New Mexico. We
took some time over the summer
at the LGBT Roundtable to map
access to behavioral health and
specifically addiction treatment
and addiction counseling
services across New Mexico.
We found a number of things, uh,
the topmost thing being that New
Mexico um really suffers from a
lack of addiction counseling
centers or providers who are not
religious-based, um, that can be
problematic and a barrier for
LGBTQ people who are not always
comfortable and religious-based
environments. So then we started
interviewing behavioral health
care providers and addiction
counselors across the state to
find out how they got into that
role and what barriers they
experienced an overwhelmingly
what we heard from especially
LGBTQ um
and people of color who were
practicing as addiction
counselors and behavioral health
providers.
is that it took them 4 to 5
years between their classroom
education, uh, and becoming
licensed and starting to
practice. And the reason for
that is because if you are not
independently wealthy, able to
um rely on your spouse, my own
therapist told me that he
married a doctor because he
couldn't afford a practice them
otherwise. I'm hoping that's not
why they're married, but, um, if
you don't have some other
mechanism for income, you can't
afford to work for 20 to 40
hours a week for a year, uh, and
then try to have another job. So
most
folks go get a job, save money,
and then come back to get their
practicum. So, um, as a result
of that behavioral health
mapping, that project over the
summer, our public safety
coalition came together and said
we want to focus on a handful of
things that will have a
meaningful impact on the
addiction crises, the behavioral
health crises, the homelessness
crises across New Mexico. And so
this appropriation to cover just
that practicum time period was
one of those focuses. Um, and
so, so excited to have you all
hearing us today.
where that we stand for
questions.
OK, first we'll go to the
audience if you are in
opposition on Zoom, raise your
hand. Anyone in the room in
opposition.
Seeing no one, if you are on
Zoom and support, please raise
your hand in the audience and
support.
Would you like to speak? OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington speaking
on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
which supports House Bill 347 as
New Mexico begins to turn the
tide with its behavioral health
services network. This bill is
going to help keep us on the
right track. A great way to
expand higher ed enrollment and
increase the number of graduates
able to work in behavioral
health fields in our state is to
create scholarships for students
studying in the behavioral
health fields.
Including substance addiction
counseling at our universities
and tribal colleges. So this
bill represents a smart, much
needed approach as it will help
keep New Mexicans in the state,
providing behavioral health
services for other pneumonia.
Thank you. So I will go with, I
will, I have Gabrielle Knapp.
Rookie,
Rachel and Jessie. So go ahead,
Gabrielle.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich. I am
the executive director of NAI
New Mexico. Uh, Nami New Mexico
is thrilled to support this
bill. This is the kind of
sustainable approach that we
really need that is going to
address the main concern in
terms of sustainability here,
which is having providers
available. Thank you very much.
Next we have Nat.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and
sponsor with the long agenda.
Again, I will just stand and
support. Thank you very much.
um,
real key, I'm sorry if I
Totally messed that up.
Uh, that's all right. Thank you
very much, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Rico Crane and I'm a
licensed behavioral professional
here in Albuquerque. Um, my dad
died of cancer in November 2020,
and he's only 55 years old. Sin
is a shock to all of us as the
time between diagnosis and death
was less than a year. I slept on
the couch in my childhood living
room for the last 2 months of
his life. That's the only place
he could sleep comfortably with
his recliner across the living
room from that couch.
I helped him to navigate the
house as well as experimental
chemo treatments, while the
cancer metastasized from his
bladder throughout his body,
eventually settling in his neck
and skull.
I coordinate his hospice care as
well as my family coming in from
out of town to see him, all
juggling COVID-safe practices.
That was his only relative here
in Albuquerque.
I mentioned this because I had
started my graduate program to
become a therapist at New Mexico
Highlands University in August
of the same year, 4 months
before he died.
Part of my graduation
requirement was to complete an
unpaid 20 hour week practicum in
both years of my program. So,
um, on top of watching my father
slowly wither from that couch. I
was revamping my practicums food
box distribution program and
co-coordinating the family
program. In addition, I was
earning a 3.97 GPA and a full
course load to graduate work,
all of which Thank you.
Um, Rachel Biggs, and just a
reminder, you have one minute.
Madam Cher members of the
committee. My name is Rachel
Beggs with Albuquerque
Healthcare for the Homeless. Um,
we stand in strong support of
this legislation and thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
We are always seeking to engage
interns in our behavioral health
therapy program and one of the
biggest challenges is not having
funding to pay our interns, we
would love to have a really
diverse workforce in our
internship program and make sure
that we are growing our own, and
this would be a great step in
the right direction to ensuring
that success. Thank you.
Thank you. And finally, Jessie.
Mhm
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Jessie Crawford, and I
will be speaking on behalf of
myself today. I'm a graduate
student at New Mexico Highlands
University and a therapy intern
at Healthcare for the Homeless.
Um, I'm fortunate to have a job
that is understanding of the
importance of my practicum
placement, and that once, and
that's uh that works with me to
ensure that I can prioritize my
learning and commitments there.
Uh, not all students are so
lucky. I have many classmates
who were left scrambling to
secure placements, any placement
that could fit in.
Between there are many other
commitments.
Um, so their goal shifted from
finding an ideal practicum and
learning opportunity to just
finding something that anything
that would fit into their
schedule and get through it.
House Bill 347 would allow
students the opportunity to
prioritize finding a practicum
placement where they can focus
on being a learner as opposed to
whatever will fit into their
schedule at the expense of
better educational
opportunities. Thank you all
very much.
Thank you. Do you have any
follow-up? Uh, no, thank you,
Madam Chair, go right to
questions right, so, so far I
have represented Ferrari.
Kates and Santa Cortez.
And in Chavez. OK, so go ahead
representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
for bringing this forward, um, I
um have another bill that had to
go through education, not
health, and then go to
appropriations, but um the um
House Bill 375, which is
graduate behavioral health
scholarship Act, um.
We kind of have an overlap where
you, is it true yours is for
undergraduate as well as a
graduate. Is that true?
Uh, Madam Chair and Madam Chair.
So yes, ours would apply for
undergraduate and graduate, but
it is specifically to cover the
practicum. It is not a
scholarship for classroom
education is purely for that,
uh, on the job training that
students have to complete under
the supervision of a licensed
provider at Healthcare for the
Homeless or Central Sabula or
UNM Hospital or, you know, one
of those spaces.
just
so
do undergrads do practicums?
Madam Chair and um, yes, some
undergraduate students. So if
you're, you know, it depends on
the path of behavioral health
that you're seeking out, um, but
yes, some undergraduate students
have to do a shorter. OK, thank
you.
And um, Madam Chair, an expert
and representative, so the
practicum is paid to whoever is
providing that.
Uh, Madam Chair,
yeah, yes, so this would work in
the same way that financial aid
works in other circumstances. So
the money is appropriated to
higher education department.
They give it to the university.
And then when you're doing your,
you know, when you're a student
doing your financial, it's been
a long time. I think it's still
the FAFSA, right? Like you fill
out your form that um the
university could say to you, and
we have this money to cover that
practicum that you're working
on.
OK, so they work hand in hand,
then the two, thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative um
Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you uh as well for
bringing this forward very much
needed, um, and I am very much
in support of this spill, but
they do have uh two questions.
One is, are you willing to share
with uh Chair Thompson and the
in health committee, your map.
That you spoke of.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so yes, our
behavioral health, um, access
map will will be ready to be
shared probably a month after
the session is over, we rushed
to get the information together,
uh, for folks who know me, I
don't put things out that aren't
pretty. And so once I my
designer has an opportunity to
design it and make it look good
and make it understandable. We
absolutely will share it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Chair, and thank you very much
uh for your answer and for, um,
you always keeping the community
in mind and sharing um uh your,
your own studies. Thank you. I
have one other question. So this
is strictly for the students,
correct?
Yes, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, it is strictly
for the student, um, and just a
bit of a spoiler alert. We
wanted it to be very focused,
but we are intending to come
back in the interim and work
with you all and other folks to
think about how we could uh
provide funding for the folks
who house the students because
being a licensed provider
supervising a student is
additional work. Um, and some of
those entities, are some that,
you know, spoke today, would
like to
some of those students to help
develop the workforce, but they
need additional capacity as
organizations. Uh, thank you,
Chair, and thank you very much.
That's exactly um that it has
been, I, I've run programs where
I've had um mos with Highland
and uh CNM and others so that we
could uh develop uh social
workers through the programs um
that I have done, and I was one
of the only providers out there
that was willing to do it
because it's not.
cost effective. Um, I could have
a licensed social worker and I
could bill for their time or I
can continue to pay them salary
and not bill for them time as
they provide supervisory hours.
So I do think that's the other
link to your paws, but not one
that would prevent me from
supporting this bill in this
form. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative Senna
Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative Ortiz, an expert.
Um, I do have several questions
and the first one is, why were
the doctoral and PhD students.
Why were they omitted from this
bill? Madam Chair and
representative, and so it um
The way the money is currently
written in the budget. My
understanding is that they're
not limited. So it's gradually
it's undergraduate and graduate
and, and my understanding was
that that would capture all of
those folks, and I, um.
I promise you that I will do
some research to make sure that
that's not unintentionally true.
Madam Chair represented an
expert because wouldn't you need
them to have their PhD in order
to practice or would they be
able to do that with the
master's, uh, Madam Chair
representative Senator Cortez,
uh, you don't necessarily need a
PhD to practice to be an
addiction counselor or a
behavioral health specialist.
Many don't have PhDs, so we want
to make sure that we cover those
folks that are, you know,
graduating from their bachelor's
program who were going into
addiction counseling or
whatever, whatever kind of
degree that they attain. OK,
that makes sense.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and expert. So
who would determine the writing
of the regulations on the amount
of money per student.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so the process
is that the higher education
department will look at the
universities and colleges across
the state, um, and then divide
the money up proportionally
based on the number of students
they have that are studying
behavioral health and or
addiction counseling, right? So
the, so HEB gets the money, they
distribute it to the colleges
and universities based on the
the percentage of students that
they represent. And then the
university or college, as they
do with any other.
financial aid, scholarship, etc.
Um, they will determine how much
money they give per semester
semester to, in order to try to
get to as many students as
possible, but not make it such a
small amount that it's not
helpful. Um,
And so I, I mean, you know,
it's, so it's 3 sort of tiers of
processes, right? It's going to
be the higher education two
tiers, the higher education
department first, and then the
college or university second. I
hope that answered your
question. It does. It answered
another question that I had, so
very thorough. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative and
expert and what requirements of
work obligations would be would
be placed on the recipients
after they graduate.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so we don't have
any of those requirements, um,
stipulated right now in in this
legislation. Um, and there's a
couple of reasons, but the
number one reason is that what
we heard from our research over
the last year, overwhelmingly is
that this is actually these
folks are studying behavioral
health and going through the
process because they want to
provide uh this service in their
community as addiction
counselors, as, as therapists,
etc. and
Um, they're not really getting
these degrees and leaving New
Mexico or they're getting the
classroom education and then
they're just waiting to get the
license because of the year
requirement that they work here,
right? And so I think the um our
belief is that if you spend a
year working at the Transgender
Resource Center. They have a
licensed counselor on, on staff,
right? So if you spend a year
working at the, at the
transgender Resource Center, and
you're able to spend that year
working under their licensed
staff because
got this stipend or the
scholarship to do so.
You're already rooted in that
community. Um, and if the
Transgender Resource Center is
the money to hire you as a as a
licensed provider on staff, then
they will, and if not, they're
gonna make the referral to you
to another organization or
entity nearby. Um, and so we're
trying to address this very
specific gap that's already been
identified for folks.
Thank you for that, um,
response, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. In my
experience, what I've seen is
people get their education here
and then they leave as quickly
as possible to go to other
places, so my, my follow up
question is, Madam Chair
Representative and expert is um
when they get their license, is
it New Mexico specific and they
can't go somewhere else. Is that
how you know that they'll stay
in New Mexico, Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chair
Representative Senna Cortez, uh,
yes, that's how we know.
the licensor is for New Mexico
and our the research is showing
that they don't.
Leave, they don't want to leave.
If you're gonna get your degree
here in behavioral health or
addiction counseling, you really
want to help the people here in
New Mexico, um, and that's what
we're seeing. OK, that's
awesome. Thank you so much and I
think you've already answered.
Yeah, you've answered all my
questions. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative and
expert. Thank you. Next we have
a Representative Nicole Chavez,
followed by Representative
Eleanor Chas. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, expert,
um.
Um, my neighbor here actually
answered all my questions or
asked them all. So I just want
to thank you so much. We need
behavioral health providers more
than anything, I think in this
state, so if you build it they
will come, right? Let's hope,
and I think that's what we're
doing this year. Um, I just want
to echo my statement. I think if
we could add some requirement
language to make sure that they
stay in our state for a certain
number of years, I would feel so
much better so that they don't
leave once they create their
roots, especially as we know,
you know, if they go to our
neighboring states, they may be
paid a little more when they're
done, so I mean just a
consideration, but thank you so
much for bringing this bill
forward.
Thank you, Representative
Eleanor Chavez. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just have, I wanted to
comment on the question that you
raised, Madam Chair, in terms of
practicums. So for example, for
social work, um, when I was
doing my BA, I had to do, um, my
I vividly remember my practicums
for my junior and senior year,
um, in, um, in college, and so,
and those were unpaid, so what
ends up happening is that folks
take out financial aid, they
take out loans, and then you're
heavily in debt for having to,
you know, do
your practicum, um.
The, the one question that I do
have is in terms of the,
actually, you know, I have a
couple of questions, but in
terms of the funding, is there a
time frame? I'm, I'm looking at
the FIR and it looks like
there's a time frame in terms
of.
When the money has to be um
spent. So am I reading that
correctly?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so right now the
the this money is some of this
money is in the budget. We were
able to get some money into
House Bill 2, and it is one year
of non-recurring funding, um,
and it is what we, what we got
in the budget was $3 million
not, not quite our $10 million
ask, but we're gonna work our
way up there, um, and I have
every, we have every reason to
believe that that 3 million will
absolutely be spent in one year,
given the number of students,
especially who are signing up.
For behavioral health, uh,
provider paths and addiction
counseling paths. Right, OK, um,
and then the other comment that
I wanted to make was around
supervision. I, I'm hoping that
there's money in the behavioral
health fund that can be used for
supervision, so that we also um
compensate the agencies that are
taking on these students, um,
because right now it's a little
bit of a, a lift for them, um,
and then the other comment that
I wanted to make also, uh, is in
terms of um.
Of kids coming back. Um, I went
away to school because there
wasn't a social or social work
program in New Mexico was gone 9
years, came back, took a
Massive pay cut.
Coming back, but I came back for
other reasons than hey, my
daughter did the same thing. She
went away to get her degree in
social work and um got tired of
the rain in Seattle, so she came
back to her New Mexico family
and her New Mexico son. So I
think kids, even though they go
away, they come back for a whole
bunch of reasons, so we just
need to keep them here, which is
sometimes hard, um, but I think
this is great and um something
that is badly needed. Thank you
guys.
OK, I have a couple of
questions, so, um, I see it's
worded as um
Behavioral health. Yeah, where
is it? And addiction so
addiction counselor, so our
addiction counselors not
included in behavioral health,
and if so, do we need to fix
that?
Uh, thank you for that question,
Madam Chair. Uh, the second part
of your question is outside of
my expertise, um, but I think we
would love, you know, again, we
will share our mapping our
access map and some of the
other, there were a long list of
things we identified as
barriers, and we fully intend to
come to the interim. Um, so, and
we wanted to name addiction
counselor, uh, addiction
treatment specialists,
specifically because there are
some paths to becoming an
addiction treatment specialists
that do not even go through
that.
traditional classroom education
undergraduate, you know, program
in the same way. Um, and so the,
the comparison I have, which is
very odd, uh, is similar to
building trades in that
sometimes some folks, uh, you
know, go through a, a sort of
union developed apprenticeship
program to, to get into the
building trades and some folks
would go to a more traditional
community college, for example.
That's sort of the setup we see
in the addiction treatment
space.
Um, and, uh,
I am, um, I know of at least one
state university that is
developing that sort of
apprenticeship program, and so
we wanted to make sure those
folks were included. OK, thank
you, and then just thinking back
to my days, admittedly it wasn't
behavioral health, so, um,
I, I, I believe that while they
are undergrads, they're
practicums or clinicals or
whatever they're called, are
much briefer um many fewer
hours. So just, just something
to think about when, when, and
I'm sure highered and um other
folks will think about it, but
it's, it's a lot less of a bur
and I what I loved was having to
do the clinical work and pay
tuition to do it. So, um, it
was.
It was kind of a double whammy,
but with that I will accept uh
and
I'll move you pass, madam chair,
OK, a second, so we, so.
So we have a due pass by
Representative Eleanor Chavez
and a second by Representative
Kate. Is there any opposition?
Seeing then you have a due pass.
Next we have um let's see.
505 opioid use disorder drug
stocks.
And Senator, we, we heard
something along the same lines
on the floor yesterday in terms
of having pharmacies able to
access the needed drugs during
weekends and nights and stuff,
so.
So go ahead whenever you're
ready, thank you, Madam Chair. I
didn't know that. I'll, I'll
look for that bill, um, to see.
I don't to see if there's maybe
a way of working together or
something. But this issue, um,
specifically deals, Madam Chair,
with the drug opioid overdose
crisis that we have in New
Mexico. Last year, 948 uh New
Mexicans died of a drug overdose
688 of them were opioid related,
and I have to show you, share
with you that one of them was
the daughter of one of my
colleagues at the Waco.
So it was, it's, it's a problem
in New Mexico and it's a problem
that um there are
But one barrier, or one,
And I always, I love to
pronounce these buprenorphine is
a drug that can, has been
evidence-based and it is a way
to treat opiate addiction, um,
and there's a problem, the
problem that we're trying to
address is that when people try
to fill their prescriptions for
buprenorphine, um, sometimes the
pharmacies don't carry them or
don't have them stocked for a
variety of reasons, even some
pharmacies don't carry them
because of the stigma, um, and
So we what this bill tries to
address that challenge by um
ensuring that retail pharmacies
that distribute controlled
substances have an adequate
stock of renorphine to meet
their daily needs.
And then some 3 extra 2-week
prescriptions at 24
mg a day. And the reason this is
so important is when you
interrupt this treatment, the
cravings for opiates come back.
And because you've been off
opiates for a while, you
tolerance for opioids is way
down, and that's what causes
that these deaths, um, and so
that's what this bill.
Does and it does that if they
fall under these requirements,
they have 3 days to order proper
stock from their distributor,
and if they do not request um
increased stocks, they'll be
subject to penalties. Um,
However, they are not
responsible for the decision of
a distributor and only required
they're only required to request
medication.
Um, so with that, I'd like to
also introduce um my expert,
Marlene Marlena Lyra, and she
has, she's um working on her PhD
in public health and it's just
an amazing expert on this and so
many other public health issues.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee and
senator, um, I think you gave an
excellent introduction to the
bill. I'd just like to add a few
more details to provide a little
bit more context and and color
for for this bill today, um,
this is actually an issue that
stretches far beyond New Mexico.
It's actually a national issue
and two recent studies have
shown that 40 to 50% of
pharmacies in the United States
did not have available
buprenorphine stock.
Um, this is actually an
unfortunate consequence of the
opioid settlement agreements,
which is ironic because those
have the intention of those was
to really reduce the opioid
overdose crisis, um, but those
settlement agreements set up,
um, basically limits and
thresholds to order controlled
substances, and because this
medication is a controlled
substance. Um, it's
unfortunately been impacted
negatively by by those um.
thresholds that have been in
place. Um, there are efforts on
a national level, including by
Senator Heinrich to mitigate
these problems, but this is a
state level bill that could
really help to at least start
make a dent, making a dent in in
the problem here. Um, this bill
was modeled after an ordinance
in San Francisco that was passed
in fall, um, but this is
actually the first state level
initiative of its kind. So if it
were to move forward.
Uh, New Mexico would be a leader
in triangle, um, one last point,
just wanna uh note that in the
fiscal impact report that was um
written by the healthcare
authority, there was a line at
the end saying that um
pharmacists could be responsible
for decisions that are outside
of their control, and I just
want to correct that that as
long as pharmacists are putting
in the requests for medication,
um, and, you know, requesting
that their thresholds go up,
they will not be penalized.
And we're really trying to kind
of shift the burden to the
distributors. This bill would
also create kind of a, a
reporting system to help shed
light into the problem and get
more information from the
distributors about what's
actually going on, um, at a
pharmacy level. Uh, thank you so
much. Thank you. So, um, we will
go to the audience. If you are
here in opposition, raise your
hand.
OK, if you'd like to speak,
please come forward.
And we'll come back to you,
Ashley.
Good morning, ma and chair
members of the committee. My
name is Lex Garcia, Doctor of
pharmacy. I am a pharmacist and
I'm also the executive director
for the New Mexico Pharmacists
Association, being a pharmacist,
we spend 8 years in school and
then a lifetime of service to
ensure that our patients get the
medications that they need when
they need them. That being said,
we do agree with the intent of
this bill. However, we do have
opposition to the methodology
that's outlined in front of you.
This is first and foremost a
supply chain issue our
pharmacists do not control how
much buprenorphine they get into
our pharmacy. This also
introduces an enormous.
administrative burden not only
to our already understaffed
pharmacies, but also to the
board of pharmacy, the
Department of Health, and our
distributors.
This is going to cost a lot of
money, not only to our large
chains that are already shutting
down locations in our state, but
also to our mom and pop
locations that are barely
surviving.
This also shifts the pharmacists
focus from doing things that we
want them to be doing. We want
them to be counseling patients,
providing clinical services,
looking for drug interactions.
This puts a lot of their time
onto unnecessary inventory
controls. We thank the far uh we
think the sponsors to for
bringing this forward and we
look forward to working with
them and other stakeholders in
ensuring that this gets
accomplished correctly, however,
this is not the bill that does
that.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I
cannot follow that up, um, but I
would certainly like to say
that, um, we have worked with
the sponsor with the expert, um,
not necessarily Senator Sidia
Lopez, but we've worked
extensively with Representative
Hadahon. My name is John
Thompson. I represent the New
Mexico pharmacy Business
council, that's the mom and pops
that Lex was talking about. Our
pharmacies are primarily rural,
independent, and have one maybe
two locations, uh, as Miss
Garcia stated, very likely not
the mechanism here. This is
a supply chain issue if one of
my pharmacists orders 1500 of
these, it can come back and say
you get 2. It's respectfully,
it's not Coca-Cola or something
where I say I need 1500 and they
show up on Friday. It doesn't
work that way. This is an
unfortunate result of the opioid
settlement agreement. Again, we
really applaud and agree with
the intent, but not sure this is
the mechanism and, and I think
the sponsors again, they've been
transparent and collaborative
and open and communicating with
us. So thank you, but we do
oppose the legislation.
OK, thank you. We will go to
Ashley and then Micah.
Hello. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Ashley Siar. I am
the current sitting president
for the New Mexico Pharmacists
Association, as well as the New
Mexico Pharmacy Business
Council. I own Care Drug and
Aztec and Bloomfield, New
Mexico. I know I've been in
front of you before, so I
appreciate you hearing me out. I
stand in opposition of this
bill. Well, I understand the
intent and emphasis of the goal,
um, in ensuring like our opioid
disorder patients need the
treatment or get the treatment
that they can.
approach places an undue burden
on pharmacies by requiring them
to carry unnecessary inventory
on our shelves.
As we, as pharmacists, see
firsthand the struggles our
patients go through. We care for
everyone in a no judgment zone.
There is no stipulations or
stigmas brought forth in
servicing these patients.
Community pharmacies are already
struggling with low
reimbursement rates, and this
would place an undue burden on
our managing our cash flow with
the amount of inventory that
they are asking or requiring us
to stock, in addition to the
burden of other financial issues
with this bill. Pharmacies not
only want to stop.
Thank you, it's one minute and
there should be a timer on your.
Green, I hope. Um, next, we'll
go to Mica.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
representatives. My name is
Doctor Mike Lansford, a
pharmacist, owner of Roden Smith
Pharmacy, vice president of New
Mexico Pharmacists Association
and vice chairman of New Mexico
Pharmacy Business Council.
I oppose this bill because it
burdens pharmacies unnecessarily
by requiring them to stop
medications, they may never
dispense and it inappropriate
levels. Uh, pharmacies always
strive to have necessary
medications in stock, but some
aren't prescribed frequently
enough or too costly to justify
carrying every variation or high
stock levels.
Uh, this bill prioritizes one
condition over others. Uh, why
require this but not insulin for
diabetics, anticoagulants for uh
arrhythmia patients or inhalers
for asthma. Uh, I could go on
and on. Uh, this perceived
problem has a much simpler
solution. Uh, providers can send
prescriptions in sooner and
include refills on this type of
medication to prevent
last-minute emergencies and gaps
in care, uh, past shortages of
buprenorphine while they did
exist, it's no longer a current
issue. Most common forms of this
drug.
are now available as lower cost
generics, um, pharmacies, every
pharmacy, retail pharmacy in
this state receives next
business day deliveries.
Next we'll go to Will.
And please pay attention to the
clock or your internal clock if
it's good.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, William Dane
with the Healthcare Distribution
Alliance or HDA, always a
pleasure to speak before you,
uh, pertaining to House Bill
505. Uh, we stand very
respectfully in opposition, um,
I couldn't have put
better myself than those who
have spoken before me. I just
want to touch on a couple of
things. Only 3 of our members
are subject to injunctive relief
or the master settlement
agreement, as it was put in the
fiscal analysis. Um, second,
suspicious orders are referenced
outside of the settlement
agreement in federal code
specifically 21 USC Section
802 57, um, that defines
suspicious orders as those
pertaining to controlled
substances that deviate from an
unusual size.
pattern and frequency, um,
quickly, I'll just add that we
can work together with um all of
those who have just spoken, um,
primarily the New Mexico
pharmacy Association to ensure
their members um have access to
their distributors if they
aren't speaking directly, um, if
there are any
threshold concerns. Um, I don't
believe that to be the case, but
it's something that we can
provide. We can also provide
education. Thank you. Jenna.
Jenna, unmute yourself, please.
Jenna, if you would like to
speak, please unmute yourself.
OK, I'm gonna assume technical
difficulties, so, um, from the
committee I have representative
Nicole Chavez, um.
8
Um, excuse me, Madam Chair, were
there no supporters?
Thank you.
OK. OK, so now we will go to
Zoom in support. Thank you,
Senator, and I'm sorry. Um,
And then if you are in the room
in support, raise your hand.
If you would like to speak, come
forward.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gloria Doherty, and I'm
here on my own. Um, I would like
to just share a story. I have
been a critical care nurse
practitioner for 25 years, and
we often prescribe
buprenorphine, and very often
those patients come back rather
quickly, and that's because the
forms, the types aren't always
available. Hearing what pharmacy
said, it, it gives me pause to
for the level of requirements
that might be there, so I
certainly hope there's can be
some kind of reconciliation.
to make sure everybody benefits
from this. But buprenorphine
comes in sublingual bugle patch,
tablets. There's so many
different ways, and as you know,
every patient is an individual,
and which one works for them
will vary, so not just the drug
itself, but the different types
that are available would be
important. And I think that
would create a large strain on
pharmacy, but the opioid
addiction creates a large strain
on our health care system. Thank
you.
OK, thank you. So I will go to
Riy and then Carlsbad Lifehouse.
So go ahead, reminder of it's
one minute.
Yes.
Hi, I'm Doctor uh Rifki Stern.
I'm a family physician, and I've
been treating patients with
opioid addiction, uh, for over
20 years. Um, I want to
respectfully disagree with um
some of the comments from
pharmacy. This is a very real
problem that people um who have
prescriptions are unable to get
their prescriptions filled at
pharmacies. Some of the
pharmacies run out after a
couple of weeks. It's also
burden on providers when they're
prescription is rejected by one
pharmacy and we have to
represcribe to send to another
pharmacy. This has a huge impact
on our patients who are trying
to get help for their addiction,
um, sometimes caused previously
by, you know, by prescribed
opioids. Uh, we need to figure
out a way to make sure that
people can get the medications.
That they need. It doesn't have
to be in all forms, it can just
be in generics, um,
But, you know, we have to work
harder. These are real people's
lives and the
we'll go to Carlsbad Lifehouse
and, and if the zoom operator
could turn the the buzzer a
little louder.
Um
Thank you. Go ahead, Carlsbad
Lifehouse.
Yeah, Madam Chairman and members
of the committee, this is
Phillip Houston. I'm the
executive director of Lifehouse
in Carlsbad. We operate, uh,
substance use treatment
facilities and mental health
treatment, as well as our detox,
um, certainly sympathize with
the challenges that that this is
uh creates to the pharmacy, um,
and recognize that there's some
federal barriers that
Complicate this situation, but I
do think it's important to
acknowledge that we often hear
in Carlsbad are not able to get
buprenorphine for a detox
clients, um, on the day that
they need it, we've run out the
entire county, we have to drive
hours to get medications for our
clients or turn away admissions,
um, so,
I, I'm thankful to the sponsors
for bringing attention to this
issue and the supply of
buprenorphine does need to be
fixed and addressed, and I hope
we're able to find a way to do
that.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Athena. Hi, my name is Athena
Huckabee. I'm a public health
professional focused on the
opioid epidemic, and I live in
Las Cruces, New Mexico, um, I
do, um, work with a clinic ideal
option that has 5 clinics, 6
actually now located throughout
the state and we run into this
challenge frequently, um, many
of our patients travel, um, you
know, for example, to see us
from places like Socorro.
um, Socorro County has only one
pharmacy, the Walmart there in
Socorro that regularly runs out
the 2nd week of the month of um
the buprenorphines the
buprenorphine, um, at that
pharmacy, um, also, you know,
I'd like to call attention to
the Alamo Navajo reservation
there closest pharmacy is that
Walmart in Sapporo, and their
overdose death rates are up 360%
this year, um, and I can't help
but think that some of it is due
to their
ability to access buprenorphine
at the pharmacy closest to them.
People are driving hours and
hours, um, and at that rate we
might as well, you know, um,
it's almost as bad as methadone.
Thank you.
OK, so, um,
Senator, did you have any wrap
up comments before we go to the
committee?
Yes, Madam Chair, I, um, of
course, we will continue to work
with the pharmacist as it moved,
uh, this bill moves forward, but
um the stocking requirements
are, are fairly minimal. It's 3
prescriptions, um, and then, uh,
one of the concerns was raised,
well, we don't do this with
insulin or other drugs. Well,
because those drugs are stocked.
This is the drug for we're
having problems getting stocked,
and that's what we're focusing
on. We're trying to address a
specific problem.
Um, and with that, I want to
turn it over to my uh my expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um, yeah, just to add a
few more details. Um, I am the
director of research at Work at
Health, which is a low barrier
telehealth addiction provider
and um
This problem has been so great
that we've actually had to
partner with pharmacies to offer
home delivery where we're doing
UPS or buprenorphine, because we
don't know, our patients are
unable to get their
prescriptions filled in their
local pharmacies, and they have
a study that is um under review
right now, but basically 1/3 of
the patients surveyed, um, said
that they actually had to go
without buprenorphine in the
last year because of a pharmacy
barrier. So this is a very, very
real issue and when
Um, people are not able to get
buprenorphine, they start
experience withdrawal. They're
at risk of returning to use of
illicit opioids and overdose and
death. OK, thank you. So so far
I have um Representative Nicole
Chavez, Representative Senator
Cortez, Representative Kates.
OK, so go ahead, representative
N Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Senator and expert witness
for bringing this, um, you know,
we all know that it's a real
problem with.
Addiction and
Prescription usage, but
respectfully, I think that
there's a reason why no other
state has brought this
legislation into law, we, we
create laws and we have to be
very respectful and understand
why sometimes we cannot mandate
things that we would love to,
and there are so many things
across the state, especially
when it comes to
Um, addictions, and we want to
help.
Our community members, um, you
know, but there is a supply
chain issue. We have to talk
about the opioid settlement
program. We have to talk about
why there's a prescription drug
monitoring system. Do we really
want our pharmacies getting red
flagged for ordering too much.
There are certain things set up,
I think, at the federal level,
and there are reasons for them,
so I just don't want to have
unintended consequences because
We
Want to pass a bill that feels
good, but is unnecessary in the
way that it's not going to solve
the supply chain issue, and then
it just feels like it's going to
truly bring burden on the
pharmacies, especially our rule
providers and community
pharmacies. Um, so I guess my
first question is pharmacy
already report the PDMP and
wholesaler monitors usage. So
why is this bill directing
pharmacies to working.
with wholesalers to increase the
pharmacy's allotment. Um, this
is to get over the problem that
is caused because of the
settlement agreement,
potentially canceling orders.
And so it's also to create a
report for our our our uh
The, uh, DHA Department of
Public DPA Department of Public.
What is it now? DOH,
No,
it's a new one, HCA HCA I'm
sorry, that I still couldn't get
the, the new, um, to work with
the HCA so that the HCA could um
figure out what's going on. The
truth is, as people say it's a,
it's a supply chain problem, um,
but we need more data to figure
out what is the source of the
problem. What we're experiencing
is that
Drugstores just don't have it.
Um, and they don't stock it and,
you know, especially in rural
communities, these, these people
just don't have access to it.
And so we're trying to work on
access to a very specific
medication that affects our, our
people greatly.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, just to add, you know, you
brought up the, the PDMP which
is a great point, but the PDMP
reports on prescriptions that
have been filled. The PDMP does
not report on attempts at
filling buprenorphine or orders
or anytime an order is just
rejected and has to be moved to
another pharmacy. The PDMP is an
amazing resource to look at an
individual's uh an individual
patients, you know,
prescription.
history. But it doesn't give
data on this problem, which is
really as, as you correctly
mentioned, I supply issue. So
this bill would create that data
infrastructure, so we have a
line of sight into what is right
now kind of a black box. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. I mean, as you stated
that it is a supply problem and
it is at a national level and
passing legislation in this
state isn't going to help the
national level supply problem. I
think I said the same thing when
we were talking about.
You know, our nurse mandates. We
have over 8000 vacancies and
it's not gonna have a national
ferry that's going to drop in
nurses after we pass a piece of
legislation. I wish it would,
but it doesn't feel like it is.
Um, my question is, what's the
cost for the board of pharmacy
to conduct site visits to
prepare biannually for these
reporting.
Madam Chair Representative, the
wholesale distributors are the
ones who are going to be
supplying the reports, not the
individual pharmacies, so it
will be up to the board of
pharmacy in their discretion
about how much to drill down
into the pharmacy level issues.
Um, in conversations with the
board with the pharmacy
Association and with the
pharmacy lobbyists, we have
tried to rework this bill
already to really shift the
burden away from individual
pharmacies and onto the
wholesale distributors since
that's kind of the source of the
problem. Um, so it would be up
to the board of. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. Is there any way they
can get this reporting or
retrieve it from the state uh
PDMP instead of doing this
reporting.
Not that we're aware of.
And then I just had this, this
second question, but you
answered that, I guess is
there's no other requirements
for other medication like for
diabetes or heart disease
medication, why single this
specific medication out.
Absolutely, because people are
dying and with the other
medication, you just don't have
such a problem, uh, having
access to it.
I've never gone to a pharmacy
and not had access to
Regular medication that I take.
OK. Uh thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator. Those are all the
questions that I have. Thank
you, and I'm gonna remind folks
that we have.
Um, about 50 minutes and we
still have 3 more bills, so I'm
gonna ask for brief questions
and answers. Next, we'll go to
representative um Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and expert, and thank
you for being so concerned about
the opioid crisis, I believe
that we're all concerned, um,
Madam Chair, senator and expert,
I come from a rural part of the
state, and we struggle with
access to basic medications like
when my daughter, my 2 year old
daughter has had respiratory
issues, there was no albuterol,
nothing, and we're just stuck
and you in those instances,
Madam Chair, senator and expert,
it does feel like a life or
death situation with her little
lungs. And so,
How would mandating this not to
beat a dead horse by any stretch
of the imagination, Madam Chair,
Senator, and Representative
senator and expert.
But if we mandate it and it's a
supply issue. How does that fix
the issue?
The
we'll get information about
this, the type of supply issue,
and remember pharmacists are not
going to have if they order, if
they put in the order, there's
no consequence at all to the
pharmacist. Um, and so the idea
of this bill is more to get in,
well, not more, it is also to
get information, um, and we also
think that a lot of pharmacists
will do it and having a, uh,
having 3,
prescriptions.
is likely to really make a
difference. We believe that this
bill is going to save somebody's
life. We don't know who, we
don't know when, but we really
believe that it will. So Madam
Chair, Senator, and expert, what
rule stakeholders were consulted
on this bill.
Um,
standard, I mean Senator
Representative Parajon and our
expert works more with the
pharmacists than I did, so I
will uh turn it over to my
expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, in the, in
the process of creating this
bill, uh, the New Mexico Society
of Addiction Medicine worked
closely with Representative
Parajon, um, the New Mexico
Society of Addiction Medicine is
a statewide coalition. It's
comprised of addiction medicine,
uh, physicians, advanced
practice providers, public
health professionals,
researchers from all over the
state, um, and in addition,
we've been working with other
advocates.
For buprenorphine who have been
involved in state level
committees on this issue, um,
and there have been previous
attempts to try to um engage
other aspects of the government
on this issue, and those have
not been successful and so we
felt that.
Introducing legislation was
really the next step. And um
just to follow up on the
previous question, this bill
also creates a mechanism for the
daily supply to be increased
over time. So, um, pharmacies
would have their kind of daily
average plus 3 extra doses, and
if that's not sufficient, they
have to keep increasing over
time, so it will gradually come
up to that need that is is
required by the community, so
there is an a built in
mechanism.
So that the supply. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. So
Madam Chair, Senator, and
expert, what I'm hearing is most
likely the rules stakeholders
weren't consulted the reason I
ask is my community is already
struggling to just get the
basics and if they have yet
another mandate and don't
comply. What's the repercussion
gonna be?
Yeah
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. Um, I meant to
say in my previous comment that
because this is a statewide
um organization. We had
Providers from all over the
state, including rural areas,
contribute to this and all of
the healthcare providers were
very much aligned with this
initiative. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Senator, and
expert. So,
For instance, if there's a 30
day supply plus 3 additional
prescriptions, different
prescriptions have different
quantities determined by the
prescriber, right? So,
How will they comply with
something like that, Madam
Chair, senator and expert. It it
focuses on the average, on their
average need. So they will know
what the prescriptions have
been, um, in the past, and they,
they'll base their um order on
what they've been, what they've
uh been doing, and that's the
problem that um when somebody
has been taking it, and then all
of a sudden can't find it
anymore. And so they will each
have the the
The pharmacies will look at what
they've been um
Prescribing, if there were some
pharmacy in the world that
didn't prescribe any 0, I guess,
um there wouldn't be a need, but
it does focus on what, what the
needs are.
Yeah. Thank you. And the 3 extra
prescriptions, just to clarify,
are 3 2-week prescriptions at 24
mg a day. That is the, the
requirement for the extra. OK.
And I'll conclude with this,
Madam Chair, senator, and
expert, so
For instance, a pharmacy in my
rural part of the state makes
this order from the wholesaler
to comply with this new law if
it is passed, and the wholesaler
can't provide it.
What is the repercussion for the
pharmacies in my area that are
already struggling for the
basics.
There is no repercussion if they
made the order.
There's no repercussion to them.
No.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and expert. That
concludes my, my questions.
Thank you, representatives. Uh,
thank you, Chair, and thank you
for bringing this forward. I do
have a couple of questions, um,
because we had heard a lot of
information out there for public
comment, so I just want to
clarify some things. Um, so you
are asking pharmacies to take
last month's average and add 3,
that is the supply you're asking
them to, is that correct? And,
and, and yes, to help my.
Let's ask yes or no thanks,
um, and this, uh, when they are
requesting for that, it can be
in generic form. Is that
correct? Yes. Thank you, chair,
and thank you representatives.
Um, how expensive is this drug?
Is this an, an abnormally high
drug compared to the opiate
themselves in which they have no
problem distributing.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, a 28 day
supply for generic is about $150
to $200
for cash price $500 so give or
take brand name. We're talking
about 3, 2-week prescription. So
I would estimate this to be less
than $1500 in terms of supply,
depending on brand name or
generic. Thank you, chair, and
thank you for that very detailed
question.
Not being a pharmacy, is that an
expensive drug?
Madam Chair Representative, I
would say that it is not an
expensive drug. I thank you,
chair, and thank you, uh,
Representative and an expert,
um, I, I, you have a lot of
things in your bills, um, to, to
show the progression of the
noncompliance after like only
once in 3 years and then what if
it's twice in 3 years you have
different penalties and things.
And I see a lot of bullets.
So I, I understand I don't know
your bill as well as you know
it, so help me. I see a lot of
your bullets saying that the
pharmacy has to show that
they've ordered it from the
wholesaler, and if the
wholesaler denies them, they are
not held accountable, but, but
what we are hearing from
pharmacies today is the
wholesaler doesn't necessarily
deny them, they just don't ship
it to them.
So, can we change some of the
language to show that they have
in written form, ordered it and
then they didn't get it, but
they are ordering it. Is that an
acceptable um amendment before
your next committee uh chair and
represent in Senator.
Um, if, if it did not, if it, if
it is unclear that this bill
does that, then we'll probably
have to make the language
clearer, but that's what we
attempted to do exactly what you
said.
A thank you chair and thank you,
senator. You could, if you have
a line or a page number that you
could say, well, this is where
it shows. I just kept seeing
when wholesale drug distributed
denies the request. I keep
seeing that bullet, but if you
have another bullet that says,
or they didn't, they didn't fill
the written order. On on page
two line 8, a retail pharmacy
that fails to satisfy the
stocking requirements.
of this section is not in
violation of this section of the
retail pharmacy takes any of the
following actions within 3 days
of failing to satisfy. They
could order, they could request,
um,
Yeah, they could order the
replacement stock.
That's all they have to do.
Thank you. It's thank you for
helping me and thank you chair
and thank you, Senator. Um, I
would also respond to why, why
are you not requesting stock for
diabetes or asthma because the.
Pharmacy is not distributing
drugs that cause diabetes or
asthma. So just like we have Epi
attack in the pharmacy in case
somebody accidentally poisons
themselves or take
we should have something that
addresses that. So on my concern
is their concern of having this
in stock being something other
than um.
What you stated, have has the uh
chair and and senator have the
pharmacies when you were working
uh with them, have they
requested.
A number such as like we don't
want to do, we don't want to
have 3, we don't have 3 of any,
I don't know. We don't have 3 of
anything, can we have 2? Do
they, do they press a number
over the average.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'd like to
introduce the, I would say the
lead sponsor of this bill, uh,
Christina Farajon, uh,
Representative Christina
Parajon, and she worked um with
this. I don't know if you have
it handy, the answer, or if you
If you would like.
Madam Chair and um
representative, I'm sorry I'm
still trying to get all my
documents up. Could you just
repeat that question?
Representative Kate thank you
chair and thank you
Representative and Senator. So
earlier we had testimony you
guys have done a very good job
reaching out, at least to the
small rural pharmacies, and I
was wondering if you had any
feedback from those pharmacies
seeing 3 is a heavy inventory
for us to keep in anything and
and we understand it must be the
average from the month earlier,
and you're seeing +3. Have they
made a suggestion of can we do a
plus one?
Can we do a +2? Have they made a
suggestion besides the +3, just
a reminder, we're trying to be
brief.
Um, Madam Chair and I'm
representative. I don't recall
that in our in our discussions,
but there was um conversation
about uh like the reporting
periods and the the burden of
that in the uh of the pharmacies
and to add to that, the, the
bill actually did change a
little bit in that we initially
wanted 41 month prescriptions.
Um, we brought that down to 3
2-week prescriptions and we're
doing a
daily average plus 3 extra,
whereas the original conception
of this bill was the entire
month's supply and we heard loud
and clear that that is not
practical or feasible from the
pharmacists, um, but the, the
daily average plus the 3 extra
would be feasible. Thank you. I
thank you, chair, and thank you
for your indulgence and thank
you for this. So, and you're not
dictating what format you are
providing this job, and I'm
assuming some formats are more
expensive than other, uh, of
course I have.
5 more questions, but I think we
have another uh.
Committee member and so I will
rest a chair. Representative
Anaya.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you both for bringing this
forward. Um,
If I'm not mistaken, Madam
Chair, and Senator
Representative, the real problem
here is that the distributor
level, is that correct, Madam
Chair, Senator Representative
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you. And um, Madam Chair,
Senator Representative, um, I, I
do have some concern in making
the
Pharmacists themselves report
and report so heavily and so
quickly and so often. I'm
wondering, Madam, Representative
Senator, if there's an
opportunity to shift the
reporting to the actual
distributors so we can actually
hold the root of the property
representative.
Um, Madam Chair, that's what we
tried to do on page so the
pharmacy doesn't have to report,
they just keep records and then
on page 3, the wholesale drug
distributors shall report the
board on a monthly basis. So you
may have seen an earlier draft.
Uh, but this, this was a change
that we made.
Um, Madam Chair Representatives
is the daily piece not included
in this any longer?
Um, the daily reporting piece is
no longer included in this and
the different stock levels for
um the types of medications also
not in this version,
is that true they've been
reduced dramatically, yes, and
it's OK, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Senator, the
reason I ask is because I'm
still, um, hearing from
pharmacists themselves that it,
it is, it is quite a burden,
even though it might have been
um drastically reduced. And I'm
just hoping, Madam Chair,
Senator Representative, that we
might be able to fix that
problem completely.
by putting the onus completely
on the distributor.
I thought that we did by on page
3, line 3.
It's the wholesale distributed
reports.
Um, so they may be commenting on
an earlier draft. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Senator
Representatives, because we, we
really did try to address the
concerns.
Representative each of us. Uh
thank you, Madam Chair. So that
um
For of last conversation raised
the question in my mind.
so
So the
Distribution supply, whatever,
that's the problem, but it's
also connected to the opioid
settlement agreement, right? And
is that at the federal level?
Yes, Madam Chair, uh, Senator.
Um
Yes, it, the agreement was
because of a problem and it was
a really bad problem in New
Mexico. And so the agreement,
unfortunately included
uh bro,
how we say this wrong,
Epinephrine, as well as other
opioids. Senator Martin Heinrich
is trying to change that in
federal legislation and that
would be very helpful. We, we
believe, um.
It's, it's unclear. I think my,
my, uh, expert described the
supply, the suppliers as a black
box. They're hard to get a hold
of, you can't get information,
we really don't know what's
going on. We're hoping that one
of them might show up and oppose
this bill, but so that we could
talk to them, but they didn't
reminder, we still have 2 more
bills, so be, sorry. So, so then
I guess, madam chair, um,
Senator Representative, so then
what we, what we need more than
anything is a fix.
At the federal level.
To help the situation.
Um, Madam, Madam Chair.
That would be helpful. It's a
practical problem too, that's a
legal problem that could be
fixed, but it's also a practical
stocking problem, and this only
addresses the practical stocking
problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
Thank you, so I do have um one
question. So, so it's you, they
have to have 32 weeks supplies
over their normal stocking. So,
uh, 3332 weeks supplies at the
CVS on Central in Albuquerque,
looks very different than 3,
that's, I don't know if there's
a pharmacy in Fort Sumner, but
let's say there's a pharmacy in
Fort Sumner and while 1500 may
not be a lot for
prescription, um, for a pharmacy
that's running on a tiny margin,
that's kind of a lot. Um, so I,
I, I, I think that what you're
going after is right on, but I'm
not sure that this, so I would
my suggestion will be, of
course, it's up to you that you
roll this.
And work with folks who have
issues and um and see if you can
get it in a better place.
Um, Madam Chair, I will ask in
the Senate, we often vote for a
bill and then before the next
committee, um address those
issues with the commitment to
address them. I think you're
right. I think it makes sense to
have the smaller pharmacies, uh,
with a lower need for this, um,
have a smaller supply, um, and
we certainly commit to do that.
If, if this bill moves forward,
um, OK, but I, I, I should
consult with, we often do that
in the Senate. I want to
consult with my, with the lead
sponsor to see if that would be
acceptable.
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
motion for a due pass with the
assumption that they will make
the recommended that so we have
a motion from Representative
Ferrari in a 2nd from
Representative Katescored 2
passes on House Bill 505, so
Karen, can you please take the
role? Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate and explain
my vote.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes, 6 to 2 by a 6 to 2, you
have a due pass.
with the stipulation that that
you will try and iron out some
of these problems cause uh
judiciary will be tough.
Absolutely, Madam Chair, I think
you have some.
Oh yes, yes, so 1st, 1st I have
Representative Anaya and then
Cates for a brief explanation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for bringing this
forward. It is very clearly a
problem. Um, and I just, um,
want to reiterate the piece on
the pharmacists themselves. The
actual reporting has been
alleviated, but the actual
counts still need to happen. And
so I understand the report is no
longer necessary, but I would
really like for y'all to be able
to um
Um, also address the daily
minimum + 3. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, uh, senator
and Representative, um, I, uh,
to look forward to looking at
your amendments if we could make
independently owned and operated
or rural or whatever the the
population served at a certain
amount of pharmacies to um have
a drastically smaller amount of
uh understand that if their
average last month is
0, and then you ask them to do
plus one, at least they have
something that's an emergency,
um, and they're not so
burdensome with the higher
costs, so thank you for taking
that suggestion. Thank you. Next
we will go to um Representative
Parajon for House Bill 527.
Insurance coverage for medical
cannabis costs.
And if any of you were here for
House Bill 500, we rolled it at
the request of the sponsor.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I will
be brief, um, with this, um,
with this intro, this bill
essentially requires medical
cannabis to be covered by
insurance, uh, including
individual and group health
plans, Medicaid and state
coverage offered to state and
local government employees and
educators. Thank you. And, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, I'll introduce
my expert today.
Uh
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Representatives. My name is
Christina Caffrey. I am the
general counsel of Ultra Health,
which has been serving medical
cannabis patients across the
state since 2015, uh, and, um, I
just want to point out a few
things that, uh, medical
cannabis is already uh subject
to a, uh, sorry, uh, medical
cannabis is already eligible for
a grocery receipts tax deduction
on the basis that it is a
functional equivalent to a
prescription.
That is both in statute and it
was um the ruling from the um
New Mexico Court of Appeals in
the sacred Garden versus uh
taxation and revenue Department.
I also want to point out that uh
New Mexico already requires uh
workers' compensation insurance
to pay for medical cannabis that
also is the basis of a decision
by the court of appeals, the
Opodo versus Benz Automotive
Services, and in that opinion,
the uh New Mexico Court of
Appeals.
Uh, observed that New Mexico
public policy is clear or state
legislature passed the
Compassionate Youth Act to allow
the beneficial use of medical
cannabis in a regulated system,
we declined to reverse the order
on the basis of federal law or
public policy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'll go
to questions. OK, thank you. So
if you are on Zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand. Anyone in the room in
opposition. If you'd like to
come forward and um
And if you are on Zoom in
opposition, raise your hand and
I'll come back to you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Marla Shots
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross, Blue Shield of New
Mexico, and we respectfully
oppose this bill. Blue Cross
Blue Shield is concerned about
the implications of this bill,
which would mandate the
reimbursement for medical
medical cannabis, potentially
increased cost of premiums and
creating a system without
precedence and potentially ripe
for abuse, although cannabis is
legal in New Mexico for medical
and recreational use, it is
still considered a
Scheduled one drug in the US,
meaning that the US Drug
Enforcement Association, uh,
agencies sorry, categorizes
these drugs as having no
currently accepted medical use
in a high potential again for
abuse. Health insurance, uh,
insurers currently have no model
for reimbursement for these
products, cannabis is not
approved by the FDA does not
have a national drug code cannot
be processed through a
traditional claim system, the
legislature should consider
strong guard rails around such
policy.
Current recreational users could
use.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the
National Federation of
Independent Business. Uh, we're
speaking today as sort of the
downstream impact of such
insurance mandates, uh, health
insurance costs have remained a
top challenge for small
businesses, really since 1986,
unlike large businesses that are
self-funded, uh, small business
insurance plans are regulated by
the state, which means insurance
coverage mandates like this
impact our small employers, uh,
and as much as we.
our insurance friends, they do
just pass on the cost of this,
um, so that our insurance
premiums become more expensive.
We struggle to afford coverage,
making it harder for employees
to access employer sponsored
health insurance. Uh,
additionally, while there are
claims of potential long-term
cost savings, no data currently
supports this because New Mexico
lacks an optional legislative
mechanism to conduct actuarial
analysis on mandated benefit
proposals. All we know for sure
is the immediate and measurable
impact will be higher.
costs making health insurance
less affordable for small
businesses across New Mexico.
Thank you.
OK, in support on Zoom.
In supporting the room.
You'd like to speak, please come
to the center.
That's Madam Chair members of
the committee, Robert Romero,
registered lobbyist for Ultra
Health, as was stated earlier,
this cannabis is a medicine.
It's already approved for
insurance for workman's comp
should be, it should be approved
for regular insurance. Thank
you. OK, thank you, and we have
Chad on Zoom, go ahead, Chad.
Hello, my name is Chad Lozano.
I'm a cannabis advocate here in
the state for the past decade. I
helped, uh, push us to update
our medical cannabis laws and
also get us adult use, um, as
the same reasons said before,
um, it only makes sense for us
to, to cover medical cannabis
here in New Mexico since the
state appeals court have ruled
many times that it is a
medicine, um, I do feel that New
Mexico we're always on the front
of something new and
groundbreaking and changing for
the whole nation and world. And
I believe this is something that
could be
in that same field. Right now,
currently, um, insurance
companies pay for Marinol, which
is a synthetic version of
cannabis, so it'd be better if
they were actually
um able to cover for regular
cannabis. So thank you so much
and I hope this passes.
Thank you. So, um, so far I have
representative Nicole Chavez,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Oh, OK, we'll start with you son
of Chavis.
Um, I guess my
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
my first question is, it feels
like this bill directly
challenges federal cannabis
prohibiting mandating insurance
coverage of a Schedule I
substance. So how does the
day
Or what is your plan for the
state, um,
To provide services when
We currently don't fill Schedule
One.
drugs. Sorry. Thank you. Um,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
so health insurance is, uh, most
of it a creature of state
statute of state law rather than
federal law, um, of course,
those two bodies of law
interact. Federal law does, uh,
federal sources of um money to
come into the system, but
ultimately, um, the requirements
for what insurance does and does
not cover, uh, much of it
originates in state law. State
law mandates already coverage
for
Certain things that the federal
government keeps its hand up,
hands out of primarily abortion
and other reproductive uh
services. So they're, there are
precedents for states requiring
coverage of things that the
federal government does not, uh,
as for the, um, Schedule One
status, uh, cannabis is
currently under consideration
for um rescheduling to Schedule
3. That is, that, that
regulation is under
consideration currently on the
basis of the health and human.
Services memo that explicitly
did find um medical efficacy for
medical cannabis. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. Um,
I'm sure it may be under
consideration, but it has not
yet been approved, and that
takes many, many years in some
instances, um, and, you know,
I'm sure you are aware since
you're in the industry, New
Mexico currently has over 50% of
our members that are enrolled in
CMS.
So either in Medicare or
Medicaid.
Federal is not gonna cover any
of these in that instance. So
that's over 50% of our state
patients, members, community
members, whatever you want to
call them at this point, is not
going to get coverage from CMS
for Medicaid or Medicare. That
means you want our state
Medicaid funds to reimburse for
all of, of the drugs in this
coverage because we know that
the federal mandate in CMS is
not gonna change anytime.
soon. Um, so how do you expect?
To provide
Really coverage like do you?
Are you expecting the state
Medicaid to pick this up, I
guess that's my main question.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, certainly
segregation of funding is
possible, um, between the
federal portions of Medicaid and
the state match, and um we
believe it is a practically and
legally uh possible and uh
doable to ensure that the, the
federal matching portions of
Medicaid do not uh reimburse for
medical cannabis.
not only comes from the state
matching portion, um, because
as, as has been pointed out in
the FIR, um, this would not go
medical cannabis reimbursement
would not be processed through
insurers, uh how they process
other prescriptions because
medical cannabis is not
available, uh.
Pharmacies, it's available at
licensed uh cannabis retailers.
So we, we, uh, that segregation
should be possible between
federal and state funds.
Thank you man chair
representative, so we are going
to be relying on the state funds
for that Medicaid reimbursement.
Thank you so much. That is my
only question.
A representative for Senator
Cortez. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative and expert,
um, my concern is always the
economic and the fiscal impact
and the the potential increased
insurance premiums, which could
be passed down to the businesses
and consumers, so that's not a
question, just a statement,
that's always my top concern,
but my question, Madam Chair
Representative and expert is
with this bill also then require
insurers to develop new coverage
structures and billing
mechanism.
ism s since this would be
outside of the traditional
pharmaceutical framework.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, yeah, yes,
it's, it's certainly possible
and probable that new uh
reimbursement mechanisms and
processes would be developed,
uh, but I, I point out that uh
insurers currently cover plenty
of things also outside the
traditional pharmacy,
pharmaceutical model, such as
gym memberships, um, that goes
through um some other system,
um, and, um, I want to also
point out, um,
Some of the inspiration for
covering um cannabis comes from,
um, a few years ago when um the
legislature eliminated cost
sharing for behavioral health
services. Uh, I believe that was
Senate Bill 317 a few years ago
And um so we, we often, um, the
state requires insurers to cover
something new or some new
portion of benefit and they
develop mechanisms to do so.
Madam Chair represented an
expert, wouldn't you agree that
a gym membership would be a
different traditional
pharmaceutical framework than a
Schedule One substance under the
controlled substances Act.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
certainly a different framework,
um, so, uh, workers'
compensation insurance, uh, as I
discussed already, is required
to cover medical cannabis, and
so there is precedent for
insurers developing
reimbursement processes, uh,
working with, uh, licensed
cannabis retailers throughout
the state.er to keep your
answers brief, Madam Chair
representative and expert, and
you may have already answered
this, are there other states
doing this?
Uh, not that I'm aware of, uh,
Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair representative
and expert. So how would this
bill ensure that the medical
cannabis prescriptions follow
the same rigorous safety and
efficacy standards that the FDA
approved medications also
covered by insurance follows.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
medical cannabis is currently uh
administered on the basis of a
recommendation by a healthcare
professional in processes that
are outlined in the linen A and
Compassionate Use Act, uh, and
Um, it's, it's tracked, it's
traced, uh, there are similar
guardrails to, to the extent
that the New Mexico uh Court of
Appeals has said that medical
cannabis guardrails are the
functional equivalent of a
prescription.
Madam Chair Representative and
expert will New Mexico
pharmacies now be given licenses
to dispense and bill for the
medical cannabis. Is that how it
would work?
Representative, this bill
anticipates the medical cannabis
is provided by licensed cannabis
retailers who are licensed under
the Cannabis Regulation Act.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. That
concludes my questions.
Thank you. Um,
I will entertain emotion.
Madam.
Do I have a second?
I guess.
OK. Will you take the role.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes.
Representative M Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam vice chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
to 2, we have a do pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair. 5 to 2,
you have a due.
hopefully, um,
Let's see, is representative
Cullen in here.
See the expert witness, but I
don't see her.
OK.
Um,
So, OK, so we will go to 517.
Um, free condoms for certain
students representative Herndon.
And the sponsor says hold on to
your seat, so this could have
fireworks and
bands and parades.
We're expecting a lot now.
Whenever you're ready,
representative, and I, I know
you have some fabulous
witnesses, but I'm gonna ask
folks to please be really brief,
um, because we
Theoretically should be on the
floor in 13 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I
present to you today House bill,
um, 517.
Madam chair.
And House Bill 517 would create
two new sections of law, both in
chapter 21, uh, and chapter 22
of the New Mexico Civil statutes
to require public high schools
and public secondary educational
institutions to provide free
condoms to students and
post-secondary institutions,
institution coordinators and
consultation with student health
centers and other entities that
provide services to students
would be required to determine
how to.
make condoms available. And in
high schools, public school
administrators in collaboration
with school nurses would be
required to determine how to
make condoms available. Madam
Chair, I have 3 incredible
experts with me today. They're
all from El Dorado High School,
and I'm gonna have them
introduce themselves.
Uh, Madam Chair representatives,
my name's Adeline Arenas, uh,
yes, it was, there we go, uh,
Madam Sharon representatives, my
name is Adeline Arenas, um, like
I like representative said we
are all seniors from El Dorado
High School.
Madam Cha Representatives. I'm
Emma Travis.
Hello, Madam Chair and
Representatives. My name is
Kayla Go. I am also a senior
from El Dorado High School.
Thank you for having us.
Madam Chair, we stand for.
Do you all have opening
statements?
Uh, yes, we did.
Very brief.
Kayla, did you want to start?
So we are seniors over at El
Dorado High School. We were
actually the ones who brought up
this bill to Senator Hickey back
in September for a class
project, but now I've made it
all the way here, so yeah, um,
we wanted to really push this
bill because we realize the
importance of providing safe
measures of protection for our
fellow peers when it comes to
sexual activities.
So we have seen firsthand the
detrimental effects of unsafe
sex, um, on our peers'
education, safety, and overall
wellbeing high school students,
um, we were in a high school
setting, so we know that people
are having sex, but it remains a
taboo. We know about half of
high school students who are
sexually active are using
contraceptives as shown in the.
LES report LE.
Essie LECS report. Apologies.
And we want to ensure that the
reason the other half of these
students aren't using
contraceptive isn't due to a
lack of access.
As young women living in a
post-dos world, we want our
peers to have access to tools to
protect their bodily autonomy.
Um, our goal is basically just
to ensure that our peers who we
know for a fact, are already
participating in sexual
activities are able to be safe.
Thank you. OK, we will go to the
audience. If you are in
opposition on Zoom, raise your
hand.
And I'll come back to you in the
room in opposition.
OK, seeing none on Zoom and
support if you'd like to speak,
raise your hand, and in the room
in support it just a show of
hands and then if you want to
speak, come to the center,
please.
One minute
And we will come back uh to
cruise on Zoom.
Hello, Madam Chair and
representatives. My name is
Karina Padilla, and I'm a
student at UNM and I'm here in
support of House Bill 517.
Students at UNM push for free
condoms to be provided on campus
if you a few years back.
However, this is not a statewide
policy. College is a
transitional stage and also a
pivotal time in a person's life,
and I want to make sure that we
are providing support to
students so that they can focus
on their education.
Students and young people make
up 50% of chlamydia cases.
And providing condoms reduces
the rate of STDs and STIs and
unplanned pregnancies. As a
student at UNM I have access to
these services, but not all
students around the state do,
and I would like to, I would
like my fellow students around
New Mexico to have access to
their, to these services,
without economic barriers in
echoing the high school
students, young people are
having sex. We just want to keep
it safe.
Great job on the timing.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Alexandria
Taylor. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition of Sexual Assault
Programs, we applaud the sponsor
and the experts for bringing
this bill. Our approach is to be
data informed and provide
medically accurate information
that promotes overall health and
well-being,
according to the youth, risk and
resiliency survey, 25% of New
Mexico high schoolers are
sexually active. Of those who
are sexually active, half have
said that they did not use a
condom.
2/3 did not use an effective
birth control method. The data
supports that combined with
comprehensive sexual health
education and access is
available, young people are able
to make informed decisions about
their health. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, my name is
Florian Strics, and I am a
junior at Santa Fe High School.
At Santa Fe High School, we do
have um a teen health center
that does provide condoms to any
student who uh who comes and
visits, no questions asked. This
has been a lifeline for myself
and many other students, um.
Uh, in a post jobs world, it's
increasingly important for um
all uh women uh all especially
female students to have access,
um to to resources to be able to
make informed decisions, um,
for, uh, about their bodies, um,
I do support this bill and I
hope that it passes. Thank you.
Thank you for being here,
particularly the students, it's
much appreciated. Um, and I
wouldn't have been so brave when
I was your age, so, so we have
crews on Zoom.
A little madam chair.
My name is Chris Hall. I'm a
current freshman at UNM. I just
graduated from Robertson High
School in Las Vegas, New Mexico.
Out of my graduating class,
There were 66 kids out of those,
one of them was a teen mom, and
two of them were on track to
graduating, but dropped out due
to teen pregnancy. With this,
teen parents have significantly
worse education outcomes than
their peers. Also, out of all
this, students sexually active
only use.
Only half of them use
contraceptives, um, we should
have more access to them.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Miranda.
Hi, my name is Mara hello. My
name is Miranda Leon from South
Texas Rio Grande RGB, um, I
unfortunately, I forgive me, I'm
a little uh nervous right now,
but I am incomplete.
Um,
like for the students to receive
contraceptives. I did.
Have a teen pregnancy and it
My, it made my life really,
really hard. It wasn't, you
know, the best decision.
So, forgive me for my nerves,
but I am in complete support for
them to receive any sort of
advice and contraceptives just
so they don't go through the
hardships that I had to face
throughout my life, and yeah,
thank you for your time.
Thank you, Miranda, for sharing
your story. OK, so I will go to
the committee.
So questions, representative
Senna Cortez.
Go ahead, representative.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and experts here
today. I do want to applaud you
on your advocacy. It takes a
great deal of courage to come
and present on such a a topic
that can typically be a hard
conversation. Madam Chair
represented and experts. I
worked in it as an executive at
a teen pregnancy prevention
program, which was the largest
youth development program in
Lake County for 11 years, and
Madam Chair representative and
experts.
Our stance was always abstinence
is the best way to guard against
a teen pregnancy, however, if
you choose another route for
yourself, um, utilizing all the
resources available to you to
guard against sexually
transmitted diseases in teen
pregnancy is crucial.
So my, my question, Madam Chair,
Representative, and experts are
are students not able to access
the condoms right now at nurse
stations or in the student
health centers.
As we are aware, students are
not able to access condoms at
these places within schools and
if they are if that is
occurring, they have to go
through like asking these
officials and we believe that
that prevents a barrier to
access and thank you so much,
um, Madam Chair Representative
and experts.
Um, do you know how many
school-based health clinics are
in New Mexico because I know we
just got one in, in my rural
part of the state, and those are
available in the school-based
health center.
Representative, I, I don't think
that's information that they
have. Yeah, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, representative
Senator Cortez. They do. We, I
don't know how many school-based
health centers, there are,
they're not enough. I do know
that there is not one at
Eldorado High School and the
students are advocating for
representative and experts with
these condoms be evenly
distributed at all throughout
New Mexico. They'd now be free
and all the restrooms. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representatives
Senator Cortez, they don't have
to be in a restroom that could
be in a, in a health center if
there is one that could be at a
nursing station, so we've left
it up to the schools how to make
it easily accessible to the
students without dictating it to
them, to the schools that is.
So Madam Chair, representative
and experts, um, I know where,
where I live they call it the
brown bag special, and so is
that not currently available in
the schools?
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Senator Cortez, that is correct.
They are not available in the
schools readily, so we are
trying to resolve and uh.
An issue that needs to be fixed
just to clarify, madam, Madam
Chair representative and
experts, you do not have a
school-based. Uh yes. That is
correct. OK,
so there are some in APS but far
from every school has one. OK,
got it, Madam Chair,
representative and experts, um,
I know that we had another bill.
I know we want to stay very
specific on this bill, but it
was providing free tampons
because menstruating does happen
during school hours. So Madam
Chair
and experts, so we advocating
that students have sex during
school hours. Is that why the
condoms are needed? I'm not, I
just want to follow.
Your train of thought. Um, Madam
Chan representatives, um, it is
not encourage sex on school
grounds, um, we've done some
research and it is proven that
students who are sexually active
with um access to condoms will
be sexually active, but it will
be safe. It is not encourage
students to have sex. It's
proven that it does not create
the condomability programs are
shown that they do not increase
sexual activity just safe sex
and the use of condoms for
students who are already.
sexually active.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. So I
know that um
This is gonna have this money is
gonna have to come from
somewhere. So Madam Chair
Representative experts, is this
already part of the state budget
or are we going to ask for more
money for this initiative.
Madame chair, members of the
committee, representative
Senator Cortez, we will not be
asking for more money. There is
enough funding within um the
school safety plan in the
school's cash reserves to
adequately take care of what's
been asked for in this bill.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative and experts and
girls, you're doing a good job
answering all of the tough
questions this morning. I just,
I want to applaud you on your,
your efforts and your advocacy.
That concludes my questions,
Madam Chair Representative and
I'm, I'm gonna jump in here and
on page one,
line 21, it talks about public
post-secondary educational
institutions.
So I thought this was K-12 or,
you know.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and Madam Chair, uh,
the bill covers two aspects,
one, post-secondary and one
secondary. OK, thank you for the
clarification. Uh, I'll go to
Representative Kates and then
minority whip Martinez.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you,
Representative for bringing this
forward and thank you, um,
expert witnesses. I was able to
speak with all of you on the
floor the other day, um, and you
are very good representatives. I
look forward to uh serving in
the house with you eventually,
and so thank you. Um, and so in
your bill, you said it's already
in in ACA budget. Um, there's a,
a fur on this estimating.
Uh, to have the impact that you
want in higher education and
then uh the high schools, it's
94,000 to 945,000 is the
estimate. That's a, that's a
pretty big gap there in the
amount, but still, um, much less
than the treatment of STIs and
um an unplanned pregnancies. So,
um, thank you so much. I also
very much want to say that I.
I appreciate, um, on page 2 that
uh your last line at a minimum
condom shall be placed in
locations that are safe and
readily accessible to students,
including the school nurses'
office and restrooms. Um, I know
that you and I, we've talked
about Madam Chair and and
representative um and experts we
talked about the the um they
have to be readily available to
help destigmatize them, so they
were used. I am a
A woman of a certain age, and so
I was around in the 80s, um, uh,
and so very much with something
of our generation to try to
destigmatize them as our world
uh was in an epidemic HIV at
that time. And so we making sure
that condoms were readily
available and not uh a taboo was
essential for the big cities
that I was living in and thank
you very much for bringing this
forward, Senator and
Representative.
Uh, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative young ladies.
I appreciate you being here. I'd
like to see young kids involved
in the process.
Um, I do have a, a
few questions. I, I was
Blessed to raise 3 sons.
And I had the the talk with them
at an appropriate age.
My question is,
Why are we
I mean, there's been a lot of
talk about the stigma of condoms
I I.
I didn't see that with my or the
uh
Young people that were involved
in my
Has there been an increase in,
in the stigma of contraceptives.
Because this
My kids were in school in the
late 90s.
And they're the people that I
talked to, their friends.
Um
There didn't seem to be a stigma
around has has that increased?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I would say
there has been an increase, at
least in our age group, I do
think that part of this has to
do with the Dobbs case that
recently passed. I think this is
because a lot of women, at
least, and I'm just speaking
from, you know, my high school,
feel like they don't want to be
seen grabbing these kinds of
contraceptives, and then same
thing with our male
counterparts. It's seen as sort
of um, how do I say this?
Promiscuous if people see you
grabbing these sort of things
and so I think what we're really
advocating for here is for the
condoms to be readily available
and accessible because of the
stigma, as Emma said earlier,
um, students feel more reluctant
to go up to say an administrator
or a nurse to go and ask for
them because of this view that
they have, like, oh, if someone
sees me asking, I'm not gonna
like that. And so I
I think that with this bill and
with um more readily accessible
contact them and also they
wouldn't have to go through that
whole process of asking. Thank
you.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
I, I'm sorry, what was your
name?
My name is Kaylao. Thank you.
Kayla, that was a that was a, a
great answer and very informed
and been around.
Teenagers for a while.
Um, so I, I find that very
interesting.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
you're bill talks on the end of
page one, and this starting uh
Page 2. So, is there gonna be a
um committee in each school that
will make these decisions where
Were these condoms are going to
be readily available.
Uh, Mainer representative, uh,
it'll be within each
administration, within each
school to make these decisions,
there will not be a specific
committee, just the
administrators themselves.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, and expert.
Um, at the end of page one line
24.
It talks about institution
administrators and consultation
with student health centers and
other entities.
Can you tell me
Give me an idea of what those
other entities or who they are.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Martinez, the goal is to make
sure that they are having these
conversations with student
groups and that they are
involved in the decision-making
process.
Madam Chair, representative, I
think that's very important, um.
Everybody have a say.
Um, why
Why
I guess my question is with the
language, why isn't it just?
instead of other entities, why
is it?
Say student student groups.
Um, because I'm sure.
Student councils.
Um, and other extracurricular
groups would
would be
Those, I'm not sure why. I guess
it's just generalizing, is that
what it is?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative
Martinez, you are absolutely
correct. Just leave it as
broadly as possible to bring in
these other groups without
specifically naming them.
Madam Chair, representative, um,
and, and just real quick.
The last line, line 25, it talks
about
Those other entities.
That provides services to.
Can you kind of clarify that one
for me. Certainly, Madam Chair,
members of the committee
representative Martinez, these
other entities at some schools,
they do have school-based health
centers. And so they do provide
these um uh services and
resources to them. So, but
they're just not at every
school.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Representative,
you, you made comment that
schools would absorb this and
take it from their surplus.
Um, I had the opportunity to
talk with with several
Um
Superintendents including my
superintendent in Rio Rancho.
We're facing up to 25 million.
Um
I hope there's a plan B in
How this gets paid for.
Because I'm sure that this would
not be
top of the list of priorities
when you're facing the $25
million debt, those, those are
my questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Nicole Travis. Yes. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representatives and I have the
pleasure of meeting with these
students at El Dorado right
before we all came up to session
and they talked about their
plan, um, and then when I saw
you guys on the floor, I did,
um, email out to the school
board and to the schools, and I
think, um, you know.
My older kids went to Manzano,
they have a school-based health
clinic there. I know at El
Dorado they do not. My oldest
son's at La Cueva, and they do
not, um, so.
They did tell me and the school
board has done a very good job,
especially with the new
superintendent of making sure
that we are looking at the
school board in those certain
districts to monitor what
mandates we should bring in, so
that's one of my concerns. The
other one is I'll just echo, um,
representative Martinez is this
shows uh 94.5,000 or 945,000 and
it is going to have to come from
the APS budget and the budgets
from that school.
So there has to be another way
to find, I think, funding for
this, in my opinion, so that
we're not taking it from
something else, so just, just
plan B or keep in mind or maybe
you will be asking for an
appropriation.
Really not a question, I guess,
just a statement. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Cha move to pass.
Madam Cha second. I have a
motion for a due pass from
Representative Eleanor Chavez
with the 2nd from Representative
Anaya on House Bill 527. um
Karen, can you please take the
role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez, yes.
Representative in Chavez. No.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
No, I'd like to explain my book,
please.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes, we were
sitting on the edge of our seat,
how you would vote.
523, so by a 5 to 3, you have a
due pass.
And thank you, especially the
students, because this, it
really is important for you to
see that work, just regular
people up here. So, and
Representative Martinez to
explain his vote.
Madam chair for the opportunity.
I, I know that teen pregnancy is
a, a widespread problem.
And we
We
It's important that we
acknowledge that and try to come
up with solutions, and I think
this might be one of them.
My concern, the reason I voted
no is my concern is how this is
gonna get paid for.
Because so many of the schools
are facing deficits in their
budget.
Um
And I think
Like I said, this, this is not
gonna be a priority for them.
They want to pay their teachers,
pay the light bill.
Um
So I, I think
As you move to the Senate, it
might be a good idea to look for
uh additional pathways for
funding, the senators still
looking at the budget.
So I, I would just encourage you
to look for a secondary stream
of funding for this, even if
it's private donations.
My fear is if we rely on the
public schools to pay for this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you,
thank you all. Representative
Cullen, you can come on forward.
Um, we haven't, I, I'm gonna ask
for us to be excused from the
floor, um, just in case by some
stroke of, I don't know, they
start near on time. Um, so
Representative Cullen.
Yes.
So go ahead, Representative
Cullen, and unfortunately, I'm
gonna have to ask you to keep it
brief, but I think, I think this
is a pretty popular bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, today I'm
here to introduce Bill 513. This
is uh relating to organ donation
requiring a space on license
application and license renewal
forms and application forms and
renewal forms for public
assistance benefits and services
for applicants to the state to
desire to make an atomical gift.
And then requiring the MVD to um
and at the Department of Tax and
Rev to maintain the
applications. Uh, this is just
another way that we can have,
um, the community be touched to
um understand organ donation and
be able to sign up for organ
donation typically it is done
when um you
Uh, go to get your driver's
license and then it could be
years before you even think
about it until it comes up
again. So I do have my expert
here um Selena, it's been from
New Mexico donor Services, uh,
the state OPO. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
council, um, a committee, I
would just like to say I work
for the local nonprofit that
makes organ donation happen in
the state the last two years
we've said a dramatic increase
in donors and the people they've
been able to save in 2023, we
saved 241 lives as New Mexicans
through organ donation and last
year 207 lives. This is just
another opportunity to touch
more people and be able to help
save more lives, not only in our
state but across the nation.
Thank you. Thank you, and I
stand for questions.
So anyone on Zoom in opposition,
raise your hand, and I'll come
back to you anyone in the room
in opposition.
OK, seeing none either place in
support if you're on Zoom and
support, please raise your hand
in the room and support.
OK, well,
That goes the most popular Bill
Award just right out the window.
So, um, there was a hand, but
now it's gone.
So, um, so committee.
Oh, there's
You
don't play with us. We're uh
We get confused easily enough on
it, yeah, so, um.
I guess there is no one in
either place, so quite OK, so we
have representative Senna
Cortez, Martinez.
OK, go ahead, Representative.
Oh, Representative Martinez
first.
Madam chair, I just wanted to
make a comment. I wanna think uh
Selena for all the work you do,
um, and I'm proud to have the
little heart on my driver's
license.
Representative Santa Cortez,
Madam chair, if there's no
further debate, I'd like to make
a motion for a due pass, please.
OK, so I have a motion from
representative Senator Cortez in
a second from Representative
Cates for due pass on 5:13.
Is there any opposition?
Seeing then you have a due pass.
Thank you, ma'am Chair,
committee members.
