Here.
Representative Martinez,
Representative Senna Cortez
here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Here, Madam Chair, here.
We have a quorum. Thank you. So
first, I'm gonna ask everyone,
including up here, and I just
remembered to silence your
phones. Um, we're going to have
a very civil hearing I'm gonna
be really watching decorum, so,
so please, and as you can see,
we have many, many bills. So I'm
gonna be pretty limiting on
public comment and, and we are
going to only ask questions and
so we're gotta move this along
just for those of you.
Keeping score, we got 13 new
bills yesterday. So, um,
I believe we're over 70.
So, uh, we have a lot of work to
do. So with that representative
um Serana.
Go ahead. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, I am Representative Sarah
Diana and I'm here to present
house energy, environment, and
natural Resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 35,
the Children's Health Protection
zone. I have two experts, um,
Gail Evans from, um, New
Mexicoli director of the Center
for Biological Diversity and Mr.
Daniel So, a community member
from the richapter area of the
Navajo Nation.
I'm gonna break this bill down
into sections. There's two
sections we change. Um, we're
gonna look at the Oil and Gas
Act and the Air Quality Control
Act, and I'm gonna go section by
section very quickly. Um,
section 1, page one, all it does
is add definitions, children's
health protection zone operator
production, um, and production
facility in schools. Section 2
gives oil oil conservation
division authority to adopt
rules to effectuate the
Children's Health protection
zone.
Um, the Children's Health
Protection zone is just 1 mile
around the school. We'll talk
more about that later. Section 3
increases the penalty cap in
daily maximum in the Children's
Health Protection zone just in
the zone for violations to
30,000 per day per violation and
3 million total oil conservation
division retains authority to
account for circumstances in
imposing the penalty.
Section 4. This is a new
section. It prohibits permitting
of new oil and gas development
in the oil, um, in the
children's health protection
zone, except where it may cause
um a taking. It protects the
state from taking claims through
variances administered by the
Oil Conservation division.
Um, section 5 is a new section
requires all oil and gas
operators to submit an inventory
of wells, and a statement
regarding whether a facility is
in the children's protection
zone in that mile.
Um
Um, those who are in that mile,
the operators must submit a list
and map of schools within 1
mile.
Section 6 is the new section.
It's additional requirements for
facilities in the Children's
Health protection zone, they
must show contact information,
dust reduction measures like
speed limits and covering of
dusty material and testing of
produced water that leaves the
property.
Section 7, is a new section,
operators within the Children's
Health Protection zone must
suspend operation if a leak is
detected and continues for more
than 48 hours.
Section 8,
operators within the Children's
Health protection zone that mile
must at the request of nearby
property owners test um test
ground and surface water before
and shortly after drilling.
And that's all for the oil and
gas Act. Now we're going on to
the air quality control Act.
Um, section 9 against
definitions.
Section 10, um, requires the
environment improvement board to
adopt rules that would set
implication and performance
standards for leak detection and
response plan.
define additional requirement
components of those plans and um
other rules that needed to
effectuate the children's health
protection zone.
Section 11. This is a new
section. It requires operators
in the Children's Health
protection zone to submit submit
leak detection and response plan
to the New Mexico Environment
Department.
Um, section 12 requires
reporting of leaks operators
must report to the Environment
Department and the Environment
Department reports to the
legislature annually.
Um, section 13, operators in the
Children's Health protection
zone must suspend operation if.
A facility has not implemented
approved leak detection and
response plan or a facility is
out of compliance with air
quality Control Act or local
ordinances adopt pursuant to the
air quality Control Act.
And with this section, remember,
Facilities out of compliance.
In the Children's Health
protection zone are breaking the
law.
And exposing our children to
extreme amounts of toxic
pollution.
Per secretary Kenny, 70% of the
oil and gas industry is not in
compliance with their air
emission standards, um, this, he
said this during the water
committee. So we have 70% of
73,000 wells polluting beyond
the legal limits.
Um, and that's about 51,000
wells, so the chance that these
that it is in the um children's
health protection zone, those
wells are in there is, is a good
possibility.
This, this bill does not require
the industry to suspend their
operation indefinitely, it just
requires them to come into
compliance with pre-existing
laws that that New Mexico
Environment Department should
already be enforcing.
I think that's it. I'm gonna
pass it on to my expert witness
representative, there was some
question when you were saying
new section, you don't mean new
as in a um uh substitute, you
mean new in terms of what's
currently in law, OK, just
making sure. Go ahead, Madam.
I'd like to clarify what the,
the number is of the bill that
we're looking at. Could you,
could you read the number?
I have 228818.2.
Very good, thank you. Is that,
that's what you have as well. I
have two different meals here
with different numbers.
I have a different 2298722298.3.
So we're looking at the oh
I have a different 2298722298.3.
So we're looking at the
which is like double the size,
right? OK. um
OK.
Do we have the sub?
But I mean for us to pass the
bill, we've got to pass this up.
No the sub was in the last, but
I'm safe, but what the bill that
we have is not the sub.
I
It's been on the website, Madam
Chair, since the last committee.
It's the house energy sub. OK.
Mhm
Yeah.
OK, OK, we're gonna get copies
in the meantime just to keep us
rolling I'm gonna set you guys
back until we get the copies and
quickly do um
Representative Jones' 171.
So if you could just, as soon as
we, as soon as we get the copies
in here. I'm so sorry.
Yeah
Let's just all go home and go
back to bed and start start
again on Friday.
The next bill we don't have the
handouts yet, um.
178, we don't have the sponsor
in here.
Um
OK, so since we can't do the
next two bills. Let's, let's, I,
I truly apologize, um, as most
of you know, we're moving fast
and lots of changes by the 2nd
and um somehow it's, it failed
to get the right bill in here,
so let's.
Let me start texting sponsors
Kelly.
I'm sorry, we, we, we have
another bill to go on now, so.
OK.
OK. OK. OK.
Mm
Madam Chair.
Hm
Oh, be careful with those. I
don't know if you hit it with
your paper or what, but.
It
we'll see how long it takes, but
the, it was not the sponsor's
fault, it was our fault as a
committee, so, um, so
Representative Jones, so we,
it's for, for those of you
listening or in the room who's
confused, including me, um,
we're gonna go on to HB 171 with
Representative Jones.
He's, here's one.
Mhm
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And uh I'm excited about
presenting this bill. It's quick
and simple, um, and I have an
expert here with me to present
HB 171, James.
Basante,
um.
James, I'll have you introduce
yourself, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Doctor
James Basante. I'm a board
certified addiction medicine
specialist in the current chief
medical officer at the Santa Fe
Recovery Center.
And Representative Jones, you
have an amendment?
Yes, I do have an amendment. OK.
Do we have the amendment?
We,
we do have the amendment. So go
ahead and present your bill and
then we'll get the amendment
passed out and then you can
discuss that. Very good. Um,
this bill, HB 171 is, uh, like I
said, it's very simple, Bill.
This is a a bill I have to give
my thanks to um Madam Char
Thompson for signing onto this
bill with me. It had um
Bipartisan support from the
interim committee. Um, it is
based on a presentation we saw
in interim from Philip Houston
about Lifehouse, a um a
facility, a rehab facility who
does, also does detox, um, for
substance abuse disorder
patients in Karlsbad, um, it is
relating to pharmacies, amending
the Pharmacy Act to provide for
custodial care facilities
acquiring and possessing
controlled substances.
for withdrawal management. So,
The situation with these
facilities, these detox
facilities that are actually um
classified as custodial care
facilities is that they are
dependent on the local pharmacy.
And that's why we're wanting to
change this pharmacy act, um,
make a, um, a couple of minor
changes that would allow them to
accept patients 24 hours a day,
7 days a week, instead of when
their local pharmacy is open.
This has been a problem with,
uh, especially rural rural detox
facilities, um.
But even in Santa Fe, I don't
believe you have a 24 hour
pharmacy.
That would
Would help these uh facilities
except patients, um,
At any time of day. So what we
have is a situation where if a
patient, if a client, a patient
arrives on um on a Friday
afternoon, for instance, and
they're ready to get off their
drugs, and they're either
alcohol or drug dependency, um,
they have to be turned away.
It's, it's really a, a tragic
situation when someone's ready
for that to happen, and the
facility has to say, you know,
we can't help you because we
don't have, we don't have the
ability to have these drugs that
you might need if you have detox
symptoms. So they've actually
had to turn people away and tell
them to come back on Monday.
I, I can't even imagine what,
you know, might happen over the
weekend. They may never come
back, they may never be ready
again, um, that is, um, a story
that I'm sure many could tell,
so that's why this is so
important, it will open the door
not only to serve more patients
at any time of the day of the
week, but it opens the door to
um other facilities, um, who
have in the past seen this as a
barrier to having uh having
these services for rehab.
In various areas.
Um
I'll point your hand out.
So for many people, detox is the
entry point to recovery.
pharmacy, um, availability is
the biggest limiting factor to
detox access, um, hours at at
the facility. We've had to turn
people away, even though we've
had beds and staff for them.
The current regulation and the
limitations have caused limited
expansion and of detox services
into New Mexico communities by
new and existing providers, we
know of um
current facilities who've
thought of expanding into New
Mexico, but they've seen this as
a barrier. So timely access to
those medications is critical,
especially for alcohol detox
where the risk of seizures is
much higher.
Um, an in-house stock of
medications with insulate
against medication shortages.
Uh, clients from 24 of the 33
New Mexico counties came to
Lifehouse detox in 2024. That's
the, uh, that's Philip Houston's
facility in Carlsbad that I
mentioned, they do serve all
people from all over New Mexico
And um Doctor Basanti's um
facilities does as well here,
you're here in Santa Fe? Uh,
yeah, we are the largest detox
provider in the state of New
Mexico. We operate 35 detox beds
across Santa Fe and Gallup.
Uh, and this is a similar
barrier we've encountered.
Mhm. So, Madam Chair, the
primary substances that need
detox or alcohol and
methamphetamines, opioids as
well, but many individuals who
utilize detox, um,
Are, are using multiple
substances. So the need to have
those drugs available at any
time is just um is very
important.
And Doctor Basanti, I will defer
to you. Do you have anything to
add? I don't wanna take up too
much time, uh, with the
committee, but this is an
important bill for us at its
core. It's an access bill, uh,
as I mentioned, we operate
treatment beds across the state.
It's important to note that
today there are fewer treatment
beds in terms of detox and
residential treatment than there
was one year ago, um, access
points are closing across the
state, and so we think it's
important to offer low threshold
access available as often as
possible.
and right now at least 29
counties in the state are
underserved with pharmacists and
pharmacies, and so for us to be
holden be beholden on the
operating hours of retail
pharmacies has really limited
our ability to serve clients.
Thank you. So, uh,
Representative Jones, we have a
motion to uh um
Madam Chair, I'd like to move
the amendment, move the
amendment for discussion.
So if you could just very
quickly, it's a very simple
amendment. So if you could
please just go over it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
have the amendment right in
front of me, but I think I
remember. do you want me to do
it? Yes, would you please, yes.
So on page 2 line 2 before the
period insert.
In accordance with board rules
on page 2 between lines and
lines 5 and 6 insert.
Section 2 effective date, the
effective date is January 1,
2026. So I'm hoping there's no
discussion on the amendment.
So do I have a motion to adopt
the amendment.
Is there any opposition?
Kissing then.
You have an amended bill and we
will go to the audience. So if
you are, and I'm gonna limit it
to 3 on Zoom, 5 in the room, 1
minute each. OK, so if you are
on Zoom and want to speak in
favor of this, please raise your
hand and I'll come back to you.
If you are in the room, um, just
with a show of excuse me, uh oh,
a show of hands, um, who was in
support of this bill.
OK. Is there anyone who wants to
speak?
OK, come, OK.
Oh, you don't want to speak. OK,
so you are just in support, you
don't want to speak. OK. Anyone
on Zoom in support Vicente
Vargas, go ahead.
Vicente, please unmute.
I apologize for that, Madam
Chair. My name is Vicente
Vargas. I am the executive
director for the New Mexico
Health Care Association in New
Mexico Center for Assisted
Living. Uh, we represent 64 of
the 68 nursing facilities in New
Mexico, um, we appreciate this
piece of legislation as it helps
um open up access for um many
residents with uh substance use
disorders that um that nursing
facilities can
care for. Um, it will, um, it
will very much prevent um having
to transport residents who um
have to take certain, um,
medications that aren't allowed
to be um dispensed in nursing
facilities. It will prevent us
from having to go to, say, a
methadone clinic to, uh, to get
care. Um, and we, and so, uh,
nurse facilities will be able to
dispense that in uh a methadone
in a nursing facility. So we
appreciate.
this piece of legislation and
hope that the committee will
support it. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have Diane's
iPad.
I'm just reading what's on the
screen.
OK, I am I am muted now? Yes,
you are. Go ahead.
No,
OK,
I, I just as a mother of a son
who had been very um on the
street.
He's dependent on the
Diane, could you please
Diane,
please introduce yourself. I'm
on the train, so it's kind of
difficult.
Yes
Yes, OK, go ahead. This is I'll
just hang up because this is
difficult. So, I'm, OK, OK, I'm
on the train, so that's why it's
difficult. Um, so my son has
been severely strung out on the
street. He now is dependent on
Suboxone and his recovery. He
hopes to get off of it, but if
he were to suddenly not have
access to it, um, it could be a
trouble and I'm aware of other
folks that have specific needs
related to their addictions and
alcohol and uh this seems
Very important to me and I hope
that you all pass it. Thank you.
Thank you. And that was Diane
McCash, um.
So we will go to the uh if you
are on Zoom in opposition,
please raise your hand and I'll
come back to you if you are in
the room in opposition, please
raise your hand.
OK, seeing no one in the room,
seeing no one on Zoom, um, we
will go to the committee.
Representative Jones, did you
have anything to
Quickly add, yes, madam Chair,
I'd like to say regarding the
amendment that that was in
response to a request by the
pharmacy board, so they're on
board with this bill, the way
it's written now. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. um.
Do we have any questions?
OK.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would love to reserve uh my
comments to make a motion for a
do pass, please. Second.
Oh, OK. Representative Ferrari,
and then we have a motion from
Representative Senator Cortez in
a second from Anaya after
representative Ferrari, we will
go to a vote.
Thank you. Um, thank you,
Representative for bringing this
forward. I was just wondering if
Manage, excuse me, I've got that
frog too now.
Excuse me, managed alcohol, um,
programs are part of what would
be under this uh bill.
Um, yes, Madam Chair,
represented for yes, absolutely.
Um, I believe with Lifehouse
what I've discussed with uh
Philip Houston, that is maybe
even the majority of the
patients they see are in alcohol
withdrawal, and this drug is
very important because with
alcohol withdrawal, you may know
that there is a real risk for
seizures, and it is actually
more dangerous than withdrawing
from opioids or
methamphetamines. Thank you.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, this would also
provide housing and then other
wrap around services while the
person is involved.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
Great. Thank you.
OK, so we have a motion on the
floor from Representative
Senator Cortez with the
2nderminaya. Is there any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
As amended.
So it's, it's House Bill 171 as
amended is a due pass.
OK, do we have the?
OK, we will go back to
Representative Saana.
You haven't learned that, you
have to be flexible up here, or
you will.
Stress be so stressed out the
first time you come, you will
never come back, so just be
ready to go with the flow. So
Representative Serana, um,
If you could just take up from
where you left off. Before we
proceed, Madam Chair, this
committee substitute I'd like to
request that we roll HB 35
because essentially we're
analyzing a different bill than
the one we received. Uh,
representative, that this has
been on the website since
last week after,
yeah, it was just a matter of
they printed the wrong bill, but
this one has been it's the same
when we heard an energy. Oh
wonderful. OK, thank you so
much, Madam Chair.
representative. OK, so
Representative Sayana.
I, I had, uh, I had actually
gone over the whole substitute,
so I I'm going to pass it on to
my expert. And just a reminder,
brevity is key.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Gail Evans. I'm with the Center
for Biological Diversity, and I
just want to quickly uh
summarize uh the
Opportunity that's in front of
you on this bill. Um, this bill
gives you the opportunity to do
something really meaningful to
protect children's health, um, I
think it's, there's no doubt
both from the FIR from the LFC
and the FIR from the LESC, um,
that the, the science is clear
that proximity to oil and gas
production, um, creates great
risks of health harms, uh,
especially for children.
And there's significant peer
reviewed scientific research
showing that uh children who are
in close proximity to oil and
gas production, um, are, um,
much more likely to get
respiratory illnesses such as
asthma, uh, and to develop
childhood cancer, um, lymphoma.
Um, and these studies show that
um these health risks are
present even at distances of up
to 10 miles away from oil and
gas production, um, and the more
and more research is showing um
just how far oil and gas
pollution goes from oil and gas
production sites. So this is an
opportunity to protect the
33,000 plus children in our
state.
who are currently going to
school within 1 mile of fracking
sites and the beauty of this
bill for all of you is that it
doesn't actually jeopardize the
revenue that our state is
obtaining from oil and gas
production on the the LFC found
that the impact on future
production was 0.15 of 1%.
Um, so this is a minuscular
insignificant impact on revenue
or future production, but
actually a massive impact on
protecting the health of uh over
33,000 children who go to school
close to oil and gas production
sites, um, and with that, I will
uh pass it to uh Mr. Daniel So,
um, who joins us today from the
Tri-chapter area and I'd also
just like to um introduce
Um, built in whererito and Odie
Chapman, who are here in the
front row who have also come in
um from the counselor chapter of
the Navajo Nation because of
their concerns about children
going to school at the library
school, which is surrounded by
fracking sites.
Thank you.
Yeah
My name is Daniel, so I'm
Um
A three-term member of the
Navajo Nation Council.
I served in
The council 1986 to 1995.
It was in that time that uh
We, uh, had the Haus Mountain
School District.
Uh, build a school in Lybrook.
Across from an El Paso natural
gas compressor station.
In 2007.
The state legislature
appropriated $7 million relocate
that school.
about mile marker 103 on Highway
550.
Because of health and safety
hazards.
But lo and behold.
In 2000.
13
We find
5
Uh
World sites on state trust land.
Within 400 yards of
The librook Elementary School.
It's a K8.
Uh
98% Navajo enrollment.
And operated by the Hamous
Mountain School District.
And what really concerns us and,
and we did it, we did a health
impact assessment that was
authorized by the
Now with one nation, human
research review board, the IRB
of the Naval nation.
And with that, we, uh,
Produce a health impact
assessment.
And
The folks that live in the
community wanted to also view it
from what we term Navajo lands.
who had addressed the spiritual,
the mental, the physical uh
aspects of living in that
community.
So it was very um
Uh,
groundbreaking.
The outplanation IRB when they
accepted our report.
Authorize the counselor
community citizen Science
Committee to use it.
To uh lobby for changes in
regulations, authorities, and uh
laws.
It was a significant uh
Direction
That theAO IRB authorized us to
do.
And part of the study, we didn't
actually put monitors at the
school.
But we put monitors within the
community where there was uh
A wet site within 1 mile of a
home.
It was a uh
A monitor inside the house
and a monitor outside 100 yards
away. We were limited to
Placing these monitors in homes
that had electricity.
And so it was very sparse and uh
because as you know, a lot of
the homes do not have.
Uh, electricity or running water
in the area.
So that is uh
What we bring here.
And uh
We found
That a lot of the
Um
Community members, as you know,
the Navajo Nation population
suffers from high rates of
diabetes and COPD.
And so, uh,
The exposure to the methane, the
methane derivatives as and the
VOCs from these well sites,
exacerbates um
The level of uh nausea,
headaches, uh,
Uh, congestion and uh
We found through our research.
In our research, there's 17
studies.
It really showed that um these
VOCs affect.
Uh
Young mothers, unborn babies and
elderly women.
It affects their endocrine
system.
More than, uh, but uh.
We, uh
And so that's the reason we come
forward to say we need setbacks.
We know that we can't do.
Anything about the 11 sites that
are within a mile of the
Lightbrook School.
But in the future going forward,
we, we sure want to um effect
legislation that will prohibit.
Any further development within a
mile of schools.
In the library and in the Navajo
Nation area as well as across
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that we
stand for questions. OK, thank
you. Um, so we will go first in
support, if you, if you are on
Zoom in support, please raise
your hand. I will take a maximum
of 3. I'm sorry, but we
But you can raise your hand now
and I will have the Zoom
operator count how many hands
are raised, and then the 1st 3
who got on will be able to give
a one-minute statement when we
come back from, from the people
in the room. So if you are in
the room in support, please
raise your hand.
OK, so I will take 5 people for
1 minute each if and, and
there's, you don't need to
speak, but if you um
Oh
So how many people do we have?
So I'll go with 7. If you keep
it to a minute.
So, so please go ahead and be,
be brief and don't repeat what
other people have said.
Uh, hello, my name is Bill
Torito. I live in counselor. Um,
my two boys are uh students of
Ibrook and their health impacts
that um when I came to the
community is great, you know,
they have coughing issues, they
have, um, my son comes home with
headaches and nauseated and when
we were living in Farmington, we
didn't have any of these issues
because there are many well
sites in Farmington, but yeah,
they're, they're heavily
monitored, but in the royal
areas like Lybrook.
There's hardly any monitoring,
so these kids, my kids have
gotten exposed to it and it's
just a a big concern for me as a
parent, and I worry about the
health effects that it's gonna
have for my children, so I
really urge you guys to pass
this bill and support of the of
my children. Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Odie
Chapman. I was born and raised
in the Lybrook area still living
there, uh, worked in the oil
field my whole entire life of
the plant that was talked about
right across from the old
school. I worked in that, I
worked in compressor stations. I
know the dangers there, they,
they test us all the time for
breathing every year, um, we're
constantly watching what we take
home, you know, try to change
our clothes at the plant so we
don't take this stuff home to
our children and our families,
um, I've been to this school and
it smells like a.
pulling into a plant or a
compressor station, sometimes
the smell of the the oil field
stuff coming in there, the
different, uh, smells. My wife
was also been a school teacher
there for 2 years. She's not
there now, but at one time, she
thought she smelled gas, called
in, they come in and said, no,
there's no gas leak, but she
kept coming home saying, and I'm
smelling stuff over there, um,
and I know that there's a lot of
headaches and stuff. When I
worked in the oil field, I
constantly had headaches and I
know the children were talking
about this, so I'm going here is
what we're breathing.
And I know our air out there is
not as clean as it used to be,
and this bill needs to be
passed. Thank you.
Good morning, chair and
committee members. My name is
Santiago Hardy. I'm a 19 year
old youth intern with animated
vote. I'm Spanish haus and Bene.
I was born and raised in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I'm
here in support of HB 35 because
because it is crucial to ensure
youth and elders have clean air
to breathe and safe water to
drink.
This bill will not only protect
the health of our people, but
maintain this beautiful planet
we walk on and the environment
we live in.
By voting yes for HB 35, you
will help the youth become
strong and healthy leaders and
reduce pollution in New Mexico.
On behalf of our youth, our
people, and Mother Earth, please
vote yes for HB 35. Thank you.
Go see him at all hope but, uh,
greetings, good morning, chair,
community members. My name is
Alicia Carrie. I'm from the
Pueblo of Santo Domingo and I am
a lobbyist for New Mexico need
to vote, and I'm in support of
this bill, uh, with this, with
this bill we're able to invest
in a safe education for all of
our youth here in the state of
New Mexico and we also are
continuing to invest in our
future generations by providing
a safe current environment for
our um our pregnant mothers and
for
are you, so thank you and I urge
you to support this bill. Thank
you.
Morning, madam chair members of
the committee. My name is
Jacqueline Walsh. I'm here
representing the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter, and we support
HB 35. I'm gonna echo what
others have said, um, we've
heard from members of
communities affected by this,
living near an oil and gas well
is associated with increased
risks of asthma, cancer, other
respiratory illnesses, the
serious issue, it's affecting
children, and they deserve the
protection that this bill would
give them. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Sharon Arjunbright. I've been a
nurse for almost 45 years. I've
taught pediatric nursing for
many years. There are some
things we have known the hazards
of for years.
Asthma alone. Have you ever been
with someone struggling to
breathe?
Sometimes there is nothing I can
do to help someone to breathe,
except for maybe positioning the
victim upright or splinting
their chest to support the
muscles that do the work of
breathing. Air exchange,
breathing cannot and does not
happen. Airways clamp, shut with
asthma, its excruciating asthma
is preventable. There's no
reason to let this happen,
especially in children. Please
stop emissions within 1 mile of
children's schools and past HB
35. Thank you.
Good morning and thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Monico
Otero, Health research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
Voices for Children.
And we stand in support of House
Bill 35. Young children are one
of the most vulnerable
populations when it comes to
being exposed to air pollutants
emitted during oil and gas
extraction. Every day, as we've
heard, more than 33,000 of our
New Mexico children are
endangered by these pollutants,
because their schools are within
1 mile of gas operations. It is
essential that our state takes
the necessary measures to
protect our children and their
health so that they have every
opportunity to succeed in a
pollution free learning
environment, and these measures
can be achieved through HB 35.
We think the sponsors and the
experts for this bill, and we
urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom
and I will announce that there
are 18 people with their hands
raised, but we will take
Giovanna, Judy, and Barbara. So
go ahead, Giovanna.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Giovanna Rossi and I'm a
mother. And also here for Mom's
Clean Air Force, an organization
of over 1.5 million parents and
caregivers concerned about the
impacts.
of air pollution and climate
change on children's health.
And I'm speaking today on behalf
of the over 20,000 moms Clean
Air Force members right here in
New Mexico.
Parents across the state stand
in support of House Bill 35
because it prioritizes the
health and well-being of our
children.
With almost 30,000 students in
the state going to school within
a half mile of oil and gas
facilities, the time to act is
now. By establishing a buffer
around schools, childcare
centers, and playgrounds.
Prohibiting new oil and gas
facilities within these zones
and strengthening pollution
controls for existing sites,
this pill can reduce exposure to
harmful toxins.
And, uh, every child deserves to
grow up breathing clean air.
So we urge the committee to pass
House Bill 35 and take a crucial
step in protecting the health of
our youngest and most vulnerable
New Mexicans. Thank you. Thank
you. Next we'll go to Judy.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Judy Messel speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
Conference of Churches. We stand
in strong support of House Bill
35 for the reasons that Mr. Tso
and others have presented this
morning. Thank you.
Thank you. And finally, we will
go to
In the dis
Good morning. My name is Eil
Lopez. I'm here on behalf of
Yaca. I'm here to urge you to
vote in support of HB 35 as a
group of young indigenous and
people of color, we are deeply
committed to fighting for
environmental justice, but also
we are the ones who will face
the brunt of pollution and
climate impacts, and so we are
here today to ask you to support
our children and our young
people.
HB 35 addresses an urgent
multi-crisis in our state
regarding our public health and
our exposure to toxic pollutants
and facilities due to proximity.
When young kids are obligated to
be at school, they are breathing
these toxic pollutants. And so
we know that this leads to
adverse health conditions
throughout their lives, you
know, such as birth defects,
childhood cancer, respiratory
illnesses, asthma, heart
diseases, strokes, and the list
goes on. Children do not consent
to this level of exposure to
toxic pollutants.
And these are decisions being
made in rooms such as this one
today. If we truly want to
prioritize our young people and
children and prove New Mexico
for the better. A 1 mile setback
is a bare minimum to protect
these children in our
communities.
So we strongly urge you to
support HB 35 today, as we can
no longer accept legacy
environmental racism, and
climate and action as acceptable
policy decisions for the state
for the sake of the economy or
for the sake of one industry
over the health of thousands of
millions of people across the
state.
Thank you.
Uh, we will go to opposition, so
if you are online in opposition,
Madam Chair.
I have a request. I understand
we have a toxicology expert who
is online prepared to give an
explanation about this.
This handout and and fully
explain it in a way that
probably no one else could is a
toxicology expert, uh, Deborah
Caden from MIT and she has a 3
minute presentation, the oil and
gas industry in the room is
willing to yield their time in
order for her to give us um a
really good factual presentation
on, on toxicology. It would be
valuable for health. OK, let,
let me, let me go to the, so,
um,
Again, if you are on Zoom in
support, raise your hand if
there are no hands raised, I
will give her 3 minutes if.
Oh, OK. Um,
OK, so opposite um support in
the room, please raise your
hand.
Opposition.
I told you I should start the
day over opposition.
Uh, OK, we will take 5 people up
here in opposition. You don't
have to speak, but if you would
like to, I will take 5 people
for 1 minute each.
And I'm gonna be a little tough
on the time, so kind of.
Turn on your internal clock.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gary
Washburn. I'm the superintendent
of schools for Carlsbad
Municipal Schools. I want to
recognize one thing that
This bill does do that I think
everybody in this room can agree
on, that's that water and land
are life, but our communities
need our children, they are our
heart and our soul and keeping
them safe is important. Our
communities are elected
officials, our school boards
have worked tirelessly for
decades in Lee and Eddy County
to address these issues, we do
not feel like this bill adds
anything to what those
representatives do and for that
reason.
I would respectfully ask you to
vote in opposition. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner with Mexico Oil and Gas
Association. I'm also up here on
behalf of IPANM and PBPA, and we
wish to yield our time for
Doctor Caden online. Thank you
so much.
So that's it for the room. OK, I
will ask again on Zoom if you
would like to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
And the
OK, so I will take the 1st 3 and
then I will give the um
toxicologist 2 minutes.
So Enrique, go ahead.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Enrique Nel, and I'm
here on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
Uh, we do respectfully ask for
you to vote against House Bill
35. Uh, the chamber supports and
all of the above approach to
energy and understands that we
need a reliable bridge to make
the energy transition act work.
New Mexico's responsible oil and
gas producers are at the heart
of that in House Bill 35
disregards all of the checks and
balances already in place that
are
integral to their operation.
Uh, it's important to note that
schools and communities in the
basins have not requested
additional setbacks, this
legislation was devised outside
of our oil and gas producing
communities. Please vote against
House Bill 35. Thank you.
Jodie Hendrix.
Good morning. My name is uh
Jodie Hendricks, and I am
speaking today in opposition to
the committee substitute for
House Bill 35 because it ignores
the voices of local communities
that imposes a one size fits all
restriction that threatens jobs,
economic growth, and the ability
of families to thrive. New
Mexico is a diverse state, and
each community understands its
own needs better than Santa Fe.
The bill takes away local
decision making and it prevents
municipalities from working with
local leaders to decide what's
best for their residents.
Energy development provides
great paying jobs, economic
stability, and essential funding
for schools, roads, and health
care. Families in our
communities rely on these jobs
to put food on the table and
build a better future, but this
legislation threatens that. So
this bill disregards the voices
of the very communities that
claims to protect. Let's trust
local leaders and families to
make informed decisions about
energy development in their own
backyards. I urge you to oppose
House Bill 35 and support
policies that respect local
decision making.
and protect New Mexico's
economic future. Thank you.
And finally, and I will say I
will give the toxicologist 3
minutes because we had a fewer,
fewer people in the room. So we
will go with Paulessing and then
we'll go to the toxicology.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, my name's Paul Guessing. I
am president of the Rio Grande
Foundation, a public policy
think tank based in Albuquerque,
I traveled the state of New
Mexico. I've been to Farmington,
where they have a 200 ft radius
around.
Residences, 300 ft around
schools.
And I've been to Carlsbad, where
they have
Uh, a 300 ft radius around other
structures.
These are the people who know
and live around oil and gas, and
unless there is
Very significant scientific
research showing that these
people are misguided in their
approach to a reasonable and
limited setback. I think we
should let the people who
actually understand oil and gas
and live around it every single
day, uh, make their own
policies, not have a central
Uh, centrally administered, one
size fits all policy from Santa
Fe. Thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you. And if the
toxicologist could please raise
your hand. We will go to you and
you will have 3 minutes and
please keep it within 3 minutes.
Go ahead.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, go ahead and just, just one
second, we do have a handout.
Um, it's son Jones, can you hold
it up so the committee can see,
OK, just so we know what we're
looking for. Go ahead, doctor.
uh Caden. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Doctor
Deborah Caden, and I stand in
opposition to House Bill 35. I'm
a PhD toxicologist with over 40
years' experience. A brief bio
is included in your packets. I
I'd like to speak to claims of
health risks resulting from
schools being located within 1
mile of oil and gas development
sites or OGD.
I'm speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association. There are two types
of scientific studies that
address this issue for OGD. The
first type is epidemiological
studies, which are observational
studies in human populations. In
these studies, the actual
exposures are usually not known,
and must be estimated using some
kind of surrogate measure such
as living within 10 miles of an
OGD site.
In addition, other exposures and
health factors are unknown.
These are called confounders.
Rather than cherry pick studies
or results that supports the
outcome you want to see, it's
important to impartially examine
all the available science when
drawing conclusions about health
risks. This is called looking at
the body of evidence.
For epidemiological studies,
ramble recently updated the 2019
analysis of the nonprofit AEI
Energy, who concluded that study
limitations prevented a
conclusion that exposures from
unconventional OGD contributed
to health outcomes. Our updated
analysis for birth outcomes came
to the same conclusion.
The problem with epidemiological
studies.
In this field is the lack of
exposure data as well as the
lack of information on important
confounders, including other
environmental exposures,
socioeconomic status and health
behaviors.
In fact, studies with the lower
methodological qualities were
the ones that were more likely
to report a significant
association as compared to those
with higher.
Steady quality, which yields
either mixed or inconsistent
results at best.
Birthenbauer, among the studies
with positive findings,
inconsistencies in a logical
results were often found, such
as more risk found for people
with lesser exposures compared
to those with higher exposures.
As a toxicologist, this makes
absolutely no sense at all.
Ramble's conclusion is therefore
consistent with HI energies.
Study limitations of
epidemiological studies
prevented a conclusion that
exposures originating directly
from OGD sites contributed to
health outcomes.
The other type of study applied
is risk assessment, where these
principles are, are applied to
exposures that are either
measured or modeled, and then
those values are compared to
very conservative estimates of
risks set by authoritative
bodies such as the US EPA or the
ATSDR.
Ramble examine all the published
risk assessment studies near OGD
sites. These studies evaluated
multiple chemicals individually,
and the combined risk posed by
exposure to all the chemicals at
once. Most only examine
distances greater than 0.5 mile,
and those found no significant
health risks. The few studies
that examine distance closer to
OGD sites were too flawed or
insistence, even within the
study itself to generate valid
risk estimates. The
The bottom line is that when
examining the body of scientific
literature, the weight of
evidence does not support a
conclusion that living or going
to school within 1 mile of an
oil and gas development site
will result in adverse health
effects. Could you please wrap
up your 3 minutes.
I'm done. OK, thank you.
We will go to the committee for
questions and
And I've lost my list, but I
think representative Ferrari was
first.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative.
Um
I was just looking at um the
credentials of Ramble and um
they are environmental and
nature-based services and
they're among the world's top
environmental and sustainability
consultants, um, they work in
partnership with clients to
develop.
Um
Oil and gas around the world, so
you know we're looking at
someone who is, you know,
claiming to be.
You know, um, unbiased or to
give us information um that I
don't think is um.
You know, along with other big
corporations, who we should be
listening to, we need to be
listening to the people, and you
are all here and have been
emailing us and texting us to
support this bill, and I'm proud
to be a co-sponsor. I was in um
radioactive and hazardous
materials as a committee I
chaired in the interim, and we
had a site visit to, I believe
it was Eunice Hobbs area, and we
visited a school and we also had
infrared high.
towered infrared, uh, cameras
that we could see the methane,
and it wasn't so bad that day,
but when the winds blow, which
we know they do in New Mexico,
they go a long way.
And they impact the health of
our children and our families
and um Representative, do you
have a question? I do, um,
representative, thank you for
bringing me back to that, um,
can you tell me that, um, how
the buffer zones in that, um,
much more needed area between
any new oil uh development oil
or gas development has been
arrived.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um,
If you're asking how we came to
the to the request for a 1 mile
buffer zone. Yes, um, that is
because that is a minimal
number.
Um, that number actually the
science supports buffer zones up
to 5 or 10 miles away.
Um, and we are trying to be a
minimal in our request.
Uh, and a mile would certainly
provide significant protection
to the children that are at
school, that is evidence-based
from peer-reviewed scientific
research.
Um, and Madam Chair and
representative and expert, um.
The impact on uh the gentleman
mentioned about how we needed um
in opposition that we needed to
protect the
Um, water and land, but he
totally left out air quality. So
the air quality, Madam Chair and
representative and expert, um,
is one of the main things that
this bill will help with our
kids where they spend so much
time in school.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that is correct. It is
undisputed that oil and gas
production creates massive
amounts of air pollution, um,
and that the closer you are in
proximity to this pollution to
this production, the greater
risk to your health.
And Madam Representative, you
wanted to add something. Yeah, I
just wanted to add. I, I passed
out a uh uh table of of schools
within the area that have oil
and gas extractions or oil and
gas wells. There's one school,
um, Jefferson Elementary in
Hobbs has 161 wells within a
mile of uh a school in 48 within
48 within half a mile of the
school. So these kids from,
they're from K to 5, 5th grade
351 of them are exposed every
day.
to pollution from this industry
and uh I think and and it's not
the only 1, 161 wells that are
polluting every day and every
day they go to school 5 days a
week, 180 days, they are being
exposed to this toxic pollution.
This is why we bring the bill.
And Madam Chair Representative,
we aren't asking for those wells
to be shut down like we should,
but we're madam chair
representative, we're just
asking that, um.
No new wells are putting our
kids in more harm's way and
hopefully the other wells will
be um properly shut down
eventually to correct. Thank
you. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
think it's important that we um
protect.
Our children, even when
corporations and even schools,
it doesn't sound like, are
willing to stand up for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next, we will go to
uh Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. I have a lot
of questions that I've written
down, um, this topic is very
personal to me, not just as a
representative, as a mama and as
someone who lives in the top oil
producing county in the nation,
so this directly impacts me and
my people and my daughter, and
the children that I've given my
life for in the last 22 years.
So I'll start with my first
question, Madam Chairs
representative.
Um,
How many students and families.
We analyzed from Jefferson's
school in this study.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, we, we asked the
Department of Health to try to
give us those numbers, and they
said they could only do it by by
county, um, so all they said,
well, one of the things they did
say is proximity to these
operations has always been
associated with elevated risk to
cancer due to long-term exposure
to carcinogens such as benzene,
5 days a week, so when they go 5
days a week, 180 days, that's a
lot of exposure, but they could
not give us specifics. OK, and
the reason that I ask is because
I went to Jefferson school. My
husband.
been did both sides of our
families did, and we're not
struggling with those health
concerns, so that's why I wanted
to know what specific studies.
My next question, Madam Chair
Representative, is.
What's the difference of doing
it within a mile of the school
when
We all live near the schools.
What about their houses?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, you are correct that the the
health of the residents of your
county would be protected if
there were setbacks around
houses as well. This is only a
request for setbacks around
schools at this time, um,
primarily because, uh, children
are more vulnerable than others.
And because the state has a
responsibility to care for its
children when the
when children are in the states.
care. And when the children are
in school, they are the state's
responsibility, and the state
should not allow them to be
poisoned while they're there.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, but that
doesn't really address the
question. They're at their house
more than they're at school, so
are we gonna evict them from
their houses. These, these are
my children. These are my
children. I believe she answered
the question and said they are
only going after school, so
we're gonna stick to schools and
not ask why they didn't include
other things. Thank you. I'll
move on to my next question.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative.
You know, the New Mexico
Environment Department has said
that New Mexico has some of the
most stringent emissions.
In the world.
Peer reviewed health studies
took place in New Mexico.
That you can provide us with
because from what I saw, these
were done by some grad, a grad
student in California. So what
peer reviewed studies took place
in New Mexico. Uh, Madam Chair
Representative, first of all,
um, when you say some grad
student in California, um, we've
provided uh the last committee
and the committee that you were
on, uh, uh, scientific summary
showing over 72 peer-reviewed
uh.
studies from a national and
internationally renowned
scientists showing the link
between proximity to oil and gas
production and harm to human
health, especially children, and
while the environment department
uh may say that we have some of
the most stringent air quality
rules in the country, uh, they
also agree that we have some of
the absolute worst air quality
in the
country and that the air quality
in the region of the state that
you live in is out of compliance
with basic federal health
standards and is getting worse,
not better. So.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
the reason that I asked specific
studies in New Mexico and not
just around the world because I
published a book and
successfully defended my
dissertation and in order to get
to prove my link in my
quantitative analysis, I had to
use specific data from New
Mexico. I did my study in New
Mexico, so.
My, my question is, again, is I
want clarification, Madam Chair
Representative, what specific
studies in New Mexico. And Madam
Chair Representative, uh, we
presented to several interim
committees from studies done um
from scientists um from Texas
and from Colorado who showed
that the air quality, uh, in
loving New Mexico is.
Uh, worse than even air quality
in um places that have extremely
bad air quality like areas of
Colorado and Texas that have
been declared non attainment
zones by the federal government,
the air quality in your corner
of the state was way worse than
that air quality, um, and yet it
hasn't been declared a
non-attainment zone by the
federal government, which is
also a problem and puts more
reason on our
state lawmakers and leaders to
take state action to at least
protect our children while they
are at school.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. I'm glad you
brought that up. According to
the elf FC's 4th quarter
performance report card on the
Environment Department for 2024.
The size is inspected 99.99% of
the population in New Mexico is
breathing air that meets federal
environmental standards. This
seems to contradict the message
that there's serious health
risks from air pollution in New
Mexico. So can you please
explain that?
Love the opportunity to explain
that because that's a point.
We've been wanting to get
clarified. I don't believe it's
me. I'm not touching anything.
Hands off the mics in the other
room they were actually glued
down, so we can't move so
because they make noise, so just
lean in or whatever, thank you.
And so when our state officials.
Um
The I think it was you too.
Thank you.
So
It's actually not correct to say
that uh 99% of New Mexicans are
breathing, uh, air that complies
with federal health standards or
whatever the statement is that
you just made. The fact of the
matter is that in Lee and Eddie
County, the air quality exceeds
the federal health standards.
The reason that those statements
are being made is because the
federal government has not
officially declared.
Those regions of the state,
non-attainment zones. That is an
official designation that this
state has resisted and that the
federal government has not
given.
The state more than quallifies
for that designation based on
the air quality readings from
the federal government and from
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I guess my
next question is, why are you
doing this now and regulating 5
hours away when this impacts.
My district the most, and people
in my area are fighting against
this and we're alive, we're
healthy, we're well,
representative,
why are you trying to keep
things moving, so I will keep it
moving, but this is personal.
Why are you doing this to us?
And
um representative that was, that
was personal.
It says children
My district the most, and people
in my area are fighting against
this and we're alive, we're
healthy, we're well,
representative,
why are you trying to keep
things moving, so I will keep it
moving, but this is personal.
Why are you doing this to us?
And um representative that was,
that was personal.
It says
we are the legislature and we do
not.
It's, things are not personal.
We are, we are the legislature,
so I would appreciate it if, if
we keep decorum and do not um
question the morals or the, the
uh intent of other members.
Thank you,
thank you for pointing that out.
It's called Children's Safe
Zones, so it's personal to all
of us and the southeastern part
of the state, but I'll go ahead
and move forward with my next
question. Thank you so much. Um,
what local leaders and
stakeholders
were consulted regarding this
bill, Madam Chair
Representative. When we, um,
actually, when we went down to
um Carlsbad for LFC, I tried to
meet with your city council and
your mayor, and I, I almost met
with your mayor, but we couldn't
quite get through, but nobody
else would really meet with me
on this bill, so we tried.
Madam,
we also
um did provide the research and
the data to all of the
superintendents and school
boards, um, concerning the
health harms that the children
in their districts face due to
all the fracking sites around
their schools, um, and ask them
to support us in this measure.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I believe
all of you guys were getting
given Doctor Cadden's info, and
you were also given this email.
I have a list of cities and
county officials from the
Permian, the San Juan, the Lee
County area, all opposing this
bill. So
Why we're local communities.
Not part of this bill, why are
we moving forward if the the
biggest local communities were
not consulted after a missed
phone call. Representative, the,
the, the, the sponsor said she
tried to meet with people and
and they and and also that they
were provided the information.
I'm sure with links of how to
get a hold of you if they had
questions or concerns, so let's
move on from that. I'd like to
give some input here as the
ranking member, I think that uh
the
representatives should be
allowed to continue your line of
question and that without
interruption, and that the
representatives should be
allowed to answer.
Representative, she did answer.
Thank you.
Just to elaborate on that piece,
I also have.
A list of moms and grandmas.
Madam Chair and Representative
that feel.
Offended that had, I'm sorry,
try and keep your papers away
from your mic because you're
getting that rattle again thank
you for pointing that out and
helping me out, Madam Chair
Representative, and another
email was also given of all the
moms and the grandmas that this
would impact the most in the
southeastern part of the state,
and they feel offended that
you've portrayed that our our
kids are getting poisoned or
that we have poisoned our
children and
I guess my biggest question is,
no one is paying attention to
the local leaders, the city
officials, the county officials,
the mamas and the grandmas that
this impacts the most. So I made
my point. I'll move on to my
next question. Madam Chair
Representative, you mentioned
you got this information from
the New Mexico Department of
Health. So I want to clarify has
any study been conducted in the
schools, specifically Jefferson,
where I went.
Madam Chair Representative, I
tried to get as much information
as I could and I got very little
from the Department of Health,
but
Um, every FIR
from just I think believe every
FIR talked about the health
effects of this industry, and um
None of them said it was clean
air. It was asthma, cancer,
nosebleeds, possibilities for
these kids.
And um,
I, I
You ask why.
We're doing this because, um,
over the 9 years I've been a
representative.
Um, as a teacher, I feel the
kids are important and over 9
years I've never had seen.
A bill come from anyone who
represents this area to protect
the people there, so.
Madam Chair Representative,
being that this is such a big
issue that you have claimed that
you're raising, why hasn't the
environmental Protection Agency
spoken up about this.
Representative, I don't think
they can answer why someone did
do something. Madam Chair,
interrupting. I just don't think
that's appropriate
representative. I'm trying to
move this along and that to ask
someone why, particularly a
government agency did not do
something.
It's kind of a um an
unanswerable question, so I'd
like to see answers EPA
is not a representative the
question was why didn't they do
this? These, I doubt there's
anybody in this room that can
say why EPA does or doesn't do
anything. So please ask
questions that can actually be
answered.
Man chair, I think we're allowed
to ask rhetorical questions if
it brings a point, and it
absolutely brings a point that
the EPA has not been involved in
this effort. So thank you so
much, Madam Chair
Representative. I'd love to give
you the opportunity to answer
that.
Madam Chair represented, the EPA
is a federal regulatory agency,
and I'm not sure why they would
have any part of this
discussion.
So,
I have another question.
I know that you guys keep using
Madam Chair representative.
The quote that 70% of industry
is out of compliance, and I want
to preface it before I give you
a moment to answer is
I have some information here
that on July 3rd, 2024, the New
Mexico Environment Department
came out with the press release
and that data doesn't match your
70%. So, Madam Chair
Representative, where are you
getting that 70%. Um, Madam
Chair and Representative, that
was in July, in November at the
Water Committee meeting,
Secretary Kenny from the
Environment Department said, and
I, and I, I give you the sheet.
It shows 30% of the industry is
in compliance with the.
emissions. That means 70% is
not. And in that same committee,
um, Senator Steinborg said, is
that because of gas and oil and
the and and the secretary said
yes. So November 25th, you can
look it up, you can watch the
video and it'll tell you exactly
that. So July, there's a huge
difference between July and
November. No, you're exactly
right. I'm so glad you brought
that up, Madam Chair
Representative, um, the New
Mexico Environment Department
started tweeting on February
4th, the same type of
information.
from the July 3rd press release,
so I guess I'm still confused.
Where's that 70% of the New
Mexico Environment Department
came out with tweets that
support.
news release.
I'm not sure.
You
I have to ask them. I'm not
sure.
And Madam Chair Represented, I
know Secretary Kenny was
involved, um, with these tweets
that came out that didn't follow
up with your 70% study. So I
guess we'll move on because we
don't have any legitimate.
Evidence to support that 70%.
OK, Madam Chair, you do. I gave
it to you. It's a handout, and
it's the, it shows a table, and
it shows it exactly 30% of the
industry is in compliance.
Well they should department says
something different. So Madam
Chair Representative, I'll move
on to my next questions.
And
Does the federal government
impose human health setbacks
like these.
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe the federal government
hasn't, I'm sorry, when you're
not on your mic, please turn it
off. It's obviously having some
issues. Go on.
Madam Chair represented I
believe the federal government
or the BLM has a setback of 600
ft.
Thank you for answering that,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
why are we imposing these
setbacks when we emailed you a
list of Hermian San Juan Lee
County they all have local
setbacks already.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I believe Eddie County's setback
is only 300 ft.
Um, San Juan County, I don't
believe has a setback. Lee
County does not have a setback.
Carlsbad has a setback of only
500 ft. Um, so these are just
some examples of setbacks that
are wholly inadequate and do not
protect people, let alone
children, and this bill because
it's focused on schools and
children, um, we need a minimum
of 1 mile and know the local uh
government.
governments have not put in
place protective setbacks,
especially for children.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. I'd like to get
the correct information on
record my my city does have
setbacks and those setbacks.
Those setbacks are drilling have
to be 300 ft from a building
equipment and our tank product
must be 700 ft from a building,
1500 ft per from a well to a
building, a building can be a
school residential, commercial
area, so we do have that city
ordinance in place, so now that
I have provided the correct
information for the record. Why
are you doing a setback if we
already have a city ordinance in
place.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I did not say anything counter
to what you just said. I said
that the Lee County does not
have a setback. And I heard you
talking about the city of Hobbs,
I believe, and the setbacks that
you say are in place there,
which are also wholly inadequate
to protect children's health.
I'll go ahead and move on to my
next question, Madam Chair
Representative, some of the
health studies that you brought
up earlier.
Should I move that back? I just
like there's heavy breathing and
I don't feel like I'm breathing.
That's great. If it continues,
well, we'll try it this way. If
not, then I may ask you to move
one seat down and use a
different, I can project my
voice if necessary. So Madam
Chair.
All right, Madam Chair
Representatives, earlier you
just discussed some health
studies that came out of
Colorado, um, do you think that
we, that New Mexico can really
compare ourselves to Colorado in
terms of production,
regulations, and geology.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
production, uh, especially in
your corner of the state is far
greater than any production uh
occurring in Colorado, uh,
making uh setbacks far more
important to protect people's
health.
Uh, in terms of the actual
processes used in production and
the pollutants that come from
fracking and oil and gas
production. Yes, those are very
comparable across regions, um,
which is why the peer reviewed
studies from across the country
apply to New Mexico.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, um, these
setbacks will most likely impact
the most innovative, newest
design facilities deploying
innovative leak detection
equipment. Wouldn't this
initiative be counterproductive,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, in
fact, for the 800 plus wells
that are currently within 1 mile
of schools, uh, this legislation
would require the operators of
those wells to put in place leak
detection systems and alarm
systems and uh to do additional
testing. So this actually uh
could lead to a greater uh leak
detection, and that's the goal,
is that in fact there is
greater leak detection and uh
protections for those wells that
are within the health buffer
zones. But again, Madam Chair
Representative, all these
scientific studies you speak of
none conducted specifically in
New Mexico.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that is correct.
Thank you. I'll move on to my
next question. Um, according to
studies, vehicles are higher
emitters of pollution than oil
and gas. So should we do a
setback for also our vehicles,
Madam Chair Representative, in
fact, in New Mexico, oil and gas
production is the greater cause
of air pollution than from
vehicles. Hmm.
Are those studies conducted in
New Mexico?
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK, just wanted to clarify,
Madam Chair Representative, you
guys would be so happy to know
that concludes my questions.
Thank you so much.
I, I would ask for a round of
applause, but we're, we're,
we're moving on. So
Representative Nicole Chavez.
In the lovely pink cape.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, first I just
wanted to point out before I get
to the questions I had is it
sounds like we were picking on
or disregarding the education of
the expert that spoke earlier,
um, and I just want to point out
that it looks like she has her
PhD in toxicology from MIT and
then some postdoctoral research
at NYU and Harvard, so, um, I'm
just a little disappointed that
we did point out.
That because it was paid by
Ramble that that had anything to
do with the way
She went through the research
paper earlier, so I guess um I
do have a question on the other
expert data we had, who paid for
these studies that you guys, um,
Provided us with and how are
those collection methods done.
Out of curiosity.
Mache representative, uh, we
provided a science summary of 72
peer reviewed studies from
national and international
scientists, um, from
universities from all over the
country.
And they are peer reviewed
according to academic and
scientific peer review
processes.
So I'm not sure if I've ever
provided that to you,
Representative, but we would be
happy to.
I, I would appreciate that
provided to us, because
unfortunately, especially for us
new freshmen, we were not here
in the interim. We haven't seen
any studies prior to this. We
only see what's in front of us.
So, um, I did have a question on
that and just wanted to point
that out. Um, so,
I won't repeat some of her
questions cause I know that my
dear friend asked you plenty of
questions that I was gonna ask,
um, but regarding, I guess,
potential and legal
administrative challenges, um,
this bills variance process
seems like it's overly
restrictive, so my question is,
could this bill violate property
rights under state and federal
law.
And would that lead to prolonged
li litigation.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
the bill has in place a variance
process that requires an
administrative process so that
if an operator is denied a
permit to drill a new well
within a children's health
protection zone that operator
can request a variance and
request to be allowed to do so,
um, and, uh, if the, if the
operator shows that this would
cause severe economic harm, um,
to them. I, I can read you the
exact language.
the bill if you like, yes,
please.
If, if you could just give her
the page and then she can read
it on her own.
Uh, it's begins on section 4,
page 15.
Uh, and it's subsections uh see.
Section C which begins on line
17.
Of page 15.
OK.
OK. And I just received some
other information, I guess.
My question, so I'm glad people
are listening out there to this
very important bill. Um, I just
received information saying that
the loving study was not peer
reviewed as the last interim
hearing. Is that true or not
true? Uh.
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't believe the loving study
was peer reviewed. That was data
that I was referring to to show
the um air quality, uh, from the
air, that was the most extensive
air quality monitoring that's
been done in that corner of the
state, and um they reported the
air quality um data that um that
they found, which was extremely
high, um, levels of benzene.
and other, uh, toxins, uh, in
the loving area.
OK, Ben. I'm sorry, just a
reminder if you're not speaking,
turn your mic off.
Especially when you're shuffling
papers.
OK, and I know Madam Chair
representative, there was some
back and forth questions, and I,
and I don't know if this was
asked or answered, as the New
Mexico Department of Health, or
US Department of Health
requested a mission studies.
Um, I mean a representative. I'm
not sure if they've requested
studies, but.
Sorry, I'm writing down and
making sure that
Representative Senna Cortez
didn't already answer all of
these questions I have
highlighted here.
I guess my last question is, and
I know that somebody in
opposition did briefly touch on
that, but.
I just have a question on the
one size fits all approach. Um,
I'm just worried that it's going
to force new development into
more remote areas. Have we
thought about
Um, the increase it would take
on long long haul trucking for
oil and gas transport or um road
weight, fatalities.
Diesel emissions, any of those
if we do move forward with this
bill.
Madam Chair Representative, to
date, there are only about 850
oil and gas production sites
within 1 mile of school. So out
of the over 70,000 oil and gas
production sites in the state,
only about 850 or within a mile.
Those 850 are allowed to
continue production, but it just
means that as production goes
forward, there hasn't been a
massive effort, uh, you know, to
put
Tthousands of wells close to
schools, and so it would just
mean they have to get as new
production as they have to just
be at least 1 mile away.
So I don't think the impact,
according to the LFC, the impact
on future production is 0.15 of
1%.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you expert. Those are all the
questions I have. Thank you,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and experts.
I would like to address again
the 70%.
Uh, out of compliance that I've
heard several times discussed,
but I'm still wanting to have
some um some answers on that.
Um,
The word compliance.
Does it, does it, uh, are you
referring to specifically air
quality when you talk about 70%
of oil and gas operations being
out of compliance.
Um, airy mittens, yes, air
quality, Madam Chair, we're,
were the handouts one of one of
it is from, um, secretary, uh,
Kenny's budget and it showed the
compliance on a table. It showed
30% noncompliance by the gas and
oil industry.
Representative, what does that
look like? It's just a one pager
plus it was the one that also
had met him chair the it it was
also the one with this that had
all the, all the wells, yeah.
That's one of them, and then the
other one.
Something like this, Madam
Chair.
You have this one? Oh yeah, we
have that one the first one on
the on the table. It says a
remitting sources, those have to
follow um.
Abide by the air quality Control
Act.
And 30% as it shows are not in
compliance or in compliance, so
70% are not.
Was this group, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative. I'm
curious to know, was this group,
did this group include
All of the oil and gas
operations are only a select few
that might have been out of
compliance. Um, Madam Chair, he,
he just said 30% of the industry
was out of compliance.
I think in order to, Madam
Chair, Representative, use this
as valuable statistic
information, we would have to
know what the group with the
large group was that or was it a
large group, was it a small
group because I, I understand,
um, I don't find it right
offhand, but I understand that
it was a select group that was
Looked at
Who were thought to be out of
compliance before the group was,
was, um, questioned Madam Chair
Representative, I believe that
was the first study in July or
August that Representative
referred to.
That was 60% of planes, they did
go to specific ones they could
see from satellite images that
were out that were polluting,
but not, I don't know about this
one I believe is the whole
industry.
Well, we have so many
statistics, Madam Chair
Representative, it's, I think,
and I think this bill is
extremely important that we go
by factual information that when
we have questions about the
stats that we're using, that
it's not valid, you know, I'd
rather know for sure, rather
than be the um making big
decisions like this on
information that I really can't
say is supported.
Madam representative, this is
from um Secretary Kenny's budget
to to
um, I, I would think most of it
is valid, Madam Chair
Representative, and I
understand, and it could be
accurate information, but it may
be based on
A group that is not uh the
entire.
It doesn't show the entire
picture. So I'm going to move on
and
And look at the committee
analysis.
Um
The committee analysis gives
some data that I found really
interesting as a, as a pediatric
nurse and, and also someone
who's been involved in pediatric
research, uh medical research,
um, I, I still enjoy looking at
this and and just trying to to
discover whether it.
You know, what information we
can get from our data because I
know we can sometimes say this
was the this data was presented
to
prove a point rather than to
actually gain information.
In looking at the table one on
youth asthma hospitalizations by
county.
I noticed in the committee
analysis, it says this is on.
I can't read my page.
And you all don't have that. Oh,
it's page 3 of the committee
analysis, there's a table that
says hospital uh.
Asthma discharges per 10,000
population, it's from the, it's
from DOH you can look it up on
the New Mexico Department of
Health website, which I did
because I was curious to know
the rest of the story.
What was pulled out of the rest
of the story that you can see on
the website is is very
interesting because what we have
here in front of us shows that
Chavez.
It shows the state average of
9.0 Chavez, Lee County are much
higher, 26, 12.2. These are
asthma discharges. He said, I
hate to interrupt you, but the
committee analysis we have only
has 2 pages, so I'm not sure
what we should be looking at.
It
I have so much information
here, 00, OK, OK. Thank you.
Yeah, study, study committee
bill analysis, so in the study
committee.
Um, and do you all have that? Do
you have that information? I do
not have it.
It has a limited um
Limited perspective on this. So
it does show that Chavez and Lee
are much higher than the state
average, and Rio Riba as well,
but when I looked at what I
could find on the Department of
Health website. It also shows
that San Miguel, Torrance,
Valencia, and Bernalillo
counties are all higher than the
state average. It just
invalidates completely this
asthma, youth asthma,
hospitalizations by county
shouldn't even be in here. We
can't even consider that, and
that's just a good example of
why it's hard.
To sort through all of this, um,
this data and these statistics
and.
Without having to drill down
into
The source documents and to know
if they're true or not.
I don't want to make a decision
on this bill without the proper
information.
Um
So all of those children had
there was more, more, there were
more uh hospital discharges and
all of those counties, not just
Chavez and Lee.
That's a
A real concern for me. Were you
aware of that?
Representative.
Um
We, we do have from them, um.
I, I don't know if it's the same
when Chavez is 62% above the
state average and uh San Juan is
48%.
He was 24% above the state
average.
Um, Bernalo County, it's kind of
comparing Bernalo County to Lee
is like comparing a watermelon
to a grape. I mean, we have two
major freeways, um, 926,000
people versus I think 38,000. So
it's, it's, um, it's kind of
expected in a big city, Madam
Chair, representative, that is
my dilemma because we can say
that this asthma is from, you
know, an oil well, and from
emissions from an oil well, or
we could say that it's.
From living in Bernalo County,
you know, there's, there's
really no, um, it's really hard
to determine what these stats
mean. I will also point out that
the period of time was 2017
through 2021.
And
Do you remember what was
happening, Madam Chair
representative from 2020 to
2021. Her children weren't even
in school.
It's, it's just, this is a very
good example of why it's hard
for me to accept.
A lot of what we're seeing is
statistics.
It's completely invalid. Our
children were in school.
So in Chavez County for almost a
third of the time that um
they're reporting here, those
kids were at home.
Not in the school that we're
addressing is, is a health risk.
Uh, representative Madam Chair
Representative, that's true that
for part of that time children
were at home, but this wasn't
just saying children who are in
school, who are hospitalized.
This is just saying children,
the rates of children's
hospitalization.
Generally
Right? And so, and the air
quality is bad.
Um, that, that didn't change
because children weren't at
school.
I'm not sure that I understand
the point that you're making,
but I also just think that
these, these kind of statistics
aside.
The, the peer reviewed studies
um are very clear that, and I
can refer you to a study by
Buchanic, and there's an
increase of asthma during
unconventional gas production at
exposure zones of 1 mile, 2
miles, 5 miles, and 10 miles
away. Um, there's there's many
studies that I could read off to
you, showing that there are
these increased risks, and that
for children they are
particularly more vul
able
Madam Chair, uh, expert, were
those studies done in New
Mexico?
Madam Chair representative, no.
And as I explained earlier,
because the same pollutants
occur from oil and gas
production wherever the fracking
happens, um, that doesn't make
those, those studies are just as
applicable here as anywhere
else. Madam Chair
Representative, we do have
restrictions on oil and gas
industry that
That are considered very strict
and possibly much more so than
where the studies were done,
which is why I asked. I don't
think they're relevant unless
you can say that they were done
on the wells that were we're
discussing restricting.
And that would be, um, that
would be under this, that would
I'm, I'm finished with my
questions, madam Chair. Thank
you and I, I'm going to allow
Representative Martinez, a few
questions, but a reminder to the
committee, I know we're all
busy, we're in different places,
but we can't retread ground, so,
so, um, briefly and, and if the
question has been asked, I will
let you know that that has been
asked and answered.
Thank Madam Chair, I appreciate
that. Um,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
just a couple of lines of
question. You know how many
wells, existing wells that this
is gonna affect.
Maner representative there are
currently about 850 wells within
a mile of schools, those wells
would not be shut down, those
wells would be subjected to um
greater monitoring and greater
leak detection to ensure that
they're not polluting uh more
than uh legally allowed, um, as
they operate near schools.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
So they're gonna, these 800 and
some wells will.
be monitored and regulated more
heavily than other wells, Madam
Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Could
you tell me why?
Manage represented because
they're close to where children
go to school.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Was it a working group that put
this thing together?
Madam Chair Representative,
there have been working groups
over the last few years
discussing setbacks in this
state and legislation has been
presented other years discussing
setbacks. This is a modified,
uh, very minor version of a
setback because although the
distance is important and it
protects children, it only
protects children while they're
at school.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
38 pages for a minor change.
Um
On this, on these working groups
were their representatives from
the oil and gas industry.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
And there, their concerns were
reflected in the committee sub.
Manage representative, no, I
don't believe the industry
agreed to any sort of uh health
protection for our children.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you,
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a
few, uh, clarifying questions.
Um, one of the patterns that I
feel like we're seeing here in
committee, um, pretty regularly
is sort of this um um industry
and folks from uh
Like local folks being a little
bit um on opposite side, so
wanted to ask some clarifying
questions here. Um, I know a lot
of um questions came about
locality, um, Madam Chair
Representative, can you remind
me where the oil and gas expert
that we heard on Zoom was from.
That ripped that was in our
experts. I'm not sure I just
wanted to reminder, um, it was
from MIT. Thank you. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, and also,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I know this is part of the
discussion as well, but the
company that that person works
for Ramble, um, it, I did a
quick Google search and it looks
like they're actually a Danish
company, so they're not even
here in the state. They're not
even here in our country. Um,
they're a Danish company and
they have a $937 million.
income
each year. Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, can you remind
me where your expert and your
guests are from?
Madam Chair, um, representative,
there are several people here
who are from the counselor
chapter and the tri-chapter
region, um, up in the greater
Chaco landscape, which is a
heavy oil and gas producing
region of the state, but they're
here because of concerns for
their children. And I also thank
you for this question because
I'd like to point out that
online there were multiple
people from the southeast region
of the state, um, Pastor Dave
Rogers. I saw.
Hayley ute from Citizens Care
for the Future from Carlsbad,
Josie Zuniga, who's also from
the Permian, um, we're all there
online hoping to be able to
speak in support of this
measure.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, I know um a lot
of conversation has also been
brought to this committee about
liability in many, many cases,
um, across the board as it
pertains to health. Um, you
know, it seems as if we could
prevent harm here before it
occurs, or at least mitigate um
some aspects of harm, so Madam
Chair Representative, my
question to you is, if the state
doesn't act on things like this,
um, could you anticipate future
lawsuits for failing to protect
our kids.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, there's always the
possibility of, of lawsuits. Um,
I think it's, it's a very
important uh opportunity for the
state to act to protect our
children.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, one.
clarifying question on the
language itself. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, the language
that you have in here is for
setbacks in the future. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
this bill is for setbacks now in
terms of no new production
within 1 mile of schools, but
importantly, does not require
the phasing out of the wells
that are currently operating
within a mile schools. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
I ask this because two points
were brought up earlier, one
about private property rights.
It seems as if um we would not
um be, you know, invading
anyone's private property rights
because they already have the
setbacks that they currently
have right now.
Um, and the second piece is just
about um future uh financial
planning as well. It seems as if
those folks who would like to
have more setbacks into the
future would then just need to
put them a mile away, and they
could, uh, financially plan for
that ahead, as well as the
state. Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative.
No further questions. OK.
Thank you. So I will go to
Representative uh E. Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
Want to make a motion for a do
pass on committee substitute for
House Bill 35.
Madam Chair, I'd like to propose
a substitute motion to table.
OK, the tabling motion.
Takes precedence, so we will do
a roll call for the tabling
motion.
On HB 35, um, the committee
substitute and a yes vote is to
table a no vote is to not table.
Representative Anaya.
No a table.
Representative Kate noted table.
Representatives E. Chavez? No.
Representative E Chavez, yes to
table.
Representative Ferrari.
No to table.
Representative Jones.
Yes, to table.
Representative Martinez? Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez, yes
to table.
Madam Vice Chair.
No
Madam Chair, no.
We have a 6, no, 4, yes. OK, so
by a vote of 6 in the
affirmative and 4 in the
negative or vice versa. We have
that motion did not pass, so we
will go back to representative
Eleanor Chavez's motion of a do
pass, and I need a second. I
will, OK, with 2nd.
Uh, Karen, when you're ready, go
ahead. OK. Representative Anaya.
Yes, for passage.
Representative Kate, yes, we do
pass.
Representative E. Chavez. Yes.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Represented Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
No
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative Santa Cortez? No,
and I would like to explain my
vote, please.
Madam Vice Chair.
It's I do pass motion. I, I vote
to do pass.
Madam Chair. Yes.
6 to 4 by 6 to 4, you have a do
pass on the committee
substitute.
Representative Senna Cortez to
explain her vote for one minute.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. I just want to
point out what oil and gas has
done for our state and more
importantly, our children. It is
funded 49% of the state budget
last year, $13 billion in state
and local revenue, $2.3 billion
in total education funding,
130,0508 students, 386 public
schools, 9580 teachers and I
just want to reiterate that I
stand with my community and I
stand with the oil and gas
industry in full opposition to
this bill. Thank you so much,
uh, Madam Chair and
Representative. Thank you and
thank you all for your patience.
So I, I have an announcement
that, that I've lost, um, we
will be rolling.
House Bill 225, the foster
parent tax credit at the request
of the sponsor and um we will go
next with HB 178 with
Representative Gallegos, and
since she is in the room, um,
and I believe a lot of the
people are in the room for HB
214, we will allow her to do
both of her bills now.
Thank you. So Representative
Gallegos, whenever you're, if we
could please let her get here so
we can get started.
And I want to thank the audience
for your decorum and your um
patients.
But with with Madame Chair
Gallegos, no patience. We're
gonna run.
OK,
OK, pass it out.
Yeah, yeah.
And if you are leaving the room,
please leave the room and take
your conversations outside so we
can continue our important work.
Go ahead, Representative Gaos.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
pleased to introduce House Bill
178, the nursing practice change
changes Act proposing changes to
the nurses Practice Act. These
changes aim to clarify the scope
of practice for various
categories. The bill also seeks
to expand the authority of the
state board of nursing, modified
the streamlined, modify and
streamline licensing process and
enhance the uh
Confidentiality of uh
disciplinary actions. Um, I also
have an amendment.
And so I asked that that um.
Oh, thank you. Uh, I asked that
uh you all consider uh moving up
for discussion.
And I, OK, we have a motion for
discussion. Go ahead,
Representative. Thank you. Uh,
would you like me to go through
the, the amendment or do you
want to um just ask questions.
How would you like me to proceed
with that? Representative, it
seems like a pretty simple
amendment, so I, I'm, I'm
assuming that that the committee
can um
take it in on their own, so and
so with that, madam Chair, I
will stand for questions. I'm
with, uh, I've got my two
witnesses here, Linda Siegel and
tell me your name, Gloria
Doherty. Gloria Doherty. OK,
thank you. So on Zoom, if you
are in opposition to this bill,
please raise your hand, and I
will come back to you in the
room. If, is there anyone in
opposition.
OK, seeing none back to Zoom,
seeing no hands raised, if you
are in support on Zoom, please
raise your hand and I will come
back to you in the room and
support.
OK, there are a lot of you, um,
I will take 5 if if uh and no
pressure to make a public
statement, but if you would like
to come up to the front, I will
take a maximum of 5 for 1 minute
each.
OK, I like this crowd.
They're ready to move along.
Let's, let's get our work done
and I don't see any hands raised
on Zoom, so.
Um, we will go to the committee
for questions.
Representative Senator Cortez,
Madam Chair, I'd like to reserve
my comments for to make a motion
for a do pass, please.
OK. Representative Anayas. OK,
sorry about that, uh,
representative uh Madam Chair
Representative, I know I was
texting um with uh Miss Siegel.
Um, the only thing I would like
to recommend as you all move
into the next committee is on
page 27, you have definitions of
gender identity, sexual
orientation, just to put those
in line with the current
definitions within the Human
Rights Act.
I.
Thank, thank you,
Representative. Um noted and we
will, we will do that. Thank
you. OK, I need a motion to
adopt the amendment.
I moved
to adopt the amendment,
Representative E Chavis and a
second representative Ferrari.
OK, so I need a motion, so you
have an amended bill. Uh, I need
a motion, um, for next section.
00, I'm sorry, representative
Senator Cortez, my mind gets
going too fast and a second by
representative Anaya. Is there
any opposition to a due pass on
um He Bill 178 as amended.
then you have a do pass. Thank
you. We need more of these
pills.
In general, we discourage um
public outbursts, but I feel
like clapping myself or being
able to scratch one off. So next
we will go to
um agenda.
Let's go for 2 for 22 for 2.
We'll set a land speed record
here I don't, I can't find. Oh,
there we go. So we will next go
to um where 24 214. So go ahead
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
just one sec if you could please
exit the room quietly so we can
keep rolling. Thank you.
Go ahead. Thank you. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, House Bill 214 is uh
creates the doula credentialing
and Access Act. This act
mandates that the Department of
Health established a voluntary
credentialing process for
doulas.
Uh, in the current fiscal year,
the legislator uh funded the
healthcare authority to provide
doula services for Medicaid
members. However, the still the
state still needs prudentialed
providers, Doula credentialing
is a voluntary process that
would allow doulas to bill
Medicaid, it is not required to
practice as a doula in the
state. However, without
certification, Adua would be
unable to bill Medicaid or
services provided. HB 214 also.
creates the Dula credentialing
advisory Council,
advi advise the Department of
Health and requires hospitals
and free-standing birth centers
to develop policies allowing
doulas to accompany patients
during specific services.
Additionally, the bill creates a
dula fund to support these
initiatives, the LFC budget
recommendation for House Bill 2
includes 600,000 to to DOH to
administer.
this program, uh, on enhancement
and similar legislation, the LFC
appropriation recommendation is
for personnel, IT program
development cost and advisory
board costs, and with me I've
got Kelly from LSC to help
answer any questions, and with
that, Madam Chair, I stand for
questions.
Thank you. I do appreciate your
brevity, um.
And I appreciate it. So, um, if
you're on Zoom in opposition,
please raise your hand and I'll
come back to you in the room,
anyone in opposition.
OK, seeing none, seeing no hands
raised on Zoom, we will go to
support. So if you are in
support on Zoom, raise your
hand. If you are in the room and
support, raise your hand.
OK, if you would like to speak,
I will take a maximum of 5.
And you don't have to speak.
I'm, I'm getting that from my
committee.
Can you, can you do the?
Aindi. Good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Taz Tamopovi and I am
from San Luon del Pueblo, my
ancestral homelands. I am
mother, sister, auntie, and I
have been in Doula for 17 years,
and my time as a doula, I have
supported families during
prenatal labor delivery and
postpartum. I have also assisted
families through pregnancy last.
I know my role on these
families' births have been vital
to the physical, mental, and
spiritual well-being. As a black
and indigenous mother, I know
firsthand the fear that can be
present when we are expecting a
baby. In New Mexico and
nationally, Black and indigenous
birthing people are far more
likely to experience
complications and death during
birth.
It is important to have
representation in both our dual
curricula and in our workforce
to be able to choose a doula who
shares some of the same lived
experiences, traditions, and
beliefs as our clients saves
lives.
I am asking you to please
support HB 214 Doula
credentialing and Access Act. Du
statistically saved lives by
reducing birth complications and
adverse maternal health
outcomes. Doulas can also
improve communication between
pregnant people and their
healthcare providers. There
should be no barriers for
families who want a doula. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
representatives. I'm Allie
Hedrick, the division director
for family support and early
intervention from ECECD that is
home visiting and fit. Um, our
state should be doing what it
can to improve access to doulas,
Doulas play a vital role in
childbirth by offering physical,
emotional, and informational
support to the birthing person
and their partner.
According to the prenatal to 3
impact center research shows
that community-based doulas are
an evidence-based strategy for
states to improve child and
family outcomes. Dulaca reduces
C-section rates, lowers the risk
for postpartum depression and
improves patient satisfaction.
The majority of births in our
state are funded by Medicaid, so
credentialing a credentialing
process would make Doula care
accessible, uh, to our state's
most vulnerable families. ECC
ECD urges you to vote in support
for HB 214 to improve birth
outcomes and promote the
continuing health for all New
Mexico families and their
babies. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you so much
for listening. My name is
Gwendoline Omanya, and I serve
as a reproductive justice
program manager with the Women
United.
Our work ensures that 3 people,
especially in rural and
indigenous communities have
access to culturally grounded
support.
Through our Ivicaindiola
training we we prepare local
doulas to address critical
maternal health gaps in northern
New Mexico. This issue is deeply
personal to me.
When I was pregnant 2 years ago,
I had no family in the United
States and no local community.
That isolation put me in a high
risk for postpartum depression,
a condition that affects 1 in 7
burden people.
But having a doula changed
everything. My doula provided
emotional, physical, and
informational support, helping
me feel less alone and more
empowered during pregnancy,
birth, and postpartum. Research
confirms this Dula supports
significantly lowers the risk of
postpartum depression and
improves birth outcomes,
especially in communities with
limited health care access like
rural areas. Thank, thank you.
That's your time.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Melissa
Lopez Sullivan, and I'm serving
as the uh first executive
director of the New Mexico Doula
Association since the end of
2019, and I'm standing in
support of HB 214.
I'm also a full spectrum doula
certified lactation counselor,
student midwife, and community
activist. This bill represents
more than 4 years of deep work
in community amongst doulas,
healthcare providers, policy
advocates, uh, the New Mexico
Department of Health and
Medicaid. However, this work
didn't start 4 years ago. It's
built on the wisdom and labor of
those who came before us. We
stand here today on the
shoulders of our ancestors.
Those whose knowledge of birth,
healing and reproductive care
have guided us to this moment.
Passing HB 214 is more than just
a policy. It is about honoring
our past, protecting our
present, and recognizing and
building a future for our next
generations.
It's about creating a system
where doulas are valued,
compensated, and respected as an
essential part. Thank you.
And I apologize for cutting
folks off, but you saw how long
we went on our, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Monicoo Otero, Health
research and policy analysts,
and also importantly, someone
who is currently pregnant and
with with New Mexico voices for
children, and we stand in
support of HB 214. Well trained
and compensated prenatal and
maternal health professionals
are a vital part of a strong
childhood early childhood.
system, providing professional
pathways and fair pay for birth
workers would honor and uplift
their essential labor.
Improving mental health in in
improving maternal health and
equities and outcomes is
inherently good for parents and
children, but doulas are also
part of a system of programs and
support that can ensure kids can
thrive, um, at all stages of
life. This bill would make Doula
services more accessible and
affordable while ensuring doulas
have the training and
compensation they need and
deserve. We thank the sponsor
and experts for this.
Bill and we urge your support.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Pepin, registered
lobbyist with the state of New
Mexico. I work for Juliana Coup,
who represents Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains. I am here to stand in
support of the Doula
credentialing and Access Act. I
worked as a doula for 2 years in
northern New Mexico from 2016 to
2018 and would love to one day
return to that work with my own
child grows up. In addition to
being a doula, I am a licensed
clinical social worker and
endorsed infant mental health
professional.
Um, in my time as a doula I
supported primarily opportunity
youth who gave birth after
sexual assault, homelessness,
migration, death, and familial
separation, often without a
partner or family member by
their side. I worked with
pregnant people who are married,
single, induced, and undergoing
C-sections. When I had my own
unexpected cesarean, I relied
heavily on my do list, not only
in the moment of my daughter's
birth, but in the days after
seeking out lactation
consultation assessment and
connection, the expertise of
Doulas served my
relationship with my daughter in
a way that no other professional
could, due to their specific
expertise and guidance. Thank
you. I know one minute goes
fast. We will go to Zoom and,
and I'm sorry, Miss Sosip Pena,
then Janet Williams, then Teresa
for one minute, but I do notice
there are 10 hands raised in
support.
So go ahead, Miss Sosie Pena.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
representatives on the
committee. My name is Beata
Sosi. I'm an independent doula
and lactation counselor. I'm
also the organizational director
for Breath of My Heart
Birthplace. Um, I'm in support
of this bill. I think I have
been operating.
Mostly pro bono in my uh
communities in Espinola Valley
and um surrounding pueblos.
A lot of the families that I
serve are um can't afford it,
haven't been able to afford to
do a.
And this would make it so that I
can continue to do the work, um,
in a way that I'm supported.
So that I can support them and I
work closely with midwives and
family members um to promote the
best outcomes possible for a
birth and it takes a, it takes a
team to have healthy birth
outcomes and doulas are an
integral part of that. So thank
you for supporting this bill.
Thank you and uh.
No, uh, Janet Williams, I almost
called you Representative
Williams.
Adam chair and members of the
committee, uh, we at the
National Organization for Women
strongly support this bill.
Thank you much, so much for your
support, Janet, could you please
state your name for the record.
Uh, Janet Williams.
Thank you.
OK, and next we will go to
Teresa.
Teresa unmute and go ahead.
Hi, my name is Teresa Madrid. I
am deputy director at the
Partnership for Community
Action, where we work alongside
families, um, who, uh, and, and
with families, especially with
parents who have um children
prenatal to 5. In our role with
family engagement, we know that
families are looking for care
that aligns with Juulla, Doula
certification, and the care
they're able to provide. Um, so
thank you for supporting this
bill, um, and partnership.
For Community action and our
families and our staff, um, are
really supportive of sort of
certification for dolas.
Thank you.
So we will go to the committee
for questions.
OK. Representative Senator
Cortez.
Wrong Republican Latina.
Nicole Chapman.
I am so sorry. I told you I
today needs to start over
tomorrow.
That's OK the
representative. I just have.
A couple quick questions, um, I,
I used the doula 28 years ago,
not aging myself when I had my
oldest son, and I know that
usually, so is this bill um
allowing then for doulas to
build outside of just labor and
delivery where it usually takes
place and or is it because it's
not included in Medicaid, but it
is included in commercial
coverage right now.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. It's
to bill Medicaid.
OK, that was my question. Thank
you so much. That was quick and
easy.
Questions. OK, I will entertain
emotion. I'd like to move it to
pass. Do I have a second? So a
motion by Representative Anaya
in the second by representative
in Chavez. Here comes my frog.
Is there any opposition?
They see none, you have a due
pass.
OK, um, next.
Yeah.
a moment
Representative Garrett, are you
OK to do 2 bills before yours.
I'm sorry, we got, but I promise
we will get to you, or are, are
you in another committee?
OK, so we will go with uh
Senator Maestas flashback to
representative Maestas and just
to reminder for the committee,
this is a compact, um, one of
the interstate compacts that I
presented 3 of a few.
Years ago it feels like, but um,
so 217, so go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable members, this is a
House Bill 217 on the Senate
sponsor along with
Representative Herndon who, who
had to go to a Doctor Bailey's
funeral. So it's my privilege to
to to be here. So there's a
national movement, Madam Chair,
there's a national movement
among licensed counselors in the
country, uh, and the way they
uh.
Um
The way they practice. As I'm
sorry, so
We have, we have a bill analysis
for 217, which is physical
therapy, um, then I apologize,
is it 2:55? Well, it's on our,
it's on our agendas 217, um, so
give us a second to uh figure
out what's going on. So
everybody take a deep breath and
my, my notebook says 217.
Yeah, I think it's mistitled in
your or
perhaps, um, could someone do a
quick
Yeah.
Represent Senator, I'm sorry. So
one of our um democratic
analysts or somehow we got the
wrong thing, so we are on 217
counseling. OK, so sorry for any
confusion, there's been some uh
some paperwork issues this
morning, but go ahead. I'm sorry
to interrupt. I just wanted to
be sure we were all on the same
bill. Madam Chair, honorable
members, thank you. So,
So there's a, there's a a
movement amongst a licensed
counselors in this country, and
they've organized themselves
into a counseling compact,
roughly 30, we have heard
compact bills, so if you could
just stick to the counseling
part of it so that we can move
you along. So 3738 states have
joined the compact, this bill
would allow New Mexico
councilors to join the compact,
which would allow two things New
Mexico licensed counselors to uh
to practice throughout the other
3.
8 compact states, but more
importantly for our purposes,
Madam Chair, it would allow
patients to seek counseling
services from counselors
throughout those 37, 38 states,
uh, through, uh, through, uh,
telemedicine, uh, counseling, so
I think it's, it's the way to go
and I hope New Mexico joins with
that'll stand for questions and
there's a couple of folks
speaking in favor, uh, and
there's.
I believe a national expert if,
if the questions get too
technical on Zoom. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and sorry
for all the confusion. So if you
are online in opposition, please
raise your hand and I will come
back to you in the room in
opposition, anyone.
OK, seeing none.
Uh, Enrique.
Or not.
He, he re
He, he
Enrique now, I, um, this is for
opposition.
Are you in opposition?
I would ask you on Zoom to
please wait until I ask you to
raise your hand and support our
opposition because we get
Books tangled up. So, um, if you
are in support online, raise
your hand. Any support in the
room, Raise your hand.
OK, a few. Would you like, if
you would like to speak, you can
come to the middle.
And again, it's one minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. My name
is Marcus Luhan. I work with
Think New Mexico, where the
folks have sent you the uh
Uh, report on how to help solve
our healthcare shortage. Uh,
we've also been hounding you a
lot about these compacts. Some
of you more than others. I have
my apologies, Representative
Jones. Uh, we, uh, believe that
the reason we've been so
persistent about this is we
believe that this is the single
most impactful thing that this
legislator can do this year, uh,
to help address our shortage.
Um, 37 states and the District
of Columbia have adopted this
and with 28 of our 33 counties
falling below the national
benchmark of where they should
be.
with uh behavioral healthcare
providers. Now is not the time
to fall behind the rest of the
pack and fall behind the rest of
the country. Uh, behavioral
health is of the utmost
importance in our state right
now, and yeah, we just need to
keep at it and this is a great
bill to keep pushing towards uh
more mental health
opportunities. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning. I'm Melissa Salazar.
I'm the director of boards and
commissions with regulation and
licensing department. We just
wanted to point out that the
Additional operating budget
request as contained in our FIR
will require an authorization
appropriation to utilize the
non-reverting funds that are
held for this board.
Thank you.
Thank you. And so we will take
the 1st 3 on on Zoom, that's
Danielle Duran Enrique Nell and
Kathleen Mosley, but I, I do see
there are 5 hands raised in
support, so go ahead, Danielle.
Um, thank you, chair, and thank
you to the sponsor, Los Alamos
County, uh, supports all the
medical and health-related
compacts that have bills this
year.
We believe that New Mexicans
deserve to have access to
healthcare officials, healthcare
professionals, and that we are
in dire need of having more
access, so with that I just
stand in support.
Thank you, Enrique.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Enriqueel
speaking in favor of House Bill
217 on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
Um, as you know, Madam Chair, as
you've mentioned, there are a
number of bills authorizing New
Mexico to enter into various
healthcare compacts. They are
all designed to bring healthcare
professionals to our state and
make these services more
accessible to New Mexicans, we
all know that it is critical to
attract mental health
professionals, um, as we wrestle
with building the
state's behavioral health
system. Uh, this bill, House
Bill 217 offers one answer to
how we attract these
professionals to New Mexico.
Therefore, we urge your support
for House Bill 217. Thank you.
Thank you. And next we have
Kathleen Mosley.
Thank you, Chair Thompson and
members of the committee. I'd
like to underline a couple of
things about compacts as well.
Uh, they increase our public
safety by helping us know the
backgrounds of folks who come in
to the state. They also help
with licensing for telehealth in
shortage areas and just point
out from the legislative report
on healthcare workers that in
Berlin Bernelio, the core mental
health professionals ratio is
36.5 to 10,000, but in Hidalgo
and the Luna counties, it's only
5 per 10,000. So this, and this
also helps with mobility in
disasters, so I would encourage
uh passage. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, do you have
any closing comments before we
go to the committee? No, thank
you, OK, any questions from
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, this
is actually something I'll be
bringing up with all of the
sponsors. I've um texted with uh
Representative Herndon as well,
but Madam Chair represented
Senator, apologies uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, um, from what I
am aware of, um, compacts can be
tailored to specific needs in
states. Montana and Alabama have
done that, um, and there's
actually a lawsuit right now in
New York, challenging um
abortion and gender affirming
care.
So I, like I said, I would love
to work with the sponsors of all
the compacts to make sure that
we get protections proportion,
gender affirming care and to
prevent things like conversion
therapy, as we're talking about
um counselors, um, and so, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator, I would
love to work with all of the
sponsors of the compacts to pass
some uh solid legislation with
compacts that also protects what
we have right now in the state
of New Mexico. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
E Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I do
have a few questions, um, one of
them is in terms of the
governance for these
commissions. I, I think I read
in the bill that it's made up of
representatives from each of the
compact states.
Is that correct?
Yes, Madam Chair, OK. That's
correct. So, so my question is,
if
Um
If there is an issue that is
That New Mexico is particularly
concerned about and I don't have
uh an example right now.
Uh, and the rest of the compact
states don't support it, then we
would have to go along with
whatever the commission decides,
right? The compact commission
for, I, I don't know if that's
what it's called, but that's
what I'm calling it. Thank you,
um, Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez.
I think the, keep in mind that
the delegates that would go to
these meetings would be licensed
counselors dealing with their
profession. This conduct would
not prohibit state courts or
state law from licensing our uh
licensed counselors.
Or uh prohibiting or or taking
action against the licensed
counselor or, or frankly taking
action against a remote
counselor if they choose to to
do telehealth here.
OK. Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
So my next question has to do,
and I'm familiar with the with
the um
Practice of social work in the
state, right? And so one of the
things that that the that social
workers who are licensed in the
state have to do is they have to
go through a a course on
cultural competency that is
created by um those social
workers in New Mexico. So I
noticed on page 8, it talks
about social and cultural
diversity, um, as something that
um
The counselors would need to be
um
Uh, that they would need to that
uh they would need to take a
course on that. So would you be
able to tell me if you know, um,
who determines what that course
looks like for this national um
Compact. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Chavez.
I believe our local board, our
local RLD board and the and the
the the the counseling
requirements of, of the state of
New Mexico. This puts minimum
requirements.
On, uh, states that want to join
the compact, and so the, it's on
the bottom of page 7 as well,
licensee shall have 60 semester
hours or 90 quarter hours of
master's degree in counseling.
Or 60 semesters or and we have
semesters in Mexico, 60 semester
hours in graduate coursework,
including the following, so that
would be part of their uh
They're um
College or university degree
program. OK, so it would be
state specific.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
State Pacific. OK, and then the
other question that I have is in
terms of what kinds of fees are
we paying to the compact?
Thank you, um, Madam Chas,
Representative Chavez. So this,
the fees are not outlined in
statute.
The, the last conversation I had
with the compact is, uh, and
it's a small staff, there's only
like 2 staff people they haven't
initiated fees just yet.
But uh, but I will find that
out, uh.
You know, ongoingly, but as of
right now there are no fees
required by the compact states,
OK, but future there would
probably be once the I believe
so, I believe so, but I think
that'd be relatively minimal.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Any further questions? OK, I
will entertain emotion, Madam
Cherry move a do pass.
I so I have a motion from
Representative Anaya for a due
pass and the second from
Representative Cates. Is there
any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Thank you.
OK, next, and, and I'm sorry I'm
going out of order, um, but we
have some firefighters waiting
to hear HB 230, so we're going
to go ahead with that. So rips
um
Majority floor leaders, the
pansy.
And the handsome firefighter, as
he is frequently called
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
members, so good to be with you
again today. Um, I'm here to
present House Bill 230, um, and
briefly, the purpose of this
bill is really to protect
employees from being adversely
impacted by inadequate cannabis
impairment testing and to create
guidelines to better measure
cannabis impairment, um, and
this bill has been kind of a
labor of love. Um, we have done
a lot of work on.
in the interim, um, I wanna
thank Mr. Tippman for all of his
uh steadfast dedication on this,
so, um, I'm here with Mr. Miguel
Titman and a representative from
Workforce Solution, I'm sorry.
I'm with the union as well. OK,
good, got it. Um, so I would ask
them to introduce themselves,
and I think Department of
Workforce Solutions is on their
way.
Oh, great.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representatives. My name is
Miguel Titman, uh, president of
Louisville 244 represents
Albuquerque and Berlin County
firefighters as well as vice
president of the NMPFFA uh that
represents firefighters all over
New Mexico, even though this is,
this is a bill that's going to
affect more than just
firefighters in the workforce.
Um, this is a bill that was
brought to our attention by our
members, um, overwhelmingly in a
large, a large number of the
group that came to us
specifically was our veteran
member members. So, uh, many
times veterans are attracted.
The two, the workforce involving
public safety and um that's kind
of who we're representing today.
Um, we have members that are
diagnosed with ailments that are
everyday ailments, but um
specific to our population, uh,
they're more at risk for,
including um pain management
because of the physical nature
and demands of our job, um,
because of PTSD which we are 6
times more likely to be
diagnosed with it in our job.
Um, including sleep deprivation
with shift work on 48 hours, uh,
shifts is, is how we work.
Sometimes we don't sleep for 48
hours. Um, all of these ailments
that have
Uh, our members get diagnosed
with and prescribed different
medicines having cannabinoids in
them, including Jainon,
including THC, including
gummies, including, uh, run of
the mill, um, bombs and lotions
that they can't use because if
they get randomly tested, which
is our stance at the randomly
test is unconstitutional and
unfair, that they will lose
their job, they will lose their
livelihood, they will lose their
pension, and that's the crux of
this uh of this legislation.
is we believe it's unfair to the
to the workforce. They have this
unconstitutional um testing
policy, and we aim to fix that
statutorily since the legislator
legislation has passed a
medicinal cannabis and
recreational, but this is a
medicinal cannabis conversation
in relation to Lynn and Erin.
Um, so we urge your support, uh,
on this bill. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Theodore Iguhai.
I'm vice president of IFF Local
244. Um, I would echo what
President Titman outlined, um.
And I further state that
Changing the testing that we do,
we're not.
Ceasing testing for cannabis, I
think it's a safer alternative
where encouraging post-accident
testing and.
Reasonable suspicion testing
with the employer, so it's the
employer and the supervisor to
engage with the employee more.
Um, I think any time that we're
just relying on a random
urinalysis test that is actually
not proving current impairment.
Um, it could go back 30 days,
the use of it, of cannabis. Um,
it's better to actually engage
with our employees, um, not just
for the fact that we can see if
they're impaired at work, um,
under a substance, but also for
what's kind of included in this
bill, right, is behavioral
health, post-traumatic stress.
Those kind of uh pieces that
we're working on.
in the workforce with our
firefighters that affect them
heavily and disproportionately.
Um, so this is a a safer
alternative to opiates and other
medications that they're
commonly prescribed for these
ailments, and we think that
having this tool in their
toolbox to face these things
would be way better. Thank you.
Thank you. So we will go to the,
if you are on Zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand and I'll come back to you
in the room. Anyone in
opposition.
case, seeing none, seeing no
hands on on Zoom if you are in
support, please raise your hand.
I will take the 1st 3, and I
apologize for this, but we, uh,
We have a lot of bills on our
agenda. So in the room in
support, please raise your hand
if you would like to speak and
no pressure to speak. I will
take 5 1-minute comments. So
please come forward to the mic.
And if you could do 30 seconds,
you get brownie points.
I could do it in 15. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, John Lipsch with the
New Mexico Federation of Labor.
We, uh, represent over 40,000
workers throughout the state. We
stand in strong solidarity with
our first responders, our
firefighters in support of this
measure, and we hope you all as
well. Thank you.
Afternoon, Madam Chair.
Committee members, my name is
Jeremy Renda. I represent local
4366 Santa Fe County
Professional Firefighters and uh
we are in full support of this
bill. Uh, I personally have lost
brothers due to alcoholism and
and depression and um I.
And
cannabis, uh, since 2011 and I
have been consistently um
discriminated against, um, for
the past 13 years and I, I
wanted it to end, I know that
this is a safe substance, the
state has approved it for not
just recreational use, but, but,
but, uh, sorry, not just medical
use, but recreational use, um,
our testing standards are
outdated and antiquated and we
need to update them to allow
firefighters to be able to use
their prescribed medications.
And not for fear of losing their
jobs, uh, subsequently, so I, I
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward.
Madam Chair representatives, uh,
Chris Johnson, um, president of
Las Cruces Professional
firefighters Local 2362, also
vice president of New Mexico
Professional Firefighters with
my colleagues, Miguel Titman and
Teddy here. Uh, I stand in
support of this bill. We have
members across the state who
deal with the ailments that we
already discussed, the PTSD, the
sleep deprivation, um, all of
the things that come inherent to
our job, and then currently the
only uh modality that they have
to seek as prescription
medication that has a
terrible track record, terrible
efficacy, risk for dependence,
um, the outcomes are just proven
to be not good, and we have a
safe alternative substance that
we've approved at the state at
the medicinal level. Um, we're
looking to change that and allow
those people that serve our
communities day in and day out
to have the access to the
medications that they need as
prescribed by their doctors. So,
thank you. Um, I appreciate the
time.
Thank you for hearing this bill
today. My name is Kristen
Wallen. I've been in EMS and
fire services for 15 years. I'm
gonna I like to reiterate what
has been mentioned before with
our chronic ailments,
inflammation, sleep deprivation,
or increased prevalence of
alcoholism, uh, chronic back
pain, anxiety, and anecdotally
I'd like to speak to the
therapeutic benefits of CBD
which I myself have dabbled in,
um, fully knowing the risks, but
I know that we all have
wearables probably these days,
Apple watches, woop bands that
can track recovery can track.
Our REM sleep and during the
time that I was experimenting
with that CBD, there was nothing
else that made such a high
impact on my recovery, REM sleep
and mood than CBD, uh, it was an
increase of 27%, uh, which was
the highest, uh, in terms of
anything that you can track the
next highest one was hydration,
which was only 10%. Um, I had an
increase in REM sleep. I a much
better mood and longer duration
of sleep as well, which has the
downstream benefits of uh
cognitive performance, which is
crucial to our job, as well as
mood. So thank you again for
hearing this bill.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom
with Ben Adrianne and Mark. Go
ahead.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Ben Lowinger. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Cannavas Chamber of
Commerce, where the association
representing er operators and
stakeholders in the cannabis
industry in New Mexico. It's
been almost 2 decades since the
line compassionate Use Act
passed this body and confirmed
that cannabis is in fact
medicine. Uh house Bill 2:30 is
important. It affirms the rights
of medical cannabis patients to
access their medicine, and it
also is helpful in progressing
the conversation around the.
complex nuances of how to test
for cannabis impairment. Right
now there is technology that
exists for employers and for law
enforcement that can test uh
impairment in a way that helps
to reduce the stigma around
cannabis use and uh as on behalf
of the industry, we're in full
support of this bill, and I urge
this committee to pass. Thank
you.
Adrian. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of this committee.
My name is Adrianne Baboa. I am
currently Bernao County
Commissioner for District 3. In
addition, I'm an anti to a
firefighter, and they work
closely with people in recovery.
I just wanted to say that this,
we have passed this at the
county we're working on um
robust implementation, but I
can't um explain the kind of
praise we've gotten from our CEO
officers, our firefighters, our
folks that are to some of
the toughest jobs in our county
are thankful that they have an
option, and in addition, we've
heard from the city that they
are folks are wanting to leave
to come to the county because we
have this option as an
availability. So I just think
this is important. This will
help us all, our whole state,
and this will just help us, um,
you know, streamline that um
implementation and how our HR
can work with it statewide. So
thank you for considering this
bill. I hope I plead for your
support.
And finally, we will have Mark
J.
Hello, Madam Chair and
committee. Can you hear me?
Yes, go ahead.
All right, thank you for your
time. So I'd like to uh speak
that I'm in support of House
Bill 230.
Um, like my brothers and sisters
in the room today have mentioned
it does, we do.
We do a lot for our communities
and it takes a toll on us over
time. We have these repeated
traumas over our 20 to 30 year
careers.
Some of that results in PTSD,
which is an accepted um
condition for use of medicinal
cannabis within our state.
However, we're being left behind
even though we're much more
likely as uh Miguel mentioned
earlier, 6 times more likely to
uh develop these symptoms over
our careers. However, our, based
on our employer's stances,
sometimes we're unable to have
access to this medication.
And um I feel that it would go
great.
Do, do a great service on our
state to start allowing some of
that access for, for our first
responders.
Uh, thank you.
OK, thank you. Um
I would go to represent for for
a question, but I, I do want to
say that I believe I was the
sponsor of the first time that
this came up, a firefighter
called me and said, we get PTSD,
we have physical injuries, etc.
etc. And our supervisors advise
us to use alcohol and everything
in my body said, holy moly, it's
not what it said, but that's
what I could say here. Um, so,
uh, just that, that, that's the
where this bill came from, so I
will go.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, madam chair. Just
real quick, I was wondering, I
was reading about um a cognitive
performance tests could be used,
um, the drug recognition experts
use a technique to see if
there's cannabis, active
cannabis by um checking a
person's convergence, um, when
they just have a finger and then
they
Converge their eyes, is that
considered a cognitive test.
Yes, it is, and you know, that's
uh using a drug recognition
expert is probably the best, uh,
avenue for testing for
impairment currently. Uh, we
recommended that when we were
negotiating with the county who,
uh, Vice President Hai worked
extensively on, on negotiating
the best method to to reasonably
do reasonable suspicion testing
and post accident and our first
recommendation is to use drug
recognition experts.
in coordination with a cheek
swab and also a blood test. They
are, um, they are limited or we
are limited in the amount of
DREs we have in New Mexico, it's
a pretty extensive training
process, but that's why we want
to work with the Department of
Workforce Solutions and, and,
and everybody to have the safest
and fairest way to test. OK,
go ahead. I apologize, Madam
Chair and Representative, we
also have an amendment on this
point, which I should have
mentioned, um, but that also
made further clarify.
This question.
Madam Chair, I'd like to move
the amendment.
For, for discussion, OK,
is that correct?
Yes, we can adopt the amendment
in subcommittee.
Um, so Representative, do you,
do you want to explain it or
it's very simple, and I think
for folks do folks have
questions on the amendment.
Is there, um, I will accept a
motion to adopt the amendment.
I moved
to adopt him.
Is there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have an amended
bill.
And with that,
I will, I will, you can't make
the motion represented Ferrari.
just
you just spoke. OK, so we have a
motion from Representative
Eleanor Chavez for Du pass in a
second as amended on House Bill
2:30 as amended and a second by
Representative Anaya.
Unfortunately we have lost our
quorum, so we cannot take the
vote, but what will happen is
first thing when we come in on
Friday, that's all we'll do. We
have the motion on the floor. We
will take a vote and, and I'm
sorry that we can't uh satisfy
those of you who are here, but
But you have my word that that
will be the very first thing on
Friday and we will take that
vote. So thank you all for being
here. Next, we will go to
Representative Garrett.
For House Bill 196.
And thank you all for being here
and thank you for the work that
you do.
Madam Chair, I forgot, I didn't
get to.
Tell them thank you too.
Finally, I'm sorry.
Madam Secretary, I do understand
we're all triple booked for
every hour of these times.
Uh, so Madam Chair and committee
members, um, I'm here to present
House Bill 196, it's behavior,
Health and childcare funding. My
expert witnesses, Marquita
Russell, executive director of
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, uh, House Bill 196 is
endorsed by the New Mexico
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee, it makes one time
appropriations to 3 established
New Mexico Finance Authority
programs.
Providing low cost loans to
eligible behavior health primary
care and child care service
providers and NMFE for those of
you who aren't aware it
specializes because of their
high bond rating in low cost
runs. We're talking about 3%
type interest loans. This
Uh, benefits medically,
medically underserved
communities and childcare
deserts throughout the state.
Specifically, it's 25 million
appropriated to the behavior
health Capital Fund, 25 million
appropriation to the primary
care capital fund and 10 million
appropriated to the childcare
revolving loan fund. Uh, these
programs were amended in 2023 to
expand the use of funding to
include working capital, in
addition to facility renovation,
expansion, and equipment. This
also means that the loan
can be used for salaries and
operating expenses, which is
critical to expanding these
providers in those underserved
areas altogether, these programs
have already financed 30
projects, served more than
350,000 patients and 1.4 million
visits, 80% of the services
rendered rendered were in rural
and frontier communities, and
I'm sorry that the whole
committee isn't here to hear
that. The
favorable terms offered have
allowed providers to lower
facility costs and direct
operating funds to service
expansion. These 3 programs were
capitalized with one-time
appropriations, more than 20
years ago and lacked funding to
support more projects. So this
bill creates a significant
opportunity for New Mexico
Finance Authority and the rest
of the state.
Working together with the
healthcare authority, the
Department of Health, and the
early childhood education and
care department to meet the
immediate demand for affordable
financing to expand access to
these services. It also
duplicates a special
appropriation of 10 million in
House Bill 2, and alternate to
my executive director for brief
editions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members of the
committee. So these are just a
few of the small loan programs
that the finance authority
offers, um, we are hindered in
the ability in in the fact that
we don't have a predictable
source of capital for these
critical needs, so we can't get
out and find, um, we can't help
clients uh with their
development of their projects
because they cannot rely that
the funding will be there. Um,
over time in the last, well
actually 30 years, our first
appropriation was in 1994 for
the primary care.
$5 million went in. There was
one other uh short term um
appropriation, but ultimately 9
million went into the primary
care, 9.7% was reverted.
Um, and 250,000 was put into the
childcare program and all of
that ended up, um, there was one
loan made and the rest was
reverted. So these are really
critical needs and they've just
been kind of overlooked programs
and with that, I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you. So we will go to the
uh to Zoom if you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand and I'll come back to you.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
Seeing none and seeing no hands
raised, if you are in support on
Zoom, raise your hand in the
room if you are in support,
raise your hand.
Oh, there goes your sexy
billboard.
OK, so we, um, we have Nat Dean
on Zoom. Thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee sponsors uh in
interest of brevity of time, I
stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you, Nat.
Um, so
Do you have, do you have any
response to the comments.
We can
we concur with this great film,
Madam Chair. Thank you. So are
there any questions from the
committee.
OK, Representative E Chavez uh
moves the Du pass and I need a
second Representative Kates on
the 2nd, as I said on the bill
before, we don't have a quorum,
so we will, we will take it up
again on Friday. Thank you so
much. Thank you very much thank
you for your patience,
Representative,
we love patience. Thank you.
Yeah, that's right. We, we, if
we didn't have patients here, we
would
I don't know what.
Patience and joy. We always like
having joy in the house.
So representative Doo, I, you,
you are on Zoom, I hear, so we
are ready for you.
Representative Doo, if you could
please come to room 307 ASAP.
Dow says she's almost here.
Rep uh representative that
Representative Kate's much to my
chagrin, we are going to have to
start meeting at 8, starting on
Monday because we just, we have,
we
OK.
Representative Dao, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and hi,
this is my first time for Health
and Human Services and I see a
lot of people who are advocating
for great stuff. What I have
before you today is, woo, I came
up the stairs.
Ah
It has been decades since New
Mexico looked at our tax credit
for families who are adopting
right now we have a very, very
narrow scope. It is only for
Families who adopt a child with
special needs.
And it's been that way.
Since the late 70s, so this bill
expands that.
To include all families who
adopt and goes from 1500 to
7500.
And
One of the things that's
important about this is that for
every child who's available for
adoption, we have 35 families
waiting to adopt. There are a
lot of
families waiting to adopt, and
we'd like to help them out in
New Mexico and definitely as one
of our packages for supporting
healthy families, we should
include the ability to adopt and
support families who choose to
do so.
And I, that's it.
Hey, thank you.
Brevity is much appreciated. If
there's anyone on Zoom in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and I will come back to
you in the room in opposition.
All 7 of you.
Maybe 8, seeing none, seeing no
hands, if you are in support,
please raise your hand on Zoom
and I will come back to you uh
in the room and support.
You lost your award too,
representative, sorry. OK, so we
will, um,
Did I go to the room? OK.
That it takes a village to, to
raise the chair, um.
Jodie Hendricks, go ahead.
Thank you, Chairperson and
members of the committee, uh,
today I urge you to support
House Bill 207, because every
child deserves a loving home,
and every family who steps up to
adopt deserves our support.
Adoption is a life changing
decision, but the financial cost
can be a major obstacle. This
bill removes barriers by
expanding the adoption tax
credit to all adoptions, not
just special needs cases. It
also raises the credit to 7000,
which helps families provide
stable
n ur t ur ing homes for children
in need. This bill is a common
sense pro-family solution. More
families will be empowered to
adopt, more children will find
permanent homes and New Mexico
will take a stand for thriving
families. So committee members,
I ask you to vote yes on House
Bill 207. By doing so, you'll
help children find their forever
homes and their forever families
and strengthen the future of New
Mexico. Let's stand for thriving
families, and let's pass this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Nat Dean.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, sponsors, I
would be there in person if I
could, but you won't see me in
the building for quite some
time, but I stand in support of
this for all of the reasons that
have already been stated. Thank
you.
Thank you. Are there questions
from the committee
representative Ferrari, followed
by Cates. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative, um.
The
First, um,
Incentive credit was to
encourage people to adopt
children with disabilities. If
we have this overall for our all
children.
How will we incentivize children
with disabilities to have, you
know, that extra.
Um, incentive.
Well, Madam Chair and
Representative Ferfari, I don't,
I, I would say that I don't
think it's disincentivizes.
But now that we know about
adverse childhood experiences
and how much children go
through. I think that every
child has needs that are
special, whether those have been
identified, whether they've been
old enough to have an IEP and I
would assume that the, that the
definition of special needs
children could be expanded not
to diminish someone with an IEP
or a diagnosed special needs,
maybe medically fragile or
something, but all of these
children waiting to be adopted,
there's a reason why they're
available, and I, I don't think
it's a disincentive.
Madam Chair and Representative,
is there a way to keep that.
Um, extra.
Um
Incentive and credit. Madam
Chair and Representative, I've
thought about so many different
ways to do this. And, um, I
mean, I'd be open to anything
that you guys would suggest. I
even thought like,
Should we take the lead on this
and say take it out of the early
childhood fund, you know, like,
what do we need to do? And I
know it was introduced the last
60 day session and it didn't get
past the tax committee. I think
you all voted for it, um, but it
didn't get in, uh,
Representative Hernandez had it,
but it didn't, it didn't get
past the tax committee, so I
want to keep this conversation
alive and I'm open to what any
suggestion that you have to do
so. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I'll talk to
some of our advocates and see if
they feel like that's something
necessary. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, uh,
representative on that since we
are increasing the one for
children without defined special
needs. Um, would you be amenable
to we're increasing it fivefold.
Would you be amenable to a um
Amending your bill to take the
special needs tax credit to
fivefold.
Madam Chan representative, if,
if we want to have a reasonable
fiscal impact report, and we
really want this to move
forward, I would even reduce the
amount for non-special needs
children and increase the amount
for special needs children.
We, whatever we need to do. OK,
that, that's my suggestion, um,
just so that we keep, we keep,
uh, we as a mom who raised a
child with a with a serious
special need, it's uh, if you
haven't done it, you have no
idea what it is.
So I have to tell you, when you
sat on the floor that your son
told you he was happy.
That, that meant a lot.
Thank you.
Represent
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward. I realized that
you weren't and you might have
already answered this, really
you weren't here last year as a
representative, but is this
similar to the bill that
Representative Fernandez brought
forth last year.
Madam Chair representative, it
is similar. It's not exactly the
same.
OK, thank you very much and
thank you for bringing it
forward again. Um, I did support
that bill last year. Um, I don't
know why it failed in the tax
committee. I would, um,
respectfully ask you to consider
to make a $5000 tax credit for
all children, whether they have
disabilities or not. Um, and,
um, my only issue with 7500 is
that if I'm adopting children, I
probably don't have.
income I need a $7500 tax.
Uh, break for. So, um, uh,
that's but the the most
certainly that 5 to 7500 would
be very um helpful and I
appreciate you thinking about.
Ways and where we can engage our
adoption program. So thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I'll also um get an amendment
for to make sure it's
refundable.
OK. Any other questions? OK, I
will accept a motion.
Rips and Kate's can't.
I'll make, I, you can't.
No, we, we make a motion and so
when we come back into full
committee with the quorum, we
will just have to vote. The, the
motion is done.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I'm if I
don't go to the bottom of the
list, I am happy to work with
Ferrari to get the changes and
make the amendments before the
next committee.
Um, that, that is totally up to
you, but I will tell you, um,
that it, it will, it will slow
this bill down to have to have
her come back, and it will
increase the workload of this
committee. So we could get from
the representative, a promise
that she will make, she will
work with folks on this
committee to make changes before
the next committee.
Thank you, ma'am, dear. I'll
move to um uh
a pass.
Do I have a second?
Do we have a second?
I was 2.
OK, so we can't take the boat
because we don't have a quorum,
so we will, we will add that to
our list of first things to do
on Friday, and oh, we made it.
