Representative Senna Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
here we have a quorum. Thank
you, Karen. So we will start
with welcome Senator, to um to
the house side.
Thank you, Madam Chair.buos Dia
singi tamu, good morning. Um,
you have in front of you Senate
Bill 199, and so this is a local
DWA grant program bill. And so
for those of you who don't know
the program's mission is to
reduce the incidence of DWI DWI
alcoholism.
um alcohol abuse and
alcohol-related domestic
violence across the state,
utilizing current tax revenues.
Now the DWI program is currently
funded at 45% of the liquor
excise tax revenues, and it's
distributed to every one of your
counties. As a matter of fact,
it's distributed to every county
in the state of New Mexico. So
all 33 counties benefit from
this program.
And and it happens in 3 forms.
One is the distribution of
funds, which are provided
quarterly. The second is uh
competitive grants awarded
through application processes
and work as reimbursables, and 2
is I'll call it detoxification
grants, which also operate on a
reimbursable basis. Now what
this bill does, Madam Chair, is
it allows for the reallocation
of these tax dollars, roughly
637% of possible return on
investment by providing
technical assistance and grant
support directly in.
of placing the administration
burden on the county. So this is
a win for every single one of
our counties in Ria Riba, we
work with the Rock Stop program,
which reaches out to elementary,
middle, and high school
students. It works with those
who are recovering from
alcoholism, and it's having a
major impact in my county, and
I'm sure every one of your
counties is doing something
equally impactful,
redistribution of the available
funds from GFA would provide our
communities with funds to assist
in community wellness and
outreach programs, such as
prevention activities, and an
example would be teen court and
law enforcement. Now I do have
my house sponsored with me this
morning, who's representative
Brown, not too sure if she'd
like to say a few words and have
an expert witness with me in
case I need her for some
questions. Representative.
We're learning Mike etiquette
here in the roundhouse, it
seems, but um, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I'm
very pleased to be um on the
team trying to pass this bill.
Um, as the senator mentioned, I
think he gave a great summary.
Um, it's been 22 years since we
um gave additional money for
administrative purposes to DFA
to the uh local DI program, um,
all 33 counties do have a DWI
program, I think the beauty of
this bill is it would take, as
the senator said, some of the
administrative burden off of the
county programs.
And uh I think would also give
Uh, more of a broad view of
programs across the state so
they can share best practices,
best ideas.
Um, I, um, I think this is a, a
win for everybody, even though
the amount of the local grants
would decrease, not
significantly, but a little bit,
uh, what they would get back and
return in terms of guidance,
support, oversight and
evaluation, I think would be
very beneficial for, for every
single program. So, um, thank
you very much for uh the time to
speak.
Thank you.
Excuse me, we will go to the
audience if you are in
opposition on Zoom, raise your
hand.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, see none either place on
Zoom if you're in support, raise
your hand in the room if you're
in support. Raise your hand.
If you'd like to speak, you can
come to the center.
OK, I guess it's Monday morning
for all of us.
Monday morning with the time
change,
yeah. True enough, true enough.
So I that I I will go to the
Audi. I mean, no.
I almost said the staff, the
committee, so I've represented
Ferrari.
OK, go ahead, representative.
Uh, thank you, um,
representative and um.
I um said, oh, I'm sorry, my
contacts are still foggy. Thank
you. Um.
I agree with uh DFA getting more
funding and but my concern is
when.
Uh, the
Hopefully, DWI the.
Uh, alcohol harms alleviation
will increase the funding that
goes to DFA to counties and to
um Indian Affairs division, um,
how will this, um,
Be resolved, do you think?
Between the two bills.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
um representative Ferry, thank
you for that question. My name
is Cecilia Mavramatis, and I am
the local government division
director at DFA and for all
intents and purposes a fund
change um through an
administrative function at the
agency is not something that is
incredibly technical and doesn't
really need to be revisited.
However, what would happen is
the agency would go back
sometime during June, um, we'll
make the request to change.
Program names to update the
system so that it accounts
appropriately. If there's a
statute that directs the fund to
DFA, um, regardless of what the
old name is, what the new name
is, that fund will still get to
DFA and we'll just have to work
on that in an administrative end
through financial control and
our controller's office.
Uh, Madameier and, uh, madam
secretary, um, are the other
bill has just 1 million, um,
this would be 1.1. Would you be
able to qualify for the 1.1.
funding.
Madam Chair and representative.
I think both of them are a
positive increase to the DWI
grant program at DFA. The there
are differences between hospital
for 17, which is I think what
we're referring to for the
alcohol harms alleviation tax,
and this one,
however, both are, are, are net
positive to the fund overall.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you secretary.
like make a motion for.
For do pass?
So we have a due pass on.
Senate Bill 199, and the second.
Did you get, OK, OK. Uh, is
there any opposition?
OK, seeing then you have a due
pass. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you.
And how
I will, senator, I will.
And next we have house Bill 551
Healthcare Authority debt
procedures with uh
representative Zamora.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
I think we're all on the same
page with the time changes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee this morning we have
House Bill 551.
In front of us, it relating to
gaming amending requirements and
procedures for liens on winnings
for debt owed to collect it or
collected.
By the healthcare authority.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee as as we go forward
and debate this bill, we'll find
out that it's about.
People who go to the
Casinos and and they went over
$1200 and they haven't paid
their child support.
And uh collections will be made
on that money so that it'll go
to the right places up in the
most vulnerable in the state of
New Mexico. And with that, Madam
Chair, I'll have my expert
witness introduce themselves.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Michelle
Pato. I'm staff counsel for the
gaming control board.
chair members, good morning. My
name is Pat Garrett. I'm the
chairman for the gaming control
board.
And Madam Chair, with that will
stand for questions.
I will turn on my mike first.
OK, so if you are in opposition
on Zoom, raise your hand.
And I'll come back to you,
anyone in the room in office ca
seeing none in support on Zoom,
raise your hand, supporting the
room.
we don't have the exciting bills
this morning.
And I don't see anyone on Zoom
either, so questions from the
committee representative
N Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I think
this is a great bill. Thank you
for bringing it forward. My only
question is, is it only gonna
target child support or are
there any other kind of debts
that this would target as well.
Madam Charlotte, my expert.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
currently this only targets
child support, um, it is
something that's required by
federal law at this point that
we address this, um, so.
This is what all that it's
handling.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, those are all
the questions.
Thank you, Representative each
of us.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. How are
you gonna know?
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
sorry. How are you gonna know?
Um, if they hit a payout, um,
usually in the casinos, and the
way this works is once a payout
is above a certain amount, um,
the opera, the casino operators
are informed and they have to
manually pay those out. Um, they
have, we have a computer system
where these names are entered
into, um, they match that with
the name, um, of the person who
presents their ID for the
payout.
Um, and if there's a match that
they are um in arrears on child
support that that list is
provided by the healthcare
authority, um, and they're
really the ones kind of
maintaining that and we're
working in conjunction with them
to do this, um, so when that
happens, the payout is then held
by the operator and the
healthcare authority is
notified, um, and any child
support, um,
Arrears are taken out of that.
So Madam Chair, representative,
are they, do they have to pay
taxes on those winnings.
Madam Chair Representative,
there is a threshold amount for
taxes as well, um, with regard
to this bill because it is a
child support enforcement lien,
um, the money is just held for
purposes of paying that um
delinquent child support.
Madam Chair Representative, then
they would not be the winner
would not be liable for taxes on
that money.
Correct.
I believe so, Madam Chair
Representative.
So if Madam Chair
Representative, if I can correct
myself, um, they would be liable
for taxes, just not liable for.
OK, so if they owed $600 they
would have to pay taxes on 600.
It depends on how much they owed
in child support at that point.
The child support withholdings
would not be taxed, but the
winnings would be taxed, so
anything they took remaining
from their winnings would be
taxed.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I will entertain
emotion, so much.
Second, OK, so we have a motion
by Representative Senator Cortez
in a second by Representative
Kates. Is there any opposition?
Seeing then you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
OK, next we go to House Bill
555.
Representative Henry or Block?
Not seeing either one.
Please.
OK, um,
Uh, Representative Jones, why
don't you go ahead, since we
have um
We don't like to waste time in
this committee, whoever's here
gets heard.
570, so we're going to a House
Bill 570. 0.
Close, come on out.
Sorry, Representative Jones,
just a hair. It was a photo
finish.
Good morning. Go ahead. Good
morning, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, uh, committee. Uh, I'm here
to present, uh, House Bill 555,
really the only thing that we're
changing within this is we are
adding on um.
Letter C just that all licenses
have a picture ID with them.
And with that, I can stand for
questions. Thank you. Um, so we
will go to the audience if you
are on Zoom in opposition. Raise
your hand. Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, seeing none, the people are
tired or we're getting
Agreeable bills, um, in support
on Zoom, raise your hand.
In supporting the room.
If you'd like to speak, come to
the center.
And we'll go back to Karen on
Zoom after this.
Morning man two members of the
committee, and Kevin Graham, I'm
the chief general counsel for
the state regulation and
licensing department and the
massage therapy licensing board
is an administratively attached
board to the regulation and
licensing department, the
regulation licensing department
is in support of House Bill 555.
Uh, we have a bill in the Senate
as an agency bill, Senate Bill
203, which actually goes a
little further, it adds uh
photos to the licenses as
required here, but we also
establish uh licensing for the
establishment.
the businesses themselves, the
locations, and so we have the
same language in that bill as
well, but we're in support of
this bill and also hopefully
you'll support send about 2 or 3
as well. Thank you.
Thank you for um the update,
we'll go to Zoom Karen.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I just
wanted to comment that I am in
full support of this bill to
have a picture, uh, for this
very necessary service for so
many in the disability
community. Thank you.
Karen, could you please
introduce yourself for the
record.
Apologies, Karen Kushner.
Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, so we will go to the
committee, any questions?
OK, so Representative Senator
Cortez and um.
Each of us. Go ahead,
Representative Senator.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think this is a a brilliant
idea, but I was just curious as
I was reading the bill this
morning, Madam Chair
Representative, is it because
there's been a rise in like the
illegitimate businesses that do
the happy endings.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
one of the big reasons, um, I
actually attended uh a human
trafficking type uh.
So uh, what's the word I'm
looking for?
Uh, seminar thanks something,
yes, there was a group of folks,
and we were talking about this.
Uh, this is one of the ideas
that the massage therapist group
came up with that would really
help us with those pop-up
massage parlors, uh, I know in
Artesia, one of our big things
is you can present a license,
but that doesn't always mean
that's who that person is once
you go into the business and so
it was suggested, uh, you know,
barbers, cosmopolismetologists,
I don't know how to say that
word.
manicurist electronic, a lot of
body artists all have to have
their picture ideas just to let
you know as a consumer, I guess,
as to whom that person is and
make sure that the picture
matches. So it's to try to help
us make sure that as we go into
those businesses where they
apply for a business license
that's actually the person who
is is gonna be doing that.
That's why we, that's why we
turn them off before we move
them because Representative each
of us,
um, Madam Chair, my question was
answered.
OK, I will entertain emotions
in a second.
So we have a motion from
Representative Senator Cortez
and the second from
representative Anaya on House
Bill 555. Is there any
opposition?
Hey, sing none, you have a pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know
Taraza is coming up pretty
quick. Perfect. Never mind, I
was gonna call him.
He's stalking you.
OK, so, um, house Bill 561.
Excuse me, Representative
Therasas, whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, members of the
committee, um,
House Bill 561.
Is that OK? It's loud. House
Bill 561 is basically uh 2, a
couple of years ago, we ran into
a situation where, um,
Temporary housing for migrant
workers was an issue in Donana
County. Uh, basically, for years
before that and in every other
county to my knowledge, uh, H2
worker housing is reviewed by
Workforce Solutions.
And for some reason, the, the
new um code enforcement officer
decided that they needed to
review those themselves and
since we, the state of New
Mexico, we don't have a um
temporary housing exemption.
They defaulted to multi-family
dwelling, uh, um.
Regulations.
Now, uh,
I have, I don't, I looked at my
the the FIR and I, I need to
talk to them because it's not
exactly uh accurate. I think
that I was sick on on Saturday
and I wish I could reached out
to to update that, but I've got
a letter here from Boianna
County, where they had, we had
been going back and forth, Madam
Chair, uh, and, uh, by the way,
uh, Representative Jones was
there with me, with other, uh,
another senator, representative,
looking over the.
situation
and basically all this has to do
is if you want to most of you
probably don't know what an H2A
housing or, or a worker is. It's
basically a migrant worker that
comes over to work the fields
and so forth.
And before they're accepted,
to come to work
Um, the person that is hiring
must
show that they have housing for
them.
And again, I'm gonna go back
Workforce solutions generally
goes in. They check to make sure
that the federal regulations are
all followed, and then after
that, they, they get that check
mark, and they can bring them
in. As we know, um, uh, anytime
we're working on in, in, in army
and that type of situation.
Time is over the essence, so
these, these workers sometimes
need to be able to get all their
paperwork and housing, all taken
care of before, uh, so that they
can still make it in time to
harvest the crops. I'll stand
for questions. I'm sure you'll
ask me some.
I
I think you may have opened the
Pandora's box. Um, so first we
will go to the audience, if you
are on Zoom in opposition,
please raise your hand. Anyone
in the audience in opposition.
See none in support on Zoom,
raise your hand.
In supporting the room.
You'd like to speak, you can
come to the center.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Travis
Day, registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Chile Association, we
do stand in strong support of
House Bill 561. Of course, our
industry relies pretty heavily
on the H-2A program to get our
crops out of the field, um, and
with that, you know, we have to
follow all the federal standards
that are outlined within the
H-2A program, including the
housing component. I mean these
housing requirements do create a
very comfortable living
conditions for our migrant
workers, um, and, you know, we
believe that the federal
standard should be.
the standard in New Mexico and
this should not be piecemeal
county by county. And so for
that reason, we do ask you to
support the bill. Thank you.
OK, on Zoom we have Victoria.
Victoria, unmute yourself,
please.
Go ahead.
Victoria, please go ahead.
I'm assuming there are some
technical difficulties
somewhere, so we're gonna skip
over you, Victoria. I'm sorry,
um, so we will go to the
committee for questions, and I
have representative.
Eleanor Chavez.
Representative Jones,
Kate.
Anaya Ferrari.
OK, so go ahead representative
Eleanor Chavez. Thank you. um
madam chair, so my first
question has to do with um
housing standards. So can you
tell me what and and someone who
who um stood up, um, in support
of the bill, basically said that
the standards vary from county
to county. My understanding is
that the state has standards,
the federal government has
standards.
So how are the two different
standards different.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative Charles was,
what, what is going on is
actually the Federals, the
federal standards are here. I've
got a whole list of what they
are, and it basically comes to
square footage, uh, uh, livable
space for each migrant worker,
OK? Uh, beyond that, you have to
have
Obviously, you're heating,
cooling your, um, uh, stoves and
refrigerators, and it's all
based on occupancy.
For migrant workers, it, it's 50
square feet per migrant on the
the federal standards.
Donia County is the only county
that came in, and I think they
just had a a vote enforcement
officer. I went back and forth
with the, the county manager and
he says, at least until we get
um uh an exemption, we're gonna
follow state, um, the state
statutes, which on a
multi-family dwelling unit,
it's, it's completely different.
He says the standards would be
um lowered if they're all
related. So if all the migrant
workers are related, then you
can stay there, but if they're
not related.
Then you fall into, I think here
it says 200 square feet per per
occupant.
For years and years and years,
and in every other county around
there, they follow the federal
standards for years and years
and years work for solutions
would come and measure and
verify that they were following
the federal standards. That's
the way the program, if you read
in the FIR, that's why they say
that there's no additional money
because that's necessary to
to um have this program uh
worked on by the state of Mexico
because it's already been done
that way and it's been
It's the way it's been working,
all except for the last couple
of years, we got a new code
enforcement officer. So
The, the, the standards are, are
what, what, what they're the
chili farmers and all the other
farmers are saying they want the
whole the same standards for
every county.
All 32, all 33 should be the
same, 32 are following this,
except for one. So we just wanna
get it, get an exemption to just
follow the federal standards so
that every farmer has those
regulations, it should go
through Workforce Solutions
where they can come through and
verify the verify that the
regulations and get that check
mark so that they can just move
on and take care of business.
OK, so,
So Madam Chair, representative
then it sounds like the state
standard is higher than the
federal standard, is that what
you're saying? Madam Chair,
Travis Day is here. He's
probably a better expert. I
mean, this is, this is what they
do deal with, uh, day to day if
you'd like to get, have them
come up, he could probably
better explain it than I am.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members Committee, um,
Representative Chavez, you were
correct. The state is more
stringent on the multi-family
housing, um, in this case, um,
Dongani County came and said,
that's what we have to fall to,
because we don't have anything
in there local codes that would,
you know, specifically for
migrant worker housing. So
that's what they defaulted to,
um, and again, the way the
situation kind of worked if, you
know, you look at Sierra County
and Donana County, if you have
a house on the Sierra County
side, they're being held to that
federal standard. And if you can
go 100 ft on the Doneni County
side and have a migrant worker
house that is falling under the
multi-family housing that the
county is using, and that has a
stringent, more stringent
requirements, so we're really
just looking for a little bit
consistency, so our folks who in
some cases have housing in
Sierra County, Luna County, and
Donna County have some
consistency on how they manage
their workforce and their
housing for their workforce. So
if we
were to pass this bill.
We would fall under the state
standards, I mean the federal
standards.
And we all know what's happening
at the federal level.
In terms of
It's not getting better.
Getting worse.
And I, my concern would be that
the federal government would do
away with any kind of housing
standards for migrant workers.
I have been
To migrant camps. It's been,
it's been a while.
The housing isn't all that
great.
Um, and my workers are often the
most abused workers in this
country.
So that would be my concern.
Ma, Madam Chair, um, uh, uh
representative Chavez.
I actually toured some of these
facilities.
I was shocked at how nice they
were.
Represents walk in, we all went,
this is, this is nice housing.
So I, I'm not sure what your
experience and where you
experienced that, um, but the
space that is, that is, um, I
don't think.
I mean, I can't perceive what
the administration is going to
change to make it work, you
know, worse, um, all I can say
is that the, the requirements of
space, and so forth are set in,
are set in federal standards.
They've been working for years.
I walked into one of the
facilities myself, a couple of
facilities actually with
Representative Jones and others,
and we were, we were actually
surprised not only the
conditions of the inside, but
the outside of the of the
facilities for seemed like they
were landscaped and everything.
I was like, wow, this is pretty
nice. I would have thought it
was a regular family home and
been converted. So, I mean, I'm
not, again, I don't know how
long ago that was that you went.
I just went a couple, uh, it's
been about.
1818 months or so that I went,
and I, they were very nice. And
so what we're trying to do is,
we're trying to just make sure
that all these uh agricultural
workers and their, their
employers.
Or have one standard.
Federal standard, it's, it's not
a bad standard. I, I can tell
you that, um, because I, I
walked in and that was during
the Biden administration, and I
don't think that there's,
there's been any changes to my
knowledge at all, uh, in making
those, I don't, I don't know why
they would make them.
Take a stove away or a
refrigerator way or lockers, it
doesn't make sense to me. So,
the standards are pretty basic
and, and, but they're nice.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative.
There's lots of things that are
going on in this administration
that that scare me. Um, and if
our state standards are higher,
I would, I would rather be under
the state standards and under
the federal government at this
point in time. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Tarassis and
Travis, appreciate you being
here.
How long have these H2A
standards been in place.
Many, many years. I have no
idea.
Early she says early 2000s, over
20 years. So Madam Chair
Representative, so during the
last Trump administration, we
have the same standards for
housing for H-2A workers. I
would say before that
administration also I don't
uh chair so regardless of who is
in office, Madam Chair
Representative, the standards
have remained the same. Madam
Chair Representative, there have
been no changes in the last 20
plus years I have known, we
haven't had any, anything like
that.
Again, it's not that the housing
standards are better the state.
It's just the, the, the
occupancy levels.
are different.
And so it's, we're now gonna
start having checkerboarding
problems.
And so like um my expert
workness witness just said, you,
you can be in this county and
this one and they're following
the federal standards, you go
across the street one block
over, patch is a perfect
example. I mean, it's
Get up. So now he's, you go
right next door and then it's
Because we don't have anything
in statute that says.
That we have an exemption for
this situation.
Um, because they're only there
for a few months. I, I believe
they work about 150 days.
150 days, they work and, and so,
um, there, and the only reason
that they provide those house,
the housing is because if they
can't go home on the same day.
Then the, the uh farmers
required to provide housing.
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, I appreciate
that description and very
familiar with this situation
since I am from the agricultural
community right next door, Lu
County. We've not had that
problem, and that I'd like to um
just add a little to the picture
by describing what happened
because of the shutdowns of
those, those, um,
H2A housing.
That met federal standards.
If I remember right, there were
a lot of people in Mexico who
were very upset because they
couldn't, they couldn't get
work. They, they come every
year, they have relationships
with the farmers, um, they're
expecting to come back and live
in the same place they've been
living, some for 56 years. I, I
spoke with a farmer last night
about that, Madam Chair,
representative, and so this is
um
It's, it's not a um
It's, it's not just a
A government standard that is
imposed uh that doesn't affect
people intimately, um.
The crops are in the field, the
workers don't have, they're not
getting their paycheck. It
affected everybody.
Very negatively to have this
happen, so I think it's really
important that we have this bill
even though it's a small bill,
pretty straightforward. We need
to have that standardized
federal standard that we work
with, um, so that we don't have
people on both sides, employers,
employees hurting because of a
misunderstanding, basically. So
I'd appreciate the bill and very
supportive of it. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative.
Thank you, Nick, we have
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for bringing this forward.
Um,
Does this housing uh affects
what we refer to as man camps
for oil and gas or construction
work is also temporary, uh,
pneumatic workers as well.
Only if they're on the H-2A
program now.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. The
the H2A is a not for
agriculture.
I don't know.
Think out of chairing
representative KH trade program
is specific to the agricultural
workforce, um, that works
primarily in the field, even a
lot of our chili processors
can't use H-2A workers because
they're specified to in the
field work.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you representative. So there's a
that that is under a different
housing standard the man camps
are. Um, can, are you, uh, and
I'm, I'm sorry, so sorry, but
this is how the processes I have
to ask you. So, previously the
representative said that
She was aware of negative
impacts because of the
checkerboard as you refer to its
standard, you know, each county
having a different standard.
If
It's the housing currently is
that state standards, which is
above federal standards.
What kind of negative impact is
that for the workers. So Madam
Chair.
I think what, let me explain
something, OK? For years, Madam
Chair, they were under, they've,
they've just been following the
federal standards.
For years.
Be like you, you, you, you get
licensed to drive a car, and
you're always following the
standards and then all of a
sudden somebody else turns
around and says, no, we have
different standards for you
overnight. And that's what
changed.
It's not that the farmers
changed.
They have, I think,
representative, uh, Jones, Madam
Chair, expressed herself in in
saying that both sides, these
are, these are relationships.
They're not just, I mean, I know
that on the news you watch some
things and whatever, but you
know on the ground.
My father is an immigrant
himself.
And we, they have relationships
with agricultural farmers.
Um, and ranchers.
And have and, and so there's
always gonna be a bad story out
there, I'm sure.
But it realistically, Madam
Chair, Representative, they come
back and forth to work for the
same farmers, the standards were
all the same federally, OK? We
had a new
Code enforcement officer that
decided to to to be a part of
this uh part of this process to
work for solutions, we're gonna
look at this and decided to say,
no, well, we can't find anything
in statute, so we're gonna
default to our our uh counting
standards. I'm so sorry. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and, and thank
you. Let, let me start the
conversation again.
I support your bill in
principle, most certainly. I'm
still making the decision on my
vote, but I very much support
your bill in principle. I like
standardizations. I appreciate
that. I don't.
I'm not, I'm not projecting that
some housing is bad and somehow
I am trying to project that.
If I, if, if we have somebody
who's interpreting our standards
and we don't have federalism. I
have two questions. Somebody's
interpreting
our and it no longer following
the federal standards, but say
no, the way our laws are written
is we get to make individual
county standards. I'm wondering
how has that negatively impact
the farm worker. OK. I'll, I'll
go ahead. I understand that
negatively impacts.
In the business of being able to
hold things that consistently,
hey, this is the housing I've
had for years and now I have to
change it. But how is it
negatively impacting, I would
say, and then I'll let the
expert witness answer, if they
have a, a, a building that is
Following the federal standards
for the occupancy rates of, of
following those.
And they have placed all these
applications and so forth and
told workers A through Z, you're
gonna come to work. We've got
you on order, same housing
you've had before, and this
county comes in and says all of
a sudden, we can't find any, any
regulations that allow us to do
this to work by default, we're
just gonna default to to the
other other standards.
It caused them not to be able to
come to work on time.
Um, possibly there, the farmer,
not to harvest their crops on
time, and how are you gonna
create housing that fast, and so
it caused, it caused a lot of
issues like that. I let my, my,
um.
I'm so sorry to interrupt. I
just want to clarify, so you're
saying that
Because that happened, you may
had to have found housing
further away from the farm and
it became more difficult to move
your workforce. OK, here's my
other question is what do other
states have. Do other states
have this law that you are
presenting in front of us in a
bill for stating that we will
only remain at the federal
level.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
represent cases to try to answer
your first question, then I'll
move, move in your second, kind
of what happened in this
situation is we had a farmer who
could house 50, you know,
migrant workers and whenever
Donanai came down and changed to
that multi-housing standard
where it really doubled the
occupancy um requirements that
worker who was already in the
process of getting their
contracts completed, was told.
I can only now house half of the
workforce that I had in previous
years, and so it was either rely
on half the workforce to get the
same amount of work done or be
able to find housing elsewhere.
And so that's kind of where
that, that issue came up. Um, to
answer your second question, um,
I mean, the H2 or the H3 program
is a federal program, and they
do fall under those federal
housing standards, so a lot of
states, even under the H-2B
program, which is another kind
of migrant worker program that's
used a lot in Georgia and other,
other states. They do fall
within that federal housing
standard.
that is set by Department of
Labor.
And, and thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm so sorry, but so what do
other states do? So a lot of
other states fall under that
federal standard housing
standard. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, so they don't
have a current log that is
saying that they will have their
own states Madam Chair
Representative Kates, and that's
what the state was doing. So the
process is before what happened
to Donani County. Workforce
Solutions oversees the H-2A
program for New Mexico, and so
they were actually going in
making sure that these houses
met that federal standards and
Representative process that they
approved it, gave him the check
box, and moved forward with it.
It really wasn't until 2 years
ago that um Don Anti County kind
of moved in and went to that
multi-housing standard Thank you
very much, and, and, and, and
expert witness and Madam Chair.
So yes, in our analysis, it does
say that the federal standards,
you can have 50 individuals in a
bunkhouse by the Federal
standards and if you go to a
multi-family unit that's gonna
be much smaller and break break
up um a much smaller than. So
that it's just that was not
clearly stated, so thank you.
OK, Next we have Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. A couple of
questions um that I also just
wanted to clarify.
You have Department of Labor
regulating housing, and then you
have multi-family housing. From
my understanding of the
conversation so far. If we made
an exemption.
It would mean that the workers
could receive.
A lesser amount of space being
Essentially, uh, lower quality
of housing. Is that correct,
Madam Cha representative. Madam
Chair Representative, I just to
clarify, um, it's 50 square foot
per sleeping space, 100 square
foot for occupant. Um, it kind
of came in and actually doubled
that. So it's a 100 square foot
for occupant, and then a lot of
times our members of our
industry do exceed that. Thank
you, Madam, I, I'm vaguely
familiar with H-2A programs, um,
generally speaking.
Um, my understanding of H2A
programs is that the reason we
have this type of um worker
status is to make sure that
folks aren't taking advantage
of.
Um, but that they are supposed
to receive equal treatment as,
as if they were citizens here in
the US working, right? And am I
right on that, uh, Madamarian
representative.
Me chair representative, that,
that is correct. Um, in fact,
the the H2A program, our farmers
have to pay for transportation
to the country, they have to
provide meals and then also um
any medical expenses and, and
again, I just want to reiterate
that our members really do go
above and beyond during during
Thanksgiving and other holidays,
they do provide, you know,
really nice meals for, for these
workers and so they even a lot
of times go above and beyond a
lot of those requirements and
and do treat them really like
just domestic workers. I mean,
and family in a lot of cases.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and the reason I
ask this is because that was my
understanding as well that the
reason for this particular visa
was to treat them as if they
were any other worker, um, here
in the United States. And I'm
wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, do we have
Um, because, um, other workers
who are here in our country who
are citizens who are working um
Uh, agriculture.
Would they fall under the
federal regulation or
multi-family housing if they
didn't have this particular
visa.
Mad I'm sure, can you clarify
you're talking domestic workers.
So the reality is the domestic
workforce for agriculture's
really doesn't exist, and then
that's why we do have to rely on
H2A, um, but in that case, the
farmer is not required to house
any domestic workers where they
are under the age-2A program and
then so, you know, even though
they are treated very similar in
cases, even as far as pay, um,
right now, H2A is paying $17.03
an hour for domes for migrant
workers and under
The program they're required to
bring their domestic workers up
to that same pay scale as well.
Um, but there's no requirement
to house or or really feed any
of the domestic workers because
they're not a part of an H-2A
program.
Madam Chair Representative, one
of one point of confusion to me
is.
The fact that we have state
standards and you're talking
about the checkerboard, why are
those checkerboard places not
following state standards. Madam
Chair, Representative, what's
going on is this a multi-family
dwelling unit was actually for
rental, like a duplex.
That's what's throwing us all
off.
And so they're just, all they're
doing is defaulting to what the
county said they're just
defaulting to what they have.
Um, on the books.
Because they, we don't have an
exemption like other states.
That's what the county manager,
we went back and forth. I have
emails from them. That was, that
was the only problem they had
because we wanted, we wanna
follow that standard, but we
don't show anything that says
that we can follow that
standard. So, um, we're just,
since
This happened to me, madam
chair, many years ago when I was
gonna build a, a, a car wash and
you just say, what does that
have to do with it?
What happens is when you have
land use codes that aren't,
don't have a uh a, a direction
for each and every situation.
They default to something
similar.
So, for instance, in I had a car
wash and they, I was building a
car wash and they said, well, we
don't have any we don't have any
land use code specific uh
regulations specific to uh this
type of car wash. So we're gonna
go ahead and put you on a
drive-through lane. And I said,
what does that mean? We're gonna
put you like at McDonald's,
there, there's gonna be 8 spaces
that you have to have for each
stall where you wash your car.
And I said, why are you doing
that? And I, I'm not, I'm just
trying to explain. She, well, we
don't have any.
Legislation we're just gonna get
something that really you into
something that's similar. And
that's what's happening here.
Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative, um, the reason
I'm kind of going down this path
as well is because why wouldn't
we make it a state standard to
have better standards for
workers across the board if we
wanted to get rid of the
checkerboard.
Oh, representative. I, I don't
think that the standards are
bad.
It's just the standards are
different when you're gonna,
when you're gonna create a
multi-family dwelling unit.
That's a, that's a um.
That's a rental, like a duplex,
like, so you're building a whole
apartment complex, and I don't
think that it's.
Feasible for them to have an
apart apartment complex is set
aside or just farm workers for
150 days.
I don't, so they this is
temporary housing.
For a short period of time.
Imagine if you're a farmer and
you've got to build this whole
complex based on these
standards.
To, to, to, how's your workers,
and you can't, you, you either
have to have people rent.
The other 9 months, somehow and
move out, or you only use them
for those 3 months.
And that's why it's not
practical. So what they do is
they're just having
The these standards are, are
done not just in, you know, it
not current, not just currently
in our state.
But 32 counties out in New
Mexico and including every other
uh state that uses the H-2A
program. It's just this one
county that's we, we've had a
situation.
Madam Chair Representative, I
just have one more question. It
seems as if we do have a county
who is able to successfully, um,
house workers in this way, and
so to me it doesn't seem like
it's unfeasible by any means,
but Madam Chair Representative,
my last question, um, is if I'm
not mistaken, um.
Workers under the H-2A program
often stack, um, their jobs one
right after the other, um,
depending on the season and the
types of crops that are growing.
Madam Chair Representative, is
that correct?
Um
And I'm sure to your first
statement that this is, this is
working because it's in Donana,
you know, their, their
standards, all that's happening
is they're just moving them into
another county, and the, and the
workers themselves sometimes,
not all the times, have to
travel further just to come to
work, to and from work.
So to me, it's, it's harder if
you're working in, in the Donana
Field and the housing that they
have is in Luna County.
Or in Sierra County, and now
you're having to travel another
hour one way just to go to and
from work, uh, even though they
have to house them, when they
could just have the same
standard in in Donana. I don't,
I don't see, you know, why we
wouldn't, why we wouldn't do
that. I'll let um my expert
witness answer your second
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. You were
correct. A lot of times they do
stack the chili, the onion
crops, and then they work a
little, um, you know, longer
periods of time versus just one
crop at a time. Um, but even
then, that, that housing um
requirement still has to be in
place and so if they are going
from one farmer to another, um,
which is again all lined out in
in their contracts the end of
the year, um, they, um, would
still have to meet those, the
farmer even that has onions
versus chili still has to meet
that housing requirement that
worker still just going from,
you know, one operation.
to the next, if that answers
your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, since we're talking about
Donana County, um, I was just
wondering um how many families
are going to be subjected to
this, or is it just the single
person working and coming.
For a short time. Madam Chair,
um, representative, that's
exactly right. It doesn't affect
any families. This is just for
the temporary H-2A workers that
are going to work on the farm
during that short period of
time.
That's it. It's not there, you
know, I mean, not to say that
they can't be related to one
another, but generally it's just
a single worker coming over and
having a space that he knows is
his own, he can call his own
when he gets there.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, um,
I'm also wondering if um the
county adopted these standards
specifically for migrant
workers, not just for single
family dwellings.
It seems to me OK, from my
conversations with um the then
um county manager, they were
just defaulting to this because
they were afraid.
They said, look, we don't have
any exemptions for H-2A workers,
at least when you go back with
what you and the representative
Jones and the senator need to do
is pass an exemption so that we
can have this, but there's no
liability on our part.
That we're not following any
standards.
I said that's fine, he says,
just follow what other states
have done. They have an
exemption for that, for those
H-2A workers, if we follow
federal standards, and then
everything's fine. Um, but till
then, we're just gonna, we're
gonna, we're just gonna default
to what we have on the books,
and that's what I, what I mean,
Madam Chair, representative,
they just went ahead and said,
well, the closest thing we can
find on, on the statutes is um
multi-family dwellings. So we're
just gonna put them in those
standards. And so that's why
there's an occupancy.
difference. It was just that
particular um
Um, uh, what do you call it, uh,
code enforcement officer felt
that that's what he needed to
do.
And then I'd like where my
experience was to expand on
that.
Ma'am, I just kind of want to be
clear in this situation. There's
no putting blame really
specifically on Doniani County.
Um, this really was them trying
to figure out a situation that
realistically they didn't really
deal with a whole lot in the
past, um, and so, um, they just
kind of defaulted on what they,
you know, what they could and
and that's completely from an
industry perspective, we met,
you know, with Doniani County
multiple times and, and all of
our members that were impacted
by this under
stood, um, you know, kind of why
the county did what they did. It
was just a matter of like, how
do we work with this moving?
OK, thank you, madam chair, just
a second, um.
I've heard arguments, Madam
Chair and Representative of what
you just said about, well,
they'll go and house them
somewhere else and then ship
them down instead of having to
comply, um, but I think the
county.
Purposely, um, is leaning
towards having the higher
standards, um,
And did they ask you to bring
this forward?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
when I, when I spoke to the
county manager, he said the best
way to handle this is for us,
for our, for ourselves here to
run this, um, and this code
enforcement and turn it over is
just go ahead and have an
exemption made. So, Madam Chair
Representative, that's what,
what we're doing today is
following um the then uh
The direction of then um the
county managers and, and their
people saying, look, we just
need to, we just need exemption
so that we can follow the same
standards everyone else is, but
we can't find anything in the
books. So I don't know that they
were trying to increase the
standards and say, you know
what, we don't like those
standards, we're gonna increase
them. It was more like we
inspected this. We don't see
anywhere in the code that we're
able to um follow these, these,
these uh exemptions.
So we're just gonna go ahead and
default to what, what I
explained earlier, um,
multi-family dwelling units,
that's an apartment complex
standards, and so they, they
just wanted us to clarify the
laws, basically, this is more of
a clarity issue and, and more
than anything, I don't, again,
I'm not blaming Donana.
I think they're just trying to
make sure things were in order.
And when I had those
conversations, they were very
respectful, uh, that, that it
wasn't an issue where we were
When it gets 0.1 against the
other, each other manager, Madam
Chair and Representative, this
seems to be a lot of hearsay,
though, the county did not take
measures to have a resolution to
ask for these standards to be,
you know, changed to federal,
um, and I don't think there was
anything at the county managers,
um, association level to um
bring this forward, was there?
And I'm sure, like I said, I had
the conversation with the only
county that was having this
issue. It was the only county
that was having this issue. So
I, there was no need for me,
Madam Chair, to talk to the
counties because this is the
only
place that felt that they wanted
to have more clarity.
Um, Madam chair and
representative, I don't mean to.
Argue with you about it, but it
seems like if.
The county did want to have this
changed that they would have
come forward, um.
And passed a resolution or did
something the county manager is
fairly new, and I don't think
can speak for the all of the
county commission, but um, well,
Madam Chair, I want to clarify I
wasn't talking about the, the
one, the new one that just came
in, it's the one that we were
dealing with
prior to them, Mr. Marcias, who
had been there for some time,
and, and, um, it's, I don't
believe that the county has the,
the, the ability to change.
The state statutes on
multi-family dwelling, uh,
standards.
They, they don't have that
authority. It's the state that
sets those standards, those are
building codes, Madam Chair.
So Madam Chair and
representative so all counties
then have to abide by this. Why
would they? I thought you were
saying that, you know, Donana
was the only one that had this
higher standards why we had a
patchwork
was the only one that was
questioning the process.
And, and decided they just
wanted some more clarity. It
wasn't so much that there they
were changing the standards,
they just wanted more clarity in
the law.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, they can't go
across to Sierra where there's
standards aren't the same, Madam
Chair, H2A housing standards are
federal across the board.
Our state
Had forever followed those
standards.
They were being, they were being
um inspected under those
standards. They were meeting
those standards.
In every county in in in in the
state of New Mexico.
It was only recently that they
decided that they for whatever
reason, this code enforcement
officer wanted to come in. He
says, you know what, we can't
find anywhere, anywhere in the
line, you can correct me if I'm
wrong, that gives us an
exemption to multi-family
dwelling unit standards.
That are state statutes.
We would like for you or, or
Representative Jones or the
senator to just give us an
exemption so that we can just
default it back to what it was
meant to be. I said, OK, we'll
do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I uh
think the county has it at their
standards higher for a reason
for that, I can't support your
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. Um, I
have several questions and I'll
go through them quickly.
Madam Chair Representative and
expert, do you feel that H2A
standards are being conflated
with the multi-dwelling state
standards.
Madam Chair Representative
Senator Cortez, that's correct.
So, Madam Chair representative
and expert, how was DWS engaged
when the issue happened in Dona
Anna since we're talking about
that.
Madam Chair Representative
Senator Cortez, um, there was a
big, let me just kind of give
through the go through the
process. So there's a meeting
annually that Workforce Solution
has in hatch and in Deming to
kind of give an update on, you
know, different changes with the
H-2A program that's happened in
this year, I believe it's 2023
is when the first meeting
happened. Donette County showed
up and said.
We were looking at our
standards. We don't have
anything and now we need to
default back to this multifamily
unit, um, standards. And so for
a lot of our farmers, it was,
they were taken aback because
those were higher standards.
There was the process of trying
to get the next crop year
planned out, and now their
workforce could potentially be
cut in half. Um, and so
Workforce Solutions was involved
in those meetings and, and
again, before this happened,
Workforce Solutions did the
inspections themselves on the
housing units and approved um um
or disapproved them and said you
need to bring these up to
different.
the, the federal standards, but
in most cases, our farmers met
those standards and were
approved to house their migrant
workers. So what I'm hearing,
Madam Chair representative, is
the DWS states they enforce the
H2A standards, correct?
amount of ch representative
that's correct. So Madam Chair
Representative expert, what
exactly did they do? Like what
was the adverse impact on the
workers and their income.
Madam Chair Representative,
there really was, um, no impact
to it. So Madam Chair
representative expert, there was
no impact to the farmers or lost
crops.
Before this change in in the
standards. Um, no, there was
none. I mean, when the workers
come here, they are presented
with a contract. They're
presented with all the rules and
regulations on what um what they
need to follow and the employer
needs to follow. And so going
into every year, both the
employer and employee know um
what is, what is agreed.
One. So Madam Chair represented
an expert. What I'm hearing is
that we need to codify H2A
federal standards across every
county and community, correct?
Madam, that's, correct?
That concludes my question.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. Thank
you and Representative Kates had
a follow-up.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for indulging me. I
think, and I want to make sure I
clarify your, I'm asking the
subject expert is, uh, you said
that the federal standards is
100 square feet per person, is
that correct?
Madam, it's 100 square foot per
occupant and then 50 square foot
for occupant of sleeping spaces.
So is that 100 square feet if
you have bunk beds?
So if they're bunk beds, I
believe that's um less of a
sleeping space standard. I've I
apologize, I forget what that
is.
Mm
OK, I just for the committee's
purposes, military barracks
standards generally aim for a
minimum of 72 square feet, a
floor space per person, but some
services like the army will have
revised standards, private
sleeping rooms for 90 square
feet for E1s to E4s. Um, it's
144 square feet if it's a bunk
bed.
So I just wanted to kind of get
an idea visually of how these
compare to our military
barracks. Thank, thank you.
You represent
Vice Chair Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
and present it based upon the
questions that were asked by my
colleague, uh Representative
Senna Cortez, you want to have,
uh, to make sure that the
standards set by the federal
government are in place in every
single county. Is that was, is
that correct? Is that how your
answer was to be portrayed. You
swim out of chair for, I know
you weren't here, um, uh,
Representative Hernon, what has
happened is
We followed these standards in
the state of New Mexico for
many, many years.
Um, to follow the federal
standards or H-2A workers, and
we had a, uh, a situation where
a um uh one of the counties had
questioned that they couldn't
find any legislation giving an
exemption for temporary workers,
so they, they went ahead and
defaulted to
Multi-family dwelling units,
which is like an apartment
complex. So thank you, uh, Mr.
President and Madam Chair. So
what you're asking is uh not to
allow a county to exceed the
standards, and I don't think
that's right, because one of the
things that can occur every
single case when this federal
government issues a standard is
you can always increase the
standards, you just can never go
below the standards. So what
you're asking for is to prevent
counties from going beyond.
those standards, and that is not
a position that we should be
supporting. So, Madam Chair, I,
I think that this bill, the way
it, it's written right now every
single county, I mean, not this
bill, but every single county
has to follow the federal
standards. You can always exceed
the standards. You can never be
less than. So to, to say
otherwise would be something we
don't want to employ, I think in
the state. And thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. uh, and just, um,
looking at the fiscal impact
report, the very bottom of page
one.
Um
US Department of Labor Housing
Standards already applied to
housing for migrant and seasonal
farm workers in New Mexico, so
this bill is not needed. If the
bill is intended to preempt
local and state building codes,
workforce solutions does not
believe it achieves this intent
without specific preemption
language, so I think what
they're saying is that first
off, it's not needed and second
off, um, what you're trying to
achieve won't be achieved by
this bill, so.
Um, representative, um, wanted
to, to respond to um vice chair
and your comments.
Uh, concerning that, uh, go
ahead, Madam Chair, uh, Vice
Chair Herndon, I think the issue
is, is the standards that Donana
County were using was for
multi-family, which is a
different scenario than
temporary migrant workers. And,
and I think that's where really
the clarification is needed. Um,
the standards that fell back to
again at no fault to the county,
they were just falling back onto
the closest relative thing that
would fall into the H-2A program
housing standards is they were
saying, we need to hold these
temporary housing standards to
the same.
standards as um a duplex or a
triplex or, you know, a multi um
apartment complex. And then so
it really was comparing kind of
apples to oranges in that
situation. And, and Madam Chair,
they weren't, this isn't to
stifle their ability. This is
just to give them an exemption
that they can.
Um, inspect them, allow them to
inspect under those standards.
If, if they want to exceed them,
then the county can then move
forward and follow those adopt
those, those, this is not
stifling them from that.
This is saying that there's an
exemption for those type, that
type of of housing.
That and, and turn it over to
Workforce Solutions. Workforce
Solutions is doing this, Madam
Chair Representative in all the
other counties are following
this rule.
And so it, it, it isn't, it
isn't or the standard, it isn't
that we're trying to stifle them
from that. We're giving them the
opportunity to say, oh, we see
that we have this, this right to
allow us to follow the federal
standards. So if they choose
that they want to increase the
standards, then I guess they can
do that. But this isn't to tell
them you can't increase the
standards. It's to tell them you
can, you, there's an exemption
for this
situation that you can inspect
under these standards. If they
want to change it, they can.
Onana was not coming out and
saying we want to increase the
standards. They said we can't
find anything in law that allows
us to follow those standards. If
you can give us an exemption,
then we're OK with that. But
till then, we're just gonna
default to what's on the books.
It's not a matter of us stifling
them from doing that. I disagree
with that if I if IR or I
wouldn't even be sitting here.
Uh, so, and I was gonna have a
conversation with him. Now when
it comes to the language in this
bill, maybe it needs some, you
know, maybe it needs to have an
amendment or something, which I
was hoping to do in judicial, so
that we could clean this up
between now and then. So if this
committee would uh be uh
understanding enough to allow it
to go to the next committee
where I can then look at the
wordsmithing to possibly
Make clean this language up in a
little cleaner uh to
Express what we're trying to do
here. That's what we're looking
for.
In the health committee, I'm,
I'm looking at health standards.
They're, they're great. I've
been in them, um, sure, uh, uh,
representative Hernan. I have
been in those, in the housing
units, they're nice.
Representative Jones has, has,
um,
I'm gonna ask you to, you,
you've already stated that, so I
only did that because she wasn't
here man we don't go back for
folks who aren't here.
Um
So did you have something else?
OK. So, I will entertain
emotion,
uh, moved to table, Madam Chair.
OK, so I'll move to table takes
precedence, so I have a motion
by Representative E Chavis and a
second by representative
Ferrari. Karen, can you take the
role, so a yes vote.
I is to table the bill.
Representative Anaya, yes to
table.
Representative Kate, no detail.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes, the table.
Representative in Chavez. No.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez, not
a table.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes, the
table, Madam Chair.
Yeah
by a boat of 5 to 4 years.
But House Bill 570 has been
tabled.
Thank you very much, chair.
Thank you. Next we have um
comit substitute for Senate Bill
249, healthcare provider
grocereceipts with Senator
Brandt and Representative
Duncan, or
Not send it to ran.
And Senator Brent had to run off
to finance real quick, so he
apologized.
This is how Bill
to Senate bill 249.
Go ahead whenever you're ready,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair, committee, it's good to
be with you today. Um, Senate
Bill 249 um cleans up the
language in with MCOs. So when
um healthcare provider is
contracted with an MCO. The MCOs
ship over the um the payment,
and they don't clarify what's
groceryceipts tax and what the
service was. All this bill does
is clarify that that MCO has to
send them uh when they give them
payment they.
To clarify that what was uh paid
for the service and what.
And any tough questions I'm
gonna have my expert, Ms. Carrie
Bruer answer.
OK, so we will go to Zoom if you
are in opposition. Raise your
hand.
And I'll come back to you in the
room in opposition, anyone?
OK, in the on zoom in support if
you'd like to speak, please
raise your hand in the room and
support.
If you'd like to speak, please
come forward. How come you folks
who want to speak sit.
Far, far away.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kim
Lagant.
I'm the registered lobbyist for
AMR Ambulance and Good Samaritan
Home Care, Senate Bill 249 just
simply ensures that providers
are fully reimbursed for their
gross receipts taxes, and they
are uh what they're paid on
Medicaid services, the
legislation um offers fair and
transparent reimbursement on
their uh reimbursements. Thank
you.
OK, on Zoom we'll go to Dana.
Joy
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, Executive
director of Desert States
Physical Therapy Network,
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. We think the senators for
introducing this legislation and
carry for her assistance, as it
has been a struggle to receive
full reimbursement of gross
receipts tax from MCO payers. We
agree with a greater need for
transparency in claims payment
processes. We stand in full
support of House Bill 249. Thank
you.
Represented
sorry, um, Doctor McEnaney.
Adam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Barbara McEnany.
I'm a medical oncologist and I
run New Mexico Cancer Center in
Albuquerque and Gallup, and I
will tell you that figuring out
when gross receipts taxes have
been paid or not paid costs more
in accounting fees than the
grocery receipts tax cost. This
will clarify things and will
help physicians all across the
state to understand that when we
see Medicaid patients, we know
what we're being paid as the
legislature.
intended and not have to fight
with our MCOs to get the money
back from them. Uh, we urge to
do pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, so committee, are
there questions?
Representative Anaya.
Uh, Madam Cha I'd like to move a
do pass if there are no
questions.
Yeah
OK. So I'll go to Representative
Eleanor Chavez and then, oh, OK,
so we have a motion by
Representative Anaya and a
second by Representative Cates
with Representative Eleanor
Chavez with questions. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I, I think
I just have a quick question. So
basically what's happening now
is that the MCOs are
Paying the bill, but they're not
delineating whether or not it's
how much you're paying towards
grocery receipts.
So do we know if
Any
Um, healthcare provider
organization has not received
their groceryceipts, taxes, and
do we know like?
What happens to that money?
Madam Charon, excuse me,
Representative Chavez.
So we do now know that
healthcare providers are not
necessarily receiving the full
GRT and the reason why is
because when you all as a
legislature established a new
fee for service schedule at
either 100% of Medicare or 150%
of Medicare that created
transparency around this is the
minimum that uh reimbursement
can be for service, and then the
GRT is supposed to be on top of
that. And our providers have
been able to go back and see.
They are not actually receiving
full GRT in the amount of money
that they're getting from the
MCO, so the example that we use
is like a baby well check,
right? So let's say on the fee
for service schedule, a baby
well check is now $100. That's
what people can get a
reimbursement for for the
service.
In Burnlio County then in
Albuquerque, really that
pediatrician should be receiving
$107.50 because of the 7.5% GRT
and a pediatrician was maybe
only receiving $100 total, or
they receiving 102. So what this
bill would uh would do is say,
OK, pediatrician, you're now
going to see $100 for the baby
well check, pursuant to the fee
for service schedule and the
$7.50 for the.
tea, so that you're being
reimbursed and then you can
report your receipts correctly
and you can pay your GRT
correctly.
It's very interesting. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So we have a motion
on the table. Um, is there any
opposition?
think none you have a due pass.
And just, just Madam Chair and
committee. Appreciate it. Just
as an explanation, the, the Rs
had a press conference that they
had to go to, but we do maintain
our coreum. So I will be putting
on the last bill, um 570.
And I will turn it over to Madam
Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
members of the committee. So
this is House Bill 570.
And um it's all of you are
veterans at at some at some
level, um, this is about prior
authorization. We all know about
prior authorization, so what
this does is just add a few
different um
Pharmaceutic well nut, few
different services slash
pharmaceuticals to be, to not
require prior authorization, and
they are for chemotherapy.
For dialysis services and for
home health care.
So what this says is that um
That those cannot require prior
authorization. I, I'm not sure.
I don't think anybody does chemo
for fun for someone who did it,
that wasn't fun. So with that,
Madam Chair, I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, uh, Madam Presenter,
Chair. Let's go to the audience.
Is there anyone who stands in
support of this legislation.
Is there anyone who stands in
opposition in the audience.
And I'll come back to you in
just a moment. On Zoom, is there
anyone who is in support of
this.
Uh, legislation.
And is there anyone in
opposition of the legislation?
All right, we'll go to support
on the Zoom first. I first see
Doctor McEnany.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Again, I'm
Barbara McEnany, and I'm a
cancer doctor, and I so
appreciate this bill because
it's so frustrating for patients
to wait for 3 weeks sometimes to
get approved to get chemotherapy
while they're watching their
cancers get worse. We are almost
never denied. We have a 98%
approval rate, so the only thing
that prior authorization does
for chemotherapy for patients
with cancer.
I make them wait. It doesn't
save money. It just makes the
patients wait. And so we would
immensely appreciate on the
behalf of every cancer patient
in the state that this bill
passed. Thank you to to uh
Representative Thompson and
everyone for for bringing it
forward and understanding this
issue.
Thank you very much, Karen
Kushner, are you speaking in
support?
Uh, no. All right. I thank you.
We will go uh to um those who
are Jonathan, are you speaking
in support?
No, ma'am. All right, so we'll
go to Zoom those in opposition,
go ahead and then we'll come
back to those in the room.
Jonathan, you have the floor.
Thank you Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee,
Jonathan Buxton, pharmaceutical
Care Management Association.
Y'all know me, I'm the PBM guy.
Um, we do stand respectful
opposition to this bill. Prior
authorization is an essential
tool for health plans and help
payors to keep costs down. The
American Medical Association is
estimates that over 25% of the
cost of medical care in the
United States is goes to waste
or low value care.
Taking away prior authorization
will remove that safety net, uh,
New Mexico already has wonderful
position or uh requirements in
place for turnaround times.
There is no reason a prior
authorization to take, to take 3
months unless improper
documentation is being submitted
or whatever because we have to
turn around those, those
requests very rapidly according
to statute. We encourage you to
be mindful of the FIR, be
mindful of the patient's safety
aspects of this, there should be
multiple eyes on patients.
To make sure they're getting the
best care out there.
As we respectfully oppose this
bill. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. We'll go to Karen
Kushner now. Hello, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Karen Kushner and I'm a
patient advocate for those of us
with spina bifida. My uh uh
opposition to this is twofold.
The first is that we're in New
Mexico, we do have wonderful
healthcare. We do have so many
things covered already that
putting even more packing it in
there tightly that everything
has to be covered. We run the
risk of, of running um
medical insurance companies out
of our state. The second thing
is some of the wording um in
talking about autoimmune
disorder, um, high blood
pressure, substance use
disorder, uh, elder care, those
are, are not very well defined
and so they can be interpreted
in so many ways, so the
insurance company really does
need to know exactly what's
going on prior to authorizing
coverage and care. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you very much. Now those
in the room who are ready to
speak in opposition, please come
forward. You will have one
minute.
Please tell us your name and
then you have one minute, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Brent Moore. I'm a
registered lobbyist for
America's Health insurance
plans, and we stand in
opposition to the bill. We stand
in opposition to the bill
because prior authorization is a
proven tool to ensure that
patients receive safe,
effective, and evidence-based
care, uh, prior authorization is
used to ensure that established
clinical guidelines are adhered
to, and those practices ensure
that uh the patient is.
getting the best care at the
best price, uh, the estimates
that I've been given are that
medical knowledge doubles every
73 days for a primary care
physician to keep up with those
changes in in updates in terms
of standards, they would need to
practice medicine 27 hours a
day, uh, that is an impossible
task, prior authorization
ensures that the best care is
being provided to patients, and
we would note, uh, the FAR
there's a significant cost
associated with.
Implementing this bill, and it
is a strange collection of
procedures and drugs that are.
Included within this bill. Thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schulz,
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico.
We stand in opposition for many
of the reasons stated by the
opposition. We've also been
working with the New Mexico
Medical Society this session on
House Bill 461 to start to look
at what areas make sense to
remove prior authorization, um,
and just a clarification, the
prior authorization for cancer
drugs and treatments have been
removed.
Already, so that is no longer an
issue. Thank you.
Thank you. Now we'll go to the
committee. Is there anyone on
the committee with questions?
Well, I, I have a question for
you, Madam Chair, uh.
Uh, just for clarification, when
the, the statement was just made
that prior authorizations have
been removed. What does that
mean?
I'm sorry, madam Chair, could
you, so I'm listening to an
opposition that was just made
and it said prior authorizations
have been removed and could you
explain what does that mean?
Madam, uh,
I'm not exactly sure, uh what
was stated was that it's been
removed for chemo drugs, um, I'm
not a lawyer, the, the drafter
who drafted this, I would assume
would know if they were removed,
so um I can do further
investigation, but that's news
to me and, and it would be a, a
basically a mistake on our
drafter's part to include
something that's already
included.
All right. Thank you very much.
All right, I'll go to the, I, I
don't see any other questions.
I'll take a motion.
I'll second. All right. Thank
you. It's been moved and
seconded for a due pass, please
call the roll.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair. Yes.
6 to 0.
With a 6 in the affirmative and
0 in the negative. You have a
due pass.
Thank you committee.
We gotta wait.
OK, I want to thank the audience
and the folks here in the room
who uh have been in here for
this electric session of the
Health and Human Services
Committee, so with that we will,
we will be adjourned until
Wednesday at 8:30.
