Back here.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya
here.
Representative Louise I.
Thank you madam chair he thought
the meeting was at ten thirty
had a flight to go down so he
still in the air to be here
shortly.
Representative thank you Liz
Thomson here.
Representative.
Fenderson.
I may speak chair that out
Representative Armstrong and
Representative films are both
still in appropriations right
okay thanks to their X. thank
you madam chair representative
assist in the waiting room I
guess.
Representative but.
That we give need to mover over
okay.
I'm madam chair sorry searing
for.
She said she's here.
Issue
she as I see your okay I found
our staff and the lord.
I'm here.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Okay.
Vice chair Dr.
And Representative for ours is
here now to okay.
Here.
Madam chair that will Armstrong
here.
Okay we've got everybody here
and looks used in years.
Yeah we got we got you okay.
So we we are starting in a full
committee have a quorum.
So let me and I've talked to
both the Sanchez but for
purposes of the audience and so
everyone is clear we're going to
hear both house bill twelve and
house bill seventeen kind of
side by side.
Will have a representative
Martinez and his experts present
twelve then Representative lu
Han and her experts present
seventeen.
We will and at that time of as
you're presenting Representative
Martinez I hope we can take care
of the substitute and get that
done so we're working from the
sub.
And for the audience the sub is
online has been online for a
couple of days.
And then we're gonna do one set
of public comment.
And how this is going to work it
we're gonna take opposition
first and opposition is
opposition to both built an
indoor legalization altogether.
So if you are in opposition to
legalization of cannabis than
you are would be opposing both
bills and that will be for one
minute you have one minute to
speak why have a timer.
For those in support it's a
little bit more new ones because
you might support one or the
other or both or Kambal so we're
going to give the support on
minute and a half.
so that you can distinguish if
you have a preference for one
over the other or if you have no
preference so for those
who are we're thinking they may
make just one will come out on
one we're going to do it
together you can just comment on
one and say you're supporting
just
seventeen and not twelve or vice
versa or some combo or
distinguish what you like about
either one so we'll get that one
and a half minutes we will hear
from everyone.
So anyone who wants to speak
because this is the first
hearing and I I try and do this
and this committee because it's
the first hearing in the house.
I I like to take public comment
from everyone.
So not to worry
you don't have to rush to get
your hand up R. for fear that
you're gonna the time's going to
be up and you won't get to make
your comment we will take
comments from everyone so just
I'm giving you a warning about
how that's going to will work so
that you can kind of adjust what
your plans are for how you want
to provide public comment and
particularly for those in
support of one or the other
about or both you can
distinguish what you like or
don't like about one or the
other.
The and then we will go to
questions from the Committee and
we will questions can be
directed at one or the other or
both because I think it's our
job today two if we're going to
pass a bill out of the committee
on the legalization that we're
clear about.
What what the differences
between the two and so rather
than having two separate
hearings when we're going to ask
a lot of the same questions and
a majority of the bills are
exactly the same we're gonna do
this side by side.
We will vote on them separately
however.
And just so that the audience
and the committee knows we have
a hard stop at one thirty
if we're not through with all
the questions in the voting will
have to carry that over to
Monday we've got too much
conflict for afternoon
committees and I have to put on
a bill that will be several
hours and another committee as
well so we have a hard stop at
one thirty and will get us
through as much of this as we
can.
there's been a lot of
information provided I know the
committee has a variety of side
by sides and analysis
but hopefully that will help us
focus and at least orient
members to sections of the bill
that they wanna and issues they
want to talk about so
representatives of the committee
does have the side by side that
I provided you that I did just
not weighing in on one of the
other I'm just trying to go
section by section what's in it
and and what the differences
were between the two bills
And so I think I think that's
how we will proceed and we will
start with
Getting everyone you want in
here on on the zoom so
Representative Martinez and I
see you've got your co sponsor
Representative Romero is here
thank you and tell us again the
experts you want and we will
will pull him over.
So we need a good morning madam
chair members of the committee
we need to Emily Kaltenbach and
we need Kylie Soffa please to be
promoted.
I have let's say I have.
And Emeli without a last name
I'm gonna I'm gonna try that one
and see if that's.
What we already have
C..
Emeli.
I do it no I didn't do it.
C..
I believe I just got her over
madam chair okay Emily is is
that Emily Kaltenbach no so
that's not the right Emily.
We can move her back to.
Madam.
Madam chair she attacks me she's
under DPA okay thank you.
More she is.
There she is okay now we should
have the right there she is okay
and
Representative lu Han.
Who would you like to include.
I'm.
Blocks.
Yes we can hear you.
Ben Lewin Jr.
Land good.
The whole island.
Okay I've got banned who is the
next one.
Ryan.
It takes just a minute to go
through here we got Ryan okay.
Let land then and land Goodman
plan is on madam chair okay on
all right we got everybody.
Okay is so we will start with
you Representative Martinez with
house bill twelve.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee at we appreciate
the time this morning and we
appreciate the way you conduct
the meeting it's it's a big deal
that we have here in front of us
so we'll try our best to be
brief and get your questions
soon as possible
first of all I'd like to to to
share a little bit with you
about why how I come to this
work as many of you know I grew
up along the border I grew up on
the other side of the border and
what is and in Albuquerque I've
seen both sides of the war on
drugs I've seen the violence
that it creates I've seen the
deep the trauma that it creates
in our communities both in
Mexico both south of Mexico to
be honest and also here in the
United States we know that the
warranty drugs has been an utter
failure we know that this
country in its perceptions drug
use is shifting particularly
with regard to campus.
So I come to this work not as an
expert that is somebody who has
expertise in the industry you
know not as a as a user I come
to this work specifically from
that place of of trauma and and
and violence and how we as a
state legislature good a little
New Mexico the you know the the
the the the the small round
house that we are have the
ability to leave the country in
a legalization framework that
undoes that on does the harms of
the war on drugs on communities
not just here in New Mexico but
across this country and
eventually across the world.
House bill twelve madam chair is
the result of more than five
years of work I want to give big
props to secretary bill mccamley
are the secretary workforce
solutions who as a state
representative work diligently
for smarter drug policies in New
Mexico including a version of
this bill.
This bill also comes from the
incredible work of more than
twenty years including you madam
chair
and the work that's been done by
folks I think Emily Kaltenbach
remission pesky just got a late
and so many others in the drug
policy advocacy world.
House bill twelve madam chair
members the committee is not a
new piece of legislation.
This bill has continually been
refined is he has moved through
different legislative committees
and has moved out of the house
floor once before.
The prior version of house bill
twelve has also been vetted by
governor Michele hungry Sean's
cannabis legalization working
group which was a group made up
of experts in public health drug
use is ordered law enforcement
medical cannabis patients and
the medical cannabis industry.
The bill before you and you know
this is why we showed up with
the sub today this bill is a
breeding looting document and it
should be.
We are embarking on the creation
of a brand new multi million
dollar industry.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is not for the
faint of heart this is a big
deal.
And it should be should be
treated with the respect that it
deserves.
That's why I'm proud to have
been a member of this fantastic
team since I came to the
roundhouse this bill versions of
it has been vetted by debated
voted upon it's been task force
workgroup and any other verb you
can imagine this bill has gone
through it and it continues to
improve every step of the way.
Madam chair we know that
legalization of adult use
cannabis is coming it's not a
matter of if it's a matter of
when.
And I'm not just talking about
here in New Mexico I'm talking
across the country fourteen
states have already legalized
adult use cannabis including our
neighbors to the west Arizona.
Arizona recently actually
deployed their legalization
framework they're already
selling in the great state of
Arizona.
However most of those states
that have legalized have done
too soon have done so through a
ballot initiative.
Which itself has cost a myriad
of problems in the
implementation of those
frameworks only two state
legislatures in the country have
had the courage to legalize
through the magnificent process
that is is legislative process a
lot of people talk about our
process is making sausage you
don't want to know how it
happens you don't want to see it
I disagree with that notion we
have a beautiful process we have
people from all walks of life we
have a citizen legislature think
about that we have a citizen
legislature that comes together
once a year and for better or
worse we put our one hundred
twelve collective minds together
our collective life experiences
together and we were up with
legislation with the loss that
can help move New Mexico forward
this is no different madam chair
let's make New Mexico the third
state to legalize that
courageous and diligent and
disciplined and patient
legislative process.
Madam chairman of the committee
this bill in front of you has
three foundational principles.
Protections and enhancements to
the medical cannabis program
which is near and dear to hearts
of many of us.
This bill also addresses the
deep social inequities and
promotes diversity in a new
industry diversity in every
sense of the word race gender
geographic except for a.
Third this bill has one of the
smartest tax and regulatory
policies you'll see in the
entire country.
That is critical because we want
to ensure that this industry is
regulated in such a way that it
promotes its growth while at the
same time Steve guarding the
needs of New Mexicans across the
state.
That madam chair I'd like to
introduce my co sponsor
representative of the federal
metal of course madam chair you
also are one of the main cool
Sanchez well I I'm assuming they
make your comments during the Q.
NA and our experts Emily
Kaltenbach with the drug policy
alliance Kylie Soffa with
culture hello a pass it on to
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I it
was too late to become a co
sponsor in the earlier days of
the five years that this is been
going on since this is only my
second term in office but I'm
gonna just give you a little bit
of reason why I got involved in
this in this year and why I
wanted to get into the weeds if
you will madam chair into this
what we're what it is that we're
trying to do here madam chair
members of the committee this
bill is about only social
justice and equity that has
affected every single one of our
communities and the targeting of
criminalization of not only
addiction but the stigmatization
of our community members in
particular not only for the
medicinal properties of what
they need but of course what we
see in the ravages of what
alcohol and other addictive Drug
staff created in our communities
and to know that this is
something that has a such an
alternative budget for not only
our state but of course for
taking those folks out of the
criminal justice system who
should not be there for the use
of cannabis secondly madam chair
Representative why it's so
critical this year and why it
matters so much to New Mexico
moving forward is that we are in
an economic a sort of tail spin
as far as what's happened post
comment and in COVID and I see
this is so critical to the
bottom line of New Mexico and
the possible revenues the jobs
in the opportunity that can be
created the entrepreneurs that
will be developed many many
people in the excitement of the
folks that have reached out to
me about the future of New
Mexico because of this really
unique opportunity that we're
presenting before you today
madam chair representative the
group that's here with
Representative Martinez is
impossible to follow because
he's covered literally every
reason why I've gotten involved
in this is because of that that
opportunity that presents it and
if we don't do it now when the
question for for the folks in
the.
Committee you know as far as
what concerns you I promise you
this is something that has an
answer that's why these
brilliant people are here today
we've gotten so much feedback
and I just want to thank folks
in the audience and the
participants as well for being
so involved in this and we
absolutely wanted to be a
statewide community effort the
folks that are here have
committed to that and with that
madam chair I'm just so inspired
and excited about the
opportunity economically that
presents itself in the fairness
and equity and social justice
that presents itself and of
course what we can do here at to
expand upon and something that
is too important to to to leave
for another day thank you madam
chair thank you members looking
for its everyone's input and
questions.
Thank you hi Emily did you want
to add.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm honored to be here
today and very excited as we
watched this bill that's been
worked on and folks Sanchez had
mentioned for many many years I
just I would just add that house
bill twelve also really strong
protection for young people by
reducing access to cannabis and
promotes comprehensive reality
based drug education that's
something that I think is new
and important that we actually
ask that the state focus on
education and develop a public
education campaign I think the
other thing is just that house
bill twelve establishes a
licensing system that favors
small businesses and family
farmers are creating that micro
business license and giving them
a head start and reduce barriers
to entry for people with less
access to capital in traditional
avenues of financing and so I I
would just also stressed the
importance of equity and social
justice as we move toward
legalization it's really
important that we not only
repaired or in the past but we
set up a system that allows our
diverse community The New Mexico
to participate.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee and I
look for.
And then did you have someone
else.
ensure we have a miss Kylie
stuff as well as an expert in
the I don't know if she has
anything to to add to the to the
introduction.
If you don't make sure thank you
I just would like to briefly
introduce myself my name is.
Right you for House agency.
Thank you for having me today
I'm excited to be part of this
process.
I am the co chair person for the
licensed cannabis producer
Mexico talk or get exposure
helps I started in the industry
I in one of our dispensaries in
Albuquerque by completing my
bachelor's at UNM and from there
I moved after the company at
into the position of project
manager where I gained a lot of
experience across all its
aspects of the industry we are a
vertically integrated company
and a vertically integrated
industry generally speaking and
so I have experienced also has
the business be it retail
manufacturing cultivation
distribution and expansion I've
been intimately involved in
contracting and leasing with
local property owners and
vendors so I I do you have a
diverse knowledge of this
industry one thing I would like
to add about house bill twelve
particularly as it does provide
a detailed framework for
creating a robust and diverse
industries that provides
opportunities to all New
Mexicans and young adults like
me in particular to get involved
in an industry to not not just
as a job but to create a career
and a promising future for
themselves and for New Mexico as
the state thank you.
Thank you and
As as one of the other co
sponsors all just add my my
interest has been long I think
I've been a co sponsor every
iteration of this and we've
heard it many times in the
interim it has gotten better as
we go along and my primary
interest all along has been
public health.
we have we can't just say no to
cannabis it is everywhere our
kids are getting at the only
Ability to really control it
from a public health standpoint
and contract control what our
kids get is to our regular our
license that regulate it
legalize it tax it educate about
it monitor it our research it
those of always been my interest
and of course protecting the
medical cannabis program which I
was involved with a for a number
of years before that got passed
and as most people know but just
for the record that
built the Lynn and Erin
compassionate use act is named
for my daughter Aaron so I have
maintained
a close monitoring of of that
program and its its growth and
expansion so I just wanted to
say that quickly
I hope Representative Martinez
can you I'm gonna move your
substitute for discussion for
purposes of and if there's a lot
of discussion or want to discuss
on it we won't we won't actually
a past the substitute in our for
the moment but
if you can outline briefly what
the major differences are and I
do appreciate that you did us
which it is hard but it's really
hard on a long bill if you also
have a lot of corrections are
technical of things or things
you messed whatever and we have
to do a side by side of pages of
amendments to a long bill it's
helpful to have it when we're
starting have it all together on
one bill so I appreciate this
but can you outline briefly.
And I'll get it for discussion
purposes.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee as you all know we
have quite a few changes all
touch it on two or three that I
believe are our major one of
them is it adds a new section to
the bill the department may
enter into one or more
intergovernmental agreements
with any tribal governments to
efficiently coordinate cross
streets external administration
of the loss of the state of New
Mexico and the loss of tribal
governments relating to the use
of cannabis products set forth
in the linen and compassionate
use act and the cannabis
regulation Act this ensures that
tribal governments can can
effectively participate in in
the new industries that is
something that was missing from
the original bill it was it was
really just oversight
another change that we make here
is we delete
a number of fines for servers
were guilty of of telling.
we we keep language that servers
permits can be suspended but you
know this is an area I think
that we need to keep working on
you know we don't want to impose
heavy penalty solely on the
young person that is working
behind the counter want to make
sure that the company's also
held accountable
another another change that I
think is is pretty major is it
allows our Michael businesses to
participate
in the industry with a head
start along with the current
producers but it doesn't limit
them to selling only medical
cannabis products we felt that
that sort of kept them from
fully participating and really
being able to make use of that
six to eight month window that
we are giving them in in a head
start that was another one that
I think really came up and and
was something that was
you know that we were amenable
to to doing lastly madam chair
another piece of new language
that I think you all should know
about is in section thirty eight
we insert language and this is
this is you know working with
with full from the railroad
industry and the new language
reads the need the the cavs
relation act does not apply to
employee health employers
subject to the provisions of
title two of federal rel wait
labor act you know this is one
of those blind spots right like
if we're not thinking
collectively about the state of
those are in unintended
consequences for from the from
the railroad industry came up
and say look this is a problem
for us we really would like it
if it's fixed and for us it's a
no brainer right we want to
create problems for other
industries so so that is fixed
under this bill other that Madam
a lot of the changes are
I would I would say sort of on
the edges nothing incredibly
substantive and how.
B. to answering questions on the
sub from from you are you
members.
Thank you Representative let me
just committee is there any
objection to going ahead and
adopting the subs or working
from this
I see no objections so
Representative you the
you we have adopted the sob.
for House Bill twelve right
thank you thank you now
Representative lu Han on house
bill seventeen you want to go
ahead and present.
Need to unmute.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Just removed the extra when this
is over.
It.
So.
I'm not sure just one moment
getting some feedback and I'm
not quite sure why.
See to this.
Thanks
again.
Once a good morning to you too
you madam chair to all the
committee members today to all
those participating virtually
with us as we unfold and move
towards working through and
getting through.
can't of this bill for New
Mexico to legalize adult use.
So in spite of myself being a
new legislator I'm not really
new to Legisla- the legislature
and the process and
understanding how it works I'm
not new to this conversation
this is a conversation that
we've been part of for many many
years and one of the things that
we keep getting told is wait and
see wait and see let's let's
let's look at the states that
are have the programs in place
and learn from their mistakes
before we move forward with our
own legislation for New Mexico
I've watched and as the as its
push to legalize has repeatedly
stalled out it's been very
frustrating and frustrating for
many of us as we see especially
our neighboring states around
this move forward with it.
Based on watching the progress
last year including how the
legislation the legislation
fared.
Really compelled me to adjust
the strategy to during the
streamlined bill.
Reading the regulatory framework
and the tax structure the most
direct route to to a responsible
way of legalizing cannabis for
people over twenty one while
also protecting our medical
cannabis program and are made up
medical cannabis cannabis
patients I come from a medical
background and current health as
well with public health and we
always put our patients first we
always look to protect those
that are most vulnerable and
that's what this bill does as
well.
S. S..
As the New Mexican who's been
raised born and raised here in
Santa Fe New Mexico my district
house district forty eight and
having had the experience of
working across our state the
majority of my time through much
of our rural communities in New
Mexico I care I care deeply
about what's going on
with our state regards to how we
have.
Mr perhaps this opportunity to
to legalize cannabis and.
And how that could help our
communities and what that would
mean Revenue wise for our state
and what it not only means
revenue wise but really what it
means in the aspect of the
innateness if we are to legalize
a separate already legalized as
and what it would meet me into
our
Our police force and with the
and to the oppressed Business of
what the the prohibition the
failed prohibition on cannabis
is down to our communities
especially our communities of
color and I will point out when
my greatest experience been
working in northern New Mexico
in Rio Arriba county what we saw
and we know that we have at and
continue to have an opioid
epidemic and not only that.
What what that meant and how
that and and being able to work
for then congressman Ben ray lu
Han and how that was addressed
in really being influenced by
the issues surrounding that and
other another trade issues and
in our state in our country but
here at home we found that if we
come together.
And we move in a balanced way
we can make this this happened
so that it would it would
effectively help and treat those
those issues that we have in in
in progressive and compassionate
way.
And then I'm going to now madam
chair and committee members just
talk with us to the top the top
line issues of what what this
bill would you
House bill seventeen would that
take the best components of the
previous bills
and an additional into a piece
of legislation that is solely
focused on responsibly and
legalizing cannabis for adult
use in New Mexico well we're
checking that as mentioned
before the medical cannabis
program is addresses in statute
which should be in statute and
leaves the details to a regular
body that that would come it
would come together when when
the time is right for that to
happen.
This bill would not have any of
the earmarks that other bills
have had and this bill creates
equitable opportunities for New
Mexicans to enter and the
success be successful in an
industry by laying the strong
foundations with existing
medical providers and fully
supported by Mexico businesses
this bill also we can still
listed market by providing a
sensible mechanism for
production management which is
absolutely essential at the
onset of any recreational
market.
Madam chair I'd like to
introduce my expert witnesses at
this time and.
First I have Mr Ben Lujan.
Your excuse me that a little
round landed men and Ryan
governments.
I have been.
Good morning chairwoman
Armstrong committee members my
name is Ben Lewin Jr I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico canvas chamber of
commerce the cannabis chamber
was created at the request of
legislators who recognize the
need for unifying voice in the
cannabis industry so our
organization owes its existence
to you so thank you I echo the
sentiments of Representative lu
Han last legislative session I
said meetings twice a week with
stakeholders representing
various interests related to
legalizing cannabis in New
Mexico well it was disheartening
to see the bill failed last year
it was not entirely surprising I
would submit that last year's
bill was trying to accomplish
too much in a single piece of
legislation and that's what
drove the approach of trying to
include what is absolutely
essential into a bill with the
the very simple purpose of
legalizing adult use cannabis
protecting patients in the
medical program and creating
something that had the absolute
best chance of making it to the
governor's desk the industry as
it exists now in New Mexico are
the experts in the state on the
business of cannabis the
industry's been dedicated to
serving a a growing medical
community and they're just as
many lessons to be learned from
our medical cannabis program as
there is to be learned from
other states moves to adult use
cannabis both how to do it
correctly and some mistakes to
avoid so I I appreciate the
opportunity on behalf of the
industry to endorse and speak to
the strength of the approach and
H. B. seventeen.
HB seventeen is the minimum
viable product designed to
responsibly and sensibly enable
legalize cannabis in New Mexico
of the representative said it
deals with statute what should
be dealt with in statute and
eight important details to a
fully empowered rulemaking
process I I have to acknowledge
that huge amount of credit for
this bill the existing is due to
Representative Martina S. Emily
Helton Bach from drug policy
alliance and all the other you
know dedicated advocates and
policymakers who have worked on
this I I I wanna be sure that I
acknowledge that because there's
a lot more in common and
alignment between the two bills
that we're discussing today as
there are differences
as the writers of last year's
bill their voice carries over
and contributes a great deal to
HB seventeen.
A version of the patient
assistance fund and the micro
business licenses for example
are included in both bills that
we're discussing today is those
were very popular items
what's not included your marks
house bill seventeen has none is
the committee Subir marks fifty
five percent of the revenue
possible seventeen sends money
to the state and two counties
and municipalities to do with as
they see fit and it allows for
the appropriations process that
you know every bill deserves in
the legislature
Representative lu Han does have
a standalone appropriations bill
that's curtain currently with
Legislative Council services to
offer guidance on how to
appropriate funds to manage and
administer adult use cannabis
and medical cannabis as well as
some suggestions for how to fund
critical prevention education
enforcement and other programs.
House bill seventeen has a novel
and thoughtful approach to
production management so the the
committee sub for twelve has no
mechanism for production
management we know that a
limited production especially in
a novel recreational market has
huge unintended consequences in
other states of Oregon and
California for example the
illicit market was permitted to
run wild and it's still outpaces
the legal market significantly
the beeping Crisis from a few
years ago was a direct result of
over production too much legal
cannabis was produced there
wasn't a market for it and it
was dumped into the legal market
which then spread untested
dangerous drugs across the
country or again last year
passed legislation to create a
mechanism to manage production
so he H. P. seventeen stipulates
for yearly independent study to
help maintain market equilibrium
producing enough but not too
much so that we're not driving
the illicit market and we're
able to curtail it which is
especially important at the
urging of the new recreational
market.
Industry voice house bill
seventeen allows for industry
professionals to participate in
the cannabis policy advisory
committee there's simply no way
to chart a course to mature
cannabis market without creating
space for the industry to weigh
in it would be a huge mistake to
disallow industry representation
on any policy advisory or
rulemaking committee and that's
one of the key differences
between the two bills that we're
considering today.
one other difference house bill
twelve has simplified licensing
I'm sorry house bill seventeen
has a simplified licensing their
fewer license types where as the
committee so it seems like seeks
to create cottage industry to
meet the desires of barycentric
in various interest groups where
is house bill seventeen leaves
the details around licensing and
rulemaking to where it belongs
and rex a band can I stop you
for just a second I'm getting
complaints and we can hear
echoing do you have if you have
both if you have to
speakers on like your phone and
your computer can one be.
Silence.
That'll help.
I'm not sure if that's for me
these are women Armstrong I have
yes.
Okay I'm I don't know why it's
echoing then.
That's my presentation so I will
turn it over to Ryan Gomes.
Brian.
Go ahead.
Representative is we can barely
hear you it's just going very
soft.
Of to get close to your
microphone.
Now.
Should be muted J..
This.
The mute pretty big on.
To try and try again Ryan.
Madam can you hear me now that's
much better thank you.
Sorry about that guys
madam chair committee members
thank you for having me today my
name's Ryan Gomez I am a
director of your life I helped
start company back in the new
licenses were issued
my a I'm honored to have been
chosen to serve on the
governor's workgroup in two
thousand nineteen I attended
every meeting I provided several
tours to our grow facilities to
legislators and I'm committed
and I'm committed to the
responsible growth of the
industry.
From my perspective house bill
seventeen is the distillation of
that group.
And the work it relates to
legalizing cannabis the
attention that group's work was
to always look at everything
that is necessary to make good
on the governor's promise of
making recreational cannabis
program in New Mexico the index
of other states it is not the
intention to try and capture
every discussion to a single
bill I firmly believe especially
after what happened last year
that the conversations in the
work that that working group
will carry into hard work we
will have in front of our souls
after the cannabis legal
possible seventeen is most
direct route to accomplishing
that.
That's all I have.
Thank you and
next we have land go ahead land.
Okay.
My work.
You're on mute it but we're not
hearing you yup.
We still can't hear you.
New tribe maybe turning your
microphone up your sound up.
Madam chair.
Yes I yes but now there's the
echo from your other computer to
me one minute we will.
At
no it's still there it's still
there.
Madam chair and Mr.
Now that now.
It up how are we yeah.
Go ahead we okay yes go ahead
good I I should get a computer
off.
We it because I was going to
read is on the other computer.
So my name is Len Goodman I am
the oldest producer in the state
of New Mexico as a licensed
medical cannabis producer
received one of the first five
licenses in two thousand and
nine and amid active in the
industry ever since.
So I've been active for the past
twelve years working closely
with the department of health
with the Legislature
particularly center system
sorely we're making changes to
look to our regulatory agencies
bring us up from initially I
producers and ninety five plants
to what we have today.
Step by step we increased it
might this bill has been created
is the first bill created by the
industry which is produce
primary concern was to create
and build on the medical
cannabis program in the industry
we created they're taking that
knowledge of new account.
And creating what we hope will
be a stable and successful
industries that will benefit all
stakeholders
the participants in the business
the state's revenue our
customers are citizens.
We had a primary concern what we
have learned we learned two
things I think in the past
twelve years working in medical
cannabis program that are key we
had the benefit in the look
chair of going in and
compassionate use act did not
try to establish regulatory
guidelines that allow the
regulations to create the
industry it was critical we
didn't have to go back to
statute who is a moving target
it will be with the new industry
as well constant changes both
legally federally state wise
developing industry figure out
how to make it work we start we
had to make continual changes to
the rules and rex working
closely with drug policy
alliance to do so and we
legislators and what staff at
the department of health.
It needed to move it needed to
be flexible we need to increase
production we need to increase
number of producers there were
times when we had to restrict
thanks to to match the flows
that were going on.
The two things that we need an
adult use which we also support
is item number one allowing the
regulatory process.
To decide where things need to
develop in in in an ever
changing environment rather than
by statute and secondly
production management what we
discovered is when we had under
cultivation we had shortages we
had high prices patients were
getting medicine there must be
sufficient supply to allow
competitive market and we're to
allow access in all areas of the
state.
We also have to be sure that we
do not oversupply every state
that is created oversupply in
every state has created over
supplying in its initial time at
the gate with legalization of
recreational adult use cannabis
every state has created over
supply by lack of regulation
they've had to back off from
Colorado's was so large that the
forced at it the prices crash
the market crashed and he forced
diversion into Oklahoma into the
black market in Colorado with
the securely into Oklahoma to
where the state of Oklahoma that
is to the state of Colorado the
trying keep legally produced
cannabis from crossing state
lines.
Are gone as I have been going
you mentioned has problem with
the bacon Crisis what happens
when you have over supply you
get a crash market yes put that
consumers for a little bit time
get a cheaper product which is
great it exacerbates the black
market it creates business
failures and cannabis businesses
have no bankruptcy protection
federally we are not permitted
in the bankruptcy courts in
order to create a stable market
we must have adequate supply but
not oversupply it's not just a
question of plant count or can
it be it's also question number
produce if we need more more
cannabis we may need to increase
plant can't we may need increase
producers we may need to have an
expanding market we also may
need to contract.
This bill allows for that we
must have flexibility in
production management creating a
continuous and safe and
organized.
Industry and we must have the
ability to make quick regular
changes as needed in the
regulatory process that's not
limited by statute I hope I can
answer any questions you may
have thank you madam chair and
committee members.
Thank you of land
and then I'm just going to give
an opportunity our
Representative Montoya at your a
co sponsor did you want to make
any comment.
Madam chair and members of this
come committee and both Sanchez
lu Han and Martinez I'd like to
speak just briefly
What an incredible time this is
we're at the precipice of
consequential lawmaking in this
state to enter as a freshman at
this particular juncture is.
Overwhelming and so critically
important to be part of this
dialogue.
In what I see is an incredible
movie that started long before I
entered.
We are essentially standing on
the shoulders of so many
experts
practitioners advocates who want
to see this happen.
I believe that in the sausage
making that these bills will
merge into a hybrid at one point
I see my role as it has long
been for three decades as an
advocate for social justice
especially with children youth
and families in mind.
I particularly like in the
Martinez proposal the public
education campaign I think
that's a very very strong piece
I also see that the industry
pieces include funds are strong
so in closing my hope is that my
role will be
One of the collaboration
advocating for the very best
possible outcomes and protective
features for those young people
a little bit later when it's
appropriate I'm gonna make some
proposed amendments I've spoken
to both of these camps about
removing the fines and fees for
juveniles I will stop there for
now and thank you for being able
to be part of this process a
year back to madam chair.
Thank you and because I want the
audience when they are speaking
to these bills to be clear on
some of the differences I'm
gonna give Representative
Martinez an opportunity to make
some clarifications sense
Representative lu Han you
focused on on some key points
and differences in your bill and
I I'd like him to be able to
respond so the audiences a
little clearer on the on the
differences between the two
Representative Martinez thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee you know very
briefly I think there's a lot
more in common than than not one
of the biggest pieces that is
included in our bill and house
bill twelve our mechanisms to
ensure racial equity and and I
cannot stress this enough racial
equity cannot be by the way side
there's no indication from many
legislators were on the house or
Senate side that are that that
that it is the racial equity
component of this bill that is
killing it or that has killed in
the past my frankly was killed
in the past has have been you
know a former pollution of of
conservative senators on the
Senate side that many of whom
have departed the legislature
but to sacrifice key components
of equity.
For the sake of having a bill
that is slightly more
streamlined I mean it's a few
pages shorter I think it's it's
a little disingenuous so just
keep in mind the main difference
between these two bills are this
social and racial equity.
Points other than that you know
these bills are very similar and
I think in many ways really can
complement each other lastly
madam chair members of the
committee.
you know we've
We all house bill twelve is very
much in my opinion the sweet
spot between protecting and
ensuring that current industry
stakeholders are are kept whole
in quite frankly are given a leg
up.
In the recreational market with
regard to new licensees but also
ensuring that those advocates
like the good people at drug
policy alliance and many others
have the ability to ensure that
whatever legalization framework
emerges out of this legislature
is really rooted in our core
values as New Mexicans so that
meant Jarrell old you'll back
the floor thank you for the
opportunity and I look forward
to questions and answers.
Thank you representative we've
had more public members a joint
join us since hi all laid out on
the plan when we first started
this meeting so let me
tell you what.
Yeah Representative when.
Madam chair.
Just.
If I may.
Which is.
I.
I believe that anything to any
of those doing in these two
these two
Bills is disingenuous I think
that what we we're we're coming
to agree upon is yes probably
two thirds or more of our bills
are very much alike and I just
like to say that what it's going
to take to make this right or
get this right for our state is
a collaborative and working ask
for together to bring offerings
to gather and I think that I
just wanted to make that point
and I I appreciate everybody
that is here and everyone is
participated and sponsor a
chairman Martinez as well thank
you.
Thank you thank you
representative I've gotten
that's my hope as well is that
this is been a collaborative
process for a lot of years and
that we continue along that line
so audience take your hands
down.
and I'm going to tell you how
this is going to the work we are
going to take one set of a
public comment.
We will hear first from
opponents and opponents means
opposed to legalization and both
bills.
So if you're opposed all
together you'll have one minute
to to state your objections.
Then for proponents for those in
support you are either you all
testify either in support of one
or the other or a combination of
both.
So and for that because it's our
speaking to two bills it will
will give you a minute and a
half.
I'm gonna start just to give us
a sense of who's in the room
we're going to start with a poll
we're gonna do to polls and
hopefully that's going to work
for my my assistance that way
take a poll opposed in support
of house bill twelve and then
we'll take propose in support of
house bill seventeen you can
vote you can vote in both polls
so if you're opposed to
everything all together or a
strong preference that you're
only supporting one versus the
other you can vote accordingly
it'll just give us a sense if we
were in the room together in
person would be raising hands
and say get a sense for who's in
the room.
that doesn't commit you to so
talk or anything will but we'll
go after the polls will go to a
public testimony first in
opposition.
So
Gabrielle are we able to do or a
doors I don't know who's doing
the poll a poll on house bill
twelve first.
See if we can get that up.
Okay house bill twelve the vote
in support or opposition to
house bill twelve.
Give us about five more seconds
or so.
Okay.
All.
Okay okay the we have eighty one
percent of the audience in
support eight nineteen percent
in opposition sixty two to
fifteen.
Okay.
Now if we can.
a take that pull down and we'll
do the same on
seventeen.
Okay house bill seventeen in
support or opposition.
Give them a few more seconds.
Okay we can and that poll that
says seventy one percent of
support twenty nine in
opposition but the numbers that
voted I think we're about the
same in opposition a few less
and support that just gives us a
sense as we I would be raising
having people race and if we
were in person.
So first and again at the first
testimony I'm gonna take is in
opposition.
Opposition if you are speak in
opposition to both bills raise
your hand.
Opposition to both bills.
I'm we'll get the clocks set up.
Okay one minute and we're gonna
first of then go to less Ruben.
Less on yourself and had.
Thank you madam chairman
senators of the house of
representatives my opposition
was on on seventeen and I'm the
finance director decreased
Pueblo and house bill twelve has
incorporated language that
speaks to the tribal
relationships with the state and
in in the overall scheme in
regards to comprehensiveness in
regards to public safety and
cutting across from from State
Land to tribal land and that
comprehensiveness is is is
needed so the reason I put
opposition to seventeen is there
is no language in that that
speaks to the tribal
relationship with the state into
the overall
activity in regards to this
bill.
Thank you thank you less.
looks like our timer wasn't
working so we'll try and
Get that going but keep
comments brief and again if you.
Are supporting one over the
other you can wait and speak
during the opportunity to
support if you're in our total
opposition you can
speak now so next we'll go to
Leonard Salgado.
I'm not sure for timers working
but go ahead Leonard you have to
you yourself.
Leonard.
There.
But there you go that manager I
apologize I I left my my hand up
the and I should have brought it
down I apologize okay well we'll
hear you the next round.
Okay and madam chair I apologize
I.
The timer shows that it's
working on my end but nothing is
coming through on me at the
image that we're getting it
fixed right now okay so we'll
we'll do the best we can here
and next we have Alan Sanchez.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Allen signed
just some executive director The
New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops the bishops
have been very supportive of a
medical cannabis but have
concerns with both these bills
because of the issue of
parenting while under the
influence but we do appreciate
the efforts I know that you'll
work on something that search
for the common good and equity
is important to the bishops in
your conversations on these are
pieces of legislation thank you
and we wish you the best on now
they can the sausage out of
these this legislation thank you
thank you you've been witness to
much of it so thank you
Alan.
Up next we will go to Jack bent.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members of
Representative the New Mexico
business coalition and we
represent to hundreds of
businesses throughout the state
and thousands of followers for
the business coalition.
The system is since the
legalization of marijuana
Colorado of marijuana tested.
Positive in drivers in depth
related actions that increased
over one hundred and thirty five
percent.
And Colorado emergency rooms
related to marijuana increased
by thirty percent.
So there's a price when there's
revenue.
from legalized marijuana and
is usually less than one percent
of states tax revenue.
Is it worth all the pain risk
less than one percent we think
not.
Yesterday in the journal
Albuquerque journal of there's a
danger cell break up of use in
New Mexico for using east.
I apologize your to your time
elapsed
So next we go to Rosalie Flores.
Yourself go ahead grossly hello
thank you my name is also the
FLOTUS and cannabis industry
professional for some years now
I've studied social equity
programs throughout the country
three and although I very much
appreciate the efforts by
Martinez and and EPA with H. B.
twelve I am concerned with both
bills not addressing equity
enough I am hearing a lot of
conversation about how it is
addressing equity but that exact
language is omitted from all of
the bills and I think if we omit
that language we are denying
actual equity and we will have
to go back and address it and a
later date as we have had to do
here in Colorado so I just I
would like there to be stronger
support for equity I would like
there to be more prioritization
for New Mexicans to participate
and less caps and limits for
small businesses we small
farmers were not able to benefit
from hemp the way that we
anticipated due to the high
regulation and hi costs and I'm
afraid that the same thing is
going to happen within the
campus industry.
Thank you Rosalie.
And that next we have Dave
Schmidt.
I I meant to sign up just for
support okay we're coming to
work coming to you next and
actually just stay on Dave
because that was the last of our
opposition so everyone who is in
support are of one or the other
or both we're going to adjust
the timer to one and a half
minutes so you can distinguish
make your points about the two
bills.
And Dave you can go ahead and
and start.
Thank you madam chair I'm Dave
Schmidt and was a registered
lobbyist for forty nine years
retiring in twenty eighteen.
As such I represented the drug
policy alliance beginning in two
thousand and one working on the
passage of our medical cannabis
program in two thousand seven as
well as the legalization of
cannabis.
I support both the measures both
bills so that they can move
forward and combine the best of
both.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair your muted thank you
I think my my and froze so I may
take my video off but I I I
missed part of that wasn't sure
if he'd finish so next are we
have Rachel Spiegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I share your goal
to create responsible cannabis
legislation which is why I
respectfully stand in opposition
to committee staff for H. B.
twelve on three points and I
agree very much whole heartedly
with Representative Martínez
that we can overcome these three
challenges to create a
collaborative bill that works
for both the industry and the
community and our regulators
those three concerns that keep
me up at night our home grows
which on which home grows do not
threaten my business I am the
CEO of the Verdes foundation and
home grows instead threatened my
child safety the threat and all
of our safety because people
should not be trading and
consuming on regulated untested
intoxicants second I am very
concerned about the unlimited
plan count in committees that H.
B. twelve the unlimited plan
count undermines the economic
opportunity that we are trying
to find with these initiatives
we can not flood the market with
unlimited supply and expect new
entrance new license holders to
survive let alone thrive and
three I am very concerned that
there is no industry
representation on the advisory
committee that is proposed in H.
B. twelve we would never do this
in any other industry.
There is an expectation that if
we were to create a new health
care system we wouldn't.
Madam chair you with us sorry
I'm talking as I'm muted myself
Robert Jackson go ahead on may
mute yourself and go ahead.
Hello my name is Robert Jackson
and I'm here today as a the end
of seven point farms and Ellen
PP in New Mexico and also as.
One of three percent black
owners in the United States of a
cannabis in New entity.
it's route exit it's extremely
important
For us to continue to move
towards equity in this industry
that's why I support house bill
twelve.
well house bill seventeen has a
lot of verbiage about equity
it's missing one very very key
thing that if you open the doors
to unlimited plan account.
You automatically create
inequity.
It is instantaneous people like
me have no option to get into
the market.
I got them backwards
Apologize about that but
I am in
It's.
I lost my train of thought there
isn't any second.
Thank you are it I'm with the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
and in.
And in support of our house bill
seven seventeen.
Thank you Robert.
Next we have Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender I think most of
that comment today has been
focusing on the industry and
business angles of the bill that
is certainly not my area of
expertise I wanted to stand in
support of house bill twelve
because among the many bills
that are out there it is the
only one that I think adequately
addresses the injustices of the
criminal justice system and to
the over criminalization of
cannabis over the years by
addressing penalties in a
sensible way in may of on going
communications with the drug
policy alliance how to improve
that further and to ensure that
there is recourse for people who
have had their lives turned
upside down in the past and
already and currently are
serving sentences for
convictions associated with
cannabis and so for that reason
I think house bill twelve eight
from our perspective has come
the furthest and done the most
to address that policy side of
cannabis regulation and cannabis
decriminalization so we do stand
in strong support House B.
twelve house bill twelve thank
you so much thank you Kim next
we have Donald Garcia.
Hello madam chair then and sat
in New Mexico our members to the
my name is Donald I work with
southwest wellness and Espanola
and I'm here to support both
does is what you I many support
Senator hi bir and also you as
Bob madam chair then about
education I think that's very
important
I think it's very important
legalized cannabis because our
patients to do our need their
medicine and there are the
people who can benefit from as
well as a lot of people be not
out are awful fall is the
problem in New Mexico the tab
then a lot of our staffs
Dalby that docking also be do
you is dust
Rehabilitation for a lot of
people as far as the cannabis
industry goes also to as far as
As far as that market I
Representative band has said
that the market was flooded with
too much I think I believe that
that product you from the black
market does it come from
different places like that
because I'm a regulated product
does not do that to you I it's
under the weight by making a
deposit actually is the what not
work because I got to do so I
believe that the ash street
drugs that are being to the
streets are are bad for our
patients and I think that's why
we should be the last this but
thank you guys are that's a good
day.
Thank you Donald.
Next we have Dan Mayfield.
Madam chair and committee my
name is Dan Mayfield over
Representative US eagle federal
credit union we take no position
on the bills but I'm here said
the financial industry right to
serve the industry we are aware
that many lawmakers have
significant questions about the
safety of banking cannabis as a
C. R. B. industry grows as you
know because cannabis is
federally federally regulated
consider schedule one drug
businesses cannot use the
national banking system and it's
too often a cash only business a
US eagle however we have license
the system from Colorado's
cannabis industry that ensures
legal businesses in the cannabis
field have access to most of the
banking offerings any other
legal business does in New
Mexico such as that cards debit
cards checking cash handling it
is not easy but we have a team
of complaint experts at Harry
that work hard to make sure C.
R. B.'s their employees and
vendors stay safe as you
consider these bills please note
the financial industry New
Mexico is offering options to
keep employees vendors and
owners safe giving them access
to banking services that all
legal businesses deserve thank
you.
Thank you Dan.
Our next we have Karen Witt
lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Karen what lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and while we take no
position on either of these
bills we support the
decriminalization of cannabis
and addressing the criminal
criminal equity issues related
to this bill in addition we
support the strong education
component of HB twelve it is
time that we address the deep
social inequities and
inequalities that the
enforcement of these laws has
created.
And exacerbated in our world
specifically we would like to
encourage the sponsors of HB
seven to amend their bill to
include these expungement
provisions and the education
provisions.
Thank you is crucial to how to
address the on going in.
Inequality and bias we face in
our society thank you thank you
I didn't mean to cut you off.
next we have Michael's you're
fine Sperber gimmick queen.
Go ahead Michael.
Madam chairwoman members of the
committee good morning thank you
for hearing me my name is
Michael Spurr Burke McQueen I am
a resident of Rio Arriba county
in a volunteer for a citizen
advocacy group called retake our
democracy we support either of
these bills were happy with
either of these bills
we lean toward a few twelve
because for the reasons that
people have already identified
of the expungement of records
the.
Attempt at community equity up
we are however concerned about
some details of the bill in its
current form not on policy
grounds but because there are
some passages of the bill that
have been garbled and our New
Mexico medical and an
interpreter full some provisions
that need to be adjusted so that
they don't contradict each other
up I have sent a list of the
problems we have found to the
Sanchez and we very much hope
that before the bill becomes law
the problems we've identified
can be repaired thank you very
much.
Thank you Michael.
Next we have Bruce McKinney.
On mute yourself they don't.
Yes I'm strongly in favor of
regulating and taxing campus but
I'm concerned about the lack of
serious penalties for black
market sales in need to build in
both penalty for unlawful sale
of nine ounces or nine hundred
pounds of cannabis is a
misdemeanor or possession of
nine ounces or nine hundred
pounds the penalty is four
degree felony there's no
distinction between retail and
wholesale sale of black market
sales and this will undermine
the regulated market I'm also so
that concerned about home grows
in H. B. twelve household can
grow pro plants which would be
as much as programs for
thousands this would undermine
the record on the regulated
market and would make a lot of
cannabis available for
smuggling.
So I'd like to see both build
strength in in their
That is for but market thank
you.
Thank you Bruce next we have net
dean.
Good morning still madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Matt dean I live in Santa Fe
New Mexico and I've been a
patient in the medical cannabis
program of for thirteen years
now I believe I am in favor of
house bill twelve
I do think that we need to
always fit carefully focus madam
chair members of the committee
on protections for medical
access to medical cannabis and
that we always are cognisant of
retaining the testing because if
you're taking medical cannabis
for medical condition you need
to know what's in it what's not
in it is it safe for your
particular condition or not I
also hope that we will place
the.
Appropriate grow for
recreational as adult use as
well as for patients that have a
personal production license and
that we always make sure that we
have adequate supply of medical
grade medical cannabis for
medical patients in the mix of
this and thank you very much for
your time and careful
consideration of these matters
today in the past and going into
the future thank you thank you
Matt.
Next we have Billy Rogers.
Good morning madam chair
committee members thank you so
much for having us on this
platform this morning I
represent a small family for
that has existed in eastern
curry county in continuous
operation since at least
nineteen those.
Thanks we've supported these
efforts for a number of years
including working group in
twenty nineteen we are very
appreciative of the efforts to
bring this legalization this
legalized market the small
farmers like ourselves the
microlights sins is specially
the area that we're particularly
happy within the legislation we
were we would like to propose
there being an early start
mechanism for current holders of
the PPL.
So that they can also
participate in the early start
of the market along with the big
pretty.
There's we very much are gets
the unrestricted plate count we
agree with the previous comments
that they immediately start the
industry out in a position.
but with the lack of equity and
also the we also appreciate the
ability of the current licensing
structures proposed to.
Of it but integration of the
industry in short we are very
appreciative to have this
opportunity a small farm orders
and we appreciate all the
efforts of the committee and now
the people are working for this
effort thank you so much madam
chair committee members.
Thank you billing next we have
on it doctor boniva bone.
All right.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you very much I
am doctor one of the directors
of the rail Services Division
and standing in support of house
bill twelve.
As both the HSD and the Human
Services Department and we are
very appreciative of the very
well crafted legislation I want
to underline just a couple of
things that requirement for
multi lingual public education I
think goes a long way from our
perspective in helping the
entire state benefit from the
kind of social equity that has
been mentioned but that that
public education is is extremely
important.
and also the the the public
health and substance abuse
prevention programming which
which we are manage quite a bit
of within the behavioral
services division and we look
forward to collaborating with
our our
That our counterparts in the
department of health if that
swear that continues to stay I
will also add just quickly that
we've also reviewed to the
substitute bill and and our
support for that stands just as
strong as our support for house
bill twelve thank you so much.
Thank you doctor bone.
Our next will go to Jesse
Crawford.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jesse
Crawford I'm a resident of
Albuquerque and I would like to
voice my support the
legalization of adult use
cannabis is a huge step forward
in addressing the long injustice
and especially the an equal and
cure native law enforcement
which have been at the wages of
the war on drugs.
Decades of damage can ever truly
be I'm done but we must do
everything possible to mitigate
the harm so while I support both
house bill twelve and house bill
seventeen I would like to voice
my support specifically for
house bill twelve expungement
and other restaurant of
components.
It would be plainly wrong for
the state of New Mexico to leave
so many individuals with a
criminal record under laws which
we now understand have done more
harm.
Representative focus from on
violence caused by cannabis
prohibition I ask that this
committee remember that history
of harm and take the this steps
in house bill twelve do you
address that part of that
history your power to today that
being expungement of cannabis
offenses the community grants
reinvestment fund and
requirements for the cannabis
control division take positive
action to welcome marginalized
individuals into the regulated
cannabis industry.
Help create a foundation on
which we can be getting to write
fifty years of wrong thank you.
Thank you Jesse our next we have
Dan weeks.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Dan
weeks and I am the a consultant
and lobbyist for the cannabis
chamber of commerce were I
basically to speak in support of
both pieces of legislation
obviously Senate bill seventeen
our house bill seventeen is the
preference of the of the chamber
I think
First of all like to
congratulate everybody that's
been involved in this process I
think we're at that point.
That if these pieces of
legislation are able to report
to the process which is a
collaborative and cooperative
process that will be able to
come out with a very solid piece
of legislation that will be
enacted the session.
I do say that
The chamber members are not
opposed to the social economic
equity provisions on nor are
they opposed any of the
restorative justice justice
initiatives.
We just took a little bit
different perspective on how to
move forward with the
legislation so and and summary
we support both pieces of
legislation would like to see
them both move forward to the
process and helpful hearings I'm
also very concerned about some
of the technical problems
relative to the probation and
the analysis of the of the
Revenue cations thank you.
Thank you Dan our next we have
Wiley after ten.
Hello madam chair committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of house bill seventeen today my
name is widely after ten I am
the head grower of an Allen PPE
and was working as a buyer for a
high volume high and dispensary
in Portland Oregon during the
transition into adult use in
twenty sixteen.
I would like to speak to what I
witnessed firsthand in Oregon as
their adult we use law went into
effect I worked with hundreds of
growers for years leading up to
legalization and what the small
farmers and business owners have
to into our as a result of the
state policy on limited
production capacity what
devastating overnight the doors
into this legal regulated market
swung wide open and everyone but
the most wealthy and powerful
we're running with cement shoes.
With businesses were crossed in
the race to the bottom when the
market flooded with product the
already powerful and well
capitalized entity for able to
withstand the price worth
meeting regular Oregonians
struggling in the way the same
will be true for every day New
Mexicans who hope to enter this
industry the legislature want to
provide opportunities for equity
and to create the most the gal
tarian and innovative market
place the choice is clear repeat
the failures of Oregon in regard
to unlimited production capacity
or allow small business owners
and hopefuls fair shot at
creating the diverse market
place that reflects New Mexico
thank you for your time.
Thank you widely next we have
Colton came.
Hello my.
What.
Colton
We're getting a message that you
have an older version of zoom
zoom and that we need to promote
you to a panelist which I'm
going to do for your comments
and then we'll take you back out
again.
Go ahead
Colton.
Chair of the members of the
committee thank you for taking
my comment I would like to speak
in support of HB twelve although
I think both bills are good
start to the legalization of
cannabis but in short I think
the objectives of legalizing
cannabis are two fold to
generate tax revenue for the
benefit of New Mexico and to
transition away from the
criminalization of nonviolent
drug offenses both bills are
very good with the first part
but come up short with the
second part in my opinion.
Throughout both bills there are
mentions of misdemeanor and
felony punishments for
violations of both bills.
this in my opinion perpetuates
the criminalization of
nonviolent drug offenses and
though HB twelve does provide
provisions for expungement in
the interim.
Are people that are convicted of
these crimes face job loss
unable to find homes other
negative consequences associated
with prohibition.
I would suggest reconsidering
the penalties I understand the
need to regulate this industry
but I would suggest replacing
the is a misdemeanor and felony
punishments with our excessive
fines confiscation of cannabis
that exceeds legal quantities or
liens on properties where these
violations occur.
Thank you very much.
Thank you call.
Our next we have Christina
Caffrey.
At good morning chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Kristina Capri I'm an
attorney and I've worked in the
medical cannabis industry for a
number of years I want to point
out in H. B. seventeen a number
of provisions that are
problematic and that are
counterproductive to the task of
building a successful adult use
market.
First section eight B. which
says that the requirements to be
a licensee shall include
standards for determining
whether the person has the
financial and operational
ability to engage in commercial
cannabis activity this provision
really invites corruption
invites the government to choose
winners and losers and in this
industry rather than New
Mexicans succeeding because of
their own efforts the provision
gives the authority to
regulators to use too much
discretion and make arbitrated
stations it really creates an
artificial barrier to entry and
it's incredibly based standard
so then you'll have appeals and
so licensing will end up in the
courts rather than being a
simple process next section six
G. which of course allows
production limitations I have
litigated the issue in the
medical field and I can tell you
that making the call about
market equilibrium is incredibly
hard because there are so many
moving parts in this industry
and really when you have
production limitations people
end up buying on the street
corners back in the US market
and suppression limitations are
incredibly counterproductive
finally US section three E.
which section three C. which
talks about executive orders and
I'm done.
Thank you.
Madam chair yes please excuse me
for interrupting I didn't get
the name of the last a person
who spoke Christina Caffrey.
Next we'll go to war
You're welcome John white cell.
Go ahead John under the New
Mexico go ahead hello yes I live
in Santa Fe New Mexico thank you
for
putting together this repair
really historic
event
I'm impressed by what I've heard
from the advocates of both house
built twelve and seventeen and
I'm just a person out here in
Santa Fe but
I would like to see things that
merge and the best parts of both
and taking into account even the
comments.
From today
I had I did have an experience
with a family member who was
offered medical marijuana during
her cancer treatment but it was
it was such a stark contrast
between.
and and and aid the
medical aid being able to
prescribe morphine and then we
had to wait in a week or two to
get her treatment.
But.
My time is expiring here good
luck with all of the work I I am
so glad that the.
Drug policy alliance and has
alerted me to the activities
today.
Thank you.
Next we have safe access New
Mexico.
you have an old version of zoom
so we're going to promote you to
panelists briefly.
Go ahead to to introduce
yourself.
Safe access.
Need to under there you go thank
you madam chair I wish to speak
in favor of house bill twelve
most importantly this is the
only bill to address the
shortage of cannabis supply in
the medical program something
has been ongoing for years now.
And another key point from house
bill twelve this is the only
bill to have this provision for
the cannabis regulatory advisory
committee.
An individual appointed to the
committee shall not hold any
ownership interest or investment
in a license entity pursuant to
the cannabis regulation Act.
That is a very key part of that
bill that should be adopted in
all of the bills.
That is all I have thank you
thank you.
And next we have Fernando
Trujillo.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
Fernando.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that of non
look to heal I am a policy
associate with bold features and
we stand in strong support of
equitable and affordable kind of
this legislation the
criminalization and
stigmatization account of this
can be traced to the history of
the past hundred years we
basically propaganda such as we
for minus in the skating it
editorials.
On articles madam culture it was
successfully criminalized by
making it seem like the some
grand danger stemming from
communities of color that day
and the so called white
stabilize world well we now what
we know now is that cannabis has
the potential to save lives such
as mine we medically assisted
treatment cannabis I have not
touched another opioid for
almost two years access to
regulated cannabis programs in
New Mexico would allow a wider
range of people to legally use a
holistic medicine and has the
potential to increase the state
revenues we are in support of
the of legislation that includes
the community reinvestment
program that is focused on
restitution employment housing
efforts for those previously
convicted on cannabis related
crimes in legislation that does
not overcome the lies you were
under agents we need your
support and encourage amendment
that strength in the state what
stigmatization and the
decriminalization of cannabis
and I say increasing the social
and racial with the as well as
the criminal legal system reform
components that I passed and I
went for this legislation and
ask for you to ensure that it is
the cheap thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you for not go next we
have Justin green.
Good morning madam chairwoman
and Committee thank you very
much my name is Justin Greene I
own a local delivery company in
Santa Fe and have been serving
the community for over eighteen
years I'm on the board of the R.
NDA the restaurant marketing and
delivery association it's an
independent association of local
independent delivery operators
such as ourselves we have
representation in Hobbs and on
the Eastern Front of New Mexico
and down in Los crucis as well
as here in Santa Fe we're
generally in support of these
building assets the sponsors
look closer at the details
regarding delivered
delivery can be the safest way
to distribute cannabis reducing
the need to leave the house this
reduces the risk of driving
under the influence and reduces
the personal interactions that
the pandemic has forced us to
limit.
All right so we are in favor of
incorporating delivery into this
but want to make sure that it is
done fairly safely and doesn't
affect some of the other
programs out there.
We have recommendations we have
put together and given to some
of the sponsors and would like
to work with the other sponsors
to create best practices that
are developed from across the
country in the world of cannabis
and alcohol delivery I'm happy
to work with Sanchez and look
forward to seeing both these
bills progress and become one
and legalize recreational
cannabis in the state thank you
very much everybody good luck.
Thank you Justin.
Next we have marked a ram.
Thank you madam chair can hear
me we can go ahead mark good
morning
Representative Maggie's farm
madam chair
I like to stand in support of of
the substitute for house bill
twelve I want to make sure they
can Sanchez Representative hobby
and Martinez and Andrea Romero
who's brought a lot to this
scale Act appreciate the
recognition of how long you've
been involved in the bill of
madam chair of magus farm is a
unique company the operator in
southern Colorado of the only
grows certified green they only
grow outside the only use the
son of the only harvest once
year a very unique company that
I think would make the New
Mexico town this program a
stronger program of the reason
we support the substitute for
hospital twelve madam chair is
because it offers more inclusion
of all of those aspects of the
legislation and and eventually
that that will support a
stronger and more vibrant
program in New Mexico it's
really important all the states
around us are passing
legalization the federal
government might
this still needs to be strong
for Byron program and inclusion
doesn't mean here marks I think
it's unfair to call your marks
inclusion inclusion will make
this a better be all for better
market in New Mexico thank you
madam chair.
Thank you mark.
Next we have dug fine.
Thank you need to I'm there you
go go ahead and share and
members of the committee my name
is Doug fine I'm a Grant County
based author and journalist of
four books about cannabis Hamm I
have a pretty good handle on the
several dozen cannabis
legalization
that have occurred throughout
the nation and so today I'm
going to speak all too strongly
in support of H. B. twelve and
specifically one aspect of it
it's the only bill that allows
home cultivation for thousands
of New Mexico families cannabis
legalization is not about going
to a store it's about
cultivating their own cannabis
safely on their own home inside
or outside of the pandemic it's
a non starter to think about a
cannabis bill without home
cultivation it's almost every
state does it from Vermont
Colorado two or again
As for and I would just I guess
like to end by saying that I
don't believe that cultivating
my own green chili disrupts the
hatch green Chile market thank
you very much.
Thank thank you Doug next we
have Jeffrey Holland.
Good morning madam chair person
and committee members my name's
Jeffrey hall and I am the
executive director of a local
nonprofit called indoor and
power company I'm also a
clinical therapist specializing
in substance use disorder and
and treating associated co
occurring issues that come along
with that I think both bills
have great qualities but to to
nonstarters for me and H. B.
twelve are unlimited plan growth
and no industry representation
at any level so it is improving
across the board in every state
with over production and
no guidelines for plant count
that it has been an industry
Keller for local mom and pop
growers manufacturers delivery
drivers and it's been actually a
driver of crime attracting
criminals from out of state
Madam procure the oversupplied
cannabis at low prices then
bringing and other crimes such
as sex trafficking.
Drug distribution that is not
cannabis related and it has
proven to be a tax burden on
those communities and you will
see if you look into those areas
where there has been over
production there's barely coming
out of that right now and what
they realized is that the over
production with unlimited plan
count or too high of a plank how
as actually worked against them
and being counterintuitive to
any of the games they were
hoping to make when they
initially started so I would be
firmly against unlimited plan
count and no industry
representation at any level
thank you.
Thank you Jeffrey next we have
David Hermio.
Yes madam chair.
Go ahead David yes madam chair
members of the committee David
how to me on a registered
lobbyist for the drug policy
alliance the drug policy
alliance applauds all efforts to
move the ball forward on
legalization of recreational
cannabis because legalization is
the only means of establishing
all up the framework that rights
the wrongs of the unfair and
unjust war on drugs that
targeted unfortunately people at
risk and people of color there
is no social justice without
social equity for those reasons
the drug policy alliance has
been proud to work with
representatives like the agency
and Romero and the others on
house bill twelve which is the
bill that contains comprehensive
social equity that will lead to
social justice we are encouraged
by hearing that the green
chamber wants to join in those
efforts and we would hope that
they would embrace those
provisions on house bill twelve.
We heard some alarmist of
concerns about home grow home
grow goes to the social equity
and social justice component as
currently citizens throughout
New Mexico are allowed to home
brew without any fear of facing
criminal charges are being
criminally targeted if we do not
allow folks to home grow those
folks will be targeted in the
unjust and unfair matter that
they have been in the past and
those folks will not have access
to cannabis the big can grow
without having to pay for it
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you David next we have
ascena.
Madam chair committee members my
name's Athena Christodoulou and
I'm the political director for
the Adelante progressive caucus
and we're in favor of
decriminalizing and legalizing
recreational use of marijuana I
think we're information there
are good parts from each bill
and I'm glad to hear that both
parties Sanchez Representative
Martinez and low on spoke about
conciliation.
I'm I would like to point out
that this is strictly a social
justice not necessarily economic
growth bill are we cannot rely
on this for income this is
really working towards social
justice we need to go into this
with our eyes wide open and I
see that there's a lot of effort
to bring education which is key
education both in substance
abuse and also in possibly using
drugs properly not just for
ingestion proceedings like
clothing so that I'm not using a
lot of water based cotton and
plastic but the biggest thing
for me is the research piece
because now we can legalize
research of this product so no
longer is it that they can say
this does not been proven to be
a gateway drug we will have to
prove it.
Thank you ma'am.
Thank you.
Next we have see on our Vigil.
extremely thank.
Google will thank you thank you
Michael go ahead.
Representative for two million
into the pension money New
Mexico as a group in New Mexico
where there would be no war or
badly been hit with the opioid
epidemic level but opioid
epidemic you and all.
You
were hoping for do more recent
as part of this vote the people
in the community and surrounding
communities battle the opioid
epidemic and the we've kind of
been for one of the best route
to go as far as as far as
getting people to be cruel.
The groups that withdrawal
symptoms will be back in New
Mexico.
Correct would.
And
So it'll be it'll it'll because
the.
And
of funding both improve the
quality for people control their
own maintenance then if they
need to go a little more still
have more PPO final that will
grow your in New and though it
the the black market and welcome
you to feel more on top of that
and we're going to use and.
You're going to create criminal
in my opinion so
oval to you both the bill and
the thank you for you later in.
Is that Representative earlier
with the for in support of the
of the Han and Montoya's bill I
do have received that there will
have to be a virgin I'm happy to
to hear that all of my concerns
however of in terms of the two
bills is that I'd like HB
seventeen because it allows
money to be given to misspelled
is not just in grants of the
education campaign is also very
important I do have a bit of
Harper with the adverse
employment action house bill
twelve and just strongly support
the committee and the sponsors
of both built to work together
for a good merge thank you.
Thank you so I am.
Next we have in the White.
After Reese reset
all have to promote indie to a
panelists had.
Go ahead in the.
Andy we can't hear you.
I'm showing she should be able
to you madam chair I think there
may be technical issues on that
and.
And they will circle back around
to see if you can get your
microphone working
you for if you want to move her
back out.
We'll go to Chad Lowe's on all.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee many shells on a
resident of Los crucis and I'm
for H. B. twelve and not issue
seventeen they're just too much
in the bill that don't agree
with especially when it comes to
home grows I'm a PPO holder have
been since two thousand thirteen
hasn't caused any issues in our
program of any significant
issues at all also most home
growers and people that you've
grown I've I've helped many
patients sort of grows and grow
themselves that they don't grow
enough to really make a
difference with anything that
most of them don't grow more
than an ounce per plant so some
is that something a pound most
produces in this program can
grow complex so most people
regular citizens are to be able
to grow power plant I was on
Senator more one of five western
SB four oh six the cannabis
regulation changes
I've done a lot for this program
and I just would like to see
legalization done correctly we
want legalization and
normalization not prohibition
with perks in criminalizing
people to grow cannabis is
brought I am able to grow I mean
through my own beer unable to
grow tobacco in my backyard no
one cares but making it a crime
doesn't make sense for trying to
legalize it here but making it
to where I have to go to a store
to buy cannabis doesn't make any
sense at all we're very rural
state revert or tool to even
have something like this people
were gonna rely on being able to
grow for themselves thank you
very much and I do support these
people.
Thank you Chad next we have
Artemis art.
Army CO were merrily carver.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is our
agency or merry cover from yucca
I'd like to read you a quote
from John other commend
president Richard Nixon's
domestic policy chief talking
about the war on drugs he says
quote we knew we couldn't make
it illegal to be either against
the war or black but by getting
the public to associate the
hippies with marijuana and
blacks with heroin and then
criminalizing both heavily we
could disrupt those communities
we could arrest their leaders
raid their homes break up their
meetings from the fund them
night after night on the evening
news do we know we were lying
about the drugs of course we
did.
Even before Nixon's admit and
quote even before this is
administration previous reports
that during the Great Depression
unemployment increased public
resentment of Mexican immigrants
escalating public and
governmental concern about the
problem of marijuana and
marijuana was linked to our
quote racially inferior
communities but nineteen thirty
one twenty one twenty nine
states have outlawed marijuana.
The criminalization of marijuana
was and is a product of racism
and political violence any
legalization bill must include
comprehensive justice and equity
provisions right now HB twelve
is the only bill this session
that does because of that it is
Mr it is our New York is full
support and hopefully yours
thank you for your time mean
thank you.
Next we have a high lonesome
help you could introduce so
speaking.
Yes thank you madam chair can
you hear me yes go ahead yes
thank you madam chair and
committee
I am Jeff because steel I
represent high lonesome Hampden
Silver City Grant County New
Mexico.
I am in support of both bills
but I would like for the
committee to take into
consideration all the small the
small farmers you in your
decision we are and should be
the strongest aspect of this new
industry so by equally dividing
the plant count between
commercial producers and micro
business producers I think this
will give an equal playing field
licensing fees held out in the
H. B. twelve seem fair and I
don't see any spelled out in the
H. B. seventeen but is the plant
count that would be adjusted I
think
I would also like to see the
hemp industry not being hindered
in these laws that being said if
the USDA does not up the limit
from zero point three point nine
nine up to almost one percent
that we could offer you know
some quality green house not
filled grown for five bio mass
but quality CBD flower to the
medical and recreational markets
some of our varieties get up to
eighteen percent CBD and just
barely over zero point two zero
point three and would like to
see if we can enter the market
that way also thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Next we have Zach Martin.
Madam chair committee members
thank you I am Zach Martin I am
a New Mexican who is looking to
enter the industry and I
therefore support legalization
and I am in favor of a simple
licensing process however I am
not encouraging by health bill
twelve which seem to find the
New Mexico medical industry or
potentially large scale
companies from out of state with
an immediate monopoly of the
industry with the unlimited plan
account.
I believe that a component of
the governor's intent with this
with this initiative is to
provide small business
opportunities for New Mexicans
and the unlimited plan count
would not provide that
opportunity.
This would enable new
opportunities for those of us
who would like to enter the
industry are there for support
house bill seventeen but I
mainly supported comprehensive
bill that enable simple
licensing licensing and remove
city on limited plan count.
That would provide immediate
monopolization of the industry
thank you.
Thank you our next we have
golden seed LLC if you could
introduce is speaking.
Hi there my name's Brian lacks I
advise the board of seven point
farms which is a New Mexico
licensed non profit producer I'm
also a paramedic with decades of
encountering and treating opioid
overdoses on the streets of New
Mexico and finally I'm a parent
of an eleven year old son who
has epilepsy and who is a New
Mexico medical cannabis patients
I'm here today to support house
bill seventeen my main concern
with the substitute for house
bill twelve is the unlimited
licenses and the unlimited plant
count in my six years of
involvements in New Mexico ten a
business I've learned that it's
a risky business and not just
because of federal prohibition
but the costs of the cannabis
startup are huge and unlimited
Market.
Creates more risk to
stakeholders and small business
people who wish to join the
industry.
House bill seventeen in my view
aims to remove barriers to entry
while maintaining a responsible
level of economic regulation we
look forward to collaborating
with the entire pro legalization
community Representative
Martinez visited our farm last
year and we appreciate his
industry advocacy thank you.
Thank you.
We're gonna try in the white one
more time.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
perfect thank you so much thank
you madam chair and thank you
committee members I said my name
is in the White I am the board
president of the New Mexico
cannabis chamber of commerce I
would like to show my support
for house bill seventeen as the
the majority of producers and
manufacturers that are currently
operating in the New Mexico
medical cannabis industry while
we do support both bills my
primary concern is the lack of
production limits in house bill
twelve unlimited plan council
allow for very very large scale
corporations to come into New
Mexico and authorize the
industry as really after madam
previously he was ahead firing
organ any witness firsthand the
unintended consequences of
unlimited grows hundreds of
small businesses were forced to
close their doors because they
could no longer compete with the
largest entities that were able
to scale up the quickest in
addition a limited growth will
divert surplus cannabis into the
legal market and to joining
states so house bill seventeen
supports smaller homegrown New
Mexico businesses are and with
that I thank you madam chair and
thank you committee members
thank you Andy and last I think
we have TJ Lawrenson.
Unmute yourself TJ.
Thank you madam chair and
members the committee of the
committee thank you for your
time and thank you for all the
work that you all done so far on
this effort I know it's been
years and years in the making in
New Mexico and we appreciate all
the work you've done.
I want to support house bill
twelve house bill twelve is
really taken into consideration
social equity which is UFCW has
worked hard on this for years
and years our public policy with
United food and commercial
workers union of the very first
cannabis contracting and the
nation is in New Mexico
the very largest
Minority owner in canvases in
New Mexico New Mexico is a very
proud tradition and the
continuation of that and we
would support the continued
legalization we would like to
talk to both Sanchez about the
the ten thousand jobs will be
created by this bill and what
that means to the workers in the
industry and again I think all
the hard work that everybody has
done with this and we would like
to make sure that workers are
considered in this in this new
emerging industry thank you for
your time.
Thank you TJ that was the last
of our public comment I would
like to really thank all of the
Attendees and those who
commented for your really fought
full comments and and focus on
the issues that matter most to
you and in either bill so thank
you very much before we go to of
questions from the committee I
would like to give each sponsor
briefly an opportunity to
respond to some of the comments
or make you you know and then
we'll go to go to committee
professionals were I'm sure we
will delve into a deeper but if
you want to have an initial
comment in reaction to the the
public comment Representative
Martinez no we're ready to go
for two and a thank you okay
Representative lu Han.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to say thank you to all
those who are participating
today and they're just so full
of energy because this is what
this is about this is about this
is just getting the conversation
and get everybody's voice is
heard and I'm just so delighted
to hear the conversation
happening this is this is this
is wonderful so thank you for
the time to speak at this and
look forward to the question
thank you madam chair thank you
thank you to our sponsors and
again yes I I couldn't agree
more on the
the COVID thoughtful comments we
got from the audience first on
my list for a questions from
members of the committee is our
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and sorry
I can't get my photo resume to
work so you won't see ninety
money face just my picture so my
apologies and my also my
apologies for not being there
this morning I was in
appropriations that went a
little long but are so I didn't
get to hear all of the
presentation but I do appreciate
the high level different shades
that you are handed out and so
I'm going off of that so first
I'd like to find out ask
question on a number eight on
the high level different sheets.
In the middle it says requires
legal rights to sufficient water
supply.
So if I'm reading that correctly
madam chair and representatives.
This is saying in law that you
medical our cat I mean excuse me
cannabis growers legalization of
cannabis growers have the right
to first water am I reading that
correctly.
Madam chair and and
Representative Armstrong
No no with that means is that as
industry apply for license I've
got a show that they've got a
proper water right attached to
that request one of the issues
we've seen in the past our
operations that set up shop
particularly in rural
communities where there may not
be a water right and they're
tapping into local water
domestic sources this will
ensure that whatever applicant
comes into a specific community
has to show that they have you
know either either a secular
Water axes or or you know local
municipal water sources whatever
that might be.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so can you give a
definition of
are they going to have to show
that they own a water rate for
that just access because
everyone has access.
To water right now just so for
your information with the middle
Rio Grande Conservancy district
there they are asking farmers to
not water their crops in their
fields because of a lack of snow
pack and melt.
So I'm not sure how that's how
you're going to measure knowing
that they have access to water
can you explain.
Yeah madam chair and all defer
to my experts who help those
draft that piece misconduct.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and representative
they're going with us.
The age you are thank you and
the.
They have to prove that they
have access just like any other
agricultural crop we have to
prove they have access to water
that maybe water right
Another or another source on
suspicion Committee to meet that
water me but the intent here
that it's just that they have
access to water like any other
agricultural crop industry.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and and expert
for that dot com and I'm still a
little bit concerned I'll have
to read on and you said page
thirty what line did you say
again ma'am
Madam chair representative yes
it's on page thirty two lines
twenty.
Our and then it goes on to the
following page so there's that
brexit.
Thank you.
Senator Representative lu Han
for House Bill seventeens has a
I think it's worded a little bit
different but it is still
has
need for water plan
Representative lu Han did you
wanna yes I'm chair of
Representative thank you for the
question and what we what it
does is speak to is that we're
we're working through these
these issues and what would
happen R. as we're creating that
the advisory committee under the
RLD and working with LG in other
state agencies would provide the
opportunity to work with the
state engineer to dresses this
further questions as as this
industry growing and I'd like to
have been addresses a little bit
more thank you.
I chairwoman committee members
it sounds like the language is
pretty similar on H. B.
seventeen it's on page twenty
five lines eight through fifteen
and it stipulates that if
applying for a cannabis producer
Lysons or cannabis manufacturer
license you must submit a plan
to utilize energy and water
conservation measures as well as
documents that you have the
legal right and access to a
public or private commercial
water supply under these water
rates or another source of water
sufficient to meet the water
needs related to the license
thank you.
Thanks okay thank you yes that
does that that's a little more
clear now so my other saying
thank you madam chair and
experts for those answers.
on the high level she also it
says on twenty two provisions
for professional services it
states that
Attorneys accountants realtor
security except for a not
subject to professional
discipline.
What does that mean Madam chair
and representative and I'm just
going to step the to to and just
to clarify those were my crib
notes and not exact quotes of
the the bills so.
Representative can respond thank
you thank you chairwoman I'm and
thank you for clarifying that I
was wondering where we're
Representative Armstrong was
reading from so that that's I
think that's your committee
announces that you have there
Matt madam chair and members of
Armstrong that's a great
question we want to make sure
that folks like me I'm I'm a
member of the state more you
know if I chose to go I work in
the cannabis industry that I
would be protected from any type
of
disciplinary action by by my
association and and the same
applies to accountants and and
other folks who have to.
you know go to a specific
process to become licensed in
their own profession that's the
that's why that language was in
there it's it's an added
protection for those types of
professions and and they're
they're pretty limited in scope
as as as you could read from the
language.
Okay thank you so much for that
so does that answer that helps
me I'm I'm also concerned about
I don't I don't really like in
the bill where we have and and
many of the people who testified
where you can own your own
plants I've heard from a lot of
people in Colorado where that
was if they could do one thing
different they would change that
so that the I don't want to our
gender what we're trying to do
with legalization as far as
diversifying our economy things
to that nature and that that
comes to my next
Are part of of
licensing.
You know I don't want to create
what we did with the liquor
licenses I'm not insinuating
that whatsoever but I do think
that there needs to be so that
our industry tribes
if this is legalized.
I'm concerned that we can do
that there's no limit to the
license so I just wanted you to
be aware of that for from on my
end.
And then the other part is madam
chair.
Thank you for putting the
employment employer protections
in there that's one thing I'm
getting closer to me for
supporting this bill.
To have those employer
protections so one of the other
things that see I was curious it
says the Indian nations tribes
and pueblos inter government
agreements are we going to
they're a sovereign nation and
are we going to I'm I'm talking
thinking about the to where the
tobacco taxes of the G. R. T.
tax and things like that will we
get the same if we going to
those agreements or we will New
Mexico benefit our our tax
benefits the same on tribal as
it does all off tribal.
That's another great question
madam chair and Representative
Armstrong you know that's that's
part of what needs to be
negotiated in those agreements
the language in this bill simply
allows for those agreements to
take place what's in those
agreements I think will be up to
both parties the tribes and and
the state my expectation is that
we wouldn't repeat some of
those.
Issues that have arisen in the
past and that we could create
truly inequitable a relationship
I think between state government
and whatever tribal nation we we
enter into a contract with.
Thank you I would hope for the
same Representative madam chair
and representative the
under the public school code I
see the madam chair
Representative math yes I'm
sorry yes Representative went on
yes go ahead.
Madam go ahead yes go ahead.
Okay I just wanted to say that
in those agreements that that we
they are discussion I've been
talking about this but they
would have to be entered into
what we know is that compacts
and creating that around the the
legalization or that the
jurisdiction under the federal
guidelines as well to that would
have to be addressed and I just
wanted to to add that to that
point thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you so much I'm so my
other question was the education
piece of it amended to require
annual annual evidence based
drug education for six to twelve
is that addressed with PED in
within the PED budget
or is this going to be sort of a
I use the word unfunded mandate.
Well yes.
That's a good point mentioned
representative you did keep in
mind this is going to be a we
estimate on the first year alone
fifty million dollars in revenue
to the general fund and as we
heard earlier from from both the
the sponsor of the other of of
seventeen and and even ourselves
we've really sort of
come to a place where we have
lived in our bill at lease would
limit the number of your marks
to only two seventeen doesn't
have any.
My expectation is as the.
The people at at HFC like
yourself and and others have the
opportunity to fund these things
that you will be able to use
additional revenue soars upwards
of fifty million dollars on the
first year alone and probably
more after that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that I was looking also
at the next our little down the
line it says counties can add an
excise tax of four percent in
the in house bill twelve and
then a little further down it
says Department re retain up to
three percent from the municipal
and county taxes to administer
those taxes so the the
additional three percent that
they're going to keep.
If I might County decided to tax
of four percent the agency that
means the state is going to keep
three percent of that is that
correct.
madam chair and reserve can you
can you point me to the to the
page so I can actually follow
the language along with you.
I'm sorry madam chair and
representative Tom the high
level sheet that the madam chair
out to us trying to do the
differences it send section
Fifty six.
Fifty six get.
So let me let me start by maybe
just expendable but on on the
tax piece so the the the tax
under house bill twelve.
Will be
Nine percent excise tax
Applicables growth seats tax so
that will include the state
questions local questions and
then a County slash municipal
additional excise tax.
the tax the local excise tax
would be imposed in whatever
locality it was purchased so you
know if your radio County and
you purchased within C. of
Albuquerque you will they will
impose the municipal tax that
the county and and if you're in
the unincorporated area for you
County you would pay that county
tax
I'm looking at the language on
now and it does say that that's
probably something we need to
clean up we wouldn't want a
local county to impose three
percent and then state takes
three percent feminist of the
three percent
so will as this bill makes his
way through and with the
intelligence of the of this
committee should you let it get
pastor committee it goes to the
tax committee next and I'm
already working with members of
my committee to tighten up the
tax piece and ensure that you
know we do the due diligence as
you know we have really good
people on there on both sides of
the aisle you know including the
speaker and including
Representative Harper and many
others so that's something that
will definitely clean up thank
you for raising that.
Thank you so much yeah that's
exactly madam chair and
representative that you know I
don't want to my County to.
Exactly what you stated so that
that was a concern for me and
again thank you madam chair for
this great our high level of
this bill.
The other saying madam chair and
representative it amends the
indoor clean act to allow
consumption areas so it's not
just adding to the local how
local tobacco is consumed.
Madam chair all all have them we
expand will be more on that
piece this is something that was
added I believe for the first
time in twenty nineteen when
this bill passed the the the
floor house in part of the
reason behind there is you know
there are people who for variety
reasons you know perhaps the
live in federally subsidized
housing perhaps the federal
government would impose
restrictions on people consuming
cannabis in those in those
spaces and so we felt it was a
very the smart way to approach
that particular leave that
particular inequity by allowing
for consumption spaces within
designated licensee.
Operates how it interacts with
the.
The indoor smoking law all all
have been really expand on that
but that's the reasoning behind
it and we went back and forth
particularly with with folks who
who do a lot of work around
secondhand smoke and whatnot but
we we decided that it was
probably a good thing to to to
include in our bill ultimately.
And then if you want to add to
the specific question.
Yeah go ahead I'm land then
we'll get to Representative lu
Han.
Madam chair representative yes
what it does is it just and then
that clean air act to include
you in a consumption areas
they're both in those areas
there may not be actually
looking at this they may be
thank you are ways but just in
case you didn't want to what
with that we are at it's treated
similar to cigar bars or clubs
that are exempt understate.
And you can find that language
on page a hundred.
Thank you.
And Representative lu Han.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I'd like to just
go back and address some of the
the the tax the question you had
and then also the distance
current question and I'd like to
have been addressed thank you
madam chair committee members
first that the tax question that
Representative brought up I I
think this is one of the
differences in kind of a novel
approach in the house bill
seventeen is to have a single
cannabis sales tax of of twenty
percent so regardless of where
you are in the state consumers
can expect the the same tax rate
and then both medical and
recreational cannabis would not
Caria a G. R. T. so it's kind of
a novel a novel idea that this
bill thought would be with would
simplify the process and then in
regards to to consumption areas
you know there's lots of the
language in house bill seventeen
regarding clean air that just
isn't conclude included and
that's because consumption areas
are not included in house bill
seventeen they already are legal
for the medical program based
and I I believe Senate bill four
oh eight and D. O. H. has not
been able to promulgate rules
and there's some you know
frankly there's really nobody in
the industry at least an in the
chamber of commerce who have a
desire to open a consumption
area because of the the
potential the potential
liability and you know I'm I'm
the former state director for
mothers against drunk driving on
the the chair of the Bernalillo
county DWI planning council so
substance impaired driving is
something that's very near and
dear to my heart and I I have
frequently said that I I don't
think that legalize cannabis
exposes that legalize cannabis
has anything beyond a negligible
risk related to increasing
substance impaired driving but I
I just would you know would ask
committee members to consider
that if you do have consumption
areas where people are going
somewhere to consume cannabis
weathered.
Smoking it or ingesting it and
then having need to get home
that could potentially of you
know raise some issues related
to the substance impaired
driving.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
back to you Representative.
Representative Armstrong we're
back to you.
Thank you madam chair just one
last
Statements for me you know I
have a lot of people in my
district that want this I have a
lot of people in my district
that don't want it I wondered if
we had if any either
representatives had reached out
to law enforcement and does
anyone know where law
enforcement stance on this
issue.
Madam chair and president
Armstrong yes this bill in fact
was that it a version of it was
that it last year through the
working group that the
governor's tablets that had
Representative as law
enforcement I have had
conversations with with the
folks from from state police I
know there are provisions in
this bill that they're not okay
that that they're not
comfortable with you know that's
that that was made clear from
the from the onset there are a
few provisions in here that they
would like for for us to
continue to work on and you know
as I've done in the past five
years that I've worked on this
on this issue I will continue to
to not only meet with them but
to take their words to heart and
to ensure that we whatever final
product wind up with is
something that they are
comfortable with so yes we have
been in touch with them all
along and and yes there are
things in our bill that they're
probably not too crazy about but
we will keep working at.
Representative live on.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative for the
question and again I'd like to
defer to to ban and also right
into to add to that to answer
your question thank you.
There have been.
Thank you chairwoman Committee
members
you know that this bill again is
the house bill seventeen is the
the product of of lots of input
on from previous bills and lots
of input from the working group
last year which included a lot
of discussion around law
enforcement the the
conversations that we've had
specifically with law
enforcement related to concern
about home grow provisions and
and that's why they're not
included in our bill it's just
very difficult for law
enforcement to have the the the
to have legal home production
but have have these rules were
there actually a position where
they're having to monitor plant
count and then a concern concern
about it driving to the the
illicit market and then if if
Ryan is on he may or may not
want.
Thank you just add to what Ben
was saying I think one of the
biggest things of law
enforcement's going to have
issues with when it comes to
house bill twelve is going to be
yeah limited plant count it's it
really is going to help drive US
market throughout the country I
mean if you look at other states
somewhere to you know Colorado
or again you know even Oklahoma
is now you know experiencing
that and your the points we
brought up earlier was when ever
pueblo Colorado really open up
the doors it it because not only
problems with the illicit market
but it also cause problems with
other states trying to sue
Colorado and you know that's not
something that you know New
Mexicans or New Mexico in a
whole is going to want it all so
I think that the price of one of
the biggest things that law
enforcement is going to be
having issues with is going to
be the unlimited plan account
limit licensure there has to be
a severe balance when it comes
to the growth of the
recreational market it has to
grow organically that's the
easiest way to do it if we just
pull the doors open it's going
to really hurt the program and
not be beneficial for the state
thank you thank you terms of
Armstrong you saw the for thank
you madam chair and and I I
agree with that last statement
type as I stated earlier I think
there needs to be limited to
licensing and and no home grown
but.
Are the the other at question I
have is and I'm I'm pretty sure
this will be up to R. L. D. but
I didn't know what the
conversations had been around it
will these be standalone our
industry for selling legalized
cannabis or will it be opened up
to convenience stores across the
state do you have any idea
Representative.
madam madam chairperson
Armstrong under house bill
twelve these would be
essentially standalone you're
looking at fully vertically
integrated licenses so you know
up an operation in your
community could do everything
from payroll to manufacture to
retail sales but that would not
mean that you know seven elevens
would be selling cannabis at
least not under our bill I mean
maybe in the far you know
fetched future perhaps that's
were this is all moving toward
but not not under the scheme
that we're proposing.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it we have the
same we have seen provisions are
the same in house bill seventeen
thank you.
Okay I'm not that's the
districts my last statement with
the you know.
Sorry if you're really bad at
all.
That.
You know this as you know and
I've I've said it several times
madam chair and representatives
on the house floor and and
public comments and and news
releases that there is a rural
urban divide and
you know for for my community to
budget for the state of New
Mexico to bit to benefit I do
will.
On it too all rural and urban
work on this
I I do have some concerns and I
look forward to seeing what
becomes of this bill and hoping
that Representative Martinez and
look on make sure that they
address those tax problems that
I brought up
because if if this bill does
pass I want my neck of the woods
to be able to benefit.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative next I have
Representative Anderson.
Madam chairman I'm here it go
go you're up next go ahead thank
you madam chairman madam
chairman I'll try to be a short
of my interest is in the.
Our house bill twelve nothing
against seventy but it sounds
like it's going to be a
combination therefore I think
I'll address my questions to
Representative of Martinez
on and one question I have
Representative is madam chair
what.
These new licenses that are
going to be issued by the state
who owns the license once the
licenses issue.
Thank you madam chair
representative Anderson up it
the no no one owns a license of
the license is not a property
right of any sort of the
licenses have to be renewed
every year by the license holder
and they've got to show a number
of different things of that the
division will impose on them.
As we explained earlier water
Exeter up but no one owns these
licenses the and and the bill is
very explicit that the license
cannot be sold transferred or or
any of the sort because we don't
want to repeat the problems that
we've University created with
liquor licenses thank you
representative I appreciate that
answer I did come to this
hearing late so if there's any
redundancy to my questions I
apologize I had a question
representative madam chairman to
doctor Paul and if he is still
with us.
If if doctor bone is working on
getting off mute I will address
the question to him but I we're
interested to you as well
representative of Martinez
This morning as I hear all of
the many virtues of of what I
generically call legalize pot
I think wait what's summers lots
of lots of good ideas enthusiasm
it's it's it's it's truly a lot
of positive what I noticed that
the spurs me is that clear lack
of anybody suggesting we should
pause and look at evidence based
research on.
Marijuana consumption over use
use by young adults and I
believe Sir that there is
a very solid body of law or
scientific research suggesting
the growing mind of young adult.
Yes not of.
Yes yes it health risk why
consuming marijuana could you do
that what were you go on a
response like that and we do
have a doctor bow and is able to
speak if you want to hear from
him first thank you that would
be great madam chairman if we
could hear from doctor bone
first on that please.
Yes madam chair representative
Anderson that thank you for the
opportunity to speak to that
and Representative Anderson
you're correct there is there is
a solid body of evidence that.
Consumption of a number of
different types of substances
including cannabis.
Carries with it risks for the
developing minded for the
developing brain
and that I I think that's why as
part of this is we're talking
about legislation which which
legalizes consumption to adults
and includes at it lots of
information about providing
education science based
education.
In in the school systems about
about the potential risks of
conception at two early in age.
Thank you appreciate the
additional response from
Representative Martinez and then
I would not to leave out HB
seventeen appreciate any.
Agreement or disagreement from
those sponsors as well.
Yes madam chair representative
that's a that's a great question
and and I don't I and I agree
wholeheartedly with Dr bowling
you know I don't believe that
young people as our brains in
their by developing should be
ingesting any type of substance
whether it's cannabis alcohol
tobacco or anything else it is
not good for you I would also
remind the committee that.
You know teenage pot use has
been happening long before my
time probably long before you
all's time
and the example I always use is
we've got a create a culture of
responsible use within our
community.
Currently prohibition does not
mean that teenagers are not
using pot.
What's missing our resources
what's missing are
you know systems in place to
protect young people from the
usage and to educate people as
to usage whether it's not just
cannabis whether tobacco and
alcohol as well as you know
we've had a big problem with
vaping and and last year this
legislature changed the legal
age to purchase those products
to twenty one because we had a
lot of high schoolers who are
eighteen year olds buying the
these things and and and you
know sharing them with their
friends or whatnot so you know
with our bill we're generating
enough revenue to reinvest in
those same communities to
reinvesting those types of
reality based you know drug drug
use education programs to
prevent the use among young
people that to me I think is is
the best path forward simply
keeping it illegal is not going
to keep it out of hand so young
people.
Thank you very much with the I
if the other two sponsored I
think Senator lu Han.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative for the
question and in New.
And adding to the or actually in
concurrence also with the
Representative Chairman Martinez
to I think that we are on our
bill does here is
just it lets the the counties
through that through the funding
mechanism that we talked about
earlier
create their own education
prevention programs in it so
that they can use those funds to
better serve the community
center where they where they
would appropriate that and also
to the rulemaking under the
under the scope of the RLD's as
well and using those funds and
and revenues to to create those
programs but I think it's really
essential that are counties are
local governments have a voice
in that because they do have
they do you already do that kind
of work and this would give them
an opportunity and I need to do
so as well thank you.
And Representative Anderson if I
can just at I.
I've kind of characterize it is
at in this way if the drug is
totally illegal of cannabis is
totally illegal our school
shouldn't be teaching about
using it.
Or not it's just saying no and
that doesn't work I don't think
in in teaching responsible use
at an appropriate age and by
legalizing and mandating
evidence based Drug education in
the schools we can teach about
responsible use and what it does
to you and not just have a
message of just say No but have
a message of just say no is
children and and bring up about
appropriate use Education that
that kids bring home to their
families and as Representative
Martinez said create a culture
of responsible use so.
Thank you thank you chairman for
that I of I think we drive both
on.
Officers in yourself on our.
The appreciate very much the
COVID because it it certainly is
not necessarily no not
necessarily the way in which I
previously tried to address that
I did want to go to the sponsor
of Representative Martinez and
say one piece in my mind that
it's confusing as well as state
government tries to regulate
supply.
Can't really do much on demand I
think to myself one of New
Mexico in so short of of product
is we call it and what if of.
Yes yes your honor overriding
need for medical to be met first
in recreational second or are
they in equal standing in short
supply situation.
Madam chair representative
mentioned that's another great
question look that's a big
reason why our bill doesn't have
an artificial plant count that
will allow for current license
holders and and recreation I and
an adult use license holders to
grow as much as the market needs
both for medical and for the for
the adult use industry I think
that by capping plant count at
an artificial level which is
what we done under the medical
program right we for a while
under the previous governor we
had a pretty pretty low plant
count this governor has
increased it but it's still
pretty pretty tight and you'll
hear you know from from
producers sometimes that it is
difficult I think under a brand
new program that will bring in
thousands of new people into the
market to keep keep up the pace
if you will so you know under
our bill we don't have that
artificial plant count we don't
believe we will have the problem
shortages
having said that there there
there is language in our bill
through the Advisory Council
that we are creating that if
indeed there are issues with
supply that there are number of
different strategies that the
division will employee to ensure
that there is enough products
for the medical program and yeah
I mean we we we that's a big
issue for us that that was
something that was concerning
and that the advocates brought
to us last year in that we
included in this year's bill.
Thank you Representative I'm
pleased to hear that you've
you've given that matter of
consideration in your
legislation I wanted to ask you
representative madam chairman if
I could do if you envision where
on on the successful passage of
house bill twelve in five years
from now do you envision the
retailers what I suppose we
would call them product recent
reached retailers.
Are they going to be for profit
businesses or non profit because
we have created a new Wersching
nonprofit enterprise around
medical marijuana what is your
thought on how we look back five
years from now and say way it
turned out everybody want to
sell recreational marijuana also
wanted to be nonprofit where
where do you go on that Madam
chairman Representative.
So madam chair and and
Representative Anderson this
would be for profit entities in
fact under our bill a lot of the
current nonprofits.
Could turn into for profits
that I think to me is an
important piece of this bill you
know this is an economic
development tool it's probably
one of the biggest economic
development tools we've seen in
a long long time we want to make
sure that you know hard working
entrepreneurs and their you know
shareholders and and you know
their employees can benefit to
the maximum extent.
Thank you thank you
representative Representative
I'm gonna close with one final
comment it goes like this
Representative Lara night
previous earlier this session
had a bill to put more money in
the lottery scholarship.
New Mexico has a tremendously
successful lottery scholarship
and our problem now is even with
declining enrollments we are
still oppressed with meeting the
the the demand for the for the
scholarship and this leads us to
believe that we must come with
an idea to increase revenue into
lottery scholarship and issue
our work forward on combining
this bill with seventeen I hope
if if but when it if and when
twenty percent taxation is
reached or recreational
marijuana New Mexico that you
give serious consideration to
allocating two percent of those
revenues to the New Mexico
lottery scholarship I don't
expect you to agree Sir in this
setting but as you know I think
Taxation of is is is going to be
very difficult to change going
forward so I wish you wish you
good luck I think and I I say
that to the H. B. O. B.
seventeen so I'm not sure you're
going to get my support but
clearly if New Mexico adopts
this going forward for.
All the reasons are.
We wanted to be as successful as
it possibly can thank you madam
chair thank you representative
next I have Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair okay so I
wrote down my questions so not
read a script instead of writing
all down said quite a few that
it's such a huge those are such
huge but also want to make sure
I stayed on track so madam chair
representative this is the
overview more.
And before you go it I'm only
going to interrupt for a moment
to remind the committee and the
audience we have a hard stop at
one thirty and if we are not
done with questions or to a vote
yet we will resume on Monday so
I just wanted to remind folks
of that and go ahead
Representative board thank you
madam chair thank your furnace
that this meeting so it's tough
when it's a more controversial
issue or in this case is just a
lot of pages to get through this
bill so my district is pretty
much fifty fifty is it's very
interesting in my district we
had a meeting were almost turned
into altercations that's that
heated some people really love
marijuana and some people really
hate it some trying to make a
decision for the people so you
guys are gonna help you with
that today with the line of
questioning so and this is gonna
be generalized so either side
anyone who's representing either
of these bills can answer okay
that's it that's fine with you
guys so madam chair
representative is what I'd like
to ask my first question is can
you smoke pot and possess a gun.
Madam chair and representative I
don't see why not.
It
you madam chair
Representative I don't see why
not okay I'm gonna answer the
question for you guys a statue
thirty dash seven dash for line
to states that smoking pot of
possessing a gun is considered
negligent use of a firearm in
the state of New Mexico I
checked with law enforcement and
they all told me I I stick with
state police local police and
sheriffs and it is illegal to
possess a gun because it's
considered inequities of fire do
you know what the sentencing is
by any chance and I'm not trying
to you guys the sponsor we're
gonna try to do is I want people
to know my gun owners to
understand if this passes what
this means to them so I don't
anticipate you guys know the
answers to this but you know
what the Senate's fines are for
thirty dash seven dash for.
Madam chair representative what
are they okay.
You might notice please madam
chair.
It's up to the judge usually but
it's a thousand dollar fine and
when you're jail.
So my concern is is that it's
illegal stockpot and this is
going to still a felony on on
the federal level so it's a
little slow pompous again and we
have a very large amount of gun
owners and want to make sure
that are gun owners understand
that you cannot smoke pot and
possess a gun those are two
things that don't go together.
Okay so if we're going to have
more Representative just so that
I'm clear yeah because I don't
have that in front of me either
it's illegal to smoke and to
possess a gun mode can use a gun
smoke and own a gun it says
smoke and possessed a gun it's
okay dash seven dash for line to
okay.
Madam chair just put a
clarification I think
So Representative it's it's
illegal to possess a gun and
be in be under the influence of
cannabis but not possessed a gun
and possess cannabis right.
But I was told by the police
officers well see here's the
problem because it's still
illegal on a federal level and
you know it's always up to the
discretion of the judge right
now it's thirty dash seven dash
four one two states that smoking
pot and possessed a gun and it
doesn't say how much because we
don't really know some people to
smoke a lot and I doubt it says
pot
notices.
Thank.
It says what.
Representative it you must be
under the influence for it to be
illegal in carrying that weapon
and any and any other to and
toxicant as well madam chair
representative so that's where
the the two shall not meet.
This is carrying a firearm while
under the influence of an
intoxicant correct but we don't
know what under the influences
because that's a question we get
to later how intoxicated is
intoxicated so.
That's what I'm trying to get I
just want to make sure that we
all know everybody knows that
under that you can not.
Legally possess a gun if you are
under the act you are impaired I
don't know what appeared as we
get to that question and and
Representative up the way you
read it I would assume that also
means impaired with a legal
prescription drugs impaired with
alcohol it's either a not
specific this doesn't
specifically call out cannabis
no thank you yeah I just want to
be make sure we're all clear
thank you Jennifer under the
influence of an intoxicant or
chronic so that I'd ask the
please give us responsive you
can and this is no you cannot so
yes my other question is can we
use are we gonna be able to use
some of those tax dollars.
Because we're gonna more people
smoking pot and those who don't
know yet whether or disincentive
carried I think my dollars and
partly so far okay good we're
good.
I'm so are we gonna be able to
fund the police and the courts
in the jails if we have an
influx of new criminals from
legalizing marijuana Madam chair
representative first of all I
think we'll probably have less
criminals because we are
creating a legal framework for
cannabis commerce
but again you know this is a the
first year alone this is fifty
to one hundred million new
dollars into the general fund
from which we can invest in a
number of different state
agencies including the
department of public safety
right I'm thinking because if we
have a whole bunch of people if
you were like okay we can smoke
pot here any gun and they get
high and you don't know that we
might have increases people just
want to make sure that we have
the money to fund everybody for
that.
with a question on that would
anybody be willing to make an
amendment to thirty dash seven
dash four two to exempt people
while they're under the
influence of marijuana so it
would say intoxicants with the
exception of marijuana I guess
could be spelled out a little
better.
Where we know we're what is
impaired.
So madam chair and and
Representative I mean that that
would be know that I don't think
that's an amendment we should we
should think about I mean it
would be I wouldn't want anybody
under the influence of of all
Pulitzer or in all aka holler
cannabis to either use a weapon
or possessed a weapon or to
drive or to do anything that
would otherwise put the public's
health at risk so you know I I
don't think that's something
that we probably want to
consider okay if I if I can add
to that in what you read under
the influence of intoxicating
substances or narcotics these to
remove cannabis from schedule
one and schedule two of the of a
drugs so they would no longer be
classified as narcotics
but it would still be under the
realm of under is it under the
influence it yet and and there
have to be some other underlying
issue that sandwich show that
that there was also a
contributing factor being under
the influence of an intoxicating
substance of whatever kind
thank you mentioned what I'm
trying to get it is right now
there's some kind of vagueness
and there right now as it stands
when I talk to law enforcement I
actually talked to FBI agents
ATF you cannot possess a a gun
and be under the influence I'm
so I can ask another question
can use one of one's is asking
questions can you.
Smoke pot and buy a gun from NFL
I'm gonna start FFL license
federal dealer of guns.
I I don't I don't think you can
show up high.
An attempt to purchase the
weapon so thank you madam chair
so so federal law prohibits
medical marijuana users even for
possessing a buying firearms
ammunition in the state allows
it this is per
federal law and the ninety court
appeals upheld this and again
it's because if you check now on
question eleven E. M. a form of
four four seven three they ask
you do you ingest marijuana so I
just wanna make sure again maybe
people know you cannot buy a gun
FSL if you smoke this is even if
you just smoke marijuana does
talk when paired.
It also was reminiscent to you
cannot purchase ammunition
either if you smoke pot and I'm
just going to answer this one
for you you cannot get a
concealed Kerry license either
because of the questions on
there so I I guess what I want
to in certain trade using just
point out.
That the second amendment got
left out and all of the
marijuana bills because it would
make everyone's life easier
guests at the justice from was
on the federal level to be not
applicable but it is I just want
to make sure that I pointed out
the people understand that
right now as it stands I want my
gun orders to know that they
can't buy or get it she still
carrier purchase again and
Stewart so there was some
discussion madam chair
representative about education.
Would you guys including
education to make sure the my
gun owners know that you know if
you guys go to Los go through
everything and make sure the
educator maybe put a sign on
grants or so that people know
that they do that their their
second amendments being
infringed on if they do decide
to smoke pot will that be part
of the discussion for education.
I think for us I mean absolutely
I think it should be a
comprehensive approach to
education I mean I I I would
probably work a little
differently but yeah I mean I
think.
Education is education and I
would
insure I would like to ensure
that it's as broad as possible
you bring up great points by the
way Madam chair representative
lord thank you and I am trying
to be just very sincere about it
I just don't want because you
know loss get passers Act rural
New Mexico you know get high and
then I don't want to get in
trouble okay do have a question
for you chair representative.
So because I think go reams
presenting a bill.
State and I have to check on
this one I'm not sure I wanted
to know if you carry a gun okay
I'm gonna ask a question for
this one politics with the
marijuana gets transferred from
the grower to and I'm not sure
about the steps as you goes a
distributor store do they do
that themselves or do they hire
somebody to transport the
marijuana between locations
that's a fantastic question our
bill has will twelve has a
specific license for a career so
you'd go from place to place now
keep in mind some of the
licenses are vertically
integrated so you can do
everything from sea to
manufactured to sell but we do
have an expert from from
industry just south of who I
think can actually give you the
very specific answer you're
looking for thank you.
Representative I'm as
Representative Martinez stated
there is a specific Currier
Lysons outlined in house bill
twelve there also there's also
the ability to Kerr your within
the some of the licenses and
they are.
Restricted your career to the
the next step in the process so
it if you have a producer they
can they can transport their
cannabis to a manufacturer or to
a retailer if that is the next
step in their process but other
than that It it is accounted for
in this bill.
And Representative lu Han.
Yeah we can add to that as well
I think that Ryan is viable and
catch that ran so currently the
way that the current on the peas
are able to transfer cannabis
one it's it's tracked on the
state level so we would see the
sail system that is literally
from the inception of of the
seat all the way to the finish
product it's monitored I know
that at your life we actually
have our own transport Division
and we have cameras in our bands
and everything is monitored and
to answer your question
Representative there are only so
I think you're leading to there
are no firearms are allowed on
premise or within the transport
it's a safety risk for you know
our drivers along with anyone
else we you know we want to
leave are enforcement of the
police where it should be as
opposed to ourselves so that's
the main reason why there's no
firearms allowed within
transport and I don't believe
it's in any bills nor should it
be.
Thank you madam chair.
just to be clear.
If a licensee it is license to
do multiple things grow.
manufacture products so all they
can transport within their own a
license two different sites they
can also transport to testing
laughs
to get their product tested but
there is a provision at least in
house bill twelve I think and
and not seventeen as well for a
career outside of that to be
licensed to be able to
transport.
Thank you representative
actually I was thinking the
opposite I think they should be
able to protect themselves some
a little concerned about being
robbed as are transporting so
that this is my concern and that
it is okay so we're gonna move
up again issues and answered
everything thank you so water
and then east mountains and
water is a huge concern after we
actually stopped a bunch of
houses meetings we just didn't
have enough water so how much
water does it take to grow
marijuana I just read maybe
wrong this is one gallon to
produce one pound of flour does
that sound about right.
Madam chair.
Senator.
And then we can yeah we can talk
that we can talk that I like to
bring Ryan back so he can he can
explain a little bit of that too
can be able to hear me yeah go
ahead.
So so basically when it comes to
the cultivation of cannabis it's
extremely scientific now and the
water the water uses actually
calculated on a daily basis
whenever these plants you know
again I'm gonna keep referring
to to my own cultivation we
literally give the plants
personal attention on a daily
basis we calculate everything
from the gallons of what we will
take from the initial tanks and
water nutrient mixes are gonna
use we're going to calculate the
friction loss of the hose in
order to re only utilize
specific amount of water not
only for costs and and you know
water savings but just so that
the plants get exactly what they
need to tailor make cannabis and
a gallon of water to equal to a
pound per plant no everybody's
cultivation methods are
different and there's so many
different ways the were able to
cultivate cannabis from your old
friend waste systems to
hydroponics to organic growing
at the end of the day there's
there's a lot of different
factors from the lights to the
humidity to everything in the
sense of how much production can
be used but water is you know
one you know the cannabis
producers the kernel of these
are very environmentally
conscious and are trying to make
sure that we you know preserve
our water because it is a big
issue and when when recreational
cannabis comes on the scene New
Mexico it's going to be coming a
bigger issue so we're really
trying to tighten up our recipes
to make sure that we don't over
utilize the water you know to
make sure it doesn't affect the
state.
Thank you thank you right thank
you madam chair representative
and it just goes back to work
you know we need to really
monitor as we're growing this
industry and into the plant
count everything and being very
sensitive and and acknowledge
the environmental environmental
aspects and water usage thank
you.
Thank you yeah it's it's and
thank you madam chair sentence
as a real hot topic for my
district water is huge we're so
limited and water and so with my
concern
I guess I I just ate to **** the
generalized questions so where
will we get the extra water from
or they're either one of bills
say we should use reclaimed
water and we're gonna get the
water thank you.
it's so madam chair you know we
we have that question and in a
town hall that we did you know
this is this is an agricultural
operation right and so those
that are going to enter this
business have to make a choice
between crops this is just
another crop I do think that
under house bill twelve you do
have as I mentioned to the two
of Representative arms or
earlier Gail Armstrong we do
have requirements to show that
you have access to water right
and does all those things will
be weighed when when granting a
license if if you're seeking to
operate in a community where
there's already a shortage water
we're perhaps people don't want
either because of that shortage
all of those things will be
taken into consideration it's
it's a very real issue and we've
got to get it just right.
Thank you I don't know if any of
you ever had a well dry up I had
and they will dry up and that is
not fun and we you have to jump
through quite a bit hoops you
have to get permit the state and
the county and then you have to
have to go out do well
assessments and are well as the
monitored and they test the
water so there's a lot of stuff
we could probably talk the next
hour and water so I'm just going
to skip that
is it is a very big concern for
me I'm.
Madam chair representative and
find me at add to Representative
Martínez is answer.
This is highly staff but again I
just wanted to add that it does
say in house bill twelve on page
thirty three that when a
licensee applies for a license
state they do need to show that
there along with their their
access to water that they have
some means of water reduction
whether that be through should
be education or collection water
collection that those those
aspects are included in the bill
to encourage water reduction
additionally.
As Representative Martinez said
it it is an agricultural crop
and cannabis typically consumes
about a third of the water and
other traditional agricultural
crops and if if farmers in New
Mexico choose to produce
cannabis over another crop then
we will actually reduce our
water consumption in the state
of New Mexico as well as
creating I'm creating
opportunity for a higher yield
and the better cash crop for
those farmers I just wanted to
add that to the comments.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair representative first
time ever moved to Idaho there
was the first murder ever heard
and it was all water rates
that's serious water could be in
a lot of states it's very
serious issue so just wanted
everything out so I'd like to
move on to impairments madam
chair and representative so I
was reading a little bit and
this trend of our home other
Italie injuries and I say to
them where they are reach
journal articles in the journal
of epidemiology they had
marijuana Slevin most illicit
drugs found blood drives of all
crashes etcetera so we're all
concerning no nobody in here is
to say they don't care about the
issue I know that for a fact but
how do we know when someone is
to prepare to drive because I
ask law enforcement officers
right now and right now it's
like they have to have probable
cause right somebody's meeting
the light goes from red to green
and they don't go they call the
person over the next number one
and they do all the field tests
but then what is the next step.
To check for procurement and how
are we going to know what the
levels are some of the B. two
impaired to drive.
you representative I'm gonna
step in for a second before our
representatives answer because
this is been an ongoing
discussion for a long time and
it is across the country as well
and is one of the reasons why I
really strongly support and
element of research because it
is that is exactly a topic of
research in many states about
determining what that level is
because of some of the
metabolites from cannabis could
remain in your blood stream for
as a as long as a month and so
just to have something show up
in your blood is Representative
doesn't really address whether
that was enough to impair use so
on like alcohol that
that gets out of your blood
stream really fast we've got a
lot of research and and you're
not looking at whether you had a
too many drinks a week ago so
it's complicated and it needs
research and it needs monitoring
and so it's it's not super clear
I don't think anywhere yet
that's why you need the probable
cause and then take a picture of
the whole which might include
alcohol it might include other
illicit drugs and there might be
a cannabis in the mix as well
but whether that was the
deciding factor it is
maybe harder to tell and I don't
know if any.
Of the
Sanchez or experts want to add
anything further Representative
live on.
Yes madam chair I I we have.
Something to add to that and I
think I'm going to ask been to
to add something if you can and
chairwoman members that
excellent points chairwoman
this is been an ongoing
discussion this is a big part of
the discussion the working group
last year I I would posit that
there probably never will be a
really good way to measure
cannabis impairment in terms of
a blood draw or in terms of you
know some equivalent to the
breathalyzer we do have in New
Mexico drug recognition experts
so this is an accreditation the
law enforcement officers can
receive
last I read I think we had about
three hundred of those so in
terms of impairment I think this
is one of the one of the nice
approaches of HB seventeen is
designated money directly to
counties to create enforcement
training programs so that they
have more drug recognition
experts who can perform version
of the standard field sobriety
tests to measure impairment from
cannabis or any other
potentially impairing substances
thank you and madam chair
nothing to add on the substance
of the question just to correct
the record both bills have
funding sources for the local
governments to do the same thing
so you know it is clear the
record there for for Mr ledger
thank you Representative Lord
yourself before thank you for
that she is one right that's
one where we all and be great we
have.
This person smokestacks and
they're impaired at this level
and they should be driving but
it's also it seems like some
people can smoke a joint we find
another person takes when Hitler
stone so there's a lot more
research in that so I think
question based on that.
So let's say a police officer
does pull somebody over and they
go through all the testing but
there's no way to blood tests
and I'm like I can't make a
determination whether they're
too high to drive or not because
they don't have blood work so if
they let them go and they do go
get to crash less if the
talented without law enforcement
be responsible with the suit.
For not doing something more to
stop them.
madam chair Representative Lord
I that's a hypothetical that is
I don't think necessarily
related to this bill although I
do appreciate the conversation
because we do have other
legislation qualified immunity
whether or not that officer
could be sued I don't think so
right now and I don't even think
so if that qualified immunity
bill happen to pass so I I I
don't think that that would be
grounds for a lawsuit for that
law officer.
Thank you Representative yeah I
know we have a whole bunch of
qualified immunity stuff going
and some other bills going on
that are controversial keep
completely out of this Hey I do
have a question on so are we
going to do either one of these
bills have anything about more
stringent laws on pesticide use
settle the federal law has some
pesticide coverage but more
states have gone gone further to
put more stringent ruling on
pesticides says reading the
journal toxicology I want you
guys to I'm very like that this
percent of pesticides remain
more want to so are we going to
do anything about has to site
and then another question that
thank you.
Representative Lamont.
We lost a little problem with my
phone here yeah soon thank you
for the question thanks for all
the questions that you've been
giving us
Representative Lord so.
What would what would be it
happens to the to the
flexibility the bill through the
language of the bill that and
and S. H. B. seventeen excuse me
would really bring in up RLD
into the conversation and GPS
and everybody needs to come in
to to talk about these issues
but
that's what that's what happened
there that's when that
conversation and and and have a
more cohesive response as we're
building this out thank you
thank you for the question thank
you and I just have one more
thing and leave it so maybe some
people who gets more questions I
apologize that my questions are
really important so the public
knows what the bill is about
and there's a series of
questions we can ask them
answers right now is there any
in these production limitations
is there any consideration thank
it sounds like you guys gonna
limit how many growers and
sellers etcetera is there any
consideration or would you
consider me a friendly amendment
I'm not sure if it's in there to
give priority to minorities or
veterans are up for any of these
applications.
Matt madam chair and you'll
present thank you that's very
thoughtful compassionate
suggestion and again we'll be
looking at those those as we're
coming together and and
formulating how we want to
To answer those questions
through again to the flexibility
into the the guidance of
RLD another eight state agencies
and how we need to do that okay
I really appreciate that that's
very thoughtful the.
Representative Martínez respond
we're I'm going as well things
you to head in need to cut you
off Representative and and madam
chair yeah those as good reasons
yes in terms of the lord and
it's already in our bill our
bill will make sure it we're not
gonna leave it up to rule it's
it's already imbedded in our
legislation that we do need to
ensure diversity I'm not only in
terms of race and ethnicity but
also Geographic locational
gender X. cetera so one hundred
percent with you on that and by
the way our bill doesn't have
limits on plants or even a
licenses at this point right we
want to make sure that every New
Mexicans who wants to get in at
the beginning is able to get.
Thank you.
If I can if and also we're of in
your a pass just question also
included in house bill twelve is
towards research and in a
particular property acting
agricultural research because
there is a lot of work going on
about US soil of pesticides
toxins water use at at cetera
and I think that's a really
important component that we
bring in the agricultural
our research as well.
Thank you doctor do more
questions thank you madam chair
thank everybody for answer my
questions
and apologize it did have a lot
of just wanted to make some
clarification on the bill I'm
just gonna tell you right now
tell you what I'm gonna vote no
one it's mostly because of the
gun issue that we say if it was
decriminalized
possibly from the back and
talked to many people and they
said yes we want you to vote for
it yes but I just wanna make it
clear Senator explain it later
thank you so much for taking
time and please do consider
giving something priorities on
some level to minorities and our
native Americans and women and
veterans thank you so much
thanks for.
Walking the walking through with
this thank you Representative
thank you for your questions I'm
gonna do a time check I think
it's obvious we can't get
through the rest of the question
gins and the vote today what
role do we have another ten
minutes and if I can ask by I've
got to
Representative Montoya bashin
trusses with questions yet if
anyone has a quick question we
can do now otherwise we'll go
ahead and and stop
Representative bash.
Yes I do have a quick question
and
Representative Martinez you have
talked about
you have address the question of
under production of cannabis
but.
Currently there's nothing in
your bill that would would
Address over production and over
production as we've heard before
his has been a problem in
Colorado and Oregon and
Washington.
or do you have any way of
addressing that.
in your hair madam chair so bash
we do have the advisory
committee that would advise the
division so if we do have an
over production issue or problem
that particular division would
be able to advise and create
some sort of mechanism through
the rule making process to
address this specific issue.
Okay thank you.
Madam chair Matt may I add to
that oh has the question as well
thank you thank you
representative madam chair for
for the question and I'd like to
call on my what exit was
witnesses lamb to add to that.
Will to where.
It precludes the state from
regulating supply no
recommendation from an advisory
committee can do anything to to
to change that.
The bill calls for unregulated
supply our bill calls for a
regulated supply based on market
where it will be expanded or
contracted based on me it's the
only bill that does that thank
you.
Thank you.
Representative bash is still the
for.
I'm through thank you thank you
Representative Montoya we've got
we've got less than ten minutes
to do have a quick question or
comment.
If the on mute.
Yes madam chair and wraps it has
been so in lightning to listen
to the depth and the sensitivity
and the richness of this
conversation.
I have a couple of the
amendments that I have spoken at
length with both camps and we
have agreed to make those
changes kind of offline and I
wanted to ask your advice I
wanted on the record they are
surrounding the fines and fees
for juveniles do I need to kind
of go through now or I'm.
Representative we're going to be
out of time so I'm going to ask
you to hold those until Monday
okay and I think we we are going
to stop
the questioning now I think that
are both
Sanchez primary sponsors all the
Sanchez I have heard a lot of
really good input
today from the public and from
the line of questioning and I do
think that there's
you know where there's room for.
Are coming to some agreement you
have the rest of the weekend.
To think about that and if there
are any additional it at least
even if we don't have formal
amendments if we've got in the
discussion and answers to
questions on Monday an
indication of where you have
agreed to and would be working
on something for the following
committee I think that would be
really helpful and so I put it
out there to you get a little
bit of a breathing room to think
about some of that and when we
come back on Monday
Representative Montoya will have
the floor for those amendments
and then we will go to
Representative to Ross's and
then if there's any follow up
questions and then we will vote
on the bills.
Individually.
and so we have a variety of
pathways on that and so any
other last questions on the
process or what we're doing.
If I may I would like to see
that in about an hour and a half
I'm gonna present house bill one
eighty three which is the
elimination of juvenile fines
and fees which is what I want in
on the record that we are going
to it's in direct conflict with
that bill and so I want to make
sure that the public understands
that we are in negotiations in
good faith and trust that we
will make those changes thank
you I'm sorry.
That was in conflict with one
eighty three.
Yes.
Which is in conflict with one
eighty three I'm not sure I
follow house bill twelve and
house bill seventeen are both in
con in conflict as written.
So I I need to make sure that
both of those will be amended
their separate amendments
because our separate bills and
we will not take anymore time
now with your.
Your thoughts on that
Thank you and madam madam chair
look on I would accept those
amendments as friendly
amendments to it I to my bill.
Thank you.
Chair.
Yes.
Who's speaking.
Representative trust as your
muted.
Just
push the button twice madam
chair
I think we've all done that too
many times this the session real
quick are we going to have time
to vet those
amendments this is very
complicated I I.
This is what I have.
And I have those all those tabs
right there are some might
issues and it's just a it's it's
it's a monster you use auto
hunger Representative Lund it's
it's a monster and.
I mean I I I mean as a we're
going through these madam chair
I sure would like to see I'd
like to to ask
you to please make sure that if
it's possible we're gonna hear
this bill on Monday that we're
given those those amendments
because I mean that changes
things and changes our
perspective and and and possibly
answers questions but causes
more and so I I I would like to
see those amendments of possible
within the twenty four hour
period before we hear the bill
because thank you madam chair
thank you as much as we can
otherwise will will discuss some
it on Monday at what the intent
is and whether those are
agreements between the two.
Any other questions.
Okay all right thank you
Representative Martinez
Representative lu Han your
Representative Romero your
experts in the audience for all
the good conversation that is
our really got down to some I
think some of pretty clear
issues of agreement or
disagreement and I hope that we
can finish up this on Monday.
And and move one or both or a
combo or and or at least
understand the intent of a combo
on on Monday when we vote we
will not be taking any further
public comment I just want to
make that clear to the public we
have finished public comment and
we have finished most of the
questioning but we will resume
and finish our questions from
the committee primarily
Representative Terrazas and
Representative Montoya for his
proposed amendments and but we
will not be taking any further
public comment and so will
finish up the committee are
working and then voted on on the
bills
And so thank you all for the
