will not be up on Wednesday and
When whenever she decides if she
wants to do it. So, so we'll
start with House Bill 138 after
the roll.
representative of Anaya.
Here.
Representative Kate here.
Representative E Chavis.
Representative in Chavez.
Representative Ferrari here.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
So just, just a, a piece of
taking care of business, so we
have a new committee assistant.
This is Nancy.
Romero.
I'm sorry, I'm not. I knew that,
Romero, so she will be our
committee assistant from here on
in, and um
Representative Eleanor Chavez is
excused. She's presenting a bill
in another committee. So with
that Representative Kate and
company whenever you are ready,
we are ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee, um, um, I
am here to present. I'm, I'm
representing Kathleenates and
I'm here to represent House Bill
138. It is for hospital staffing
ratio.
Um, and this committee is all
too aware of uh the safety
issues that have been occurring
with budgeting balances for our
hospital settings by reducing
staff.
Uh, we have already have a
national study claiming that for
every one patient above the
national standard for uh nursing
ratio. There's a 7% increase of
that patient dying within 30
days of being in the hospital.
think about that 7% for every
one patient above the basic.
National ratio standard. So this
bill, um, we have come to
different versions of this bill
for over 10 years to the
legislature.
And asking that are medical
facilities, budgets are not
balanced on the backs of safety
for patients and providers.
Um, I'm presenting this film
slightly different than the
bills you've heard previously.
Um, this bill requires the
hospitals have the bottom.
Uh
Minimum safety ratio, national
standard and all their
facilities, and then each
hospital setting will have its
own on-site.
A review committee that will be
made up of hospital providers
including nurses, as well as
administrators that will create
sites specific.
ratios.
We are concerned that patient
and provider safety.
have been
Not prioritized over profits,
and we need to increase
our safety levels in our
hospital settings.
Our providers, including our
nurses, our mission-driven
employees that are now put into
impossible situations to be
successful at their jobs, and
they are leaving their
occupation.
And drove numbers. If you are
graduate from nursing school.
Being a bedside care provider is
the most difficult position you
would take. There are other
nursing physicians out there
that do not
Required the life and death from
moment to moment in their
patient care.
So our providers um have an
abnormally high rate for their
occupation of self-harm as well.
And the hospitals themselves
will talk to you about
workforce, but they've had over
10 years to develop workforce
recruitment and retainment.
positions, and I'm here to let
you know that as a workforce,
somebody who studied uh
workforce and business analysis
and many different occupations.
We've had
numerous studies even back
From the 1930s, about what
motivates workforce. And what
motivates workforce is having a
purpose in your job.
Uh, mission-driven job, the
connection and knowing that you
are supported for success. The
current
Uh, business model for our
hospital settings in New Mexico
does not support this very
needed uh environmental change
to protect our nurses.
I would like to introduce my
co-sponsor representative
Patricia Robo Cabarero, and also
my expert witnesses offers let
the reps speak.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
But I really love about this
bill and um I think
Exemlifies the need for it is
that it is the worker's bill, it
is the patient's bill. It is
what the workforce knows best,
and it's driven by those that
are our first line, um.
Responders and caregivers in the
hospitals, and it will
Involve.
nurses
Responding to patients
commentary.
Sitting at the table with
hospitals directly, and uh this
makes a big difference in terms
of being able to work out the
day to day, um, intricacies and
details of what
That will
Be
out.
ratios between staffing and
patient ratios, and I think
that's really ultimately the
most important part about this
bill, and so I'd like to go
ahead and turn it back to
representative we welcome uh to
go into more detail, but I think
the experts are here to say a
few words as well.
Thank you, Madam Sharon. Thank
you committees. Before I
introduce our next expert
witness, I have an amendment,
um, can we have
And, and I can read you the
number for it.
So, just a couple of things. So
the House committee analysis
that Karen Wells did, that's in
your book is based on before the
amendment and the one that you
got handed to is after the
handed.
After the amendment. So, so the
The latest one. And so I, I
will, um, accept the motion to
discuss the amendments so.
OK, any opposition. OK, go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So the
amendment is basically just to
uptake the
The number is 00230547.1.
OK. The amendment is basically
to update the bill to reflect
our changes in our state, uh,
Structures such as the
healthcare authorities, so we've
changed department to authority.
Also, um,
Uh, the, the bill sent to the
drafter inadvertently left out,
um.
Any
Of the
Uh
The enforcement action for this
bill, and so we put it back into
this bill and that's what the
amendment covers, so those two
things. I'd like to know uh
introduce Shane as another one
of our expert witnesses. Thank
you.
J Thompson, uh, members of the
committee, my name is Shane
Youths. I'm a lawyer. I
represent healthcare workers
across the United States, uh
from Oregon to Washington DC, I
represent and have represented
thousands of healthcare workers
here in New Mexico for about 30
years, uh, representativeate
mentioned that this bill, uh,
has been in the legislature for
10 years, and I have worked on
several iterations of this bill.
I would say this about this
legislation. I'm sorry. No, no.
Oh, OK.
This legislation.
is unique insofar as it
incorporates changes that have
been created in other states.
This staffing guideline rule was
in existence in California for
25 years, in previous iterations
of this bill relied upon the
California legislation in the
interim, in the last 2 years,
states such as, I mean,
Washington, Oregon, and
Connecticut have passed this
legislation because it's so
important for healthcare workers
and for patients.
Bill that you have before you
represent those modifications
and the evolution of nurse
staffing, but I think maybe the
two most important things about
this bill, uh, members of this
committee and, and, and Chair
Thompson are first, that there
are state minimums that are in
the statute that will never go
away, so that we will always
have that protection so that
healthcare workers and New
Mexico's patients will always
have that protection in the
statute. The second important
of this legislation is that it
allows individual facilities to
develop their own plans, not a
single plan statewide. It allows
for the variation in the rural
areas here in New Mexico. And
most importantly, those staffing
guidelines are, are led by
workers in the state of New
Mexico.
If I, I, I was at the last
committee and uh I listened to
representatives talking about.
uh uh staff administrators at
hospitals around Mexico.
Don't talk to staff
administrators around the state
of New Mexico, if you want to
know what's going on. Talk to
the healthcare workers. They
understand, and that's what this
bill is about. That's who this
bill protects, and those are the
people who will be assisting in
making the staffing decisions if
this bill passes.
Thank you.
I think you've been sharely to
introduce uh my other expert
witness.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. Thank you so much
for hearing us today. Uh, my
name is Ari Nhous. I'm a
registered nurse. I've been a
registered nurse for 28 years,
mostly in the intensive care
unit in the emergency
department, but I had a 5-year
stint where I worked in hospital
operations. So I have a really
unique bit understanding of how
a hospital works, how it can be
staffed.
Um, my colleagues and I have
been working on this bill and um
In the previous we worked on
other iterations because
literally it's destroying our
profession, and we can't
maintain the standards patients
deserve. Patients require to get
out of.
The hospital well and improve
their health. And that's really
uh to represented Kate's point,
that's our mission. That's what
we want to do. We want to make
things better and things are
getting worse. The safety in the
state has gone from 41 to 46.
And there are
million, like 2.0 nurses.
Only 89% of the licensed nurses
are actually working as nurses
right now.
You just can't maintain the
The standards that are being set
in the facilities, we can't keep
it up and so people are leaving
their demoralized. They're
leaving the profession within 2
years of getting their degree,
and so I'm just here to
represent that voice today. So
thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So once
again, this is a nurse, this is
a hospital staffing ratio that
will provide minimum staffing
levels that are at national
standards that will have
individualized groups in each
hospital that will um have the
voices of medical care providers
as well as administrators, um,
and we will rest for questions
right now. Thank you.
Thank you. So
according to the speaker, we are
able to adopt amendments without
a quorum.
So I, um, I will.
Except in the um
I moved for adoption of the uh
amendment to House Bill.
3
OK. Is there any opposition?
and you have an amended bill.
And we will go to, if you are on
Zoom and opposition, please
raise your hand and I will come
back to you if you are in the
room in opposition, please raise
your hand.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward.
We'll take a maximum of
10.
In 2 minutes
Or, uh, madam chair and
representatives. My name is Mary
Beth Thornton.
And I am the chief nursing
officer at University of New
Mexico Hospitals. We do have an
FIR in on this bill and uh you,
I would encourage you to look at
that. Um, real legal opinion
that this uh
Bill is in uh
opposition to the conditions of
participation, which requires
that the chief nursing officer
set staffing levels.
Additionally, it does not allow
us the flexibility of our units
that are mixed units, for
instance, we have units where we
have both.
For patients, patients no longer
requiring acute care.
The patients who are progressive
care patients.
We are also, according to the
latest workforce report, short
8800 nurses in our state, we
simply do not have the workforce
to meet this requirement.
Um,
the cost projections for UNMH
are $78.6 million over 3 years.
And it also appears that this
may be in conflict with our
collective bargaining.
agreement.
Thank you.
i ly
Thank you members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce here to express our
concerns about how Bill 138,
while we fully support safe
working conditions for nurses
and quality of care for
Mexicans. We believe this bill
could unintentionally worsen our
healthcare shortage.
Mexico is already facing a
severe shortage of nurses and
mandating staffing ratios could
force hospitals, both urban and
rural, to closed beds and divert
patients away from emergency
rooms. This would reduce access
to quality care and equitable
care, leading more patients
being transferred out of state
and away from their families and
communities. State-mandated
ratios could also limit
hospitals' ability to adopt
innovative technologies and new
strategies that improve patient
care. New Mexicans deserve high
quality care.
close to home, and unfortunately
the unintended consequences of
this bill could push patients
out of state and further strain
our healthcare system. We urge
the committee to consider
consider alternatives that would
improve patient care without
limiting access. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Juliet Ritten. I'm the
senior director of government
affairs with the New Mexico
Hospital Association and on
behalf of our 47 members and
their uh nursing leaders be seen
in opposition to today's bill,
um, as has been mentioned, um,
due to our, uh, severe nursing
shortage. Uh, the only way that
hospitals will be able to uh
meet this at this time is by
reducing the number of beds and
uh reducing and already uh
severe access uh crisis. I would
also like to point
Now that the um bill sets the
maximum, not minimum ratios and
statute, and we feel like that
is um an approach that uh limits
the state to responding to
changes in um guidance from uh
national best practices, uh, to
having to address those during
the legislative session, um, and
so at this time, we would ask
that you uh vote no on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Drew
Center registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian. Presbyterian is
committed to providing a safe
environment for its employees
and patients. Um, however, this
bill, uh, due to the significant
staff storage nationwide will
only lead to less access to care
and fewer, fewer beds, beds
being able to be staffed
respectfully ask you to oppose
the legislation. Thank you.
And we will go to Zoom, I see
Terry Cole.
April and Vicente, so we will
take those 3, you have 2
minutes, Terry.
warning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Terry.
I you.
I'm not sure if it's on your
part. We can we, we're gonna
skip you and come back. You
sound like you are, you have
swallowed a truckload of gravel,
so um so we will come back to
you. OK.
Oh, did we lose our
OK, we will go to April.
Hi, good morning. I'm chair of
members of the committee April
we're having the same issue with
you.
So, um,
Do we need IT to
I, I'm not sure. What do you
think it will pick it up.
April, go ahead and, and speak
again. Let's see if our um
are
post-captioning can, can
understand you better than we
can.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
My name is April Heidenreich.
and 3 crosses Regional Hospital
in Las Cruces, New Mexico.
in opposition of the 138.
were very
important reasons, um, found in
Las Cruces.
We already have a huge shortage
of nursing as everywhere in the
state. Um, we are surviving to
be able to care for the patients
that we have using contract like
with a supplement, the shortage
of nurses at this time, it is
not sustainable.
Also having to send a large
amount of patients out to El
Paso, Texas to Albuquerque to
Tucson.
And
To the community
community's inability to care
for the number of patients that
we have.
present
problem for families that are
trying to help remain in contact
and, and supportive of their
loved ones.
Um, it's creating a lot of
discontent with them and
Um, we
a lot of dissatisfaction with
having to send those patients
out, we are able to maintain um
good staffing ratios based on
acuity, which allows us to make
decisions from minute to minute,
hour to hour, within our
departments to ensure that our
patients receive the best
possible care.
For instance, at this point, we
have 2 patients that are 1:1
ratio in our ICU because of the
needs that they have. We also
have some other patients that
are able to be 3 to 1 because of
their lower acuity rate. This
allows us the flexibility to get
those patients the care that
they need also in our, on our
department level in, in our
medsurge tele department were
able to do the same thing and
help to accommodate our
patients. Um, that would take,
you know, our ability to make
those decisions that are so
important for our.
facility and our nursing ratios,
um, that are, that are needed at
any given time. I've been a
nurse for over 30 years and
multiple capacities that for 10
years I did work on the floor
and I do know how difficult that
was, um, many years ago.
However, we've been able here
to, to make those appropriate um
decisions for our staff, and
they are happy. Our patient
satisfaction is in the 90th
percentile, your time is up. If
you
just finish your thought.
Yes. So for patient
satisfaction, which is excellent
for our nurses' satisfaction,
which is excellent. I ask that
you oppose this bill to keep the
patients in our community and
allow us to make the decisions
that are necessary for our
facility and keep our doors open
you April, we'll go back to
Terry Cole.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Can you hear me? Yes, we can,
and it's very good.
Great, great. Um, Madam Chair
and committee members, I'm Terry
Cole, president and CEO for the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We enjoy a terrific
working relationship with
Representative Kate, so, um, I
am, uh, sad that we have to
stand today in opposition to one
of her bills, but we do oppose
HB 138, you know, there's a
Scottish
Proverb from the 1600s that says
if wishes were horses, then
beggars would ride. This bill
has a lot of wishes that we all
wish could come true. More
skilled healthcare
professionals, but mandating
hospitals to hire that which
doesn't exist, just won't get us
there. The FIR says we need
5,0353 more registered nurses.
That's a gigantic gap to close.
To get there, we must improve
staffing ratios, build a better
workforce pipeline. The
legislatures on the right track,
increasing reimbursement rates,
providing tax and loan
incentives. Joining interstate
compacts are examples which we
support. A government mandate
isn't the solution. We need
proactive steps to build and
retain the workforce we have
here now. So we respectfully ask
you to vote no.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you
Vicente.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the Committee. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Health Care Associate New
Mexico Health Care Association,
New Mexico Center for Assisted
Living. We represent 64 of the
68 nursing facilities in the
state of New Mexico, and over
100 assisted living facilities.
Um, we respectfully oppose this
bill. We appreciate the intent,
which is to improve the quality
of care for patients in
hospitals. However, there is an
unintended consequence.
for nursing facilities and
assisted living facilities. If
there is a ratio mandate in
hospitals, given the lack of
nurses in the state of New
Mexico, as previously stated,
the, the hospitals for uh for
reasonable uh reasons will
Go and higher and essentially
poach nurses from nursing
facilities to help fill any
ratios. Therefore, limiting
access to nurses in, um, in many
communities across the state,
especially in those rural
communities where there is a
hospital and maybe one, or two
nursing facilities. Um, that is
where the pool of nurses will
exist in order to um uh to fill
any ratios that are mandated by
this legislation.
Um, again, we appreciate the
intent, um, however, there are
unintended consequences for long
term care facilities, we would
instead um appreciate the
legislature to do um uh to, to
hold um higher education
institutions more accountable
for producing the nurses that we
all need in um, in our health
care system. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. So we will go in
support if you are on Zoom and
support, please raise your hand.
I'll go to the audience and then
we'll come back to you. So
anyone in the audience in
support.
You, you can raise your hand and
it doesn't mean you have to
speak.
Notice how much more, how many
more hands we got. You never
required to speak, but if you
would like to speak, please come
forward and please let's stay on
the bill.
And I will take 10.
Good day, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Jake
Smith, Governor Change Project,
Sandoval County. I support this
bill because Project 138, or
sorry, House Bill 138 is very
much necessary if we leave it up
to the CEOs and the CNOs to
decide what our levels are at,
it will continue to get worse. I
have worked for Presbyterian for
over, for over a decade as a
bedside caregiver, and I know
exactly what it's like when
you're getting abused by staff.
However, I do have some concerns
that this leaves it open for
interpretation a little bit more
in this bill, which could then
result in target.
of staff, especially our
healthcare heroes like our
nurses, um, I do wish that there
were sanctions involved with
this as well, um, but that's on
a different point, however, I,
if we do not support this bill,
what we're going to end up
having is we're going to have
even a more shortage. And the
reason why I say that is because
when you look at our numbers, we
can't recruit nurses from other
states when they look at how
deplorable our healthcare ratios
are. We can't continue to stay
at this level without this type
of bill. If you don't have this
bill in
we will never get past where we
are right now. So this is a very
big bill to have people and
you'll notice that a lot of them
CNOs, CEOs, Presbyterian
lobbyists, they want to speak
out against it. However, the
reason why they want to is
because it's going to cost them
money, but it's money that they
should have already invested
into our healthcare. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Hope you have a
wonderful day.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright. I am
a 45 years plus master's
prepared, registered nurse,
retired Air Force.
To address the nursing shortage.
I taught nursing here in New
Mexico for over 20 years.
Because of the mass exodus of
nurses from the bedside, I
shifted my priorities from
teaching nursing to addressing
nurse retention. Nurse retention
is the problem.
Do you know your hospital's
nurse turnover rate since 2012,
nurses have petitioned our New
Mexico legislators for mandated
nurse to patient ratios. The
arguments against safe staffing
are stale. One person opposing
it said the CNO must dictate the
staffing levels. This is not
true in the CFR, it does not say
that. There is a reason for
nurse hospital turnover and
shortage, re-establishing the
practice of collecting exit.
interviews will tell you the
reason for turnover, hospitals
must be held responsible. They
need to publicly report nurse
turnover rates, New Mexico
nurses need mandated
nurse-patient ratios, please
vote, vote yes for HB 1308.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kelly Sanchez. I'm an
attorney in Albuquerque, um, and
I represent patients um who have
been harmed, and I'm stand in
support of this bill because
this is a bill that provides
proven proven results, um, and,
you know, in, you've heard from
the opposition that this, um,
this will not work. However,
depositions of CEOs and CFOs,
uh, demonstrate that their
budgets can
Um uh accommodate minimum
staffing, um, and this is a very
important bill that will result
in not just a better environment
for providers, but most
importantly for increased
patient safety. Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Colin Willis. I'm a
registered nurse here in Santa
Fe, New Mexico. I'm going into
my 7th year being a registered
nurse, my first job in nursing
was in a progressive care unit,
so I've heard some people
earlier talking about sub acute
care units needing not to have
this sort of thing like it
really should just apply to ICU
and I'm here to tell you that
that is totally wrong.
Um, that 7% change in more uh
morbidity and mortality is huge,
OK, you guys, every time, um,
they would push us beyond the
ratio in PCU is 4 to 1, so 4
patients to 1 nurse, and I can
tell you firsthand that if you
push the nurses that are doing
that job beyond that, it's you,
it's me, it's your kids, it's
your family who get hurt from
something like that as a nurse,
my first job is to be a patient
advocate, and I can tell you.
you firsthand that when we break
these ratios and the fact that
we don't have them established
in law in New Mexico, it leads
to a lot of patient harm, and so
I just want you to try to
remember that at some point all
of us are gonna have to go and
stay in the hospital, so this is
something that we all need to be
on board with because at some
point it's gonna be your kid who
has a nurse who is totally
overworked, because they just
need to give them more patience
or whatever, and.
Just try to imagine that that's
you in that situation, you know,
it's not safe for me as a nurse
and it's not safe for you or
your family member to push us
over our ratios.
Thank you.
I'm kind of the elderly nurse so
coming here, but um I do want to
encourage you all to think and
you, could you tell us your
name, I'm sorry, ma'am. Delma
Delora.
Delora, um, a lot, um, anyway,
just want to encourage you all
to think about it and uh vote
for safe staffing because it's
so important. I worked for 58
years as a nurse till I got to
where I couldn't work anymore,
but
You know, it's so important to
have the amount of people, the
amount of, of, I always say
bodies cause that's kind of what
we, how many bodies do we have
today, but you know, that are
the nurses or the other
healthcare workers to take care
of you when you're there, cause
you think about yourself in that
bed.
You're gonna want someone to
take care of you. And if you
don't have the proper amount of
people working on that floor,
you're not going to get the
care. So yeah, your leg might be
hurting and there's something
wrong with it, and later on
you'll find out you had a blood
clot, but that nurse might have
not been able to get to you
because of the fact that you
don't have enough nurses on the
floors.
So, um, I think everybody just
like that gentleman said before
me, you've got to think about
it, you got to think about
yourself and other people who
are in the hospital. It's not
like just putting somebody in
the hospital and they're gonna
get well. They need to have that
safe care, that good care that
is needed, and if you don't get
it, you might end up
Like in Santa Fe on Rosario
Boulevard. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee. My name
is Lily Sandoval.
Um
I am a nurse, retired now, 46
years. Um, I did pediatrics.
Me surge quite a variety of
different nursing care in my
career.
My daughter's.
Our nurses.
And
I know how hard it is and was
for me when I didn't have.
Proper staffing to take care of
my patients, and I'm here to
advocate for them as well.
Um
So that
We can continue to try and
improve the working conditions
of nurses and any other
caregiver in the facilities.
Bill 138 will definitely help.
Improve the working conditions
and provide a stable workforce
for our nurses.
I ask you to please support this
bill. Thank you.
I, uh, Madam chair in committee.
My name is Lydia Furchell. I'm a
retired MRI tech. I started as a
young nurse and went into
radiology. So I
Uh, I know that this is a
Very heavy on the nursing bill,
but also the technology is the
one that also suffers right now
I'm hearing that at the our
hospital here that if you are a
patient and you need an MRI or a
CAT scan, you're having to wait
a few days to, for, for a test.
So that backs up patients,
nurses are having to take care
of these patients extra days and
patient has to wait extra days
and just to have a test like an
MRI.
Or a CAT scan or X-rays or
probably done. The, the thing is
that there used to be a school
here, oh well, northern New
Mexico Community College had a
radiology program, and that
closed up, that closed off, and
they do have a nursing program,
but they do not have radiology
anymore, so that really backs
up, you know, the technology,
uh, and I hope the other day we
heard from this res respiratory
therapist that he's, you know,
too, he has to go from one floor
to another to attend patients
and apparently they're short
staffed also. So anyway, uh
please uh consider this bill.
It's very crucial to our health.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh
representatives. My name is
Stephanie Valdez. I'm a
registered nurse. Um, I
specialize in oncology.
I just wanted to say that nurses
are leaving the profession they
love because we are exhausted,
we're overworked and we're
unsafe. Patients are becoming
more violent and we are
constantly being verbally abused
and physically assaulted at a
4th degree felony isn't enough
to protect us. Right now we're
expected to care for 8 to 9
patients at a time. We are
expected to work like this
without breaks, without lunch,
without time to even drink water
or even use the restroom.
This needs to burn out mistakes
and worst of all preventable
patient harm when hospitals are
understaffed, patients suffer,
and so do nurses. They fall,
they develop bed sores, and they
don't receive the care they
deserve.
We need safe staffing rat ratios
to ensure that we can provide
quality care that every patient
needs.
This could be your mother, your
father, your community, um,
During the COVID pandemic, we
were there for our community and
we, we showed up, now we need
for you guys to show up for us.
Please, um, pass House Bill 138.
It's time to make a real change
for both nurses and patients.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairman and
representatives. My name is
Kristen Larson and I'm an intern
resident physician at University
of New Mexico Hospitals in
family medicine.
Um, I would urge you all to
consider this bill. I want to
stress that whenever you have.
There are some difficult
situations in which
administrators dictate the ratio
of nurses to patients. However,
a mandated ratio creates a
different kind of relationship
between nurses and physicians
where I've been able to have
nurses when, you know, as
physicians, we're not always at
the bedside and the nurses are
able to notice things that.
We may change our plan of care,
for example, if you have a
stable patient that has a
neurological change or a new
finding, it's able to really
enable us to catch those
problems early and enable better
outcomes for our patients. And
so I would urge you all to
consider this bill. I know it
offers some challenges with
staffing and other things,
however, I do think that it's
critical for the quality of care
for our patients.
Hi, my name is Cindy Gonzalez.
I'm a certified nursing
assistant.
Um, I would like you guys to
consider this bill.
Uh, we are understaffed,
overworked.
No chance for breaks.
Even to.
Go use the bathroom or anything.
I work on the floor, bedside,
and I have 12 patients on a
daily basis.
If you
would consider this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, and we will go to
Zoom. We will take the the 1st
5.
Which is um Gattriana Marco
Boyd.
I'll be and you um
And Yolanda.
So go ahead,
G Satriana.
Hello, can you guys all hear me
OK?
Yes.
Thank you. Um, please give us
your name. Yes, madam Chair, my
name is Gino Satriana, um, I am
with uh Rio Rancho School
Employees Union also with uh
United Health Professionals, um,
of New Mexico. Um, I am speaking
today on behalf of um in favor
of this bill, um, not as a
representative for um my, um,
people that I represent, but as
a
Um, unfortunately, uh, this
Christmas I got a, a nice
Christmas gift and was put into
the hospital and had to have a
medical procedure done. Um, I
witnessed this firsthand on the,
on the staff shortage. I also
witnessed, um, uh, uh, an actual
nurse um that put in her last
day of the day, and she was a
fantastic nurse. Um, I
witnessed, um, the call buttons,
um, the the the the staff
that can't answer the call
bustings in a timely manner.
Certain hospitals have a
dispatch system and that's
actually answer the patient and
then uh 20 to 30 to 40 minutes,
I waited up to sometimes an hour
for a, for a nurse to come in,
Um, and so witnessing that
firsthand is one of the, the
issues, the main issues of this
staffing bill that needs to be
pushed through is the quality
care for the patient. I mean,
it's not only
the burnout for the staff
members or from my friend that
we talked about the CT scans or
the um uh the MRIs that they
have to wait on and that pushes
patients back further and
further and further. It just
becomes a log jam, and if we
don't get this bill passed, it's
going to continue to be a
logjam, um, in, in, in the sense
of, of this, uh, the other
thing, uh, my friend from Santa
Fe also that that's time.
OK, sorry about that we will go
to Margo and keep your remarks
to 2 minutes or under.
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
My name is Margot Gwyn and I'm a
patient who experienced medical
malpractice.
I'm here to strongly support
House Bill 138 because all New
Mexicans deserve the highest
standard of care.
In 2018, I experienced firsthand
the effects of substandard care
while in the hospital.
Which resulted in permanent
nerve impairment to the lower
half of my body.
For example, I live with a
neurogenic bladder.
Requiring frequent
self-catheterization.
Experience on a daily basis,
other complex health issues
related to this nerve
impairment.
Proper attentive care at that
time could have minimized or
completely avoided my long-term
injuries.
I speak out now so that future
patients
Maybe spared unnecessary pain
and suffering.
I'm excited about this bill,
which will require adequate
staffing in hospitals to ensure
that every patient receives the
highest standard of care.
At a time when they're trusting
their lives to that care.
This will also provide a better
environment for the amazing
healthcare providers and
hospital staff who, as we know,
are stretched beyond their
limits.
This much-needed bill puts
patients and providers first.
By making profit-driven systems
accountable.
It has an action plan.
And I'm hearing so many great
things about
How doable it is and how needed
it is.
I urge you to support House Bill
138 to make our hospital safer
for everyone. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we will go to
Boyd.
Boy, can you unmute?
Boy, please unmute or we will
skip you.
Yeah
Please go ahead, Boyd.
Can you hear me now? Yes.
OK, sorry. Uh, good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
On the 21st of last month, our
governor stated the speech, uh,
uh, public.
Uh, mention public safety is our
number one focus. Well, public
safety in the regards of patient
care is directly affected by
staffing. So today, I speak in
favor of HB 138.
Uh, to keep staff and nurses,
you must first treat them
fairly, pay them well, and more
importantly, give them a fair
and safe workload and
environment. Uh, I kind of speak
for my wife this morning. She's
a, a registered nurse for over
30 years in New Mexico. Uh, she
can, uh, she currently can only
handle about 3 or 4 days a
month, uh, this is the absolute
minimum for her to keep her job.
She wants to quit, but, uh, at
62 needs to keep working. Uh,
the hospital
conditions often leave her with
no breaks or even water or meals
during up to 7 hours of time,
um.
Her entire shift is like this a
lot of times I hear it, um,
it's, it tears her up her body.
Uh, this is, uh, mirrored over
and over in testimony that you
guys have heard, and I
personally have spent over 50
days as a patient in New Mexico
hospitals, uh, uh, due to
medical malpractice, a lot of it
was. I've seen firsthand what
nurse and patient overload can
do um one example is like
hitting the call button like the
previous person said I, I had a,
a blood transfusion going on and
it started affecting me, um,
really badly and I
I hit the button and nobody
came. I was screaming for help
and luckily the door was partly
open, so eventually I got help
and they came in and brought the
crash cart in and I guess save
me, uh.
Uh, hospital profit is the
absolute driver behind what's
going on here with the nurse
work the overload and burnout,
uh, you lose the nurses because
of the pressure that's time you
can finish your thought.
OK, yeah, safety over profit,
not profit over safety. Thank
you. Thank you. Next we'll go to
I'll be.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. Can you guys hear me
good?
Yes.
Hi, yes. Um, my name is Albi.
Uh, safe stopping isn't just
about numbers, it's about
protecting both patients and
healthcare workers.
In New Mexico. The hospitals
continue to push on safe
staffing ratios, like assigning
at 1 CNA27 behavior health
patients without acknowledging
the real dangers that we face
daily. Behavioral health
patients require more than just
standard care that require
immediate attention,
de-escalation, constant
monitoring to ensure the safety
and the safety for those around
them.
Yeah, but current staffing
levels for healthcare employees,
nurses, and counselors are
stretched far too thin. We
expected to do the impossible
watch multiple patients while
providing one on one care for
adults who are on suicidal or on
crisis watch.
Meanwhile, we are being kicked,
stabbed with pencils, verbally
abused, simply because we cannot
get to every patient fast
enough.
This is, this is unacceptable
and we cannot continue to
sacrifice our safety, our mental
well-being, and ultimately
quality care for our patients
received.
Safe staffing isn't isn't a
luxury. It's, it's a necessary.
It's time for New Mexico.
To make a real change in sharing
the hospital's provide safety
levels needed to protect both
patients and healthcare workers.
We are exhausted. We are
injured, and we don't want to be
ignored no longer.
And I, I
Um, with this bill, and I hope
you go with this bill as well,
and you approve it.
Thank you.
Thank you. And finally, we will
go to Yolanda.
And community, can you guys hear
me?
Yes, go ahead.
OK.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak today. My name is Yolanda
J Ulmer. I am the CEO of
District 1199 New Mexico. Our
union representative healthcare
professionals at 5 hospitals
across New Mexico. Holy Cross
Medical Center in Taos, Alta
Vista Regional Hospital in Las
Vegas, Los Alamos Medical
Center.
Christa Saint Vincent's in Santa
Fe and University Hospital in in
Albuquerque, excuse me.
Today I'm here on behalf of
District 1199 New and AFT.
Organizations that collectively
represent over 250,000
healthcare workers committed to
delivering safe, high quality
care to patients across our
state.
2 years ago, we fought
tirelessly for safe staffing
legislation. The bill made it
through two committees, and we
were on the verge of making New
Mexico the only second state in
the nation to enact with
critical protection for patients
and healthcare workers. Since
then, that since then, thanks to
relentless
Advocacy of 1199 and AFT Mars
states successfully passed safe
staffing laws. HB 138 is is a
direct result of that momentum.
This bill takes the strongest,
most effective policies from
across the country and puts them
into work here in New Mexico,
ensuring that patients receive
the care they deserve, and the
frontline healthcare workers
have the staffing and support
necessary
to provide.
It's safety. New Mexico has a
choice to continue the status
quo, allowing patients and
caregivers to suffer or to take
action and lead. We have the
power to join growing numbers of
states, prioritizing patient
safety and workplace protection
for healthcare workers. The
unions demand safe staffing. The
workers demand safe staffing,
and most important time is up,
please wrap up.
Serve high quality care.
District 119 urges you to pass
House Bill 138. Thank you, and
that's all the um public
comment. So for those of you who
came in a little bit late, this
bill has been amended and you
should have the amendment in
front of you and also the um the
House Committee analysts report
that's in your notebook is based
on the old bill without the,
without the amendments and so
the, the one that's with your
handouts that's not in your
book, it's for.
It's pink.
So with that, I will go to the
committee for questions.
Oh, I'm sorry, Representative,
do you have any wrap up?
Yeah, some apologize. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you
committee. Um, I want to wrap up
a few things and then I also
want to bring somebody in for a
second. One is, is that um uh we
have been asking for this for 10
years, you direct care staff for
10 years, hospitals have been
able to come up with workforce
solution plans to recruit and
retain nurses we have nearly 20%
of nurses who have spent the
money and the time going through
nursing school have
the profession, and many more
who are still continuing to
nurses have less the direct care
beds because of these harsh
conditions in which we're asking
them. I'm gonna ask if uh Dan
Linari will from DHI will come
up here. He is not here to
support or um go against the
bill, but he can clarify some of
the misinformation we heard in
public comment about the um like
the chief nursing officer.
other CMS uh criteria. Thank
you.
And we have already taken an
hour on our first bill, we still
have a lot, so I'm gonna ask
folks to be brief, yes, no, um,
just the facts, ma'am or sir.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh, good morning. I'm
Dan Linari, the director at DHI,
uh, with the Healthcare
Authority, uh so yes as the
representative said, we don't
have a position on this bill,
but I can clarify uh what we
have stated in our FIR, uh, so
DHI is the uh regulatory and
licensing entity, um, for
healthcare facilities that
includes hospitals, um, and so
we are uh contracted by CMS to
enforce their conditions of
participation.
Um, and so, as you can see in
our FAR we do not see a conflict
with the CMS conditions of
participation as it relates to
nurse staffing committees.
Thank you very much. We rest for
questions. Thank you, Dan.
Thank you. So, um, questions, I
saw hands and then we, OK, so
Jones.
Ben Chavez.
Um
Anaya
OK, and Santa Cortez, so go
ahead, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Kates, uh,
Representative Reval Caballero,
Adrian.
I, I didn't catch your name,
sir. Shane, appreciate the
opportunity to have this
discussion, I have to say right
off the bat, I am
Discouraged about all of the
changes I went, I went through
the bill and I thought, oh wow,
this is just a committee bill.
This is, this is more like what
I was hoping for, Madam Chair,
uh, representatives, and then I
realized I got to the end and I
thought, oh, we have an
amendment. I had to go through
the amendment line by line. Now,
and then I went through the um
the FIR line by line, and now I
have a pink sheet that is the
updated FIR that I don't even
have time to read. I'm
frustrated about that.
So I have to say right off the
bat, like I'm discussing a bill
that I can't really discuss
fully because I don't have all
the information. Um, I haven't
had time to really look at the
information.
So based on that.
I'll
I'll go forward with what I
know.
First of all, as a nurse,
appreciate all the nurses and
nursing staff that spoke about
the need for a better patient
care, better work environment. I
hear you. I, you know, I know
it's worse now than it
gonna ask just for questions.
We, we are, um, and just to
remind you that if you get here
on time, you can hear the bill
presentations. Madam Chair, um,
I appreciate your input, but I
think this is important for me
to, to lay the foundation for my
questions because I do agree
that's important. As a nurse, I
know it's important as a um as a
legislator, it's important for
me to look at the big picture.
More than just the emotional
trauma that we go through as
nurses and uh so.
That's my foundation for my
questions.
Um
As far as
As far as patient safety goes,
of course, that is, that's the
goal. I think we all agree on
that. There's, there's, um,
There's patient safety and
there's access to care. So my
question when I look at this
bill, do you think, Madam Chair,
Representative, that this will
improve access to care for
patients in New Mexico.
Yes, I do. Madam Chair
Representative, how do you see
that happening?
I believe that when you uh
change, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative.
Um, I believe when you uh change
the work environment that you
will have a stronger ability to
recruit new nursing, um, uh
states that have adapted this
particular bill, or again,
Washington, Connecticut have um
higher vacancy. I'm sorry, have
lower vacancy rates in their um
direct care beds providers as
well. I am also want to
mention how
Disappointed I am that we
continue to hear the same
rhetoric and threat for the last
10 years that they will reduce
beds and hospitals. I don't want
hear about for safety reasons,
we will lower our shareholders,
uh, rate or our executives pay
or we will uh reduce our medical
malpractice, uh, liability
because we have been able to
have proper staffing.
s they go right to the threat,
and I'm very disappointed in
that, that rhetoric for the last
10 years.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So you said
something that I, I find
interesting. You said Oregon,
Washington and Colorado have
adapted this bill. Is that true?
I'm so sorry, um, the, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, I met
Washington, Oregon, and
Connecticut.
OK, thank you.
Thank you. I'm sorry. I had a C,
but yeah, not the, not the rest
of it, but as far as I'm, I'm
aware, the only other um states
that have adopted nurse staffing
ratios.
Our California and
Massachusetts. Is that not true?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll let
my uh expert witness answer
this, Shane, and just, just for
quickness sake, whoever's gonna
take the question, just take the
question, the sponsor doesn't
have to give you permission,
just talk amongst yourselves.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Jones, no, uh, Washington and
Oregon have adopted minimum
staffing guidelines as well as
Connecticut. Those states have
enacted statutes within the last
2 years.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, uh, and they already have
data that shows that they don't
have a nursing shortage. Is that
what you're saying?
No, Madam Chair, representative,
I did not say they didn't have a
nursing shortage. We have a
countrywide nursing service, I
said they have less of a vacancy
rate than we do. Is it true that
Connecticut, Madam Chair,
representative, I mean, I'm
sorry, that California, um,
adopted nurse staffing back in
2004.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
yes, but that is a different
process than what you are seeing
in House Bill 138.
Madam Char, how does the
California um law current law.
That was adopted then compared
to what we have here in front of
us.
Madam Chair Representative, the
California law addresses
staffing guidelines on a
statewide basis through the
administrative process, this
bill has a minimum staffing but
allows each healthcare facility
to create staffing plans
consistent with the statute.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. I do appreciate that's a
big part of what I appreciated
about the original bill before
it was amended, I thought, you
know, we, we need people who are
unique to their facility. They
know their unique needs, they
know their patience needs, they
know their staffing situation to
make their own decisions is
something that we here shouldn't
the decisions we should not be
making. But then I saw the
ratios, and then I saw, I, I
have
I have problems with the ratio,
so Madam Chair, um,
representative this is not even
the same bill. So I don't, I
can't even point to the line,
but I know that, um, for
instance, I'll give you an
example and ask you to address
the, um
A mental health facility.
Uh, for instance, there's one
for juveniles in Las Cruces.
They would be, would they be,
um,
Would they have to comply with a
1 to 6 nursing ratio.
That's stated in this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I just want
to go back to the, the amendment
as presented, it changes two
things and two things only. It
acknowledges that we are no
longer the Department of Health,
but the healthcare authority and
puts the enforcement um element
back into the bill that was
inadvertently dropped by the
drafter.
Um, so there is, there is not in
any changes besides that in the
amendment, um.
Man chair representative, if you
would look in section 6, 13, and
14, uh.
But page
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
working on maybe an older
version of the bill, you, it's
in section 6.
Which sets out the ratio section
6 just to make sure that we're
all on the same page. So is the
one you have 0.229.
On the bottom left of the front
page.
Page 229.
I mean, not page, but um
202, 229125.1.
OK. All right, now, now we're on
the same version, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you. Uh,
if you look on page 17 uh of.
The iteration identified
sections 13 and 14 address
specifically the minimum nursing
ratios for behavioral health
units and psychiatric units. I
am not familiar with the uh
facility that you've identified,
but the statute provides those
ratios for those types of
facilities.
Very long.
Um, I know that there is a place
here in the amended and in what
I
Understood to be the amended
bill.
That
Specifically addresses.
Um, ratios and I'm certain it
said that there was a ratio.
of 1 to 6 fur.
Um, facilities such as rehab,
um,
Um
Mental health, psychiatric
facilities.
Is that
Does that sound familiar? I
don't see it now. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. I will say that
any ratio that's put in the bill
are the minimal national
standard ratio, we are asking
for specific on-site individual
groups in each hospital setting
made up of administrators as
well as healthcare providers
that decide as um as mentioned
in public comment, the minute by
minute and category of what sex.
in the hospital, what is the
appropriate ratio for that
specific site. The ratios in the
bill are just minimal national
standards.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
I've Google searched this to
death, and I find numerous uh
national sta national standards,
so which entity are you speaking
of when you call, when you say 1
to 6 is a national standard.
Yes, thank you. It is a national
standard from healthcare
providers, not from hospital
associations.
I didn't limit my searches to
hospital associations. I'll just
add, um, as you probably know,
we have the emerg oh Madam
Chair, I apologize.
Man,
I thank you. Um, just, uh, the
standards are set by our
national organizations, so the
emergency nurses Association,
the intensive care unit
intensive care nurses
Association, the American Nurses
Association all have standards
and recommendations that have
been set. All of this is data
backed with research, there's uh
data and research and we cited
different references that you
can look up.
We're happy to find more for
you, but these have been
recommended for years and years
by our, by our professional
organizations nationally.
Thank you, Adrian and Madam
Chair, um,
I think there's just there's so
much information that I don't
quite understand, um.
There's
Various sources and so forth. I
was unaware, totally unaware
that what you said originally
here in the discussion that
these other states had adopted,
nurse staffing bills.
That were like this.
From what I see, California and
Massachusetts are the only, the
only states that have um nurse
staffing ratios involved in the
nurse staffing that's been put
in legislation and that's,
you're telling me that's not
true. So I don't have good
information, uh, apparently. I'm
not sure exactly how to get it,
because I know my experience,
Madam Chair, and, and this is
important.
It's valuable to this
discussion, my experience is
that that nurse ratios.
Are are helpful.
And within an environment.
And that to legislate them is a
very difficult thing to do,
nurse staffing, I'm all for it.
We're all for it. There's nobody
in this room that probably
doesn't want good nurse
staffing, um, not hospitals want
it, they want their patients to
do well. You can, you can
explain your vote. We, we are
running way behind. Um, if you
have a question, please ask a
question.
So,
My question would be, is there a
way to fix this bill and to um
Not to limit, not to have nurse
ratios to to uh focus in on
nurse staffing without the
ratios that are not possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
believe it is this legislator's
duty to ensure safe and
accessible healthcare to New
Mexicans and we have proven uh
and also uh through through the
uh, that for every one patient
above these minimum standards,
there is a 7% increase of
mortality from the patient
within 30 days, the hospital
visit. This is definitely
something I believe is our
legislative duty.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and Representative Kates.
How do you
How do you resolve the
mathematical difference between
the number of nurses that we
have in New Mexico and in the
United States since we have a
uh and national nurse shortage
and the number of patients that
need care.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I am, I
have studied a great deal.
That's my background is
workforce and if you put a
workforce, um, in impossible
situation, especially the
workforce who is mission driven
and purpose-driven, such as
nurses in a place where they
cannot be successful, they would
most certainly will leave the
industry or go to
a
Uh, uh, a type of nursing like
providing Botox shots, then
doing direct care bed provider.
We have allowed the hospitals
for 10 years, we have asked for
nurse ratios and we have not
done that and they have not
shown that they have been able
to recruit or retain nurses any
better without the ratio.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. If this bill would make
that happen. Why haven't uh the
other 49 states adopted it.
Representative, she can't speak
to what 49 other states have
done, or how many of other
states.
Let's stick to questions that
actually are in the bill as
opposed to um what other states
are doing. I think it's, it's a
valid concern. It's a
mathematical concern, and I also
would like for you as the chair
to control what's happening in
the audience because I'm getting
a lot of faces made at me. I'm
getting people nodding,
laughing, making all kinds of
gestures when I speak and when
represented Kate answers me, and
I don't see that happening on
the other side.
So I'd appreciate a little
respect and decorum.
We will maintain decorum in the,
in the room, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, represented Kates.
This is emotional for me, Madam
Chair.
Um,
there's no way I can address
this without being emotional. I
get PTSD listening to these
people talk about their work
environment. This is not
something that I take lightly.
So I have to just come down to
the common sense. I think it's
valid for me to ask you, how do
you resolve what is the
definition of ratio, you have a
certain number of nurses, you
have a certain number of
patients. How do you legislate
ratios and make that work
without patience not being cared
for. I, I just need to, I need
to get the big picture of that.
How do you say, I have to take,
I'm gonna take these nurses.
And I'm going to ratio.
their care for these patients
and make sure that everyone gets
care. I'm sincere about that,
madam chair, Representative
Tates.
I'm so sorry, Madam Chair and
Representative Jones, I do know
it's an emotional issue for you,
and I know, um, that this weighs
heavy on you. I can see that. I
am not clear.
Of what that question is. I'm so
sorry.
It's just, yeah, I'll try, I'll
try to, try to make it clear. If
you, if just look at the
definition of ratio. It's a,
it's a relationship of one
number to another number.
So if you, if you expand that
out, Madam Chair, Representative
Kates, and you look at, OK, I
have this many nurses, the most
updated workforce solutions
number that I've got just this
morning was about 7000. I've
heard, you know, anywhere from 6
to 9, but they've updated um
since COVID, um, since all of
that leveled out just recently
to about 7000 RN short in New
Mexico. We have such great need
uh in terms of, you know,
patient.
care, so you have those nurses,
that's one part of your ratio
that we're talking about here is
7000 of them.
You have these patients, they're
probably more out there than we
even care for right now.
How do we legislate 1 to 4 and
make sure that no one is left
out and not receiving care.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. Um
first, I would like to
So sorry, I want to make sure
that I'm answering your
question. So,
I do not believe that because
the hospitals have not
adequately been able to recruit.
And I would
Argue that it may be because
they're paying traveling nurses
more than their staff, maybe
because they have impossible
environments that they're having
problems with that. But because
they have not been able to
recruit and retain. We need to
balance that on the backs of the
safeties of our patients and our
nurses.
I
I think that if we can create a
safe environment, the 17% of
nurses who have gone through
huge expenses and and time
investment to become nurses and
have left their profession,
they, there might be a
percentage and that will, uh,
want to come back. I think that
the other 25% of the 83% that
our nurses who are not getting
satisfied doing.
their nursing jobs that are not
as mission driven as bedside
nursing. Once they have a
successful environment to come
back to may come back as well.
I will continue as a legislator
to fund education opportunities
and, and want to support that as
they recruit. So those are my
only
I workforce solution ideas at
this point. So I'm, I'm gonna
ask folks, we need to be brief.
We are on the first bill of 6,
and we've taken almost an hour
and a half, so I'm gonna be
really tough, ask a question if
you need to explain your vote,
explain your vote, and I'm gonna
ask the panel to please brief,
brief, brief. A lot of this
we've heard before. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
think I've said a lot of these
things before, but um I do
appreciate every
effort to address the workforce
situation, the crisis that is
healthcare in New Mexico, and I
know that we worked together on
a lot of things, and I do
appreciate that. I hope that we
can continue to do that.
This is a mess to me. I, I can't
support it, and I hope we can
continue, um, working toward
common goal of access to care
and uh patient safety. Thank
you. Thank you and Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, and I,
and I don't want to ditto what
everybody said, but I have a
question. So, and I actually
have been looking it up and it
shows over 8000 positions
unfilled for nurses in New
Mexico currently.
Um, so, other than the
Main worries and concerns we all
have with, with
Ratios with not having nurse
shortages. My concern here is in
your amendment, um, Amendment G,
it says, in the event of an
emergency circumstance not
described on the amendment, I'm,
I'm the last page. OK, please,
if I can, please give us page
number page number just turn it
all the way over, OK.
In the event of an emergency
circumstance not described in
subsection F of this section,
either co-chair of any staffing
committee may specify a time or
place for a committee to meet to
review and consider
modifications to the staffing
plan while emergency is in
effect. So the only thing I can
think of is COVID. It was awful.
I've been in healthcare for 25
years, healthcare
administration. if we already
have a shortage of over 8000
nurses and something like that
happens today and in this
language all it says is consider
modifications, not mandated, not
put this on hold, but consider
that is a huge concern for me
for that word to be in there at
a time and place when we just
lived through probably one of
the worst things most of us.
have had to go through,
especially when it comes to
hospital and staffing and
patient care.
Is there something maybe you can
change in that wording or or why
does it say review and consider.
OK, the question has been asked
get the answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative.
Um, because we've picked the
committee of subject experts to
make that decision we're not
mandating them, the, the
committee is the subject
experts, their site specific,
and they will make that decision
whether it's COVID or a bus
accident.
And then my next question. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
With the number of nurse
shortages and
Not being able to recruit or
retain nurses for hospitals.
Have you thought that this.
Mandating hospitals to staff at
a certain level now will then
lead to a further burnout
because then these nurses are
having to staff more and more
times, positions because they
cannot recruit or retain more
resentative Kates has already in
experts have already answered
that question. I, I have not
heard that question or answer.
I'm sorry, go ahead, uh, very
briefly, you've stated it at
least once.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Maybe I can sum it up for you.
She said basically in improving
the climate of a workplace.
will be an attractive way to get
new folks in or to, to maintain
what they have, and she has
stated that several times, so
we'll move on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So,
I'm glad we're, we're hoping
that this bill will recruit and
retain more nurses in our state.
I guess the last um question
that I'd like to ask or state is
it looks like this will go into
effect less than a year from
today, which is January 1st,
2026, when we have a massive
shortage already. Have we
thought of maybe
Moving the date to a whole
another year if this bill does
pass because of the shortage and
because sometimes hoping and
dreaming that a legislation
passing will bring people here
might not work right away.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. That's a
fair question. And uh understand
that there is an exemption in
this bill that if the hospital
can show that they have um done
recruitment efforts, uh, then
the and and it is a uh they have
also 6 times of losing their
staffing ratio within a 30 day
period, so they have lots of
options to continue that
conversation with the oversight.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Those are
all the questions I have. Thank
you, Representative Anaya. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Uh, thank you,
Representative. Feel free to
answer these with yes, no. Um, I
just wanna be sure that we're
covering a couple of bases here.
I have 2 questions, Madam Chair.
Um, the two things that I've
heard come up the most in terms
of opposition or cost, um, and
patient serve slash patient
care. Um, so my first question
is about cost, Madam Chair
Representative, um,
Do you believe that your bill
will help with cost savings as
it relates to better safety
rates to make sure that we have
better insurance pricing to make
sure that we have less medical
malpractice cases to ensure that
those that cost savings can go
towards salaries and incentives.
Do you believe your bill will do
that, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes. Thank you, Madam Chair. One
last question, um, in terms of
patients served in patient care,
um, Madam Chair Representative.
My understanding from some of
the comments that were made by
Frontline staff is that
Just because folks are checked
in to a hospital doesn't
necessarily mean that they are
being cared for or cared for in
the way that they should be, um,
from my understanding, Madam
Chair Representative, your bill
would address this in terms of
having smaller ratios, ensuring
that patients are seen faster,
and this way we have quicker
open beds. Is that the premise
of your bill as well, Madam
Chair Representative. Madam
Chair Representative, yes. Thank
you, Madam Chair. No further
questions. Thank you,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair Representative
Kates, the lens of my questions
are in regard to rural
hospitals, and I know that we've
heard about the beneficiaries
today, so who would you see as
being adversely impacted by this
bill.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I do not see adversely impacted.
So again, my lens is about rural
hospitals specifically in my
part of the state, um, which
hospitals in the southeastern
part of New Mexico were engaged
on this bill.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. They
also, they have a section in the
bill to give rural hospitals a
specific exemption given their
uh the challenges to less
population around them in the
recruitment and retainment of
nurses. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative Kates, and
that's, that was my big concern,
the potential for unintended
consequences with increased
costs to the rural hospitals. So
what you're saying, Madam Chair
Representative, is there is an
exemption.
For rural hospitals. Yes, ma'am,
there is. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Cates, could you
show me specifically where
that's located?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Shane.
He handed me back the bill.
I'll go to the next question if
you like why they looked that
one up, please. OK, no, ma'am, I
think that, that might have been
my last question.
Madam Chair Representative, I
guess it depends on how you
answer it if it's my last
question, but we're getting
close. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We
are
On the last page, and in section
10, it says emergency, it is
necessary for the public piece.
OK, I'm sorry.
Um,
so on the last page line 8D, the
department may grant waivers to
rule or critical access
hospitals for compliance with
the hospital Patient Safety Act,
if the hospital is able to
document reasonable efforts to
obtain adequate staff.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative Kates. So I see
that it says it may grant, so
what are the stipulations?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is up for the the oversight from
the from the uh from the
healthcare authority. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair
Representative Kates, and that's
my concern that if my rural
hospitals in my district don't
get the waiver, then my concern
is about medical malpractice if
this becomes a New Mexico
standard of care. Um.
So just so you can see, that's
where the lens of all of my
questions have come through and
based on the temperature of the
room, I'll, I'll finish with
that. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative Kates.
Thank you. So, um, seeing no
further debate, I will entertain
a motion.
Madam Char, move a do pass.
So we have a motion for a due
pass on House Bill 138 as
amended. Um,
and the second thank you.
Second
Wake up, wake up.
OK, so we have a motion from
Representative Anaya and a
second from representative
Ferrari and uh
Can you please take the role,
Karen.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Pass
Representative Ann Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Cortez.
No. Madam Vice chair. Yes.
Madam Chair,
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez, yes,
and to explain my vote.
by a vote of 6 in the
affirmative and 3 in the
negative, you have, you have a
due pass on House Bill 138 as
amended, and we will go back to
um Representative E. Chavez to
explain her vote. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, unfortunately,
I didn't um get to ask a
question, but that's, that's on
me. Um, so one of the questions
that I have, and I had asked
this in another committee was
with with regard to the uh the
committees that are going to be
set up with
within each hospital.
Um, you've got the um
Representative, you are
explaining your vote? Yes.
So, um, I, the multiple staffing
committees that that are noted
in the FIR caused me some
concerns, so if I could get a
little bit more clarification,
not now, uh, but later on that
would be very helpful. Thank
you, madam. Thank you. OK, so
you have a due pass. We will
move on to House Bill 151 and
for those of you who are here
for House Bill 171,
Representative Jones, you are
rolling that, correct? And we
are also, we are
Also rolling House Bill 189
indefinitely. So if you are here
for either of those, you are
welcome to stay, but we will not
hear them today. So we will move
on to House Bill 151,
Representative Anaya.
Whenever you're ready and I'm,
please, I'm gonna beg the
committee and the audience. We
gotta get moving or we will have
to meet on Saturday
171 is being rolled and 189.
Go ahead, Representative.
And if you are uh leaving the
room, please leave the room and
have your conversations outside.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We will
try to make the beginning of
this presentation very short.
Thank you for hearing House Bill
151. Um, you all have actually
heard legislation similar to
this before and I've passed it
on to this committee, um, a
couple of years ago, menstrual
products in K-12 schools was
before you. We are trying to
build upon that. And, uh, make
sure that this time we are
encompassing institutions of
higher of higher education here
in our state. Um, Madam Cherry
have with me my two expert
witnesses today who I would like
to give a
introduction.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Alanna
Baca. I'm the executive director
of governmental affairs at the
Associated Students of the
University of New Mexico.
I'm sure I was the committee. My
name is Alexander Adams. I'm an
alumni from the University of
Mexico, up until last semester,
I was the executive director of
our governmental affairs, and
working on this with a lot of
students. Thank you, Madam
Chair, just a couple of quick
points before um we get to
questions. Um, I will just say
these are uh students from ASUNM
and they brought this to me.
And I always really appreciate,
um when um legislation is
deriven from those that impacts
most. Uh, a couple of quick
points before we get into this.
Um, a survey was done recently
for needs on UNM campus and um I
can only um anticipate that
these types of um
Rates of insecurity will also
permeate through other
education, educational
institutions, but UNM had a
study that found that 58% of
their students were food
insecure.
Uh, 62% are housing insecure,
14% have been homeless in the
last year. And so we see these
as very basic needs and uh we
stand for questions, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. So if you are on Zoom
in opposition, raise your hands,
and we will come back to you
after we go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in opposition,
in case, seeing none and seeing
no hands on Zoom in support if
you are on Zoom in support,
please raise your hand. I will
take the 1st 5 in the room if
you are in support, please raise
your hand and raising your hand
doesn't mean you have to talk.
It just means we're kind of
getting a temperature of of
who's, so if you would like to
speak, please come to the, and
we, I will take a maximum of 10,
and I hate to do this, but we're
gonna go to one minute instead
of 2 because we're so far
behind.
And we have a new timekeeper,
um,
my legislative assistant Britney
will be the timekeeper. Good
morning. Um, Madam Chair and
Committee. My name is Leeanne
Lorenzo. I am from.
Um, indigenous women rising. I
am the community engagement
manager, and I also um,
And the manager for the moon
Python, which is a menstrual
product distribution.
Um
The cost of menstrual products
in real stores is much higher
than the stories in the city,
and we are very concerned about
the additional costs our native
people incur when they leave
home to further their education
and find that they cannot afford
menstrual hygiene products of
quality and find that
environmentally friendly
products are always financially
out of reach.
We support this bill and welcome
questions from the committee
later on about our moon python.
Thank you for letting me.
Morning, Madam Chair
Representatives. Uh, my name is
Quentin Ambersand. I'm a law
student intern working uh on
behalf of registered lobbyist
Juliana Koop, who represents
Planned Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains. Um, I'm here to
support HB 151 providing
menstrual products and
institutions of higher education
because providing these projects
is a big financial help to
students, um, menstrual products
can cost up to
$20 a month for people, um,
which can make or break whether
or not someone is able to attend
school that month, some, uh,
studies show that people choose
to not attend school or work
during their periods because
they don't have access to these
products.
And for students knowing that
they'll have what they need at
school, um, we'll allow them to
attend and have that peace of
mind, um, we already assume that
public restrooms should provide
us with toilet paper and soap
and uh paper towels providing
menstrual products should be no
different, especially in our
institutions of higher
education. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto with the ACLU of
New Mexico. We are in strong
support of this bill as it will
help address the lack of
menstrual equity and higher
education, especially for
marginalized populations,
individuals who lack access to
adequate products
disproportionately suffer the
medical and psychological impact
of reusing products, using
products for longer than
indicated or not being able to
use any products at all. This
can significantly impact a
person's ability to attend
classes, participate fully.
in academic life and affect
their overall well-being. We
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward as it will help to
improve the overall health,
safety and welfare of campus
communities across New Mexico.
Thank you.
Good morning, chair and members
of committee. My name is Kat
Sanchez. I'm with Bold Futures.
We are a reproductive justice
organization by and for black
indigenous women and people of
color in New Mexico.
Before an advocate, I'm a mom,
and in a home with 4
menstruating bodies, um, our
household is more than aware of
early menstrual starts and
accidents, and with two of our
daughters in higher ed, these
can come maybe at home or they
can happen on campus, and not
everyone has or can afford
extras and be prepared. Products
on campus would be more than
helpful. As an advocate and
having been here for debate on
products in K through 12, there
was heartburn around products in
men's restaurant.
ro om s And just because current
executive orders at the federal
level tried to erase trans
people, they exist. They exist
in our state.
In your districts in our higher
ed campuses across the state,
products should be available.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, are there people
on Zoom in support?
Who would like to speak.
OK, seeing no hands, um, do you
have anything to wrap up? Are
you ready for questions? We're
ready for questions, Madam. OK,
thank you.
Representatives, so questions.
Representative Martinez. Anyone
else?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. um Representative Ani or
for bringing this, um, this has
always been an interesting
conversation I had.
I was fortunate enough to have.
Several conversations over the
interim.
Um, with some
Transgender people that lived in
my district, um,
Covered a wide range of topics.
They were open to my questions.
I was, I was open to their
answers.
Um, but I do have one question.
Um,
On the bill.
H1, line 24.
I'm, I am in full support.
Of having these
products available in women's
bathrooms.
And even the general gender
neutral bathrooms.
Uh, I'm just, I really have a
hard time philosophically with
putting them in a men's
bathroom. If there is a
transgender person they can use
the gender neutral bathrooms
have that access.
Um, I just don't.
see the wisdom in, in allowing
it in
At least one men's bathroom in
every state educational
institution.
Um, we, we have spent a lot of
time to develop or uh
Opening the, the gender neutral
bathrooms, which I think is a
great idea. I think it solves a
lot of problems.
I don't think putting menstrual
items in a men's bathroom is
gonna solve anything.
Um, can you explain to me the
thought process of
Getting this done, Madam Chair
Representative, why?
What's required in a men's
bathroom.
Absolutely, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, first of all,
thank you for recognizing trans
folks as a part of our community
because they are, they are
people that we love and we care
for. Um, in terms of putting,
uh, menstrual products in a
men's restroom. Um, there are
Trans men who use men's
restrooms and trans men can also
bleed through. I will say one of
the most terrifying things, um,
that usually happens, you know,
to folks who do menstruate, is
the fact that you may bleed
through your clothes, and it is
hideously embarrassing. Um, and
so, uh, you know, the fiscal
impact is insanely minimal when
it comes to this. And so it just
gives one more opportunity for
folks to not be incredibly
embarrassed as they're walking
around, uh, walking around their
campus. Uh, it gives one more
place where they can
You know, walking to the
bathroom, um, that they use
consistently and be able to get
menstrual products there. Thank
you, Madam. And just a reminder,
think about UNM campus, there
must be hundreds of bathrooms,
so one men's bathroom is a drop
in the bucket.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, that, that
comment is exactly why I have a
problem with having just one
men's bathroom.
We're gonna make a transgender.
person run all the way across
campus to the one men's
bathroom. I do not see the
wisdom in doing that. My
discussions with
Uh, these transgender young
people in, in my community was
very enlightening and, and
I, I love the very honest and
open way we had the discussion
and one of the questions was,
Why do,
why do we need to have
Uh, menstrual products in men's
bathrooms, because we dealt with
this in, in prior.
Um
Sessions
They were as confused as I was.
And
Just like the, the chair said.
There are hundreds of bathrooms
at UNM and we're only gonna
require one, just, to me, it, it
Uh, I think it's more of a, a
social comment than a solution.
Um, and for that, I, I, uh,
You know, if we could amend that
part out.
Boom, I'm all over this. Um,
I, I just don't see one bathroom
that you and I'm solving any
problems.
Um
But those are my
Os, Madam Chair, representative,
thank you for indulgence.
Madam Chair Representative, we
would happily work, um, with
you, uh, to actually expand to
more men's restrooms because we
do think that one is great if
you're able to use it, but if we
could have them across campus,
that would be fabulous as well,
um, Madam Chair, Representative,
if you'd like to help us get
additional funding to make sure
that they are in all restrooms,
we would appreciate the help.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I have a quick statement and
then a question. Um,
I, I have, um, I just wanted to,
to say that I have a, a dear
friend of mine who's a trans
woman and because I've had many
conversations with her about the
various issues that have to do
with transgender, um, concerns
that she's not in favor of this
bill. So there's that, but then
there's also this.
Would you say, Madam Chair
Representative, that um
State educational institutions.
are
are prevented from
Having menstrual products in all
men's restrooms if they would
desire to do so? Is that against
the law?
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe it's more a matter of um
Money and the ability to be able
to fund, um, the products that
are in restrooms, and that's why
this is an appropriation bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So we could
just focus on the funding, and
they could decide where they put
the menstrual products. Is that
the case without legislation?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, if there were just a million
dollars randomly allocated to
institutions of higher
education.
They wouldn't necessarily be
required to put um menstrual
products in any restrooms at
all. Um, this ensures that the
money is actually going to
menstrual products.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
OK, I will, um,
Yes, I have a question, um,
Madam Chair, and um.
Representative, we, um,
Have, um, uh, I have a bill that
is to eliminate POS and one of
the products is probably going
to um include, um,
you know, feminine hygiene
products, so I don't think you
need to put this in your bill
because we'll take care of it
other ways, but just to keep
that in mind, is that something
that would cause a problem?
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
I believe it's something that we
can work out with the
institutions of higher education
to try to figure out how we can
have the safest products
possible. Thank you, Mike. Um,
and
I think that's all.
Representative Herndon has a
question. Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair and uh presenters. So it
looks like the New Mexico
Independent Community Colleges
were left out of this uh
legislation. You were talking
about amending an amendment, I
think that they are looking
forward to being included with,
is that something that you would
consider?
Madam Chair Representative, we
would definitely consider that.
I think, um, one of our, you
know, as, as we're going through
numbers, this is part of our
analysis. It was pretty simple
just to be able to, um,
encompass a whole group of
higher ed institutions and um in
the particular section that we
listed, but we're definitely
open to that if we're able to
also get the money that is
attached to it as well. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Well, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
one good thing I think I noticed
is that in some of the uh
In the bathrooms already at the
University of New Mexico in
Taos. They are already covered,
so there's some money you would
save there. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Love cost savings. Thank
you, Madam Chair. OK, thank you,
thank you. I will entertain
emotion.
Thank you manage like to move.
Sorry
Thank you manage like to move
to make a motion, uh,
For due pass on House Bill 151.
And we did not have amendments,
correct?
Correct. Trying to keep up. OK,
in a second, I'll second. So we
have a motion by Representative
Kate for Du pass on House Bill
151 with the second from
representative Ferrari, Karen,
will you take the role, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
She's excused. OK.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
by a boat of 5 to 4, you have a
due pass.
Thank you Madam,
uh one51, and we will now
quickly move to House Bill 174.
And I saw the sponsor.
A second ago, did she escape?
Represent um minority floor
leader Armstrong, are you here?
Yeah, I know.
We rolled 171.
OK, I think the sergeant went
out to see if, if they could
find her. If not, we will, we
will move. Are you on
OK, come on forward. Hopefully
she'll be, oh, there she is, OK.
Oh.
If one of you can cook it, he
should hopefully help you.
So uh
Minority floor leader,
Armstrong.
I want to just call you Gail,
but
No, I'm just kidding. I'm
kidding. That's
So whenever you're ready, go
ahead. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
committee, um, I'm gonna be
short and quick and to the point
because that's how I roll, um,
House Bill 174 is the Community
pharmacy reimbursement for
healthcare purchasing Act plans,
um, uh, HP 174 supports
community pharmacists and
pharmacies by increasing
reimbursement rates for
medications.
To the less than 60 community
pharmacies in the state,
community-based pharmacies,
especially in rural New Mexico,
um, provides individual quality
frontline healthcare services to
the communities they serve.
Uh, in many instances,
instances, the local pharmacy is
the only health care available
in rural areas. And so this is
increasing the dispensing fee to
match what is done, um,
by others. And so with, I would
introduce my uh special guest
here, uh, Ashley Seyforth,
Sayfarth
far. That's a really tough one
for me, um, and, um, she's here
to support and uh with that, I'd
like to let her make a few
comments and then we will stand
for questions. Good morning,
Madam Chair, representatives of
the committee. Thank you for
hearing my, my name is Doctor
Ashley Seafarth. I am a
pharmacist and the owner of Caug
in Aztec and Bloomfield, New
Mexico.
Um, I've been up here a few
times in front of you. I want to
thank you first of all for doing
exactly what we're asking for in
last year's legislation, we are
doing nothing but asking and
requiring the PBMs within the
healthcare authority across the
entire healthcare authority this
time to reimburse the
independent community
pharmacists at a fair rate, very
transparent rate, which is
already being done in Medicaid
as passed last year.
Medicaid had full support, and
we had full support from
everybody within Medicaid and um
HSD and so it has been
implemented and is working very
well.
Now we are asking that it is
rolled to the entire system, um,
for this, for the state.
It is that simple. It is a fair
reimbursement NADA, which is set
by a national level, um.
And then the dispensing fee,
which covers all cost to
dispense a prescription at a
fair and reasonable rate set by
HSD. Right now, the current
dispensing fee for the state
payers with our school systems
is 10 cents.
To the pharmacies, which I think
is absolutely egregious. I don't
know how many of you work for 10
cents. So we are asking it be
moved to a reasonable rate.
Thank you, I will stand for
questions.
Actually, we work for 0
Actually, we work for er
But, but we are not a good model
to follow. Um, so thank you for
that. Let's see, if you are on
Zoom in opposition, please raise
your hand and we will come back
to you and just um actually
mentioned PBMs, that's pharmacy
benefits managers. We speak a
different language in here
sometimes, so for those of you
who don't know, so.
Did I say support or opposition.
OK, so I see no hands in
opposition on Zoom in the room?
Is there anyone in opposition.
seeing no hands, we will go to
support on Zoom if you are in
support, raise your hand, um,
and we'll come back to you in
the room if you are in support.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward and we are
going to limit it to one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I know y'all
are pressed for time, so I'll be
brief. My name's Jason Thompson.
Excuse me, I'm the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Pharmacy Business Council and
also American pharmacies. So we
want to just really take time to
appreciate the sponsor for her,
uh, work on this and support on
this. Uh, he stated the primary
points you wanted to make, uh,
this is just a really
vital investment that these
community pharmacies need in
order to continue to serve the
patients that are under these
plans and to um keep them from
having to continue to take these
compounding losses that are part
of the, due to the dispensing
fees in these plans. So, um,
with the statements committee uh
previously stated we stand in
support of the bill. We ask your
support. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Lex Garcia. First and
foremost, I'm a pharmacist, but
I'm also the executive director
for the New Mexico Pharmacists
Association. I know we are
pressed for time, so I will also
be brief. Um, I'm here today to
voice our strong support for
House Bill 7174 community-based
pharmacies are the backbone of
healthcare across New Mexico,
particularly in our rule and our
underserved communities, these
pharmacies provide essential
medications, essential
medication counseling and
clinical services to patients
who often have nowhere else to
turn to.
Yeah, in inadequate
reimbursement rates are
threatening their survival,
making it harder for New
Mexicans to get the care that
they need. This bill ensures
more fair reimbursement for our
pharmacies without these
protections, we risk losing
independent pharmacies that are
often the only providers of this
type of care in their area,
passing House Bill 174 is a
necessary step to protect
patient access to medication,
support our local businesses and
strengthen New Mexico's health
care system. I urge your support
of this bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Madam Chair, members of
committee, Kat Sanchez with Bold
Futures. Um, first and foremost,
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward. We
are in support of this bill. We
have been working on pharmacist
parity, especially because
community pharmacies reach rural
and frontier communities and
would urge a due pass.
OK, and on Zoom I see Kirk. You
have one minute, Kirk.
Thank you. I would like to, uh,
get express my support for this
bill, can you introduce yourself
and speak a little louder for
your mic closer.
Uh, this is my name is Kirk
Irby, and I'm from Artesia, uh,
I own Lowell Pharmacy, which is
one of these community
pharmacies and I just wanna
support this bill and uh
Yeah
But
That's essentially I, I just
want to show my support for this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Kirk. OK, so seeing
no more um public comment, I
will go to the committee.
Representative Senate Cortez,
Madam Chair, minority Leader
Armstrong, I'd like to reserve
my comments to make a motion for
a do pass, please.
OK. Any, does anybody have
questions?
OK. Is there any opposition?
OK, seeing none, you have a due
pass. What are we?
I.
Uh, uh, the second was
represented in Chavez, correct?
So by a vote of 8 to 0, you have
a due pass.
Thank you. Thank you and, and
representative Armstrong, uh,
you can teach a class on how to
present a bill quickly.
We are waiting until we get a
sponsor for either the only two
bills we have left are 178
nursing practice changes and 186
state administered health
coverage plan. So we are waiting
for Representative Gallegos and
or representatives of Pansy,
whoever gets here first can go
first. It's a race.
Yes
OK.
OK, so we will also roll um 178
to Wednesday.
Um
OK, so we will wait for her, um,
and unfortunately, that was 3
rolls for today, so we're
Saturday is looking more and
more likely.
I'm sorry, but we gotta get our
work done.
Whenever you're ready,
representative Gallegos.
2
Oh, wait, wait, wait, hold, I
confuse myself here. So,
Are there changes coming to 178.
And we are rolling 178. Is that
correct? OK. OK. So then we will
go to 186, um.
That I will text her, uh, please
hold, hold, hold on.
So some out of here. We were
just in a press conference and
she was in the press conference,
so she may not be uh looking at
her phone. OK. Where, where was
the press conference? It's in
the room,
which is 31717.
Yeah, we're gonna we're gonna
send a retriever,
and, and I do apologize. I was
just told by my expert witness
that we do need to add one more
amendment on my bill, uh, HB
178, and I'm asking if we could,
uh, roll that until Wednesday.
Uh, we will roll it. I'm not
sure it can be Wednesday. Um, we
are falling further and further
behind and so we will, we will
get to it as soon as we can and
just and not directed at you,
but directed at anybody who
might have a bill in here.
Please, please, please, if
you're, if you want to roll it,
let us know in time so that we
can take it off the agenda and
put something else on. We need
24 hours' notice because we are
Going deeper and deeper into the
quicksand.
I apologize for that. I actually
was just told myself, so I
understand. I'm just throwing it
out in the world hoping that
some someone onces will hear it
and and be able to get their
amendment.
Thank you. So I'm gonna leave
Madam Chair, but I would request
at your earliest convenience if
I could be rescheduled. Thank
you will do that. Thank you.
And sorry to.
And I, I hope I didn't sound
harsh cause I know that we are
moving at a million MPH and
things change, so I, I'm not
upset if you don't have the
amendments in, but it will help
our committee process go a
little more smoothly if um
But, but no worries if you
don't.
So we will wait for um majority
floor leader Sapansky and
hopefully she'll be here before
we get called down to the floor.
So anyone have a good joke? We
could all use a smile on Monday
morning.
OK, I got one.
All right
tell a joke but it probably.
Yeah, yeah, don't give up your
day job. It's the comment from
up here.
But thank you for partaking in
our fri frivolity in this
committee while we're killing
time.
And a reminder to the committee,
we do have our committee dinner
tonight at 6:30 at
Where are we?
Maria, thank you. I'm glad
someone among here has a memory.
Thank you for, for rushing here.
We were the hurry up and wait
committee.
We're the hurry up and wait
legislature.
So
whenever you're ready triple
tasking this morning. OK, go
ahead. So we are now on um House
Bill 186 state administered
Health coverage plan.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. It's
great to be back in this
committee. I miss you all a lot.
Um
Hospital 186 directs the
healthcare authority to begin
the implementation of the
Medicaid Forward program.
Medicate for it is a major
affordability initiative that
would allow residents to
purchase robust health coverage.
While at the same time capping
their expenses at 5% of
household income.
Medicaid forward gets directly
at the affordability crisis, and
the status quo that is leaving
hundreds of thousands of New
Mexicans behind.
Uninsured or struggling with
bills that they really can't
afford.
Today, over 200,000 New Mexicans
are uninsured and over half of
those who are insured report
skipping needed care or
medication because of medical
costs.
Affordability is still the
number one issue for families,
uh, even with the progress that
we have made with the Affordable
Care Act, the Healthcare
Affordability Fund, there's
still more work to be done. Um,
this legislation would lift the
income cap on Medicaid, allowing
residents to purchase a robust
coverage plan through the
program with a sliding scale
premium.
It utilizes existing federal law
and would bring in substantial
federal funds into our health
care system with the 71.68%
federal match.
Um
And I do want to say just two
more things on this intro, uh,
we have a wealth of information,
of course, um, but one, this,
this bill would allow us to
eliminate the Medicaid cliff.
Um, currently, too many folks
have to really make those hard
decisions about whether to seek
or accept a pay raise, knowing
that that will mean that they
will be kicked off of Medicaid
and have to seek healthcare um
through the exchange or through
the private market.
Um, secondly, uh,
I want to say just a word on
reimbursement rates or
providers, reimbursement rates
are critical to making this
work, and part of the advantage
of Medicaid For is we are
leveraging those federal dollars
and specifically look uh able to
look at increasing those
reimbursement rates with those
additional federal dollars, um,
in ways that are, that are
currently only supplemented by
the general fund. So, um,
that I would like to introduce
my expert Erica Sanchez for the
New Mexico Center of online
poverty, and if she would like
to make some comments, I would
welcome that.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Erica Sanchez with New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty, where
I'm an attorney in the
healthcare director. We're also
members of the New Mexico
Together for Healthcare
campaign, a statewide community
led.
Movement seeking quality
affordable healthcare for all
New Mexicans.
And we believe that every New
Mexican deserves access to
quality healthcare that fits
into our families' budgets, and
we know that our current system
isn't living up to that promise.
The current system is broken,
it's fragmented, it's
unaffordable and it causes too
many families to choose between
paying for medicine or food or
delaying healthcare until it's
too late. At the same time, it
places unnecessary burdens on
providers who are overwhelmed by
a fragmented insurance.
and costs of uncompensated care.
House Bill 186 presents a viable
solution, putting the wheels in
motion for New Mexico to
establish Medicaid forward, a
truly affordable quality
coverage option for our family.
And with that we would stand for
questions. Thank you. So if you
are
On, on Zoom in opposition.
Please raise your hands.
OK, and we will come back to you
in in the room in opposition,
raise your hands.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward and we're
gonna limit it to a minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans, National Trade
Association of Health plans. We
stand in opposition of House
Bill 186. And what you have in
front of you is a proposal to
move forward with the Medicaid
forward plan, but without a lot
of detail, and without that
detail, it's really hard to know
exactly where this bill is
going, and it also gives a
significant delegation of
authority from the legislature
to the Office of Superintendent.
in the healthcare authority and
understand at the end of this
path, uh, the FAR says that it
will cost 1 point.
$2 billion so it's a significant
fiscal investment by the
legislature and you don't have a
lot of details, he believes that
this will also require a waiver
from the federal government and
significant funding from the
federal government. Both of
those are uncertain at this
time. There's a new
administration in Washington and
we simply don't know where that
administration is going to go.
Finally, I will tell you that
this proposal will have a
potential negative effect on.
having providers and providers
have noted that in the paper.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz,
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross, Blue Shield of New
Mexico. We have been in touch
and had discussions with the
sponsor and really appreciate
the intent to try to continue to
reduce um the uninsured rate in
New Mexico. However, we stand in
opposition as well due to many
of the comments stated by Mr.
Moore just to emphasize that
we're concerned concerned about
the solvency in light of the new
administration, we're also
concerned about the cost and
sustain
ability of the program, uh, and
we also would like to reiterate
that we believe it's going to
potentially have an exodus of
providers if the reimbursement
rate is at Medicaid levels.
Thank you.
She members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, public
policy director with the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce. Um,
many of my comments on this bill
were already mentioned, so I
won't belabor the point, but I
just do want to talk about small
businesses, um, for a bit so we
do know from past studies of
employers dropped their health
coverage, a payroll tax, or
other tax will likely be imposed
just for the solvency issue, and
this disproportionately impacts
our small businesses that are
already struggling with costs,
as you state, our number one
priority should be strengthening
our healthcare workforce and
ensure we have enough providers.
to meet the demand. New Mexico's
small businesses are the
backbone of our economy and
policies that disrupt the
private market and increase
costs will only make it more
difficult for them to survive.
Thank you.
OK, we will go to Zoom, um.
cold.
Good morning again, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Terry Cole, president and
CEO for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. We are
opposed.
86. The Medicaid program is the
2nd largest piece of the budget.
Second, only to education. It's
grown from 5.6 billion in FY 17
to 12.3 projected and FY 26, and
now we want to extend Medicaid
to virtually everyone, that
promises to be the budget buster
of all time, and it's impossible
to know how the program will be
structured to get that actual
budget impact. Medicaid forward.
to do irreparable harm to
private insurance market. Why
should we care? Private
insurance reimburses health
practitioners, which is key in
attracting practitioners here.
We struggle to increase Medicaid
reimbursement rates. We should
grow private insurance, not
discourage it. With all due
respect to Majority Leader
Syspanski. We do oppose the bill
this morning, and we do think
it's a giant leap into budget
uncertainty. Please vote no.
Thank you.
so much, Madam Chair.
We will go to Barbara McEnany.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am Barbara McEnany.
I'm the CEO of New Mexico Cancer
Center of 27 physicians in
Albuquerque and in Gallup. I'm
speaking in opposition to this
bill because the effect on our
delicate fragile health care
ecosystem in New Mexico was not
addressed either in the Mercer
study or the FIRs. The bill is
expected to move 7% of patients
from commercial payers into
Medicaid. Medicaid now pays
100% of Medicare, but the
Medicare fee schedule for
physician practices now pays 29%
lower than it did in 2004, while
our practice expenses have
increased 36%. In New Mexico,
Medicare does not cover the cost
of caring for patients in
independent practice settings,
and we use the extra payment we
received from commercial
insurance to cover the shortfall
of Medicare. Most ill
ness occurs in older people.
Over 50% of the patients seen by
adult specialists are in
Medicare, not Medicaid. You
cannot raise Medicare rates, and
Medicaid rates do not help us
take care of our Medicare
patients.
I studied this in my practice as
a case study.
If this bill, can you wrap it
up?
Yes, if this bill practices, I
will not be able to make payroll
and access drops if we sell to a
hospital, the cost of Medicare
and Medicaid will double.
This is not a bill that will
help us take care of New
Mexicans. Please do not pass
this bill. Thank you. OK, so we
in if you are in support on
Zoom, please raise your hand.
And in the room, if you are in
support, please raise your hand.
OK, if you would like to speak,
there's no requirement. I will
take 10 or one minute each, and
then we will come back to the
Zoom folks, and I will just take
the top 5.
On Zoom, so that's Beverly
Rachel, Janet, Luz and
Angelique. So go ahead, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Doctor Rick Madden.
I'm a family physician practiced
in Bolin for 38 years.
With due respect to the
opponents who voiced their
opinion already.
I see this bill as an
opportunity to look further at
the opportunity to help New
Mexicans because this bill as as
I understand where we are right
now is to actually do the plant.
It is not an authorization bill
for more than that, and I think
that planning would help us
understand how it can help New
Mexicans.
At the same time, payment for
services has to go up. I agree
with that because it's not
sustainable to have the payment
level that we have right now for
Medicaid, which we can help
Medicare, we cannot, but we
don't have to be bound to
Medicare rates. So I'm
suggesting we pass this bill.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Lance
Senna. I'm the policy director
for the Center for Civic Policy
and many of you know I've been
battling cancer for the last 15
years and within those 15 years,
I have been underinsured, even
through my employer, meaning
that my employer-based insurance
was not sufficient enough to
cover the care while battling
cancer, even before leaving to
my bone marrow transplant, I got
a letter from my private
insurance saying that my
hospital that I was attending
was no longer in network, and I
had to scramble to really think
about.
how we would cover a
multi-million dollar procedure
like a bone marrow transplant.
House Bill 186 would really
provide that stability for
cancer patients like myself into
a system that we can really uh
trust and rely on or really
thinking about uh cost and
efficiency. We shouldn't have to
lose our insurance, even if we
make one cent over the federal
poverty line. So with that, I
urge your support. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabriellevaaz, and I'm
the executive director of New
Mexico Voices for Children, and
we stand in support of House
Bill 186. We all know that the
increasing cost of health care
coverage for those who do not
currently qualify for Medicaid
can cause great financial burden
for New Mexicans, broadening
access to the Medicaid program
for all New Mexicans will
benefit children and families
who would not otherwise afford
or qualify for Medicaid with the
current income.
limits, eliminating the medical
cliff effect, allowing New
Mexicans to pursue better job
opportunities without fear of
losing their current Medicaid
coverage. Medicaid forward will
make our state healthcare system
more affordable and accessible
to all New Mexicans and will
help families meet their needs
across the board by making it
affordable. We thank the sponsor
for this bill, and we urge your
support.
members of the committee. My
name is Isabella Villen Naranjo,
and I'm a legislative fellow
with a Quality New Mexico. I
stand here today in support of
HB 186. Since I was kicked out
of my parents' house at 17, the
ability to receive healthcare
has been a constant struggle and
worry for me prior to this
fellowship, I was working one of
the highest paying retail jobs
in Albuquerque and though I was
being paid almost $4 more an
hour than the average retail
worker of my study, I was still
making a whole $350 over the
current federal poverty limit,
which didn't even allow me to
apply for Medicaid. With that
same wage though, after taxes
and necessary bills.
I was left with $-100 a month
for groceries, gas, and other
expenses that I needed to meet.
There is no way to express the
frustration that I and others in
my situation feel when it comes
to the opportunity to gain
stable healthcare. HB 186 will
help narrow that gap between the
Medicaid cliff and the income
levels are just out of reach. I
encourage the committee to vote
yes on HB 186. Chair and members
of committee, my name is Kat
Sanchez. Uh, first and foremost,
we want to thank the sponsor and
the continued support. That's
OK, I won't bite, continued
support from the
community-based.
cohort to close the gaps of
those falling in the cracks of
healthcare coverage. I don't
know how many times that I have
heard from folks in Donana
County who have been afraid of
being able to take a promotion
because it would get them off
Medicaid, so they're making
those choices for themselves and
their families of whether to
grow their career.
Or to keep their health care
coverage for them and their
families. We support HB 186 and
urge it to pass.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Andresauel. I am the campaign's
manager at the New Mexico Dream
Team. I'm here to show support
for this bill, as uh as for a
lot of reasons that have been
stated this uh program would
make it a lot more accessible
for a lot of folks in the
immigrant community. I'm
thinking a lot about my mom who
recently got diagnosed with uh
arthritis on her lower spine and
is prediabetic and people like
my mom would really would really
appreciate having more easy
access to health.
healthcare, um, to get any of
the medical procedures that they
need. Thank you.
Thank you, and we will go to
Zoom. We will start with
Beverly. Go ahead, Beverly.
Beverly, please unmute and go
ahead.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Good morning to Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Beverly Neil Clinton,
and I am a member of the
Veterans and Military Family
Caucus, the caucus of more than
560 members. I rise in support
of HB 16186 state administered
health coverage plans
specifically Medicaid forward.
We support this bill because I
see firsthand the struggles of
fellow veterans when it comes to
accessing health care. House
Bill 186 is a crucial step
towards ensuring that more
veterans and their families get
the care they deserve.
By expanding
Healthcare options for veterans
and lowering costs providing
financial relief, the out of
pocket medical costs can be a
heavy burden for veterans and
their families, especially those
living on fixed moderate incomes
by extending Medicare
eligibility to those earning up
to 400% of the FPL. This bill
makes quality health care more
accessible and more affordable.
It also addresses the urgent
health care needs, as well as
improving and coordination and
I'm, I'm sorry, as well as
improving.
coordination between the VA and
Medicaid, and finally,
This bill will honor our
commitment to those who served.
Veterans have served their
country, and now it's time for
the state to serve them. This
bill isn't just about health
care. It's about fulfilling a
moral obligation to take care of
those who sacrificed for our
nation.
So as a veteran,
And someone who helps
individuals find Medicaid
coverage, we strongly support HB
186. It's practical
life-changing solution for
thousands of veterans in New
Mexico. We urge you,
um, booze.
Louis, please unmute yourself
and go ahead.
If you are speaking, we can't
hear you.
Um, now you're muted again.
OK, OK, there we go.
Uh,
there's a mistake. Uh, my name
is uh Lorenzo Villestas, Madam
Chair, and good morning to you
and members of the committee,
community. Uh, I live in Sunland
Park along the Texas and Mexico
border in Donana County. I'm a
leader with a New Mexico
together for her campaign. Our
goal is that everybody in New
Mexico has access
to qual quality affordable
health care. I consider hospital
186.
To be the lifeline for 0 and New
Mexicans that don't have health
care.
I have faced many challenges in
my own health care needs. I have
had to make decisions between
paying for healthcare needs or
paying for my basic family
needs. We all know that the
health care system is broken for
patients, for providers, for
administrators and for our own
New Mexico budget, the findings
from two studies have shown that
Medicaid forward.
It's the opportunity to not only
save money for our state, but
also to make health care truly
affordable for all New Mexicans.
Please vote for the lifeline of
New Mexico House Bill 186, and I
would like to add just
something.
Can I get something?
Mhm
Excellent. Can you hear me? Yes.
OK, wonderful. Um, thank you,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
uh HHS committee, um, I, uh, am
a family physician and the
executive director of Casa de
Salud Clinic in Albuquerque soon
in Los Lunas, a member of the
statewide primary care council
and a lead member of the New
Mexico Together for Health Care
Coalition, um, I stand in strong
support of this bill, um, we
really need bold solutions for
New Mexicans, uh, this is a
win-win for small businesses for
the state, for the economy, for
New Mexicans overall, as well as
for providers, and I understand
the concerns about making
practices whole, and I know that
there is there are possibilities
with that for, uh, for
specialist, uh, clinics, but
there is huge support of this
bill on the ground, primary
care, healthcare providers, and
many other healthcare providers,
moral injury is an experience
where people are prac
what they want to practice, but
other barriers disallow them
from doing so. um, and when I
work with a patient who's in
early recovery on treatment for
opioid use disorder and all of a
sudden he gets a minimum wage
job and therefore doesn't have
insurance with Medicaid and
therefore doesn't have access
easily, that is painful for me,
and we have clinicians leaving
the state because of so much
moral injury, we can really
benefit, support, healthcare in
the states by moving this bill,
uh, forward, um.
I hope we,
we will go to Rachel Biggs.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Biggs with
Albuquerque Health Care for the
Homeless. We are in strong
support of HB 186. This is a key
strategy to prevent homelessness
by reducing health care costs
for low-income New Mexicans. Too
many of our clients are
experiencing homelessness
because health care costs were
too high, bankrupting them and
forcing them to lose their
homes. The lack of access to
care has created a crisis of
homelessness in our state, and
our clients are dying on average
30 years earlier than the house
population because of lack of
access to affordable care.
Too many of our clients are
dying from preventable health
conditions that were exacerbated
by a lack of access to care. We
also see firsthand the impact of
lack of health care on the
safety net healthcare system in
New Mexico. This is a smart plan
that utilizes federal funding to
cover a substantial portion of
the costs for new enrollees, and
it projects significant annual
savings. Together we can push
for bold action and create a
healthier, more equitable future
for all New Mexicans. Please
support HB 186. Thank you.
OK, with that, do you have any
follow-up, Madam Whip, madam,
going back to last year, Madam
Leader.
Madam Chair, um.
I would just add a couple
things. One, that there was a
mention of a a potential payroll
tax. There is no payroll tax
contemplated with this program.
I just want to be extremely
clear about that, and in fact, I
think you would like in the
impact on small business
employers to the SCI program
from the mid 2000s if people can
recall that program where
actually small business
employers, uh, costs were
incredibly offset due to
leverage.
Medicaid dollars, um, so they
were able to meet their uh uh
their offerings of health
insurance to their employees,
but they were able to use uh
both state and federal dollars
to to do that. Um, and I just
finally, I just wanna say that
um that.
We want to continue this
conversation.
Even in a moment where there is
great uncertainty at the federal
level, in part because this is
authorized by law in a federal
law. And so this kind of waiver
is permissible and could be
obtained through that uh uh
waiver process. Thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, questions from
the committee. OK, let me.
Start, OK. Representative Jones,
did, did I see your hand? OK,
just keep your hands up while I
write you down. OK, Go Jones and
Cortez.
Martinez is uh giving SOS
signals over there.
Um, Anaya.
OK. Oh, I'm sorry. OK. Oh, I'm.
I'll just scratch out the S and
leave the C. So go ahead, uh,
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and welcome back,
Representative, yeah, or.
What is your verbal title
leader.
Yes,
yes, leader Sapansky, um, yeah,
we miss you too. Um, we voted to
fund a study, Madam Chair, um,
were those study results
presented to this committee.
Madam Chair, they were uh
presented to the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee in the interim.
Um, and the studies is available
online.
OK, thank you very much, thank
you, uh, Madam Chair. Um, so,
So it helped me with this.
Doesn't this legislation address
the needs of those above the
poverty line.
Madam Chair and Representative
Jones, yes, this is uh above the
current eligibility for
Medicaid.
Thank you. I get the impression
listening to a lot of the people
that chime in for public comment
that they don't really
understand that, but that's just
the impression based on their um
statements.
Um
Madam Chair, Representative or
Leader Sapansky.
Um, be well currently covers
lawfully present immigrants,
including DACA recipients.
Who are ineligible for Medicaid
to to their immigration status.
Um, so under this bill with
those consumers not be covered
under the proposed state
administered health.
Coverage plan. Madam Chair and
Representative Jones of Medicaid
is only available to people who
are uh documented, um, and that
is due to the mix of state and
federal dollars, um, so, so, but
this program does not end, be
well, New Mexico's coverage or
ability to cover those
individuals. Uh, this is not
presented as an alternative to
that. It is, in addition to
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
leader Sapansky.
What,
do you anticipate that a lot of
people would prefer this program
over be well because I see
there's a real possibility that
That it may affect the be well,
um, access negatively or will
programmed negatively.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh.
What I do know is that the uh a
lot of our uninsured are
concentrated in that federal
poverty level of 250% and below.
Um, so particularly for those
individuals for this program to
serve as a bridge, uh, I think
it's really important because if
you get you receive $1 more per
year. I'm sorry, $1 more per
hour for your position, um, to
all of a sudden be kicked into
the exchange can be an
overwhelming and uncertain
process, so it's not to say we
Medicaid certainly has a lot of
comprehensive benefits including
case management, which uh
increases efficiency of health.
Care delivery, um, that is not
always as as uh it offered.
On the exchange. Um, and Madam
Chair, I don't know if Ms.
Sanchez would like to, OK, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
I still have more concerns about
that because it isn't, if I
understand it right, be well is
um is dependent on the number of
people that are involved, so if
those leave, if any, a number of
them leave, how can it sustain
itself?
Can you speak to that?
Madam Chair and Representative
Jones, uh, it's part of why
we're allowing a 2.5 year runway
for the submission of the
waiver, um, because that's, it's
got to be part of the planning,
um, the Mercer study did look at
to some degree, uh, the impact
on the exchange and it's
probably that exchange, um, the
Affordable Care Act program
where some of those premium
subsidies would end up being
diverted to support this
program.
Um,
And this is not it, however, I
would say this is not intended
to be a program that.
is undermining of the exchange.
I'm a supporter of the
Affordable Care Act and
Obamacare, uh, for sure. Um,
however, we still are left with
200,000 uninsured New Mexicans,
uh, even after more than 10
years of ELNM.
Thank you for that, and I still
have a little bit of a question,
not trying to, I'm trying to
preserve time but about the
lawfully present immigrants that
I have, I have a lot of those
people in my district and
concerns about their family and
access to to coverage. Can you
please clarify that for me?
Madam Chair Representative
Jones. So, um, Medicaid forward
would follow federal eligibility
requirements. So people who are
immigrants who are already
eligible under um have
immigration statuses that are
eligible under Medicaid would be
eligible under Medicaid forward.
However, there are some
immigration statuses that do not
qualify for Medicaid and those
people are able to access
coverage on the exchange, and
that would continue to
be the case, it would not impact
their ability to purchase
coverage on B well New Mexico.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative.
Um, in Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, leader, I was just gonna
ask her exact question about the
risk pool for um the Affordable
Care Act and exchange. Um, I'm
just worried that those.
Premiums will go a lot higher
for those members that aren't
still eligible for the Medicaid
forward because they do um
really share that risk, and so I
guess um I'm not familiar with
the amount or percentage of
individuals that would be taken
from be well New Mexico or the
Independent and individual
health plans and moved to the
New Mexico forward. Um, do you
guys have, have that number?
by chance or percentage.
Madam Chair, I'll have asked
Miss Sanchez to respond to that.
We do have some of those
estimates from the Mercer study.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, so your question is, how
many people do we expect to move
from the exchange to Medicaid
forward.
Madam Chair, yes, um, expert,
yes, or the percentage, the
number percentage, whichever
number you have. OK, Madam
Chair, so under the Mercer study
for the model that has no
the motto that has no income cap
where anybody would be able to
opt into Medicaid forward.
Um, they anticipate.
That about.
56,000 people would switch from
the exchange to Medicaid
forward, and that's something
that would, would occur over
time, um, not on day one.
Um, that's their projection.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
um leader and expert, 56,000
people is a lot when you're
talking about a risk pool for
individuals, um, and their
individual premiums, um, I, I
don't even know what that number
would look like, but um that is
a much larger number than I had
thought. My other question was
individuals who prefer maybe
their employer sponsored
coverage, maybe because they're
providers in network, um, and
they
want to stay on that. Could they
stay on that plan and then get
this in addition, or is it
choosing one or the other. Madam
Chair and Representative, they
would, they would have the
opportunity to stay with that
plan.
Um, unless their employer made a
decision to go with a different
plan, for example, so there's no
uh
And Medicaid cannot be, I don't
believe can be used as secondary
coverage. um, so.
Madam Chair.
Let me pause and see if my
expert would like to clarify
that.
Madam chair and represented, but
I would just say that I, so
we're we're not clear on whether
Medicaid should be, can be used
as secondary coverage. I want to
be clear about that, um.
However,
There's nothing in this that
would say anyone has to switch
onto this this program, Madam
Chair, leader, expert, Medicaid
can be used as secondary and it
is used as secondary instead of
primary when there is a
secondary coverage. The same
goes for Medicare. Um, my next
question would be how many
members do we currently have on
B Well New Mexico.
Do we have that number?
Madam Chair, I think it, it, uh,
I did read in one of the FIRs,
it's over 70,000 members.
So we may have 56,000 out of
70,000 members moving off of
that plan. I just think that
that would drastically increase
those premiums for those members
that are remaining on the plan,
but thank you so much that that
really opens my eyes. Thank you
so much for the questions, Madam
Chair, leader, and expert. Thank
you, minority Whip Martinez, who
was very excited to ask
questions.
Madam Cha, I just wanted to make
sure that you saw me.
Cause I, I know that I fade into
the background.
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Floor
leader, uh, and Ms. Sanchez.
Thank you for bringing this
forward. Um, once again, I say
that as a concept, getting as
many New Mexicans insured is a
great idea. Um.
But I don't think this is
Quite the mechanism to do that.
With that said, um,
A lot of practitioners that I
have talked to have claimed that
they lose a certain amount of
money.
He Medicaid recipient patient
that they have.
Is this gonna solve that, Madam
Chair, Madam floor leader?
Madam chair, uh, representative,
Mr. Whip, um,
It
That the issue of provider
reimbursement is extremely
complex.
What this legislation.
Would do to improve that
situation is we would leverage
federal funds to increase the,
the amount of healthcare
dollars, we would lower the
levels of uncompensated care
that our health care system
currently absorbs, and so
through that increase in
healthcare dollars in the
system, Medicaid Forward can
then begin to leverage those
federal dollars to increase
reimbursement rates, not just
for
forward enrollees, but the
entire Medicaid system, so that
would allow, which is, you know,
7 covers 75% of births in New
Mexico certainly cause uh covers
a significant proportion of our
population, um, this doesn't
address Medicare, so you know
the programs as, as you know,
Madam Chair, and uh with
Martinez are completely
separate, so it doesn't address
the Medicare piece, but it does
address um Medicaid
reimbursement for the
the entire system.
Thank you for that, madam chair,
Madam floor leader, um,
That that just
Raises all kinds of questions
for me.
Uh, one of them being
If we're going to rely on the
federal dollars flowing into New
Mexico, I think we really need
to rethink the plan.
Uh, Especially now.
Um
My, my issue is that every time
government gets involved.
There's a lot of promises made,
a lot of
Uh, paid for studies, a lot of
Um
People standing up and saying
this is going to solve the
problem.
Um, unfortunately, I have yet to
see it. The Affordable Care Act
made the same promises.
Um, and here we are trying to
solve that.
Um, be well, supposed to come
in.
Uh, and subsidized healthcare.
And here we are trying to solve
that problem.
I don't know that.
First of all, that this plan,
the solving.
Here's a question, Madam Chair,
Madam floor leader, is there a
solvency plan for this?
Or we simply gonna rely on.
Wished for federal dollars to
fund this.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
This is not this the way that
this program is run, it doesn't
necessarily um.
Look at solvency in the way that
we, uh, Madam Chair, and with
Martinez, we were just
discussing on like the Para
plant, for example. However, it
does require an actuarial
analysis each year to set the
premiums for the sliding scale
premium fee, so if there was a
concern that the medical loss
ratio would be too high,
basically, the claims being paid
out, we're going to exceed the
amount of dollars coming in, um,
those premiums would would
adjust due to that.
actuary analysis that occurs.
And just a reminder that it is
going to appropriations.
After this, so, um,
Just a reminder. Appreciate
that, Madam Chair, Madam floor
leader.
Um
I don't always get to attend
the.
The house appropriations
hearings, I, I just
Using more and more and more
taxpayer money.
Uh, as a solvency plan for
The healthcare issues that the
be world was supposed to solve
in the Affordable Care Act was
supposed to solve.
Uh, I think, you know, 5 years
from now, we'll be back here
with another plan to
Take that final step towards
Um
Single payer insurance.
Um
Madam Chair, Madam floor leader.
Is this working in other states,
Madam chair and Representative,
currently the District of
Columbia has increased
eligibility to 225% of the
federal poverty level.
Um, in part specifically to
address that Medicaid cliff
issue. So that's certainly
something um there were
different approaches studied in
the Mercer study and so others,
there have been other states
that have been looking at this
as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
floor leader, um, was their
thought given to maybe.
Capping it at 250%.
Instead of leaving it open to
everybody.
Madam Chair, uh, and with
Martinez, um,
The
sought the revenue becomes net
positive.
When you lift the income cap
entirely, meaning that the
amount of funds flowing into the
program, uh, leaves the state at
a revenue net positive, uh,
position.
However, I think this is also
like a long term conversation
for us to have around what is
the appropriate uh starting
place for this. So I think we,
we have discussed many of the
options. We know that for the
state's pocketbook, the no
income cap is the best, leaves
us in the best financial
position in terms of state
general fund. Um, however, we
know this is gonna be a process
to discuss and thereby giving.
Uh, HCA a long term kind of
planning ramp for this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
floor leader, and
Um
Was
Are you getting this from a
study?
Or where were you getting the
figures.
statistics that it becomes
revenue positive removing.
Income limits. Madam Chair and
whip Martinez, um, that a study
was commissioned by the
healthcare authority this past,
uh, it took about 18 months, and
that study is published. I'm
happy to send you a copy. It was
done by Mercer Consulting.
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Flo
leader, I would, I would
appreciate that.
Um
a couple of questions, madam.
Chair, Madam Floor leader.
When you say revenue positive.
Can you explain that to me?
Are you talking about?
Federal dollars flowing into the
program where you talking about
people paying premiums into the
program. Where is that revenue
coming from?
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez. So yes, both of those
things. So, um, we did hear that
there will be um.
An increase in, in state costs,
the federal government will
cover about 70, a little over
71% of it. So there is some
remaining cost to the state, but
that cost will be offset by a
number of cost savings and some
additional revenues. So this
includes um enrollee financial
responsibility, so people over
200% of the federal poverty
level would be paying premiums
and some out of pocket costs
contributing to this. There
would be cost savings in the
medication.
drug rebate program revenue.
There's some additional revenue
coming in through that.
Um, there would be um some cost
savings to the state for public
employees who enroll in this
program. So, um, right now
that's a, a huge cost to the
state, those self-insured
programs. And so that would even
with the state paying for um the
employees Medicaid forward cost,
it would still bring savings
into the state.
They're in addition, um, it
would grow the tax base for the
premium tax and surtax revenue,
so having more people insured
and more people shifting from
plans
to um Medicaid plans would
increase that tax base, so there
would be some increased revenue
from those taxes as well.
And sorry, finally, um, for
employers who who want to cover
the costs of their employees
enrollment in the program.
That's another potential revenue
stream.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Flo leader and Ms. Sanchez, um.
I worry about the unintended
consequences of some of the
stuff that we deal with here.
Um, and I, I, there's several.
consequences that really concern
me.
Um
I think we're gonna lose
healthcare providers that are
gonna move out of state. I think
we're gonna lose um
That revenue that you're hoping
for because patients will, you
know, along the border is gonna
go to Colorado, Arizona, Texas.
Because we don't, I mean, we're
having problems.
Having providers now.
Um, and I think
the last unintended consequence,
Madam Chair, Madame Floor leader
Miss Sanchez.
is that this is simply a push to
single payer.
We're gonna start charging
premiums for people.
We're going to control uh health
care through this program.
Um, and I do not think that it's
sustainable, uh, I know be well
New Mexico will be decimated.
We'll, we'll lose that.
Representative, could you, if
you have a question, please ask
a question.
Thank you, madam chair.
I always appreciate when you
remind me stuff.
My question is, losing.
2/3
Of the base for Bewe in New
Mexico.
Is there a solvency?
Plan for that cause I don't
think
It's gonna be around much.
For too long after this is
implemented.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I, that's something that the
healthcare authority and all of
those who were involved in the
planning for the ramp up for
this would have to look at, I
mean, certainly the exchange you
LNM bumped along at about 10,000
enrollees for many years, um,
due to the success of their
outreach and the healthcare
affordability fund, which
created some new programs,
they've seen a great increase,
which is terrific, you know, and
um, this, this program is not
trying to define the role of be
well.
and him and, but it does require
some planning and and looking at
because we don't want the risk
pool for be well to become
unstable either. So, um,
however, you know,
I would say for many consumers
their preference is to stay with
the health plan that they know
with the company that they know,
um, whether that be a Medicaid
MCO or whether that be an
insurer on the exchange or
commercial insurance because as
we all know, every time you
change an insurance company,
you're, your life is kind of
upside down, right? You have to
find a new pharmacy, find a new
doctor, you're not sure what's
covered. Everything changes and
so there is, um, I think a
natural preference for a lot of
folks to stay with what they
have.
Thank you Madam Chair, Madam
floor leader.
Thank you and and there's been a
request from the committee to
either send us a link or the
actual study. I believe you
have, is there a website? Madam
Chair, we are happy to share
that. OK, thank you. Thank you.
And we will go to Representative
Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have one quick question from my
understanding, I know I've seen
fact sheets on this before, um,
my understanding is that the
state will actually have a cost
savings. Like the bottom line,
cost savings. Would you mind
talking a little bit about um
the cost savings that the state
can expect if we fully implement
this program.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative Anaya
for that question. I think, um,
Miss Sanchez has that chart
right here, so I'll ask her to
answer.
Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya. So, um, actually, the
state has conducted two studies
on this one, through the office
of the superintendent of
insurance, um, through the Urban
Institute and then one by the
healthcare authority using
Mercer and both of those studies
do show a net revenue gain. Um,
the Mercer study, so for the
model with no income limit where
anybody who wanted to to opt in
could, um, after taking in.
consideration, the Medicaid
competition costs, the federal
match, um, the cost savings for
the state employee health
coverage, um, increase in
premium tax revenue, potential,
um, private employer funding,
um, for their employees. The
Mercer study shows the net gain
as $45.8 million.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
imagining there is no uh
constraint on that $45.8 million
that we could reinvest that into
reimbursement rates as well. Is
that true, Madam Madame Chair
Representative Anaya, that's
absolutely right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. No
further questions. And Madam
Chair Representative, and I, I
do also want to say that both
the urban Institute and the
Mercer study, um, anticipate an
increase in reimbursement rates,
so those numbers already include
some of that increase in
reimbursement rates.
Right, thank you. So I will
entertain emotion, Madam Chair,
I move a do pass. OK, in a
second.
Oh, it was a time, so we have a
motion from Representative
Eleanor Chavez in a 2nd from
Representative Anaya.
And Karen, will you take the
role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones? No.
Representative Martinez. No.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
by a vote of 6 in the
affirmative and 4 in the
negative you have a due pass on
House Bill 186, and we are
