to our begin our higher
education hearing general
grizzle it's great to see you
here today will start members
with our special schools start
with miss Holmes mismas CS and a
good general result thank you so
much for for being here today
we'll start agency code nine
seven eight.
Right Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for having
us here today like our chairman
said we're starting with New
Mexico miglior military and
student have general present
here in the call Misia's are DFA
analyst
the LFC recommendation for
fiscal year twenty four for
general fund for New Mexico
military institute includes a
five percent increase to their
general fund base their general
fund also includes an
appropriation for athletics
infernal scholarship which are
unchanged and we've also
included higher the higher
education department's
recommendation for fifty five
thousand for instructional
materials and that general fund
and I'll turn it over to the
closet DFA thank you so much but
the fiesta fave Mister chair
members of the committee we came
to consensus on performance
measures and I don't have any
thing else to ask for the
recommendations and I'll turn it
over to general result.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
that we appreciate as always
opportunity to talk about New
Mexico military institute I will
be brief though and the with the
fact we're running a little late
show with that we've reviewed
all the budgets and we'd like to
recommend that we receive the
LFC is budget we appreciate the
assistance and as I have said
before we the only thing that we
ask for this year really was an
increase in transportation that
stayed the same right now we
would just ask for that
consideration simply because of
cost of energy going up and
we're very isolated down there
in our the we end up paying two
hundred miles a day and it just
to pick us up to take his in the
event that other that Mr
Chairman glad and for any
questions.
Thank you very much general goes
a very brief and to the point
let's look or get a sense for
any questions from members.
what we we wait the general
result one of the questions in
this isn't necessarily part of
of
Some of the the the budget today
but there has been an additional
focus with the higher education
department and some of the
infrastructure particularly some
of the older infrastructure in
the cadet barracks we have a few
new committee members would you
mind if you would going through
just a brief summary of some of
that work.
certain Mr chair we very much
appreciate up to do that in the
support we received New Mexico
military institute a hundred and
thirty three years old some
buildings actually are a hundred
and thirty three years old.
Everyone of my buildings is on
state or National Historical
Society but three so when we
started renovation project I
don't have the luxury of
considering tearing it down
unless the building is not
structurally sound so we're very
proud of the fact in the last
fourteen years and I've been
there we've completed over a
hundred million dollars in
renovation to the campus the and
about fifty percent of that
coming from support from the
state to the general obligation
bonds and the severance tax
balance specific projects that
we've completed were the
complete renovation of our
administration building complete
renovation of our dining
facility our infirmary which is
also a multipurpose building we
need the.
Our class for our a physical
therapy and physical fitness in
there we just completed the
renovation of our main gymnasium
and where we teach health
physical education recreation
classes so we really that
appreciated the support in this
position the majority of those
buildings we hope for another
hundred years and we will
continue to go around the campus
as building by building the
