Marian Matthews Matthews is
here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
I'm here thank you
Representative Louise I.
Representative eight Thompson
I'm here.
I'm going back to Representative
Phelps Anderson.
Representative gales excused.
Representative cut off us there
you are here sorry about.
Well that's all right.
Vice chair Joanne Ferrary I'm
present and madam chair Deborah
Armstrong I'm here.
We have a quorum and will get
started so welcome Senator
Tallman and our first bill is
Senate bill one fifty two
continuing care
contracts and your co sponsor
representative Thompson I don't
know who which one of you wants
present but do you have experts
that you want us to bring in.
We we have Sarah Jacobs.
Okay.
Okay so I will get started at so
madam chair this is a bill that
we've been working on for
several years it made it it just
ran out of time last year
essentially so what is there
something called what continuing
care contract and what that what
happens with that is is seniors
and we have a large one in our
district that senator Tom and I
share the view that you that
they buy into a place and and
essentially they're buying long
term insurance so that no matter
what their needs turned out to
be whether it be we have or or
memory care or those kinds of
things so thankfully there
finance and insurance policies
so that no matter what happens
in their lives they'll have a
place to be and the correct
level of care and what this bill
does madam chair is that these
these groups need to file a
financial report I'm.
And and they need to have a
closing plan I know we heard
from senator from Representative
Susan Herrera about a nursing
home closing in her district I
think that was the last term so
I'm and I will let senator
Clemente but we are hearing this
for for our constituents
essentially so I will let
Senator Tallman go into more
detail.
Thank you Representative and
the.
Good morning everybody on this
on this committee of thank you
for.
Give me the opportunity was talk
about this bill.
This is one of three of
transparency and accountability
bills and such Karen this is
here.
yes the representative said we
this is exactly the same bill we
got through the Senate last year
and we ran out of time.
In the in the house so.
The.
This continuing care a.
Type of the housing is very
popular in other states that
very popular in the New Mexico
only about I just want to
Carlsbad I agree and Albuquerque
N. water two in Santa Fe you
have to pay a significant
upfront costs anywhere from a
quarter to a half a million
dollars is initiation fee plus a
three to five thousand dollar a
monthly fee but it's a very
comprehensive provides the.
Independent living units
assisted living in its
transportation medical care
skilled nursing care memory
care.
And
So the.
The residents were very very
concerned because that they were
taking us there and.
Initiation fees and buying
properties about properties in
I'll go home of the Denver.
Santa Fe N. A. bills to the new
facility in Rio Rancho called
the the neighborhood so they
were very concerned because see
over the last eight years their
debt to go on for forty five
million to two hundred twenty
million and so there are very
concerned also they were
concerned about the quality of
care was stepping food quality
of food was slipping and the
services were slipping and may.
Promise for many years to.
To construct a new a health care
facility which is now under
construction but if the
increasing their their debt
considerably because of that so
they were very so they contacted
to myself in Liz.
And blast after complaining to
the.
Ministration nothing happened so
they contacted the list myself
and
What was happening was they they
were required to file a.
Fairly and some financial
reports to the Department of up
aging long term services
however.
It then there was nobody on
their staff that.
Of the.
The ability to know they know
what they're looking at that
they weren't they have anybody
that could do a financial
analysis so they were really
quick to to do this but however
in the summer of a two thousand
nineteen the governor.
Appointed to.
A new a cabinet secretary
Katrina from Lopez and she
assigned the general counsel Sir
Jacobs who is a and board to
help me drafted and shepherded
bill through the.
The legislature to bring about
more accountability.
So and also listen I contacted
the attorney general's office.
In the summer of two thousand
and eighteen.
And the they certainly came up
with a statement to set there
been violations however they
were able they weren't able to
tell us what they were.
And we still don't know what
they're all early they did say
there are violations but
eventually we'll find out what
what they are so
That pretty much concludes my
remarks I think it's important
at this bill be enacted so as to
bring about some accountability
and transparency with the
respective to facilities
governed by the committee
continuing.
Care Act so I can close my
remarks and they said beef for
we have sits general counsel for
the.
Department of age in a long term
services on board and that gonna
give her the option of the
appliance to add some comments
or to teach or do as Sir do you
want to just to answer questions
thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Serra.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee as
senator Clemente mention my name
Mr Jacobson the general counsel
aging
I want to thank the
representatives and senator Tom
and for their work on this bill
so the committee is aware
this bill had several amendments
last year from the Senate
Judiciary Committee those
amendments are incorporated into
this bill also the changes from
that committee
are here as you see it today and
just to
the secretary will turn Lopez is
very passionate about this
particularly the closure
language that you see would be
required in those contracts
which is it's a general language
in the bill all but will allow
us to promulgate some additional
rules around what that looks
like in those continuing care
contracts and that is specific
because if a.
I'm if you are continuing care
community goes out of business
for whatever reason
it at least would allow us to or
would sort of force that
community to
plan for what happens if they do
close and that means working
with the state long term care
ombudsman's office it means
having
you know certain provisions
around where
where this excuse me where the
residents would go upon closure
and we've had issues with that
in the past where there have
been closures and residents are
sort of dumped
so anyways I I don't have any
further comment but again thank
the representative and senator
Tom and and this committee it's
nice to be in front of you all
this morning.
Thank you are you ready for us
to go to the audience.
We are madam chair okay well
first are we start with a poll
to see who among the attendees
sorry here and either support or
opposition to house bill one
fifty two.
Okay.
I think that's a good we've got
looks like we've got twenty
eight.
Here in support and zero in
opposition.
And so for those who wish to
make
a public statement raise your
hand and I will call on you and
we limit public comment to one
minute you'll see a clock yeah
and I would ask that you trying
not to be are repetitive
but we will hear from everyone
who wishes to make a statement
so first we have ad in sandy
straight.
Yourself and go ahead.
Thank you madam chairman I'd I
didn't actually realize that I
was going to speak and I anxious
for the opportunity initially do
it in the and one minute my wife
and I signed into the community
we're actually over in Rio
Rancho which is the sister
community level of the EDD and
that and the we have the the
same problem the neighborhood
over here and that we're
concerned about our investment
we had to sell two houses to
move in here and we're very
concerned that the album Carter
corporation expanded out of
state to Colorado an out of
state to Oklahoma before they
upgraded the medical facilities
over and with the VA now and I'm
concerned that their their
failure to take care of people
locally before they expanded out
of state.
In some ways contributed a lot
to the number of people who died
from cold it over it will be the
eight so that's my comment thank
you very much the time thank
you.
Our next we have Catherine.
Unmute yourself.
Catherine in need to on mute.
Catherine we can't hear you you
need to unmute.
Okay we'll go on to is a very.
Yes my name is so right I've
been living in the now for five
years
and I have a financial
background I've spent a good
part of that time actually
studying the finances of
haggling Carter and its
affiliates and what I discovered
and in fact have on Carter has
declared that let me do it is a
cash cow so what's been
happening is that the surplus
that we generate each year at
living ADA with our entrance
fees and with our monthly
service fees that surplus has
been used for corporate
expansion and when we talk about
that we talk about roasting
creek which is losing tens of
thousands of dollars.
Daily of Rio Rancho Somerset and
so on Somerset in color in
Oklahoma right and.
Roasting creek in Colorado plus
the the neighborhood in Rio
Rancho and so I'm very concerned
about the way our assets are
being is that that money is not
being invested and being used to
support the residents that are
here living in a.
Thank you.
Next we have Diane.
Hi my name's Diane swimming and
I live in the neighborhood in
Rio Rancho I was one of the
first residents to move here
when they opened five years ago
I used my entire life savings to
move in here and if this.
Company does not operate wisely.
I would be left with absolutely
nothing if they were to close
and nowhere to go.
So I'm very concerned about it
and I really support this bill
thank you thank you Diane next
we have Jackie Cooper with a a
RP.
Thank you madam chair I am
Jackie Cooper and advocacy
volunteer with AARP we want to
thank senator calling for
bringing this important bill
forward yet again.
R. A. R. T. supported us your
comments twenty twenty bill when
we support SB one fifty chair
that provides disclosure
projections performances seniors
living in facilities but they're
paying for and for the
clarifications of definitions
responsibilities of continuing
care contracts thank you very
much.
Thank you hi Jackie our next we
have Charlie Marquez.
Thank you madam chair of my
name's Charlie mark is
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico health care association
and we've actually worked with
the sponsor of over quite a
period of time and with the
office of of the US secretary of
Asian a long term services.
I am we appreciate of the work
that we accomplished this is
been an area of concern for
residential we want to reassure
them that everything is of all
well and if the all these of
facilities are financially
sound.
and we are prepared to disclose
that
in order to again make sure that
everyone feels comfortable with
the Services they purchased and
that they will be there for the
duration of time that they
believed them to be so again we
appreciate working with the
center and the office of the
secretary thank you very much we
do stand in support of this
legislation thank you Charlie
inextricable Rebekah Dimond.
Thank you my name is Becky mon I
live it live video game now I'm
seventy two years old and I've
lived here for four years
despite our large by in we are
not a bunch of rich people
living here in the lap of luxury
in our case my husband and I
paid over three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars and
twenty seventeen and we pay over
six thousand dollars a month
that is an insurance for their
care we sold our home and gave
them are nesting because we have
no children to rely on and the
meeting that is our long term
plan for physical and health
support throughout our lives we
use our savings every month
because our pensions and social
security you not fully cover our
large cost we are very typical
family here except for much
younger the average age of R.
four hundred and fifty residents
is over eighty five years old
I'm concerned about the
financial stability here
insufficient reserves create
systemic risk.
Thank you our next Adan are sue
Martin.
This is so.
Go ahead this is okay I'm sorry
I didn't know if you could hear
me up thank you mentioned that
the average age of a person that
L. the L. is eighty six years
old.
Keep in mind that many if not
most cannot physically or
mentally know what's going on
around.
So that they have no voice to
speak.
My major concern at this point
is.
The reductions services are
primarily with health care that
or.
Impact going to affect the
people that is what they buy in
for and they are being
taken away step by step the last
thing I'm concerned about is new
people moving in are not given
the full financial picture or
the fact that L. B. L. can
change anything they want to
change under contract.
Thank you so our next we have
policy towards.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
okay thank you I am eighty seven
year old resident of the VAT a
that I've been here only one and
a half years the new kid on the
block and I have been very
concerned as I heard what was
going on corporately and what
the changes that took place
during just water.
Years I believe that we need
oversight.
I think that the owners and the
administrators do their very
best but they are not always
focused on what will keep the
community so all the need for
the long haul so just as they
look over our shoulders to help
us I am asking New Mexico to
look over their shoulders to
help them thank you thank you
next we have robbers Ellen.
Thank you madam chair I'm Robert
Siegel and I am a former
accounting professor and I have
of the a CPA CMA and up a
certified fraud examiner my
mother insured LPL fourteen
years ago.
And at that time my brother who
was a tax accountant and I
thought.
LPL was very sound it was a
great place for her to be.
But.
Since have Lou Carter has come
into play and made some very
risky investments I am quite
concerned about their viability.
My mother is older so.
I I know that she can
Go through the the the process
so I just I but I worry about
the future of it people entry.
Thank you and and the next last
we have secretary ho tram Lopez
and you can ignore the clock
secretary you can go ahead and
thank you thank you madam chair
I I won't take long I just just
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and
for you all hearing it it's
really important bill for us
because and not only starts
starts with the protection of
the people who are in these
continuing care communities but
it is also going to show
transparency for anyone looking
at a continuing care facility
and we're gonna be able to be
transparent about what their
financial status and what
they're solvency is
particularly important to me is
the discharge planning and the
plant if they close because
we've seen far too often not
just in the state of New Mexico
but really in Florida where they
have aggressive protections in
continuing care communities but
it and we want to know what is
going to happen to people who
have put their life savings into
a continuing care community and
and then then you know one of
these facilities closes and what
happens to their investment what
happens to their money what
happens to them and their care
as they move forward and that's
something that is really
important to us that we are
going to work not only with the
industry but advocates that have
helped promote this bill we're
gonna work with them on the
appropriate
regulations in order to identify
what the steps are that these
facilities must take in order to
protect and safeguard their
residents exceptionally upon
closure so thank you so much for
hearing this we are so proud to
to be supporting a bill that is
really at a grassroots movement
and
Just again thank you we just
find this very important.
Thank you Secretary next we will
go to
the committee.
And at first I have
Representative more Matthews.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Re orient my screen here.
Three just a second.
There we go sure.
There are the madam chair at
Senator Tom and representative
Thompson at there are a number
of these kinds of facilities in
the city probably in the state I
to actually don't know that but
I'm assuming that that your bill
will cover any kind of a
continuing care facility like
this is that my correct about
that.
What got you here I know we've
been talking about.
Having Carter now the all the
test says.
Representative covers all such
facilities in the state of New
Mexico.
And on that point I think
there's only five is that right
in the state yeah there's one
and that Carlsbad that is.
One in.
Albuquerque water Rio Rancho the
those one and
Santa Fe that might be what I
think is I I got I forget with
the fifth one is yeah I just to
be clear these these are
facilities not like a nursing
home but one that you buy into
that guarantees your ability to
get care all the way through
through skilled us to nursing
home care from independent
living all the way through
nursing home care.
Madam chair thank you for that
and Senator
that actually kind is my follow
up question because there are a
number of facilities certainly
in Albuquerque again where
people buy in and they there's.
Restaurants at restaurants but
there's good service in and so
forth is there a difference
between.
those kinds of facilities where
people do slide and they live
in the senior places for a
period of time
and this kind of facility and
I'm what I'm hearing is that the
differences the medical care
that one offers versus the.
There's not offering medical
care just assisted living or
living arrangements it might in
my understanding the difference
correctly okay as a matter of
chair and Representative me if
I'm wrong Sir.
Jake ups but my understanding is
is.
The continuing care facilities
that we're talking about today
and then there's well other
facilities we just pay a monthly
fee there's now an initiation
fee I I'm not familiar with
anything in between is there.
Sir is there anything at.
In between is either you know
either that issue fear monthly
fee or the all the other
facilities are simply a monthly
fee is that correct Sarah.
Madam chair and members of the
committee senator Clemente I I
yes I that's right I think for
this bill specifically in for
continuing care communities
there really defined by the type
of contract that a person enters
in jail when they are buying
into the community
and and so that's what
categorizes the continuing care
communities but yes there as as
the chairwoman mention it really
guarantee could supposed to
guarantee this long term care
basically through that right
like and almost end of life
and whereas a hi generalises the
living facility or nursing
facility is not always like that
they may take Medicaid right
that that sort of thing so this
is a different a different set
up.
Thank you thank you madam chair
at Kelso for that explanation so
of the five that exist in the
state of are they all
At risk of of because of their
investment policies and so forth
are they all at risk of
potentially
not being able to fulfill their
contractual relations.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you for the question are
we I I keep I'm not familiar
with the financial.
Health there are conditions of
the others we've only been that
concerned
with the have on Carter page is
by far the largest operation of
its type in the state.
I'm.
Madam chair and senator thank
you
It does it the residents of
Delhi signed some kind of a
contract
do are are there any
do they have any contractual
remedies any enforceable
contractual rights to keep the
company from overspending it you
know not providing the services
they have is our other contracts
essentially don't provide those
kinds of rights and.
Or.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to the general counsel
thank you.
Thank you senator Tom and madam
chair and and Representative so
you know you you're correct the
these are private right
contracts that an individual
would sign into but we as a
state have decided that some
form of state oversight is
appropriate for these give and
the investment and the care at
St for individuals so there
certainly private causes of
action that could be brought on
behalf of residents
that being said there's still a
level of responsibility you know
we believe for the government in
order to monitor and and
protecting potentially involved
law enforcement when there are
concerns and and I wanted to
mention on your previous
question regarding financial
solvency of
of these organizations that they
can be very complex
organizations that have parent
companies and then smaller
companies out in other states
and that sort of thing so the
financials and up looking very
complex when you get into like
who owns what and where and and
what that solvency and and ends
up looking like so Madam chair
representative to answer your
your most recent question there
definitely private causes of
action but we believe that a
state oversight and this you
know body has
has adopted you know statutory
rules around around these
facilities and we also have the
ability to promulgate rules for
them and those mostly go around
what needs to be in those
contractual agreements
and you know having a private
cause of action is one of those.
Madam chair canso thank you so
much for that because that was
one of my questions was whether
when we talk about state
oversight we're looking both at
remedies that the state can
impose but also beefing up the
contractual rights of these
residents and I'm understand you
say that what this bill will do.
Madam chair representative yes
that's correct.
And
Madam chair and senator
Is.
I is is our model on this to.
The state of Florida and the
things they do and I and if so
or where the model is it doesn't
that you can share that
information but have.
Do they restrict the ability of
the management the company that
ownership to the are they able
to require that they.
Reserve that their financial
reserves are sufficient to probe
to provide the services that
they are offering when they make
contracts with people.
Thank you for the question
Representative defer to a
general counsel thank you.
And senator Tom and madam chair
representative Matthews yes are
they do most models and
including New Mexico's model
work requires a certain level of
what we consider solvency
where the complications arise
again is how much of other
ownership gets disclosed in
those financial analyses but
just give me to answer question
Representative Matthews yes we
do other models have that where
they require a certain amount of
solvency in order to cover their
obligations
and I think it's about
transparency for the public and
an ability to review those
statements and I think it's the
state's obligation to be able to
provide information to the
public that synthesizes the
actuarial findings because those
are not it's not an easy read.
The madam chair and councillor
and Senator I'm sure it is not
an easy read but
At that are you able is a state
able to impose those
requirements in any kind of
retroactive white or will the
bill only.
Protect people moving forward.
Representative thank you for.
Your question to the general
counsel thank you.
Madam chair representative so
currently it would be moving
forward but I but I just want to
you know clarify that you know
there are significant amount of
statutory language around at
this so this isn't right a brand
new act we already have those
protections in place this would
be additional to to those and so
not not the beginning of that
but but yes.
And madam chair at
Representative council
What is been the response of the
company add to the state's
concerns.
yes madam chair representative
Matthews as a Mister mark has
mentioned in his public comment
we have been working with the
industry on this bill for
several years you know their
response I think has been
entirely appropriate given how
how much work also acknowledging
the work on their side what it
means to provide these types of
analyses for their
organizations they have been
open to providing you know
whatever it is that the state
feels is appropriate
we have not had an issue or a
real disagreement are around
that at all
so I think you know.
It is because the language
becomes technical around the
actuarial analysis that's where
our disagreement was for a
little bit but again it wasn't a
massive disagreement it was just
how do we get right to the place
where we're addressing things
that our cabinet secretary
mentioned and heard public
comment.
Madam chair attention senator at
again thank you for the answer
so is is Evelyn Carter company
is that of New Mexico company.
Or Madam chair representative of
yes.
Madam chair Senator cancel
yeah hi my district is very
close to that area where let me
that you is and I've got a
number of friends who live there
and been up there is a very nice
facility
Just a question if this
legislation goes through.
Those people will be better
protected will there be any
danger that this company would
close the facility or did
anything like that I'm just
trying to understand if there's
some unintended consequences of
this legislation.
Well.
There is.
No guarantee that it will close
with the if this is the.
Bill is an act that this will
certainly go a long ways and
that parenting that the facility
will not close thank you madam
chair.
I'm.
Madam chair Senator thank you
for that answer I appreciate
that it would be the.
There there's a lot of people up
there and there's a lot of
investment in that and so we
sent certainly want to stabilize
that situation.
and I appreciate you bringing
this bill and I will support
thank you very much.
Thank you
of the committee members I'm
gonna take a little prerogative
I usually wait till the end to
ask questions but I have a kind
of a long history with this and
so I would like to jump in and
provide some background
clarification and and a couple
of questions that that might be
helpful
you know what continuing care
communities this model started
decades ago there was a lot of
a lot of closures and
bankruptcies because as a new
model how you
actuarially determined the life
span of someone in an
appropriate by and I'm out and
to be able to stay afloat for
those people as they age and
provide the full continuum of
care was a tricky and so decades
ago there was a lot of closures
across the across the country
and so
the language of of statutes and
so forth I tightened up over
time and in when I was secretary
of aging if I remember correctly
and and US secretary hope from
low pros might remember as well
said she was also an aging when
I was secretary I believe we had
seven in the state at that time
I remember specifically one that
went bankrupt and had to close
in northern New Mexico and the
it the the statute as we have it
a previously of what is really
one of just disclosure of that
to the financials were available
to to individuals living and
continuing care commend that
communities the certain
components had to be in the
contracts and that they had to
report of their annual financial
information to the
Agency on it was agency on aging
at that time and then the aging
long term service department to
be available for anyone that
wanted to see him but there was
a requirement that you actually
that we actually reviewed are
assessed
we have done some of additional
since since the northern New
Mexico facility.
Of closed are there was some
tightening up of that language
and then today what you're
seeing in the US I think and
please US senator and
representative correct me if I'm
wrong or cera that this is
adding in an additional
component that should that that
on continuing care communities
have a plan for what they would
do with the residents what would
happen if they went bankrupt and
had to close up so that people
weren't just left on their own
to figure out something so what
that would so the that there's
not a plan but it is that
correct Senator and and Serra.
Thank you madam chair for the
question
is my understanding that this is
the.
The provision that we're adding
at.
To this the kid carrying care
they didn't exist the before so.
Correct me if I'm wrong Sir.
I'm not I'm madam madam chair
senator Tom and Madam you're
correct yeah that's right yeah
that that's what I thought is
adding that that ability plan my
concern in question actually is
and I know you added also added
in a maybe a little bit more
access and ability to go to the
to the Attorney General it is it
still just a disclosure to aging
and long term services is there
a mechanism in place for anyone
with the right skills that to
actually review
the the financials and actuarial
analysis or is it just a
disclosure.
Thank you madam chair for the
I question my understanding is
the.
Yes there will be someone
available to the has the
expertise to to a financial
analysis of the financial
information that is required the
staff to be submitted to the
department so Sir you may want
to expand on that.
Thank you senator and and madam
chair so to ensure first
question yes it is just that
this it is just it technically a
disclosure of those financials
however you know secretary how
trump has has been adamant that
we be able to find something
more meaningful to community
and to consumers and the act
currently allows for either the
department of aging or the
attorney general's office to
publish like a concert with
consumer guides and that sort of
thing but we have her commitment
that will be seeking essentially
a contractual agreement to have
somebody look at those to be
able to synthesize that
information so that we can then
produce that information
publicly thank you I I
appreciate that because that's
the missing piece at this point
it's it's a disclosure but I can
tell you when I've looked out
are you you I couldn't I would
have not the skill set to be
able to tell at all whether they
were financially sound or not so
just disclosing it and making it
available for and not to
disparage of those who are
elderly inability to figure this
out my my and others ninety
three and sharper than I am but
I couldn't I couldn't have made
heads or tails of that's not a
skill set that most people have
to judge the not just the
finances but the actuarial
soundness because it has to be
actual currently sound to be
able to provide care through
someone's life so it's not just
actuarially sound to maintain
your your your rant you know and
the property but to actually
provide medical care it's it's
it's quite different so yeah and
I had and.
Actually
Senator it and and committee
members I had actually twenty
years ago I hate to admit that
spend that long in law school
done a paper on continuing care
communities and were they really
a form of insurance because you
are buying into an expecting
something from that some kind of
guarantee that you can have
access to
to services throughout your life
so I'm just throwing I'm not
suggesting a change this bill
and thank you for bringing this
is one step closer but I think
that and to the secretary who is
still on I think we should have
conversations about what's the
appropriate
of oversight or ability to to
actually analyze the those
reports and the financial
soundness of the organizations
and I'm wondering if a
partnership with the office of
the superintendent of insurance.
who has actuaries of or the
state auditor who I assume has
actuaries or I don't know
whether the AG's office has has
actuaries or not or whether it's
just you know financing a
appropriating to the department
to be able to contract for
actuarial services there's not a
lot of there's five of them they
don't change your here so but it
seems to me that that's one of
the next steps that we can do to
protect.
people in New Mexico in these
communities is give them some
assurance that that their
their home and what they bought
into and put their entire life
savings into is actuarially
sound so that's Madam madam
chair if you look on page four
starting online nineteen it does
talk about and and on line
twenty one an annual future
service obligation calculation
by an actuary who is a member of
the American academy of
actuaries right support part of
that there thank you thank you I
I I totally missed that so that
that's great because that is the
I think the missing piece on
just sending the reports to
aging so that somebody can look
at I'm it is isn't enough so
thank you
thank you for that madam chair
yeah.
Yeah you up this is so points
one into it my opening remarks I
if you remember I did say that
that was the problem they were.
With the reports required but
they were sent to the office.
Of the eighty low during the to
sitting on the shelf because no
one had the skill set to know
what they're looking at you
mentioned LSI we did work with
OSI for several months to
beginning
And they finally said no we
don't want to are we gonna deal
with this it does so with a we
went back to.
The office of aging long term
services actually did that I did
a survey and I.
although the state's.
Well I contacted did know the
National Council of state
legislatures and they
Yes so what departments and
other states handled the this
type of issue and.
There were several but roughly
half of the states of this issue
was a the responsibility of of
the aging long term services to
run so I think it's the
appropriate place and
Is certainly a hit upon a key
point that these reports were.
That being looked at with a
discerning eye but this bill
we're now the choir it in with
the support us of of the new US
secretary.
Of this department
I'm sure everyone can be assured
that these reports will be a
analyzed.
By people who have the skill set
to know what they're looking at
thank you.
Great thank you very much and
you're you're a step ahead of me
thank you for persevering
Senator on on this issue and and
thank you to the the secretary
for
for taking this really seriously
because we have had as I said we
have had facilities in the state
close and
decades ago there was a lot of
history across the country of of
a lot of facilities going
bankrupt they had miscalculated
what it would take
at to stay in business and serve
their their residents through us
through life so thank you all
all stop.
Now but I I thought maybe that
history might might help
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair thank you so much
for this up.
Opportunity was great to hear
your overview and your personal
connection to this matter I
applaud that work Senator
Tallman and representative
Thompson I rise not with
questions but with gratitude and
a brief story in the interest of
time I live in work in the
Espanola valley.
And I was very much aware of the
impact of the closing of that
long term care facility for our
treasured elders it was without
notice it was disruptive in such
a powerful way to the family
members who had gotten used to
attending and visiting their
loved ones but I shudder to
think about the actual.
Seniors that were displaced
Too often we miss consider and
don't give the time were
treasured elders who are in
their final days and I think the
dignity and.
Remedy and targeted protections
that this provided is
legislation is bringing is to be
commended and I just want to
want to say thank you I look
forward to hope there's enough
time in this session to assure
this bill to signing because I
think it is a priority I yield
back in thank you for the good
work.
Thank you Representative next
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative and Senator for
bringing this forward most of my
questions have been already
discussed what I was wondering
are the reserves are the
reserves that are required in
are those high enough to meet
increased those
that expectation so that know if
something happens that the
recovery for the people who have
invested so much could be
recouped or you take into
another facility.
Insurances and the
Representative thank you for the
question I'll defer that to the
general counsel thank you.
I thank you senator madam chair
Representative Ferrary I I think
that is absolutely something
that we can do in terms of what
the reserves are
I believe that the reserve
requirement is currently in the
state regulation so obviously
that's something that's fairly
easily changeable
on our departments and.
Do you excuse you madam chair
and Representative and Senator
do you know what that reserve
amount is you know what
percentage or.
I.
If you give me one second
Representative I can tell you
I'm so sorry the number.
And madam chair I would just
jump in here and this is this is
I think where that the residents
started to feel like there was a
problem is that they saw they
had had the by and then all of a
sudden the organization was
buying new properties that new
properties in New Mexico and so
and I I know that that's where
the residents.
Have a lot of concern is that
there isn't enough in reserves
to for all the future costs that
they're going to be.
Apologies madam chair and
Representative thank you
representative Thompson and
Representative Ferrary if I can
get back to you about the amount
I believe it's a percentage of
the obligations but if I can
I'll I'll get you an email right
after this hearing.
Okay thank you very much madam
chair in Sir are.
Is that something that we can as
you were mentioning a state
regulation in that building
increased by your department or
is that something it has to be
done legislatively.
Madam chair representative sorry
I believe that can be done in
regulation.
Right I madam chair in
Representative Senator I I think
that would be really important
and also
These people's worry about a lot
of that besides knowing the
disclosures but also the bonding
is that Madam chair
representative senator
also high enough
there I assume there's a bonding
of the company.
Chair and representative of
defer to the general counsel.
Yes madam chair representative
for yes there's also bonding
that it would also be right
regulatory.
And is madam chair and
representative senators are
being looked at being increased
also.
I'm Madam chair representative
for it we haven't talked about
increasing are the the bonding
or that reserve amount but it's
certainly something that we can
you know we can't do.
Right maybe we can madam chair
talk about this more at during
the insurance how important that
would be and also madam chair.
I was and Senator Representative
I was wondering if there also
might be some way to avoid any
further
developments like this in our
state since you know it could
easily jeopardize the well being
of a lot of people.
So that was really a question
but if you want to comment.
Go ahead Sir okay so sorry
senator Clemente madam chair
Representative Ferrary you know
I think that's right I think
it's an interesting balance as
we were discussing with
Representative Matthews
questions earlier right it that
how to balance the individual
contractual nature of these
relationships and what the level
of state oversight is for
something for something like
this and certainly you know the
state obviously does not want to
see you know the businesses
closed
in any sort of circumstance and
so I think the best thing for us
to do is what can we put in
place so that one the residents
are protected and have as much
knowledge as they can about the
private contract that they're
entering into right and then how
can we work with the industry
sort of on the backend if for
some reason that is.
The start we're starting to
maybe see something like that
coming and I don't know maybe
I'm madam chair you can speak
about what the experience was
like
when the facility and has been
you know because I was I was not
around for that so you don't
have the experience but I I
wonder if there's not sort of
some lessons learned about how
the state can prepare for
something like that in obviously
this bill is something we're
doing that we think is a step in
that in that direction but
certainly there's more that we
could you.
Manage madam chair and the.
Representative this that that's
the whole point of this
legislation is to bring about
more accountability and
transparency so that
The.
So that there's no that there's
less likely of these type of
facilities to go bankrupt that's
the whole point of this of this
legislation is going to be much
less likely that that the in the
future these types of facilities
will go bankrupt thank you.
Thank you Senator madam chair
that's all.
Thank you and to be clear the
facility that closed and
Espanola was not a continuing
care community it just
demonstrates that when a when a
long term care facility close
it's pretty devastating
the continuing care community
that I knew of that close I
believe was in house it's been
long enough ago it was
problematic but I don't remember
anymore specifically how that
was handled it was pretty
traumatic for those who were in
the facility.
Madam chair yes so I just just
during again I just want to just
emphasize a couple of things
number one there are different
types of different models for
continuing care communities some
of them work really well so some
of them are really like a co op
that are owned more by the
residents and they they buy into
it but they also have a say in
how things are moving forward
there other types that don't
have that and so it's it's not
about making sure that they're
not in the state of New Mexico I
think it's more about the
solvency and giving residents
and consumers options and full
brought the understanding before
they signed a contract of what
they could be getting into based
on the company that they choose
in terms of the continuing care
community but not all continuing
care communities are back and
the situation that happened
inTaos was devastating and what
happened there is that most of
those residents were destitute
had to go on Medicaid and get
ought to get into a long term
care nursing home and that is
not at all what they plan to do
so these are the types of things
that we're trying to protect
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Secretary for jogging
my memory on on the tiles
facility I yes and I would agree
not all are bad my my parents
lived in a continuing care
community in in Tennessee it was
that was
that was great but
next I have Representative
trusses.
Morning madam chair I hope my.
My internet holds up here.
Not all shut off my.
My video here
Good morning.
Madam chair and senator and
representatives and in the
committee thank you so much for
bringing this legislation for
really I like it a lot I think
it's wonderful
I. two is a this is a person in
the southwest was one of these
type of types of up.
Over a nursing care facilities
what we had a nursing home shut
down and in in order for which
is very close to my area and it
was very difficult to a lot of
people so I do understand what
you're expressing here and I
appreciate it so I appreciate
Madam chair of.
Representative at that the
secretary just explain.
Just helping right there because
I was gonna ask about structure
and why you know why I I I I
thought.
Is this like a coop we're not a
coop and so I was thinking about
that and so I'm glad she
clarified that so might my first
question this morning madam
chair is
Is that how I heard earlier I
believe it was a I believe was a
secretary that mention something
that
Florida had very tight rules are
stronger legislation and so I
just want to know what the
differences between our
legislation and that is what the
gap is.
Thank you madam chair
representative so it you know
Florida just got a state had a
lot of continuing care
facilities and some of them seem
to pop up overnight and they
didn't have regulations or any
sort of stipulation initially
for these continuing care
communities they I think ask for
a lot of bonding today have
restrictions in place before you
can open that that business have
to to show solvency a lot of
those things are done and
statute that we now have some
flexibility to do in regulation
if this bill is passed.
That's great to hear you know I
I'm not one of these people to
believe that over regulation I
think that has to be a balance
of excuse me madam chair
secretary secretary Center and
representatives I don't believe
in over regulation because it
can also choke an industry but I
do believe there has to be a
balance and that has to be
protections so it sounds like to
me I after the conversation I
have a few questions but a lot
of them have been answered and
of it sounds like this is just a
step that we're taking to go in
the right direction and this
sounds like this is gonna be a
continued conversations within
term is up sounds correct.
So.
Madam chair I'm sorry senator
Tom and and and Representative
that we will have conversations
but if this bill is enacted the
conversations will be around
that regulations and what we
need to put in place we are at a
delicate balance in the state of
New Mexico in that we have
nursing facilities closing and
that the most recent is in
Representative town and of
course we were devastated in
Lawrenceburg and and Espanol as
well and so we are in a delicate
balance for you don't want to
tell companies they can't come
into the state of New Mexico we
want long term care facilities
here but we want the right ones
and this bill offers consumer
protection so that we can
protect not only the individuals
that are in there and closures
and what happens when a facility
close is that we can also be
transparent for those families
that any adults that are in the
market for going into a
continuing care facility.
Thank you
Madam chair Senator
Representative so secretary so
I I appreciate that I'm going to
share something that happened.
Up to me and I overheard this
conversation happen to be
sitting in a in a restaurant in
Tucson a few years back and the
and so while I was sitting there
it was it was a group we're here
if you have a nice restaurant
and a group of of individuals
came in a sector is right next
to us.
And they were be allowed in so I
mean you could help your only
like three feet away and and
they were loud about their
conversations anyway.
The we ask each other what we
did for a living and we began a
conversation and come to find
out they were up there were
literally investors and they
were
administration investors of long
term care facilities and I've
I've never brought this up
because we we never had any
reason for me to bring this.
Conversation up but in my
conversation with them they
sought New Mexico as a a place
that was right four investment
in in
In these types of facilities all
different types of facilities
but the they were reserved and
said we are not going to invest
in New Mexico because of the way
they're structured and because
of their liability exposure is
what they that's what they told
me so I don't know exactly what
the man I'm gonna get into a
long deep conversation about
that what is something that I I
I I absolutely a hundred percent
with you guys in this
legislation I just what would
like to see maybe there's a
conversation maybe in the end
from that we talk about how can
we
attract good companies to to our
state
and not over regulate what we
what we pushing way maybe we can
model after other states like
Florida so
Just a quick question that I
think I know the answer to this
so basically madam chair Senator
and Representative what I
understand is this is basically
a disclosure so that your
average person to come in and
understand what we're what what
is going on and it's a very
recent it would be more of a
recent
I guess
Report of what's what the status
of the companies so they have a
more pulse on on what's
happening before the invest I
just had a couple questions
with that madam chair of center
representative so is this gonna
affect other than that any of
the people that invested money
this is I mean I heard three
hundred thousand half a million
whatever are do they have any
protections outside of so if one
of these facilities were to
close out of their facilities I
guess let me rephrase this other
facilities out there that if
they close they lose their
investment and they're just they
just get placed in our in in
some sort of Medicare or other
type of facility or maybe
they have nowhere to go.
Okay.
Thank you for the question thank
you madam chair and thank you
for the question I'll defer to
the
General counsel Sir Jacobs.
I thank you senator Clemente
madam chair and and
Representative drowsiness
You know the individuals let we
were talking and having a
conversation about earlier do
you have individual contractual
rights
however you know I I and the
residents can obviously speak
much better on this because I
believe some of them have
pursued that
and I I don't believe it has
gone.
Very well for them
you know I think that there are
provisions.
In con in the contracts and then
as well as what the state can do
in regulation and statues around
Again those reserves and bonding
and then what could potentially
happen upon closure and I and I
wanted to go back to your
questions about the about
Florida secretary coach from
Lopez mentioned Florida
you know I I like a lot of their
statutory language around
closure which requires
Some of the funding that would
go into bankruptcy or
liquidation to be reserved for
residents upon that closure and
so being able to utilize some of
that we're not there yet as the
statute exists but I believe
that with our with adding the
closure language that we have in
the bill as it stands we get
closer to that in being able to
provide some additional
protections around that initial
investment.
Great madam chair so Center and
Representative and and secretary
and all those in the members so
it I guess I was just more
concerned other so is there any
existing protections right now
for those who have invested now
I mean it do they have any
financial or they pretty much
there what they've done is
already.
It's done art this is gonna go
retroactive is there anything
that will protect them or
anything like that I'm just
trying to find my way outside of
that I really I mean I love the
bill I think it's wonderful I
just wanted to kind of find my
balance and I'll I'll tell you I
really appreciate the chairman
of should be a trigger madam
chair for for you asking those
questions you cleaned up a lot
of my my questions and and and
what you guys have discussed
thank you so much but I just
wanted to know those that have
invested already our existing is
there any retroactive
protections that they have or
any thing that is that would
protect them that they're
they're not just out on the
street I guess for lack of a
better phrase.
And and on that point if I can
just jump and they all have
existing contracts and so it it
depends on the contract it also
depends on the reason for
closure if its bankruptcy it's
going to end up in bankruptcy
court and so then that's going
to depend on what kind of
finances they have available and
and the court's decision about
hierarchy of contracts and who
they owe money to an.
And so forth so so it's very it
could be very complex on
depending on how long someone
was in the facility and what
their original contracts that it
it and Sandra so the whole point
of this is to try and.
No far ahead of time that that
in trying protect against it if
so if an organization is
beginning to get into trouble
that we you
can intervene
Earlier and and I think we need
to look at at Florida for
closure but it does it would
involve I would think it not
just.
Your legislation around the
continuing care community
community but also your
bankruptcy laws so it there it
would be an interplay on on that
so it's it's very complicated
to
to know exactly how that's going
to happen but I think that's
maybe the next step is to look
at of of bankruptcy laws when it
regards in regards to something
like this that are the residents
are are given top priority in
settling our debts.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Representative I I guess of mine
of family was
if I was gonna put someone in my
family one of these facilities I
definitely like the structural
words a coop where they have
some some.
Rights to to speak up on it but
I really appreciate legislation
was supported god bless thank
you so much for answering all my
questions.
Thank you next we have a
representative of Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman up.
I I I.
That the of.
The eight of the bill will
accomplish the intended goals in
my questions to the sponsors or
sort of directed that way.
Of questions observations of.
And in one back to you madam
chairman is unfortunate
bankruptcy laws I believe
Federal and and so when we get
to that point it doesn't mean
that New Mexico's without some
state but I do think we may be
waiting into an area where we
don't have a lot of the
authority I believe you're
correct Representative thank
thank you madam chairman I go to
the Sanchez now and and ask them
of.
I suppose to the expert witness
if I could and that is of we
talk about increase liability
exposure to investors or owners
is there anything in the bill
that would increase liability
exposure to the owners or the
investors in the facility
question.
Thank you.
Madam chair thank you
Representative your question
I'll defer to the general
counsel thank you thank you.
Thank you senator on madam chair
and representative to answer
your question no there is an
additional language in the
current bill that in eighteen
directly increases liability
any violations of the continuing
care I can be referred to the
Attorney General but of course
that's not a private cause of
action right so that would be
some form of recovery for the
state
by any Representative right
there still all those individual
protections and those breach of
contract actions that can exist
but in your question no there's
not additional language in there
that quotes and directly
accountable thank you thank you
for that and and of I didn't see
it and so you your your your
answer confirms my opinion
although I'm not an attorney
then a to the sponsor of senator
Tom and on page four.
Of I see where we online
nineteen through twenty four.
What of the existing language in
there but the addition of the
work comprehensive.
And I think to myself okay we
have to now have instead of a
summary of actuarial analysis
within the last five years we
have to now have a
comprehensive actuarial analysis
within the last five years my
question Senator is is there
something I'm missing use or
something and actuarial
terminology that differentiates
comprehensive from not
comprehensive question.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator that's a good
question I'll defer that to
general counsel thank you.
Thank you senator common on
madam chair representative
Anderson that is a good question
and honestly I'm I'm not sure if
there is a distinction in the
actuarial
industry about comprehensive the
idea behind that language and
the sole member of language that
was added to the bill was to get
at the parent organizations and
not just the individual company
likely beating and us and.
Thank you thank you for that.
Then Senator going up the page
two lines ten through thirteen
this is existing language and I
understand that but it it really
goes to I think perhaps what
we're trying to help of these
New Mexicans who made long term
care of living commitments of
provide some form of of.
We're Lee
sure it's of.
Certainty of as two of the
viability of the the owner of
the facility providing the
services and it says Senator
madam chairman a statement as to
the community or corporations
would like would reserves to
ensure payment of debt
obligations and on going ability
to provide services to residents
might my simple question knowing
this is existing language.
Yes what what what what if they
say well we don't have of
sufficient liquid reserves to
ensure payment of our debt
obligations.
What what happens next in the
context of this proposed law as
well as the existing law
question.
Madam chairman.
Representative trust with your
very incisive question which I
would defer to the general
counsel thank you.
Thank thank you senator Tom and
madam chair Representative
Anderson so
so what would happen
with or without the context of
the new language that's proposed
in this bill
if there were violations of the
continuing character so for some
reason does disclosure
statements did not contain that
information or they weren't able
to say that that that
right which is not included for
whatever reason
we would refer that to the
attorney general's office which
could potentially be a consumer
protection action
that being said I did that that
does not change with the current
bill as it's and as it's in
front of you I think again to
the chairwoman's point it's
really about being able to look
at this statements and provide
information to the public like
actually what it means to them
and whether or not they can if
that is a good decision for them
to make entering into those
entering into those contracts.
Thank you thank you for that
response
I'm about to finish up my
questions are I think what we're
trying to do here is terribly
important.
If I could Senator we go to page
seventeen and the on seventeen
lines nineteen twenty one we're
looking at some new language of
that
says upon receipt.
Of a report from any source.
My question Senator is is
pondering from any source being
a rather ill defined undefined.
source for an alleged violation.
Of the actor rules
my question is
Are we satisfied that that does
not invite
Competitive forces from taking
advantage of the language in and
creating
It turned the general.
Investigations real or unreal
because it simply says a a
Representative if if there's a
report from any source the
Attorney General shall.
Promptly Act question.
Madam chair I will jump in here
and if you keep reading it says
the Attorney General shall
promptly with the with the
allocation and and madam chair
and Representative Anderson you
know if if there is some I'm.
International spying you know
where work can can.
Competitor reports on someone
there has to be something there
to review yeah and I don't I
don't think we're gonna have to
look at them and a lot of that
kind of stuff but I think the
point of this was so that a
resident to have concerns has a
place to go essentially they
have felt for years that they
have gone to to to their
management and have not been
heard so this is just I believe
a way to to make sure that the
the residents and their family
members have a place to take
serious concerns thank you thank
you for that answer
Representative and invite my
reading of the bill was not
sufficient and I appreciate your
pointing out the additional
language because I I I I L.
minute that by by accident not
not on purpose and I I take your
answers is is a very good one
and so I'm gonna close by simply
saying that
It was one last question it goes
like this when I hear the word
increased bonding.
And I assume bonding relates to
closure.
There must be a connection
between.
The mature closure of the
facility and therefore calling
on a bond
yes yes you setting the bond
already within the statutory
authority of the state
regulation of this industry
question.
Okay thank you for the court
thank you madam chair thank you
for the question of the for to
The bond the general counsel
thank you.
Thank you senator madam chair
representative Anderson now I
don't believe that the funding
is currently in our statute.
Okay thank you that is that's
all I needed I assume that was
the case but it did seem like in
our hearing this morning we
continue to wander back to of
the bonding concept being a way
in which we might find
additional security for those
who are buying into the services
for a long long time we hope.
Senator I I'm very supportive of
your bill I appreciate them
Representative please don't
leave out representative
Thompson I I'm very supportive
of what you're trying to do of
and the I believe this is going
to be an important next step in
in moving this issue forward a
because
of the issue is a growing one in
the that needs to be addressed
so thank you madam chairman that
concludes my questions thank you
Representative next I
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I
thank you for bringing this bill
I apology apologize for being in
and out I was.
I'm presenting in another
committee and so madam chair I
just know that I've been told
Madam chair representative and
senator that of discussions with
aging and long term industry and
the industry have been in the
works and that aging and long
term was going to evaluate the
actuarial and if they didn't
have or needed additional help
with the the the ability to do
that
that that would be that that
would be done and I just wonder
has that been House agent in
long term been able to
go over the actuarial.
Both.
Madam chair and representative
that.
Thank you for the question with
which was
Already been answered the.
The department of aging luncheon
Services has a.
Made a serious commitment to up.
Find an individual who has the
skills to adequately analyze the
actuarial is and they will let.
Place this person under contract
since they don't have anyone on
staff that can look at these of
financials with a discerning eye
thank you.
Thank you senator and thank you
madam chair I I apologize for
asking the question again that's
been answered so do you think
that this bill may be jumping
the gun and tell the actuarial
Sir actually.
Analyzed madam chair Senator.
Both madam chair and thank.
And the representative thank you
for the question the.
The at that we obviously we need
to do this bill in order to.
To carry out what the the carry
out the proper analysis of the
financials this will give us
the.
They were with on the authority
to the.
To do the analysis of the
actuaries thank you for the
question.
Perfect thank you madam chair
thank you senator.
Thank you and Representative
Matthews did you have a follow
up question.
Yes.
You need to on mute.
We can't have a morning madam.
Representative Matthews that we
wait one week here we've got
yeah we got your test.
Then you muted yourself again.
Sorry
so when we talk about bankruptcy
I.
Flashback to when I was a
practicing lawyer and security
credit people with security
interests are have priority in
bankruptcy and I just had this
thought is probably really
dangerous because I'm a retired
lawyer can just a wild thoughts
but
if somehow in the contract you
created a security interest on
behalf of the
residents the people by in again
she assets under certain
circumstances there might be
something that would give a
preference in the event of a
bankruptcy so I just throw that
out there and let somebody else
still legal research to find out
why that's probably a bad idea
but anyway just I would share
that.
Thank you and Representative
Anderson you have a comment on
that yes just quick follow up
the that we should add that to
the interim effort of a head as
part of our scope of bills
looking into this in terms of
the next piece of legislation
that follows this one thank you
madam chair thank you and I I
was also interested in it if
Florida has done something since
bankruptcy laws are federal laws
but if they've done something
that helps protect against
bankruptcy proceedings which
might be something as simple as
what was suggested by
Representative Matthews that
would be that be good to know
alright what's the pleasure of
the committee.
I make a motion to argue passed
madam chair I have a motion and
a second.
Got lots of of seconds a go
ahead and call the roll Torrez.
Representative Bob Sanderson I
vote yes thank you
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Britney but.
Yes.
Representative term bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Excuse me Sir yes.
Representative Louis Fox.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative vice chair John
Ferrari yes.
madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes
Representative but also small
yes yes yes ma'am I did yeah
okay thank you you've got
unanimous eleven to zero I do
pass and thank you so this is a
very good discussion and and I
want to thank you Senator for
continuing at this and for that
US secretary in and supporting
this this effort so that we
appropriately protect residents
of continuing care communities
thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee I
hope everyone has a wonderful
day thank you you too.
I'm next we have Senate bill two
twenty two health info system
definitions and I believe
senator Hickey was in the
audience for sure there is.
Hey.
Senator Hickey welcome.
Are you there Senator I am
chair thank you I'm of.
Bear with me because we're about
to vote on a controversial bill
over an education okay listening
a little on the side and you do
have experts I do have I do have
an expert Carian showers.
Okay let's find area and there
she is.
Will bring her over.
All right and
All right anyone else.
And Heidi
If you see her there yeah Heidi
got it.
Okay we've got both Sarinana
ninety.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative it's an honor
to be in front of you in my new
role as a senator rather than a
lay person commenting on this
that the other although I want
to tell you I this last
discussion so fascinating I was
living in between my committee
and staff I'm glad you're gonna
do in the summer this this is
like health insurance for for
the end of your life and having
it regulated with RBCs are that
have to be and so forth and
that's great in New Mexico is a
wonderful place for continuing
care to attract that business so
thank you for allowing you to
listen in on that discussion now
to the matter at hand hopefully
this one isn't gonna generate
near as much a discussion I
think it's relatively
straightforward the Senate bill
to to to changes some language
in the
health information.
And this comes out of twenty
fifteen and I'm just gonna
paraphrase essentially as things
were being amended in the Senate
bill is being passed through
some of the definitions and of
that
crossing over each other and
being inconsistent in this bill
is to bring consistency to those
definitions what I will comment
on is the importance of this
bill because this bill will be
able to enable the reporting out
of the all payer claims database
is currently I believe out for
an RFP and then that is brought
into the state being able to do
the aggregate reporting are that
was intended particularly
focused on hospitals will help
the state significantly
identifies health issues it's
costs and potentially lower
costs and also prior ties with
the state's working on and when
combined R. as Representative
Elizabeth Thompson knows
when it is combined with the
health information exchange
which is the medical.
Digital information on it will
be a power house of data for the
state to really focus in and hit
the priorities and spend money
very very wise so that's why
this bill is very important we
really want to get it through
the state legislature because
the up here claims that
basically just down the street
are a little bit of time and now
I'm going to turn it over to
erring showers who is the head
of policy and she works with
Heidi apple is well to explain
the substance of the bill and
thank you very much
Representative.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee I think that Senator
Hickey did a pretty great job
actually explaining what we're
trying to do here
there was a bill in two thousand
fifteen as as Hickey mentioned
that amended the hiss Act and
the express purpose of that
amendment in two thousand
fifteen one is to allow the
release of data that is
aggregated workgroups by
specific health healthcare
providers or hospitals
so that the his act Phoenicians
that for two and these are two
definitions that Mr chairman I
want to yes I'm bounces back and
forth and.
At the definition for aggregate
and record level data those are
the two definitions that we're
seeking to
get consistent they conflict
with each other they they also
conflict with the intent to that
amendment two thousand fifteen
the the the act definitions for
aggregate data at as it stands
now is preventing and
identifying the provider and the
definition for record level data
which are really actually never
released by the department ing
includes the term provider or
hospital as a criterion so
because of that both of the the
definitions as they stand are
not really for allowing the
departments released data that I
identifies specific providers or
hospitals in a Senator Hickey
suggested that's really going to
prevent us from moving forward
in a meaningful way meaningful
way with the all payer claims
database
so I will I will send my
comments at that and turn it
over to the committee for any
additional questions thank you.
Thank you hi did you want to say
anything before we go to the
audience Madam chair now thank
you all right I'm all right we
you start in this committee with
a poll to see who among the
attendees are here it either in
support or opposition to a bill
so if anyone wants to weigh in
on Senate Bill to to to.
Okay thank you.
On.
I think we've got it
Thank you and a Senator we had
of four people in the audience
in support and non in opposition
and for those who wish to make a
public comment if you can raise
your hands.
Anyone wishing to make a public
comment.
Seeing no hands raised.
We'll go ahead and go to the
committee members and first I
have Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of I
would as the sponsor madam madam
chairman I I'm I'm really short
question up in a I hope for
short answer of I support the
legislation that Senator Hickey
is is bringing us but none the
less whenever I hear a bill
introduced in it talks about
data and data acquisition and
distribution of data my question
is always.
The data and can they sell out
and if we use madam chairman
Senator Hickey with third party
vendor to acquire or or in any
way shape or form work the data
do they have the right to sell
it question thank you.
Thank you Representative for
that very very good question
the answer is no
there may come a point in time
in which the data in New Mexico
needs to be compared with say
data in other states or what
have you and that would probably
come through a project the data
could not
in any way be solved with our
legislation allowing that as I
understand and I will ask my
experts if there is a
circumstance that I'm not aware
of where it could be so.
Madam chair representative
Anderssen so for this particular
bill it's about hospitalization
data and hospitalization data
required a nonfederal
hospitalization they are
required to be reported to the
department of health and so we
are the ones you analyze the
data collected data do all of
the data cleaning etcetera and
so we're the ones in charge of
it.
Thank you very much for that
answer my only concluding
comment is that's an excellent
answer and I challenge all who
were involved in data
acquisition in every form in the
state of New Mexico to know that
the data is to be are not only
respected but it is not property
for somebody else to sell that
is a non legal opinion madam
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you
any other questions I'll just
add in is as someone
Senator and members of the
committee who has been
supporting
the development of an all payers
claims database and so that we
can have access to data for
planning purposes and for health
care trending purposes and so
forth but it is our data that
goes to the state and and and
and it not for resale but a
potentially used for research
but
but not for a private sale.
any other questions yeah go
ahead Senator madam chair
actually there is a precedent
for this going to the department
of health currently Medicaid
data is collected by the
They'll love the CENIC
foundation that develop the
health information exchange this
is digital data and that is just
reported to HSD for them to
begin to identify patterns so
again this is really for state
use are only and
I appreciate that
Representative I'm sorry madam
chair and I worked in the.
High risk pool together and we
had data and we tried and and we
did do some analytics but this
will this will definitely help
with that that the process in
the pool as well as a number of
other state agencies that do.
Deal with health and in fact may
actually even supply important
data once the regulatory
apparatus is set up for
continuing care and maybe
important that in that
particularly as people move in
and out of hospitals up from the
continuing care so thank you for
the opportunity to expand on
that.
Thank you Representative
Ferrary.
The.
Thank you madam chair I forgot I
didn't I wasn't on you already
I think it was a meeting that
you and I went to madam chair
two in Colorado in Denver where
we were talking about data and
it was either regarding rural
health or just in general but
they talked about how people in
Colorado could go to a database
and compare the different cost
of the procedure that they
needed to get and they could
look at different that charges
of different hospitals and they
could kind of like shop for the
least expensive and that helped
drive down of the costs and so
is this madam chair and senator
making nice to see you
at going to be able to provide
that for even
Patients.
Madam chair and Representative
Ferrary you hit the nail on the
head and that was some of the
original
motivation behind behind the
twenty fifteen bills is to be
able to get comparative data out
there I will note that the
federal government just before
president trump left office it
has required hospitals to post
their charges not not not not
that contracts for state but
again in being able to analyze
the claims.
The the operator claims database
will be able to figure out what
is being paid for various
diagnostic and procedural codes
and comparisons can be made from
that yes and that's a little
more kind of realistic and then
of course they'll be able to
look at whatever cost sharing
or co pays if they have but I
again this is this is the
beginning of that type of
sophistication so that people do
now
what it would be to go to a
different hospital now for lower
cost things but in time for.
I thank you.
At.
Thank you I'm glad to hear that
that was something I really look
forward to for New Mexico thank
you for bringing this bill
forward thank you madam chair
that's all thank you what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Yes the medicine for do pass all
second.
Can you have multiple seconds
adores you want to go ahead and
take the role.
Representative Phelps Anderson I
vote yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative Stephanie
lord yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes good work Senator Hickey.
Representative Louise.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative vice chair Joanne
Ferrari.
Yes madam chair Deborah
Armstrong yes unanimous eleven
you have a eleven this zero do
pass on Senate bill two twenty
two congratulations Senator
Hickey.
Thank you madam chair and I do
want to give credit to Ariens
towers who is the one who's
really work this through and
asked me if I would carry it so
on credit to the department of
health and your ship thank you
thank you.
Okay and next we have
Representative Matthews on one
seventy seven.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee do you
have any experts and to that you
want to join you and I don't
know if Representative Cook was
gonna join you or if you're
taking.
Taking this
I don't I don't think
Representative Cook is is it is
going to come
but I do have an expert Erica
Smith if you could please bring
her over.
Okay.
I hope that and we've had two
eleven zero do pass votes and I
hope that's a streak that.
T. nearing.
At.
Go ahead.
Chair members of the committee
thank you for hearing the bill
this is said this built out a
little bit of a interesting
history of it was originally
heard in
every culture and water
resources state which is my
other committee and it was
originally
table and after in in the
process of talking about it at
that point I mentioned that I.
Of because I taught
entrepreneurship in C. N. M.
that I was had developed a real
interest in of cottage
industries particularly in terms
of homemade food and
After was tabled I was contacted
by the as original supporters
and said would you be willing
to.
Of.
Come in as a sponsor and tried
to continue the bill and I said
well I will I will but you have
to fix the bill it has to get
cleaned up and we have to be
sure that the New Mexico
environment department is okay
with the bill before we proceed
and they and the supporters did
that
in in in the meantime I sure
hearing from constituents and
other people about how much they
really wanted to have this
option and have this bill passed
that's a little bit of the
background anyway I we amended
the bills it is now committee
substitute I went back to Ag
agriculture last week and we on
tabled the bill and it was
passed unanimously in a I think
was a nine zero wrote in
agriculture.
On.
we're course running against the
clock here but I really
appreciate the committee being
willing to hear it.
as I mentioned I got I became
very interested in cooking and.
Businesses when I was teaching
entrepreneurship at CNM which
has a culinary arts program and
if.
I used by my students to bring
in products that they wanted to
produce or make or whatever and
I had a lot of students who
wanted to be bakers or do
various kinds of culinary
programs and they would bring in
their food and we would all it
nobody ever got sick
and I really begin to develop an
appreciation for.
What is it called but the love
and the creativity and the
passion even that these that
these folks these bakers and
cooks and so forth brought to
these projects that they were
producing and sharing with us
and wanting to make a our life
around production of food
And
So that spurred my interest in
this whole area that plus one
other thing I hi
you know like you I go into
grocery stores and there's all
kinds of food that comes from
sterilize factories filled with
hydrogenated whatever's
and I think the food that always
makes me kind of crazy is she is
not she's she does and
But the food is sold to us as a
is is something that we that we
should be able to eat that's
filled with as far as I can tell
nothing but empty calories and
salt and all kinds of things
that aren't good fors and I was
surprised to learn that actually
in New Mexico there it is we
have very restrictive laws
allowing home cooks to make
homemade food to sell to us.
And in fact in Albuquerque is
actually prohibited you cannot
sell.
Ice maybe home or a home made
food products and so what this
bill does is.
In a way that I think is
it imposes appropriate safety
precautions
basically allows the.
Homemade bakers and homemade
cooks and so forth to
So beyond the farmers markets
and roadside stands which across
the state is pretty much the
limit now but as I noted in
Albuquerque can't even do that
and so it allows these
entrepreneurs.
To sell their products in a
number of different locations
so long as they meet the safety
standards that the New Mexico
environment department has has
provided and
Thank you much and thank you
and give us a call a a chance
to.
Experience and share food.
In in a way that we can't do
when we go to the grocery store.
So.
With that I'd like to introduce
Erica Smith and let her talk
more specifically about the
provisions of the bill and
Representative do you also have
an amendment.
I I I and madam chair I think
we're going to hold the
amendment and two items we
didn't get to you within twenty
four hours and so we're going to
hold that for the floor okay
thank you thank you
go ahead Erica.
Thank you Representative
Matthews and thank you madam
chair members of the committee
first I want to thank
Representative Matthews for all
her hard work on this bill this
is a very important bill we're
really excited about it my name
is Erica Smith I'm a senior
attorney at the institute for
justice we are a national
nonprofit firm and what we do is
we help make it easier for
people to earn an honest living
and get jobs and start
businesses without having to
worry about unreasonable and
burdensome government
regulations and I apologize for
the sirens in the background I
don't know if you can on here
that.
So I am also an expert on
homemade food loss and I help
advise legislature's on these
laws.
Why to help perform these lost
so let me give you a little bit
of contact on this bill so
selling homemade food is legal
in every state but New Jersey
however New Mexico's law is one
of the most restrictive higher
country and it's probably the
most complicated and there's
three reasons for that the first
reason is that people are not
allowed to sell food out of
their home whether that's having
pickups or deliveries instead
they're only allowed to sell at
farmers markets and roadside
stands that means a home Baker
can sell sourdough bread at the
farmers market but she can't
sell that same exact read to her
neighbor down the street it's a
legal.
The other problem with this law
and when we say that there's
only five other states and
actually have that restrictions
that's very unusual and almost
all the states are actually
considering legislation right
now to fix that so this bill
would help bring New Mexico up
to speed with best practices the
second problem with the law is
that the environment department
currently requires a permit
before you can even sell one
cookie and this is a very
burdensome permit it requires
pages and pages of paperwork and
also can require thousands of
dollars in upgrades to a
person's personal home kitchen
this is very unusual I'm only
aware one other state that does
that and that's Rhode Island we
talked to NMED about this and
they have no problem getting rid
of the the permit requirement.
Finally the third problem is as
Representative Matthew sent on
the law does not apply across
the state right now so it does
it only applies to places that
the environment department has
jurisdiction so it does not
cover Albuquerque as a result
Albuquerque does not allow the
sale of homemade it's not even
just selling cupcakes to your
neighbor they are one of the
only cities in the entire nation
to do.
So fortunately this bill would
fix all those problems and it
would do so in three main ways
it would allow all sales direct
to consumers including out of
the home an online so what most
states are already doing a
second it removes the burden
some permit requirement instead
it just substitutes that with
other safety assurances and
finally it makes sales legal
everywhere including in
Albuquerque the bill also
addresses safety concerns the
bill only applies to shelf
stable foods so we're not
talking about mac and cheese or
cheese burgers were just talking
about things are shelf stable
don't need refrigeration like
big goods jams roasted coffee
beans that you typically see at
the farmers market and anybody
who would be selling under this
bill we need to get a food
handler's certification and also
bye bye other safety
requirements so finally this
bill would go a long way to
making it easier for people to
support themselves their
families their farms we've done
studies on this the USDA have
done studies on these businesses
and it shows that the with the
people who are really benefiting
from these laws are low income
women who really are lacking
other opportunities and they
want to be able to use their
talents in the kitchen to
support themselves and their
families so this bill would let
them do that especially now
during the pandemic people need
to be able to work from home so
thank you and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you and before we go to
the full audience I see that
Representative Ezzell is here
and I I know that sponsor had
asked whether she could attend
and Representative Ezzell I'm
adding you to the panel if you'd
like to make a comment before we
go to the audience.
Madam chair thank you very much
we heard this bill the last week
and it was passed out of the
house and then water committee
unanimously of whenever we're
talking about people needing to
supplement their income this is
an excellent way for them to be
able to do that and they do have
to follow the guidelines that
are set up by the environment
department they do have to have
obtained that food handler
certificate am madam chair and
members of the committee of as
Erika pointed out earlier this
is only for the sale of shelf
stable foods and that that's a
big bank right now until we can
work with in M. D. A. as far as
other items go but this does
allow men and women to be able
to sell stuff not only not only
at farmers market but to their
next door neighbors if they want
to or to be able to have a legal
bank sale to help somebody out
and madam chair members of the
committee
Representative Matthews has done
an excellent job with this bill.
Chairman Representative Cook was
not able to get on today but it
is a bipartisan bill that it
that we are pushing right here
and the now more than ever these
people are our need no way to
get back on their feet and to be
able to sustain the lifestyle
for their family of by doing
things like this discourage food
industry is a big deal and I'd
certainly do hope that the
members will support this bill
madam chair thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
next we'll go to the audience
with our poll
for those in attendance who are
either in support or opposition
of house bill one seventy seven.
A few more seconds.
And okay I think we've I think
we've got it we've got four in
the audience and support and one
in opposition.
We'll go to the audience for
anyone that wishes to make a
comment in support or
opposition.
and first we have Katie's
sacrament.
I thank you madam chair and
committee members for allowing
me to speak and thank you to a
representative Matthews for
spring messed I'm K. act then
and I'm a resident of
Albuquerque when I first looked
at starting my baking business I
was very disappointed discovered
that New Mexico's laws which
allow home produced food didn't
apply to me as an Albuquerque
resident and I reached out to
people in the city council and
the mayor's office and they all
told me that they weren't
interested in making any changes
and so I was blocked from this
opportunity simply because I
didn't choose to live twenty
minutes away from Albuquerque
where I could do it legally in
the state and so that was about
three years ago so it's been
three years that I've missed out
on growing this business and I
have a three year old at home so
renting a commercial kitchen and
launching a full fledged bakery
just is not feasible for me at
this point and that's about bill
would allow me to slowly scale
my business and reduce the risk
of costs for my family I have a
husband who's a teacher and so
I'll just close with one last I
my daughter a few weeks ago said
she wants to be Baker when she
grows up and I know from my own
experience and that of over
thirty Baker is that I know that
that's difficult so I'm hoping
you guys will pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you next we have brandy
with the pop company.
As mentioned ratings brandy and
I just want to thank you madam
chairman Representative Matthews
a longer dress a committee for
allowing us to speak
I'm here to speak on behalf of
myself and all the other
talented bakers in Albuquerque I
started my business last year
when I was laid off in I also
began to look into the laws and
regulations to run alleged home
based business and I myself also
realize that didn't cover me and
business I wanted to run so I
spoke with other food business
owners and health department and
to see what I can do to make
this dream a reality right after
doing research I did find a
place we to date so I can run a
legit business however.
Thank you just shared space so
that is a very limited time to
get my work done it also to own
my own space that would cost me
thousands of dollars so I'm just
asking you guys to help us yes
this bill so that we I can
attend more events around the
city thus contributing to our
community without having to go
into debt to income so thank you
thank you and next we have a
someone from farmers market New
Mexico if you could introduce
yourself.
Yes good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Denise
Miller and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
farmers marketing association
and while we fully support the
intentions of this bill and feel
like the amendments got the bill
much much closer to being where
it needs to be I'm afraid that
we still stand in opposition to
the bill because it just doesn't
seem to quite go far enough in
protecting the public health I
understand I mean we.
Many many of the farmers markets
across the state and the
producers there have expressed
similar you know they would
really like for there to be
and improvement it accessing
sales for for some of their
baked goods but in particular
there's a few things that that
stand out and I see my time is
running out but I'm still stable
foods can also still have
at can also still be
potentially hazardous if they
have garlic in them if there are
no inspections that can really
be a problem so I think there
are ways to improve this bill
and we really hope to work with
the Sanchez after the session
and make this and improve it but
thank you we currently are in
opposition I don't have a touch
screen.
Well hello.
Okay looks like that so all the
Public comment we'll go to the
members of the committee and oh
wait a minute someone just got
their hand up Representative.
Yes I.
It was a panelists so I wasn't
able to vote thank you Gail.
On the list apparently because
of that so at it as as a
panelist and not the public okay
go ahead and make your comment I
appreciate it thank you so much
for hearing it today my.
Orchard in December increase you
know we came down from North
Dakota where I was able to face
my Stardoll and you know make a
pretty good living that way I'm
currently a full time student at
Texas a and I'm online going
after a masters in environmental
law and so this would give me
the ability to make a living and
I've been doing this for my home
kitchen now for substance became
there for over here the second
piece of buying the orchard it's
been in our family my husband's
family for thirty three years my
mother in law's EDH restaurant
eighty eight on Monday and she
would like to stay in her own
house so I I just listen to your
discussion about the long term
care facilities and this was one
way that you could make sure
that she didn't have to go there
if I can stay here and make a
living from my home and my
mother in law's house is
literally right next door on the
orchard
remain in her house for the rest
of her life she is legally blind
and needs someone to driver
places and especially to
doctor's appointments Las Cruces
and Albuquerque except.
So this would give me the
ability to do this and like I
said I was doing this in North
Dakota we also have a house in
Wyoming I was doing it there and
it was great I could post my
products online someone would
say Hey I would like a loaf of
sourdough and I could meet them
at the gas station I could bring
it to their house I practice
social distance distancing I
want to ask you know we were
very careful and so this would
fix that it would make it make
it easier for me to stay here
and then of course when our
culture which is so just prepare
is able to make a profit then
that would be helpful to you I
can go back to making my mother
lost goodies for the community
and they're all just waiting so
thank you for sharing the state
and thank you for letting me
just thank you.
Looks like we also have Tricia
right.
Good morning madam chair
representative Representative
Matthews and committee members
thank you for this opportunity
to speak to you in favor of
house bill one seventy seven my
name is Tricia ray and I am from
San Felipe pueblo for three
years I have been on the path of
trying to legitimize a home
based bakery business and have
not been successful I've
explored different avenues
reached out to various resources
and no one can seem to tell me
how a person who resides on
tribal land can get a flu permit
license to legally sell to the
public.
Like Albuquerque residents
tribal folks don't have a clear
path to obtaining a food
license.
And this is due to jurisdiction
issues this bill is key without
this I have no other path to
explore other than to approve my
family and move off the
reservation I cannot do this as
all my traditions and roots lie
in this community by moving this
bill forward I am one step
closer to getting my second
career up and running before I
retire in three years I'm asking
for your help The New Mexico
baking community needs your help
help us become successful legal
businesses and entrepreneurs
thank you for your time today
thank you Tricia and Pam Roy.
Okay madam chair a committee
members my name is camera a and
I'm here representing the New
Mexico food and agriculture
policy council
we really appreciate our
Representative Matthews
Representative crook ring this
bill forward house bill one
seven seven and yet we don't
have full consensus from our
membership which is very broad
based farmers health
organizations at in a scene this
bill move forward and and we
feel that it's getting close
we're are one consists of major
concern and looking at the
fiscal impact report yep the one
to is that that this might over
it might the it becomes an act
and then it might over arch
rules that are in place now live
in certain that and within the
contacted actually by numerous
people about the bill as well
in concern about
in the if someone is utilizing
their home kitchen even if they
get a food handler's license
that that kitchens meat and not
be expected
slide eight by the Environment
Department appropriate entity
and we have that kind of concern
and also I really appreciated
Representative Austin in the
house ag committee not that it
would be good to make sure that
if someone has a food handler's
license that is posted publicly
that's not in the bill at this
point in time
and we think that this is
absolutely steps in the right
direction we did participate in
in working with Environment
Department to create the
opportunity for people to
utilize their home kitchen this
was back in two thousand eight
in two thousand nine.
and so we're we're very much
interested in really want to see
all these different kinds of
opportunities for people to be
able to sell food items
especially because it's about
local business and creating more
local business would love to
work with the Sanchez on this
bill and with the environment
department beyond the session to
moving to a few more details
that we think are going to be
really important to making this
work well and right.
Thank you would impact.
Thank you thank you so much for
the.
Okay members of the committee
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews and Ezzell it's so good
to see you in our committee.
This is a very interesting bill
and I'll I'll just share a
little bit of background I have
run non profits for the last
thirty years and my my latest is
an after care program where we
have a very very important farm
to table meals no service and we
serve about four hundred
families a week so there is so
many times there's so many times
when the farmers the community
the mothers you to want to ask
questions about value added and
so I've tried to navigate the
New Mexico environmental
Department warranted standards
from public safety food handling
etcetera and while I understand
the reasoning.
We have to keep our people safe
I'm also keenly an advocate for
the notion of entrepreneurial
opportunity for.
The folks that are speaking out
having Pam Roy and on this
call's very interesting she's a
legend and
Thank I guess my point is well
I'm very very much in support of
this idea and the fact that you
have moved this far is
remarkable when I first read the
bill at that off that's like not
going to happen but I think I
applaud if I can be of any help
in the interim should not
succeed I would be a champion at
your side because I think we
have to find a way to create
compliance you know dotting the
landscape with commercial
kitchens is out of reach for a
bunch of reasons but the notion
of people being able to safely
create a product and an
opportunity for income at this
critical time is really
important so I will stop their I
just want to say thank you for
working on this it seems like
it's getting close and thank you
I yield back.
Thank you Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward I have been reading
the FIR and some of the
information can you tell me what
T. C. S. stands for I've been
looking everywhere for that what
that acronym is.
For.
Representative Ferrary madam
chair I can't answer that if you
would like.
Thank you that.
That means the food does not
require time and temperature
control for safety so it doesn't
need to be refrigerated so in
layman's terms shelf stable food
this is the term that the
environment department wanted to
be in the bill and this is the
exact type of foods that are
legally sold in forty eight
other states.
So nanti CS is actually shelf
stable foods exactly they do not
okay got it and
I see might not have been paying
close attention madam chair and
representative the amendments
it says it will not be in
Bernalillo in Albuquerque but
yeah that I think you said that
it's going to make it so that
people in Albuquerque can go
ahead and sell.
Yes Representative and and madam
chair I could clarify that so
what the amendments to is they
allow Albuquerque New Bernalillo
county the option to have a
permit if they would like but
what they cannot do you is and
the sale of these.
So it leaves the allows them to
regulate these foods that they
choose to do so but they cannot
completely ban them.
I see okay that's great that's
all I wanted to make sure that I
understood correctly so thank
you very much thank you madam
chair that's all.
And on that point
Representative Matthews while we
we do have the amendment and
while we may not have had a
twenty four hours having just
been explained what that is do
you want to add that here or do
you want to hold off that's up
to you I'm madam chair madam
chair
if if you are willing to go
ahead and consider it that's
fine I think we were going to
make a couple just very minor
wording tweaks of beyond that
because of the the act defines
That's the term they use
homemade food and recover places
where we wanted to we just use
food we wanted to be sure and
and put in there that it was
homemade food but we can do that
on the floor if we still think
that's important but yes if if
that is fine to consider the
amendment if if everybody's
comfortable with that okay let's
let us take care of this and
I'll move the amendment for
discussion purposes and
less let's say I'm hearing from
let's let's make sure what
you're what amendment you're
talking about because our
analysts said that's not the
amendment that we have so if
you'll give us a two oh two
number.
madam chair if you give me just
a second and I don't see it in
the share drive so we may not be
able to do this this morning
but.
Okay the manager I'd like I I
think there's some confusion I
do have to to to number it's two
two oh five two nine point two
really all this does is a.
Correct the title to reflect
that there is a
a penalty for a violation which
was left in that which is in the
bill but which which was
inadvertently left out of the
title okay I.
Okay and I think I think the.
When when Erica referred to the
amendment she's referring to the
substitute bill at which was
approved by the.
So that's already done yeah
that's already done it's okay
and so that that provision
regarding Albuquerque is already
in there find correct right
Erica yes.
Okay so the amendment that we
have now it's just correcting
the title search and present
which is why I it would be easy
to handle it on the floor.
Okay.
I would recommend that the
sponsor consider amendment today
on the title a very
straightforward but in the late
hour that we're in the session
my recommendation would be take
advantage of that when offered
thank you madam chair.
Yeah is there any objection to
that amendment just fixing the
title.
Seeing none are you have an
amended you have an amendment to
that fixes the title and then
you can if you heard on the
floor can deal with anything
else
okay so we got that taken care
of next I have Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman Madam
chairman of I'm gonna be short
to the point this morning of.
I'm not sure we ever of
consider legislation that is is
perfect in every way but clearly
this is a huge step forward I
see this is a rural and urban
friendly a piece of legislation
as American choices save this
proves why in the world I know
that because I'm an agricultural
economics major chambers food of
America spends less of its
disposable income on food of any
developed country in the world
is we try and recover from this
pandemic slow down.
I think encouraging cottage
industry is tantamount to our
ultimate success.
So when I hear concepts of
removing burdensome permit
requirements it's music to my
ears I want to do everything we
can to encourage these
entrepreneurs in this up
potential cottage industry in
the state that forty seven to
per capita income so madam
chairman I hope we will give
this bill due consideration and
send it forward even at this
late hour that were in on a
house bill moving over to the
Senate because I think that this
is truly a bill that is needed
to of not only encourage New
Mexico's economy but also to put
food on the table in literally
food on the table for not only
those who will enjoy these
homemade food products in their
homes put food on the table for
those young.
For new orders new entrepreneurs
perhaps old and the encourage
them to go forward with their
their their business concepts
I'm selling homemade food to New
Mexicans thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative of lord.
Thank you madam chair assist.
So some quick commentary in this
I was thinking about come some
of the best tamales ever had my
life for by out of the trunk of
a car stickers Lee I have bought
so much homemade food in New
Mexico and it it's amazing I
just I love it and I I want to
see that is a continual cultural
thing in our state what the
things that makes our state
great
When I had we had our office
open was running for office we
had people coming by to sell
things all the time and it was
all great it was wonderful and
brownies and all kinds of things
especially a lot of New Mexican
food so I'm very happy to
support this bill and and thank
you we need to keep this as part
of our culture in New Mexico
thank you ma'am.
Thank you Representative Lord
the very best tamales I've ever
had I've by by from a friend
every Christmas and.
Me yes you get thank you.
Representative trusses.
Thank you madam chair I'm I'm
glad that I'm not the only
person that has trouble acronyms
that is a whole new thing when
you're when you're brand new to
this everything's an acronym so
thank you madam chair and and
Representative Ferrary for doing
that I mean we filled with
somebody else that as I want to
live yeah I think it is have
have it that down a lot better
than I do but real quick I just
wanted to say I'm gonna support
this I think it's wonderful you
know these are these are people
that are needing to take care of
their family by by making a
little money on the side and I
think we should make it easier
for them I'm a big advocate of
of painful side down cake and
there are other things that are
sold out there will you go to
certain places very happy to
hear this is good legislation
this is you know I I feel really
good when I hear stuff like this
so I really appreciate you
bringing this up for madam chair
up Representative Matthews on
and so it makes me feel good
I'll be able to buy some stuff
at a big sale at a at a county
fair at
whatever you know church deal
whatever it is and so we
appreciate your legislation god
bless you.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair adjust
quickly I don't really have any
questions but.
People of already stated Madam
chair representative thanks for
bringing this legislation there
is a huge difference in the
environmental health department
that's in Albuquerque Bernalillo
compared their health to one
standard the rest of the state
is held to another and and I'm
not sure that it's exactly the
environmental health department
but they are you know we're held
to a really high standard in
rural New Mexico which we have
here to happily to keep people
safe but at that in that same
voice I will tell you I have
local people in my community
that sell their wares on the
side of the road and jerky and
honey and Khumbu chat and
everything else so this is this
is economic development of at
its finest thank you madam
chair.
Thank you
Thank you and thank you
Representative Matthews for
reviving it and that's
and always happened so the times
your worst enemy.
at this point but thank you for
bringing this forward it very
interesting Representative to
hear how out of step we are with
the rest of the country
on this so thank you Erica for
for being here and thank you
Representative Ezzell for
joining us this morning.
What's the pleasure of the
committee just if I had to
guess.
Yes.
With the second okay.
This week we have a competition
we always take credit for this
is there any objection to the do
pass.
Seeing none hearing none and I
believe we are all present so
Representative you have an
eleven to zero do pass on your
revived house bill one seventy
seven I'm as amended.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you and
I I just I'm so impressed that
the committee was eleven oh on
three consecutive also that's
amazing.
Thank you and Committee members
of that's our agenda for today I
have been watching what's coming
out of the Senate and I think
that as of today I think we will
be referred a bill that we will
here on Friday and we could have
more referrals by tomorrow but
we will meet on Friday I'm
assuming I will I will confirm
that but just watching what came
out of the Senate there's
there's at least one bill that I
assume will come to us so what's
not officially been assigned to
us yet I think you should
anticipate we will meet
on Friday and I do have a
question for committee members.
If we only have one bill maybe
two bills would you prefer to
make a little bit later or get
it over with first thing in the
morning.
Later.
Find.
I was gonna say six in the
morning but I know.
This.
You won't get me that early.
Okay madam chair as far as the
Republicans go we will do
whatever you want us to do
that's fine I do have other
committees those starting at
eleven
eleven thirty so appropriations
so just if we keep that in mind
but we also could possibly if
they were really simple bills I
would be open to a consent okay
thank you Representative that's
helpful let's see what bills we
get I I hate to schedule late
and then we get a good bill like
the continuing care and we
really want to talk about it and
then we run late so we'll see
how much we have and
representative Armstrong thank
you I'll be in touch of it looks
like as a bill we could just
consent.
Okay thank you that's it for
today thank you thank you madam
chair committee last year a
state by good meeting.
