The Lawrence.
Well.
Can bash.
Stephanie Representative
Stephanie lord.
Your muted ma'am.
Here Representative Roger
Montoya here thank you.
Representative Lewis but also.
Is.
Yes Representative Liz Thomson.
I'm here.
Rep Joanne J. Ferrary.
Present.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
I'm here and and lower as it
maintenance skills.
Yes Representative Matthews.
Here thank thank you sorry.
Okay.
Okay and I see we've got
Representative Cook your you are
first up with House Bill to
sixty nine.
And Representative do you have
experts that you want to join
you thank you madam chair I have
Tom east.
Okay I have Randall Marshall.
State announce so madam chair
members of the committee I'm not
seeing
I don't see Randy at.
What's important I also have
Terry Stewart.
Have we have
we have to have your experts we
have Thomas east and Terry.
Terry Stewart and I'll watch for
Randy.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
members H. B. two sixty nine
would allow for the release of
information to providers health
institutions or healthcare
purchasers for treatment payment
or health care operations
activities as long as each
release of information conforms
to federal health insurance
portability and accountability
act.
Asians and Long contained in
forty two US code section ninety
PED dash to which is titled
confidentiality of records
madam chair members as I
mentioned just now I have to
experts Tom east Terry Stewart
Randall Marshall is also was
going to be an extremist here he
is he's an attorney who knows
more about this as well and
madam chair not sure how you'd
like to do it I'd like to hand
it off to the experts as soon as
possible but we also have an
amendment okay
do you want to I'll move the
amendment for discussion just so
that you can are we all know
what we're talking about is it
going to make a difference to
the audience do you think or is
it technical that is technical
madam chair but you might as
well go ahead and and tell us
what it is so that we're all
discussing the same thing okay
madam chair members the
amendment addresses to technical
issues raised by the analyst in
that FIR imminent one revises
the US code designation dealing
with confidentiality of records
to section two ninety dash DDT
Tax to.
Two eight definition of health
care operations activities taken
from the hit the definition of
that term okay.
All right
At just so that way out so I've
been known to forget as we go
whole hog so is there any
questions on the amendment or.
Any objection to that amendment.
This is Representative Ferrary
I noticed that OSI recommended
the paragraph twenty four dash
fourteen B. dash six G. I be
deleted because of the
redundancy is that what this
second
Section that you mentioned
Representative Cook.
I'm.
Madam chair I believe it is I
wonder for a Mr Easter Mr
Stewart could shed more light on
that well let's let's tell you
that if we've got discussion
about about this let's just go
ahead and present the whole bill
and then that may make it more
St's more sense as we talk about
and we can do the amendment when
we get to questions and answers
just don't let me forget
The amendment but go ahead and
whichever one of your experts
would like to begin St Ste.
Yes good morning Representative
Cook and madam chair Armstrong
my name is Thomas east and CEO
for synchronous the New Mexico
state designated health
information exchange I'm here
today and support of hospital to
sixty nine.
The S. S. health information
exchange integrates medical
records and makes them available
when and where they are needed
for patient care throughout New
Mexico.
Synchronous includes billions of
health records on over two
million New Mexicans an
aggregated view of a patient's
health history from a variety of
different organizations can be
extremely powerful.
This S. H. I. E. has played a
central role in the comment
pandemic collecting the majority
of COVID results and providing
them to department of health in
the state and to providers in
the community.
The health information exchange
provides a number of value added
services that perhaps the best
way to illustrate the power of
synchronises with the real world
example for you.
A few years ago a young pregnant
woman in her third trimester was
in a bad car accident and
transported to a trauma center
for care they quickly determined
that the synchronous H. I. E.
had her medical record including
prenatal care records from
another health system this
information was invaluable and
quickly providing the
appropriate care that resulted
in a good outcome for both the
mother and the baby.
The physician felt strongly that
the information made a big
difference in their outcomes.
Despite examples like this
organizations have decided to
not use the synchronous HIV
because the traditional the
additional consent requirements
above and beyond what is
required by HIPAA we're too big
an impact on their work flow
staff and costs.
Can you imagine how many
examples like this mother and
baby have occurred in the last
five years in these other
organizations.
How many lives could have been
impacted if the New Mexico laws
were aligned with the federal
HIPAA requirements.
I ask you to please approve
house bill up to sixty nine and
make the powerful synchronous in
operability tools available to
more providers to significantly
improve the quality and safety
of patient care for New Mexicans
I close thank you madam chair.
Thank you and before we go on
Representative Cook there's a
Randall McDonald in the
attendees with his handout
that's the right one it I was
quick to go to Randy Marshall as
the.
We'll get him in.
Okay so you've got your you've
got your third expert isn't out
to.
Why go to Terry Stewart next
let's do that Mr.
Good morning thank you madam
chair committee members and
Representative Cook my name is
Terry Stewart and I'm the chief
administrative officer of
synchronous as Dr each told the
we are the state of New Mexicos
designated health information
exchange and I am yes are you
today about the importance of
the health information exchange
need to allow the appropriate
and timely sharing of health
information in ask for your
support on this legislation.
I worked in healthcare for over
thirty years in New Mexico
primarily in the clinical
laboratory oncology research in
specialty practice
administration I understand the
impact need for data to flow to
health care providers to improve
the health of New Mexicans with
the opportunity to help grow the
state's H. I. E. as a result of
thirty one million dollars in
funding from the federal
government we million dollar
match from the state funds I
jumped at the opportunity as I
saw.
Portents that H. I. E. E. can
bring to healthcare providers
and healthcare facilities the
funding the legislators
committed to build the state of
the art H. I. E. has allowed
synchronous to work
collaboratively with common
health IT vendors as well as the
New Mexico Human Services
Department in the New Mexico
department of health this public
private partnership in New
Mexico will be a model for other
states.
Over the past year as I've
learned more details about how
physicians healthcare providers
and their staff access the
records in H. I. E. I have come
to understand some of the
barriers of the H. I. E. or why
this great tool has not been
implemented by a wider group of
health care providers the
current state and federal
funding have remove the
financial barriers to health
care facilities however some
barriers to access the data
will.
We have built a field of dreams
with the funds that have been
appropriated however more
stringent privacy protections in
the state and the federal health
insurance portability and
accountability act or HIPAA
privacy rules we have left the
fence around the field in no one
can play ball.
The difference in the state and
federal privacy protections have
had unintended consequence on
the adoption of the H. I. E. by
health care providers the
barrier of consent has made
easier in some cases for
specialty providers to pick up
the phone to call a primary care
providers office ology lab
radiology and ask them to fax
those results to them instead of
signing into the portal.
In this is very important for
specialist you need all of that
diagnostic information to be
able to have a very valuable
first appointment in find a
treatment plan for patients.
The solution is this proposed
amendment without a third
situation in which provisions of
disclosure of an individual's
electronic health information
would be allowed specifically if
the disclosure is made to a
provider healthcare institution
or healthcare group purchasing
for HIPAA treatment payment
operations by aligning the state
privacy rules with the federal
privacy rules having one set of
privacy criteria will make it
easier and remove any additional
administrative burden for health
care providers.
Why is this revision needed to
improve.
Individual health care through
the sharing of information.
To reduce health care costs by
eliminating duplicative
procedures physicians can go to
our portal and see that a C. T.
scan have been done and perhaps
not order another one it will
ensure disclosure only permitted
by HIPAA.
It will still maintain state law
protections against
inappropriate disclosures in we
will be able to use existing
enforcement and compliance under
hippa rules which are more
robust the state lost.
To allow the successful
implementation of the health
information exchange with this
funding that we have received
from the federal government or
the state with the goal for us
to on board eighty percent of
health care providers including
Indian Health Service tribal
health clinics federally
qualified health clinics prisons
long term care facilities by
September thirtieth twenty
twenty one.
To leverage this the success of
this program for additional
funding in matching funds from
the federal government in during
this comment pandemic the
ability to share health care and
demographic information was
highlighted.
In this current deficit in the
state's ability to share health
information we have been able to
use the health information
exchange and provide access to
the Department of Health contact
tracers to the infusion suite at
one of the hospitals to treat
patients from other health care
systems.
In the emergency medical corps.
I thank you for your time your
servicing respectfully ask the
committee to vote yes to this
this ammendment are you thank
you.
Thank you
Randall McDonald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Randall with Donald been a
practicing attorney in New
Mexico for forty years for the
last sixteen years or so I've
been working extensively in the
areas of electronic medical
records and health information
exchange
Representative synchronous for
about the last sixteen years as
the developer and the operator
the state designated health
information exchange.
In two thousand eight in two
thousand nine I helped draft and
present to the legislature to
try to get medical records act
codified as chapter twenty four
article fourteen B. of the New
Mexico statutes and I'm here
today in support of hospital to
sixty nine which will improve
the delivery of health care and
reduce costs for the exchange of
electronic health records in New
Mexico without jeopardizing the
privacy of individuals medical
record.
As you've heard before current
law allows I'm sorry current law
allows patient medical records
to be maintained electric
electronic form and disclosed to
the electronic health
information exchange without
requirement of getting a patient
consent.
The synchronous health
information exchange currently
holds about two point two five
million medical individual
medical records Representative
medical records for New Mexico
individuals
and under the electronic medical
records act if an individual has
the ability to exclude access to
his or her records in the in the
exchange but only a hundred
forty New Mexicans have opted to
have their records not be
available on the exchange that
shows a rod
brought support for the exchange
of electronic medical records
the next.
But as mentioned earlier under
certain circumstances the health
information exchange can't we
disclose the information in a
patient's medical record without
first obtaining the medical care
the written consent of the of
the patient.
This this is even required
needed for treatment or payment
purposes.
And restricts the exchange of
medical records for the
treatment of New Mexico systems.
Privacy and security of medical
records is subject to strong
protections under the HIPAA
regulations and hip Act and
under the federal law.
Under hip of patient consent is
not required for the release a
disposable electronic
information for electronic
medical information for the
treatment of the patient for the
payment of insurers regard
regarding treatment of that
payment and for health care
operations of the of the
provider in the health insurance
company.
House Bill to sixty nine would
apply that same hip a framework
to the release of electronic
medical records from some from
synchronous and with help your.
Polity and timely health
information or health care to
New Mexicans.
Especially now it is critical
that citizens be able to obtain
accurate and timely medical
records medical treatment and
the enactment of hospital to
sixty nine would help improve
the delivery of health care to
New Mexicans.
I'm here in support of hospital
to sixty nine and I'm happy to
address any questions you might
have.
Thank you.
Thank you and of Representative
I totally forgot and apologized
for not welcoming you back to
the health and Human Services
Committee for new members
Representative Cook was a member
for how long four years two
years two years.
Two long years to shorten.
Act this thank you very much
appreciated and I enjoy the
committee but they're just a
very complicated issues in there
and I didn't know that I was
much more contributors so it's
nice to be here today.
I appreciate that well thanks
for thanks for being here and
bringing this
let's go to are you ready for us
to go to the audience I am chair
okay.
let's start with a poll we
usually do a call in here to
show who in the audience might
be here in support or opposition
this bill house bill two sixty
nine.
Looks like we got it looks like
ten people are here on this bill
nine in support and one in
opposition.
And we will go first
To opposition if you are in
opposition and wish to speak.
And give COVID with you'll raise
your hand.
Unseen no hands right so we'll
go to those who wish to speak in
support.
The rest to speak in support
raise your hand our Stetson
Berg.
Go ahead.
You have to unmute.
Stetson Berg on mute yourself
and then you can.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on
Stetson Berg interim director at
the UNM center for telehealth
vice chair of New Mexicos
telehealth alliance president of
the New Mexico health care
executives and friends were for
New Mexico health information
management systems society I'm
here to speak on behalf of
UNM's telehealth center and we
have plenty of reasons to use
the H. ID for a patient that
comes to you and then it's again
it's more complicated because
the patient with signed consent
that the patient is our patient
and can do that in a way that we
do consul our physician
assistants line or through
access neurology neurosurgery
and cardiology we need to gain
consent from the rural
facilities in order to do that
and this bill would make it much
easier to deliver consents are
to deliver consoles around the
state and I would encourage you
for patient quality metrics
billing sending documents back
and forth and registration and
everything to vote yes on this
bill.
Thank you.
Our next we have Mario Cruz.
Thank you madam chairwoman.
My name is Dr Mario Cruz I'm
associate chief medical
information officer for the
university of New Mexico health
system I am Matt the medical
director of health information
management for the university of
New Mexico health system I am
also a clinical professor of
psychiatry at the university of
New Mexico health system and on
the advisory board for
synchronous.
I am not going to belabor you
with just reiterating what many
of my other colleagues have said
about the importance of
expanding this virtual hospital
which I think is one of the
concept that the state
legislators trying to conceive
of in terms of ensuring care
coordination and seamless
transitions of care for
individuals with the addition of
information moving just as
seamlessly as the person from
hospital to hospital to clinic
back to hospital.
In the case of psychiatry this
is of utmost importance
the psychiatric community within
the state of New Mexico is not
well coordinated.
Individuals move from one
organization to another and it
is very difficult to get
information back and forth
between each of these
organizations to provide care to
the most in need that being the
seriously mentally ill these
clauses major roadblocks
particularly for the psychiatric
emergency room at the university
New Mexico health system the
only psychiatric emergency room
in the state I'm it is quite
cumbersome to get information
from other organizations to
understand how a person
ultimately gets to that
psychiatric emergency room in
there for at limits our
perspective in there for our
ability to make adequate
decisions for care and treatment
for that person.
And there will be the other
thing about this is that there
are difficulties in
understanding the medications
that these patients on which
sometimes can be quite complex
and to not have that information
available at the fingertips of a
provider really puts that
patient safety at risk as well
as putting the provider at risk
as well.
So I encourage you to strongly
consider adding this third
section it will provide it will
incur ensure that psychiatric
here with in the state of New
Mexico is markedly improved as
well as the care from other
medical per specialties as well
thank you.
Thank you.
We will go to
the committee now but let's I
and I moved to the amendment for
discussion
And if I understood correctly it
makes the it corrects the
citation to to federal law and
as a definition consistent with
federal law is that correct.
That's correct okay any
discussion or further questions
on the amendment Representative
Ferrary did you.
Yes except certain.
In our analysis it mentions
about OSI recommending that a
certain paragraph.
be deleted because it makes the
paragraph redundant potentially
confusing
And I don't think it's included
in the amendment is paragraph
twenty four yes fourteen B. dash
six G..
One I think it is.
So I'm not sure that you know is
important enough to make it to
clarify it.
Sure wonderful miss McConnell
explained that yes madam chair
Representative Ferrary it's our
recommendation that that not be
removed that is a specific
Exemption that tracks the forty
two CFR part.
To roll.
And those are in addition to the
rules so what we would recommend
that that not be.
Taken out of this bill.
Okay if it's a little confusing
they can figure it out it is it
is a little confusing all there
is a little confusing but but
the it it makes sense to leave
it in because even at the
federal level there's two
there's at least two different
provisions that deal with
medical records
and the forty two CFR part to
the deal with.
Behavioral health and driving
and we have the locations
etcetera so it's in there for a
specific purpose and it would be
better not to take it out.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Mr macdonell.
Thank you any other questions on
the amendment.
Sir any objection to the
amendment.
Seeing none hearing none your
bill's up is amended thank you
and questions from the committee
representative Thompson.
You madam chair and now good
morning everyone at I'm just
going to say that I sit on the
board of synchronous and and
while I'm they are really smart
and most of the time I have no
idea what they're talking about
but it madam chair this is such
an important bill you know but
probably members of the
committee don't that I co
chaired a national task force
subcommittee on and.
On this page especially checked
in in the in health care and now
this is really an important bill
for a lot of recent history of
the pregnant woman and and baby
just really bring it bring it
all to all home essentially that
if something happens to us that
we've got medical records spread
all over the place
they may not you know in an
emergency situation that you're
providers may not know what meds
you're on or may not know what
other conditions you have so
this is really really important
bills and I will say that the
That the care that's taken with
private information is extreme
and and they do a really good
job so I'm just encouraging my
fellow committee members to
support this thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Cook for for doing this work.
Thank you Representative thank
you Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair up to the sponsor I have a
quick question that I try to
always ask.
Seeking reassurance relative to
no one objects to care
coordination what what my
specific concern is are you
satisfied that the data will be
private.
I worried that I live in a world
now where third party data at.
Gatherers shall we dated to
somebody else and and I just
would up Preciado Sir your
comment on data security in the
process that we're opening up.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative I put a lot of
trust in the people who respite
care this bill so I think I
would defer that to Mister
Easter agency to order Mr
macdonell.
Madam chair.
Representative Cook
We comply with all of the state
and federal regulations related
to privacy and security of
medical information.
All access is.
Honored and we.
Provide tools for all the health
care organizations to do their
routine audits for to ensure
that there's no abuse of the
system.
And
we that are on a planet for now
that is hi trusts certified
that's each I. T. R. U. S. T.
high trashed certified and that
is the current are for most
health information systems hi
enters a building compliant.
Both in terms of privacy and
security and best practices for
managing privacy and security.
Thank thank you very much for
that answer and
I'm satisfied with the answer
thank you madam chair.
Thank you our next I have
Representative Matthews.
Good morning I'm.
And
madam chair Representative Cook
I'm.
Current.
Let me start this and so we're I
thought for a long time that
having coordinated health care
records is just common sense but
it it when I mentioned it to
people they talk about how in
credibly complex it would be to
do that so what I'm interested
in is just if you could give a
brief.
And simple for a non techy
person like myself.
Explanation of surah how you
make this happen and what.
And and and I am sure it's like
tronic in some form but has how
does how do you pull all those
records together and it can be
very simple.
It better be I won't understand
it so.
I'm sure if I can refer back to
mysteries.
Yes madam chair Representative
Marian I'm sorry I see your last
name that passed.
The have.
I'm essentially what we do is
make a lectern Act connections
to health care organizations to
their electronic health records.
And there are standards of care
and standards for information
exchange that define how these
electronic health records send
information out.
So we connect to the
standardized electronic
connections and the information
flows in and patients are
identified by a collection of
demographic information and so
when Records command there there
are identified and connected to
the same individual.
And then these are made
available to organizations that
have a treatment payment and
operations relationship to the
patient out for access to that
information.
I'm madam chair and thank you
very much for that answer how
are you sure.
How can you be sure that the
records are complete and up to
date.
This is madam chair and.
We at.
We are somewhat at the mercy of
the health care organizations to
share as complete a record as
they can.
We are only as accurate and up
to date has the information is
shared from the electronic
health records so as an example
after encounter the main not
receive their final diagnosis
for days after that encounter we
won't have that diagnosis either
because it's not and put into
the electronic health record
this is it is it flows over to
us
to have part of this big program
we're working with the at Human
Services Department and CMS on
is to dramatically expand the
number of organizations sharing
information so that we close
information gaps and make sure
we have the most up to date
information.
Madam chair and mysteries thank
you for that it should probably
drive east isn't
thank you for that answer is
there something in the
Representative indicates that
there may be.
That they may not be up to date
that you're waiting for results
from something.
Madam chair representative
we are.
We.
On occasion will have things
that saves lab results are
pending being finalized that in
many cases we don't have
anything that says that for
example were missing information
on this operating the New World
of Mexico.
That's why we're trying to do is
much outreach in on boarding is
here as.
Terry mentioned we are at even
in Maine for eighty percent of
all the health care
organizations sharing nation
just an ideal leader future work
at two hundred percent.
Madam chair Dr is thank you and
is there.
It I assume that these health
care about on it organizations
voluntarily joined is there do
they pay to be part of this do
you pay them to be part of this.
How does how is it structured.
Your Representative Matthews
Hi at.
In order to assist this
information without charging
you.
In the our programs that we have
this your maps agency helps to
cover that technical cost
connect their electronic health
record to us.
To access the agent needs we do
ask certain types of
organizations to.
Join us and become a member in
pay as a fee to participate in
the H. R..
So organizations can contribute
information right if they want
to have access they need to be a
subscriber and then we'll.
Out for accidents.
As an example today we're
charging providers around fifty
dollars a year for actions how.
It is less healthy today.
and madam chair Dr H. thank you
and and just one other question
so is there some federal funding
or something that's helping to.
Put this together on on on a
national basis services only on
a state basis.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews
we are taking advantage hi tech
funding that's the funding we're
talking about with this big
program it's ten percent state
match and ninety percent federal
match.
In the future
this is going to move into Iraq
different funding streams that
helps on that Medicaid have
information systems and that and
that.
Will be shared at twenty five
percent state and seventy five
percent.
Madam chair at doctors thank you
for those answers and that
completes my questions thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you we've been working on
the the state H. I. a for a
number of years and gradually
over time getting more more
participation thank and just as
a real world example
Representative and committee
members.
my daughter who you all know is
very medically complex.
And it is really hard.
To go someplace that isn't in
the system.
Yeah because she's got years and
years and of information and
issues going on and
I remember a point of about a
year ago a little over a year
ago we were in Santa Fe and she
had an issue come up and we
her provider her primary care
provider if I should go to the
ER at Saint Vincent.
And I instead drove her home and
went to UNM because I out of
fear that it if you don't have
access to the records it's kind
of like us asking them to to go
behind in trying to trigger or
starting all over and
duplication of tests and
you know and so forth so it's
it's.
Being able to share easily share
and access information is.
Is really important and when I
take her out of state.
They're not part of the system
and it's again really difficult
to share information and I look
forward to the day while we have
to be careful that information
is much more accessible and
shareable for our complex
patients that have to move
around to different specialties
and in a small state like New
Mexico may have to go out of
state.
To get care and so this is
something I think really
important and what.
As I see the issue on this is
federal law under hip is is
pretty onerous in and of itself
and our law made it worse
because we made it more onerous
and so this is kind of putting
it in line with federal law so
that it's not any any different
than what is
federal law to I have that
correct Representative and
experts.
Mr east.
Chair yes you have it correct
and I was going to add to it we
now participate with the
national eHealth exchange rates
all in fact people can access
this and routinely do from
places outside of New Mexico so
the future is out there and
we're working towards making
sure if you travel your records
will be able to follow you.
Right I'm I'm gonna have to talk
to Sloan Kettering.
I can't get them to participate
because his mailing having scans
mailed it's is really that's a
hard thing to have done.
Representative Armstrong.
I'd like to move it to pass
madam chair on the house bill
two sixty nine as amended and
all second.
It's
getting.
Is there any objection to a do
pass.
Saying non hearing none
Representative Representative
Cook you have a do pass on house
bill two sixty nine as amended.
Thank you madam chair and
members.
An analyst and so everyone
present so I think that's
attendance zero.
I think we've got ten people
here.
Thank you thank you come back
again.
Thank you thanks.
next we have Representative
Thomson your bill to seventy two
health easy enrollment program
and do you have experts I do I
have Gabby Rivera from
Health Action New Mexico.
Qatar okay so madam chair this
is a great bill I'm it's pretty
straightforward essentially what
it does is that when you file
your taxes you can check the box
that says
I'm interested in in our I don't
have health insurance and what
happens madam chair is that that
that your tax information will
be shared with the appropriate
estate agency to get our to get
you enrolled in a free or low
cost health insurance plan if
you qualify so if you are you
said in your taxes and and they
say oh what they qualify for
Medicaid that they you will be
assisted to apply for Medicaid
or Medicare over on the exchange
essentially they'll figure out
what what your finances qualify
you for and then help you get
signed up with the appropriate
insurer and and I think everyone
on this committee knows that the
more people we have covered with
health insurance the lower all
of our rates are going to be and
the healthier we're going to be
and it's going to save us money
and that's pretty much it in a
nut shell and I will let Gabby
are filling in the blanks are
put in anything else she thinks.
Go ahead Gabby.
Thank you representative
Thompson madam chair committee
members thank you for having me
my name is Gabby Rivera and
policy analyst with Health
Action Mexico very excited that
this legislation is being
considered today many of you may
be aware of this figure already
but the urban institute
estimates that two hundred
fourteen thousand New Mexicans
are currently without health
insurance and the pandemic has
made it clear that having this
many members of our community
without access to health care
affects and should concern all
of us but the figure that really
inspired this bill is that of
that two hundred fourteen
thousand uninsured over fifty
percent already qualify for
Medicaid or premium assistance
on the exchange that means
affordable coverage is already
available to as many as a
hundred thirteen thousand
Mexicans who may not know that
they qualify or have other
barriers preventing them from
accessing it and that's why
we're proposing easy enrollment
so as representative Thompson
began to say easy enrollment
will leverage the income tax
system to reach the uninsured
and connect them with coverage
when a New Mexican bills out the
income tax form there will be a
section where they can indicate
which members of the household
or uninsured any and then there
will be a separate check box
allowing the release of relevant
information from the filers
taxes for anyone Marcus
uninsured the taxation revenue
department will send that data
to the New Mexico health
insurance exchange who will
assess if filer or anyone in the
household qualifies for health
coverage or premium assistance
connect them with potential
connect the potential enrollees
with brokers and agents if
appropriate and open a special
enrollment period to sign up and
they will also refer people out
to HSD for Medicaid or to the
New Mexico medical insurance
pool when appropriate.
I wasn't legislation also
provides exchange with the
option if it's feasible with the
new state based exchange or in
the future to allow automatic
enrollment is no cost coverage
via the tax form in this case
TRD would add a separate consent
box to the income tax form
filers for quest that they be
automatically or before enrolled
into no cost coverage if they
are found all I for.
We model this legislation after
program in Maryland by the same
name and I want to briefly
mention really promising results
they had in twenty twenty what
was their first year of
implementation over fifty six
thousand people check the box
allowing their information to be
shared three thousand five
hundred sixty people enrolled
into coverage and that number
may have been affected by the
pandemic and a very exciting
data point from Maryland is that
forty percent of those for
enrolled for young people which
we know improves the risk pool
and drive down costs for
everyone and we do expect a
similar rate of interest here or
higher rate of interest and
hopefully by twenty twenty three
when this is implemented the
pandemic won't be a factor at
all we'll see the full effect of
the program.
I also want to share the
incredible support we've
experience for the legislation
and the outstanding interagency
collaboration that produced at
this legislation is endorsed by
the New Mexico Public Health
Association association
southwest women's Law Center The
New Mexico conference of
churches senior citizens law
office and we grant acting
administrative and I believe
you'll hear from some of these
groups speaking and support
today we've also had a generally
positive feedback from insurance
carriers and we've made some
changes in the committee so that
takes their comments into
account.
And and also over the past year
the office of the superintendent
of insurance the Human Services
Department TRD and exchange have
collaborated to build this
program in a way that works
responsibly for everyone and
that will have the intended
effect.
And so we Health Action consider
quality health insurance the
cornerstone of a couple health
care and we recognize that
progress has been made to make
coverage more affordable and
accessible but that work isn't
finished of people are still
unable to take advantage of the
coverage and discounts that
qualify for we believe easy
enrollment is nonpartisan common
sense solution to a persistent
problem and madam chair
committee members we hope you
with a do pass recommendation on
this bill thank you.
Where we will stand for
questions.
Thank you and the.
Do you have on a cell is that
right.
I just yet.
You know you think what the five
bill limit I could keep things
straight but that's not how it's
happening so yes madam chair we
do have a stab I'm as as Gabby
said to take it to to take into
account some of the concerns
that were.
That were I stated.
And of course I don't have any
yeah we do have that in front of
you with that.
With the.
Two oh two number I can find it
I just.
Thanks to all to number that we
have and share file is two two
zero zero eight eight point two.
Sounds good thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair yes
that was I was going to
different of the number that
stand share file because
according to my email that is
the one that I have received
okay.
Okay
Representative or or Gabby can
you I'll move it for discussion
because assuming this may matter
to people in the audience one of
your walk us through
thank you walk can you walk them
through what the changes are
please thank you madam chair.
Yeah absolutely one second let
me put my notes on it.
Okay so the biggest change is
that the information flow will
no longer be TRD to HSD and HSD
referring out it'll now be here
TRD refer out sending all the
tax data to the exchange and the
exchange will handle handle the
initial eligibility assessment
refer out as appropriate we also
she used arms control.
We also change the effective
date two twenty twenty three to
allow the exchange more time to.
Implement this along with their
state based exchange.
We change some language should
be appropriate to what's
consistent with HSD TRD and
exchange language like special
enrollment period
And Committee members I'm sorry
I'm trying to pull up my notes
and they're not coming out.
Okay I'm sorry committee members
this isn't working but okay here
we go so because we change the
information flow from TRD to HSD
we change the section the tax
code be modified two seven one
eight point eight two seven one
eight point ten.
We change the term taxable
income to modified adjusted
gross income we can terms
according to concerns brought up
in FY are that taxpayer is the
correct term for anyone who
files you know if they're not
subject to an actual payment.
We clarified that neither the
interest it neither agency nor
the exchange will be assessed
assessing Medicare eligibility.
we require the exchange to
update its plans of operations
according to the mandates of the
bill.
And we added that provision that
allows the exchange to add an
automatic enrollment options the
program if it's feasible okay.
All right thank you
we'll go to if you're ready to
stand for questions
Representative will go to the
audience and then we'll come
back and.
discussed the the I'm a sob and.
And bill yes we are madam chair
okay so will first do a poll to
see who in the audience is would
like to register support or
opposition.
Your house bill two seventy two.
Okay looks like we got it we got
twenty people and support and
zero in opposition.
So going to the attendees if you
wish to speak on this
On two seventy two if you could
raise your hand.
And we'll go first to Derrick
Lynn.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
directly in line Representative
New Mexico voices for children
we like to think spots for bring
this important bill forward and
voice our strong support
expanding health insurance
coverage is one of the most
effective public health
interventions for providing
people with access to preventive
care that can reduce rates of
chronic disease and dramatically
improve health outcomes there
are currently numerous barrister
had barriers to health insurance
and this bill will help address
those barriers by creating a
fast lane for enrollment this
strategy has the potential to
reach roughly fifty seven
thousand New Mexicans who are
eligible for Medicaid but on
rules not only will this bill
increase health insurance
coverage and save New Mexican
lives will also make the state's
health insurance administration
process more efficient and
equitable we strongly urge you
to support this bill thank you.
Thank you I'm next on necklace
Cordoba.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Nicolas
court of a staff attorney at the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty we support each B. two
seven two.
Every New Mexicans should be
able to access quality
affordable healthcare coverage
and we New Mexico are fortunate
to live in a state that chose to
expand Medicaid to adults under
the ACA.
Unfortunately fifty seven
thousand New Mexicans who are
eligible for Medicaid remain
uninsured in fifty six thousand
uninsured Mexicans are eligible
for federal premium assistance.
Senator also stand the way of
these Mexicans from getting
quality affordable coverage for
which they're eligible
significantly many of these
uninsured vaccines are simply
unaware that they call.
No.
Over the past four years the
federal government has cut
outreach efforts to educate
people about their eligibility
for these programs by ninety
percent.
And so eight three two seven two
is a cost effective way for the
state to take on an active role
in helping these Mexicans get
the coverage they deserve and
need in with that in mind we
urge it to pass thank you thank
you next call in bio.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is called in by
with the office of the
superintendent of insurance as I
stand in support of the
committee substitute for house
bill two seventy two one of the
agency's top goals is to get as
many people cover with quality
health coverage as possible we
know the health insurance
provides financial security for
New Mexico's families gives
people access to care and
ensures that our health care
providers are reimbursed for
their services this committee
substitute establishes that easy
enrollment program that allows
people to inform the exchange if
they are uninsured and would
like to see if they qualify for
coverage we really see this as
an innovative way to reach
people who are uninsured and may
not know that they qualify for
that coverage and has been
mentioned by several other folks
standing in support many of the
people who are uninsured qualify
for some type of program that
can help them four coverage and
we just need to reach them with
that information and so for all
these reasons we stand and
transport of house bill two
seventy two thank you.
Thank you on next Jeffery
Bustamante.
Good morning committee members
Jeffery Bustamante with New
Mexico health insurance exchange
the exchange supports this
legislation for a lot of the
reasons for mentioned including
the committee so this bill is
medically helpful as we discuss
new opportunity to entertain
novel ideas and support greater
communication.
Ultimately get New Mexicans get
connected to coverage this also
would greatly expand our ability
to connect with those remaining
uninsured and reach them and and
some of those new ways and get
them covered so thank you.
Thank you next our Jackie
Cooper.
Thank you madam chair committee
members thank you Representative
Thomson for bringing this bill
forward and the clarifications
with the amendment access to
health care for all New Mexicans
is essential to a healthy
workforce that helps protect us
all and contributes to health
care welfare for families
European New Mexico students and
support as B. two seventy two
thank you.
Next we have a Kerry brindar.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Kerry
robin grounder registered
lobbyists with the New Mexico
Medical Society we strongly
support this bill and really
like the way that it set up by
having taxpayers have the
ability to check a box on their
tax return that says I am not
insured currently and am
interested in information about
how to enroll in insurance we
believe that we're empowering
our patients in New Mexico to
take control over their own
medical insurance decisions by
breaking down barriers that they
may not know currently exists we
appreciate the fact that the
committee said make sure that
all of that content is
affirmative consent and we
appreciate that this bill is a
way to utilize infrastructure
with in state government to
ensure that our patients have
access to quality healthcare for
those reasons we hope the
committee passed the bill and
that we can have another
discussion about it in the tax
committee not thank you so much
madam chair.
Thank you next we have Tracy
McDonald.
Good morning my name is Tracy
McDaniel madam chair members of
the committee my name is Tracy
McDaniel I'm here on behalf of
southwest women's Law Center but
we were to promote policies that
improve the lives of women and
girls and that includes access
to comprehensive healthcare we
promote enrollment in health
insurance and Medicaid and
understand the challenges and
barriers faced by many New
Mexicans trying to enroll
currently this innovative
approach to identifying and
enrolling the uninsured would
improve access to care for those
who need it so we ask you to
vote in support of HB to seventy
two thank you.
Thank you next we have Hannah
Burling.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Hannah Burling I'm speaking for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico we stand in strong
support of this bill including
the committee so.
The league believes every New
Mexico residents should have a
comprehensive level of health
care thank you.
Thank you our next we are Morrow
show that's.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee more the show's
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield in Mexico we
stand in support of house bill
two seventy two and appreciate
the Sanchez effort to establish
a program to reach into the
individuals who do not have
health insurance by giving them
the option to report their
insurance status and request
enrollment assistance from HSD
and health insurance exchange we
have some questions about how
the information would be secure
the exchanges between TRD HSD.
X. but those concerns appear to
have been addressed to the
committee said thank you.
Thank you R. Scott Scanlon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
morning my name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for common
chair a LLC its manufacturing
company new to New Mexico but
very interested in health
insurance coverage for their
employees and for all New
Mexicans and we stand in strong
support of this legislation we
think it's a it's a very good
idea of when a taxpayer checks
the box that both the private
and the public
side can be can be addressed
that those that those taxpayers
can
can be directed to to one of the
other whether it's public or
private so we think this is a
great idea and we stand in full
support thank you madam chair
thank you our next Judy mess
all.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Judy Messel speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
conference of churches we
strongly support H. B. two
seventy two and caring for our
neighbors as we do and our food
pantries and soup kitchens and
times when we offer shelter to
on house families we know how
important health care is and the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in
America has issued social
statements about the need for
people to have equitable access
to all basic health care
services and to address barriers
that keep people from health
care we thank our house bill two
seventy two addresses these
concerns to a great extent for
New Mexicans and we want to say
we're very grateful to all of
you for your service and we urge
you to support house bill two
seventy two.
Thank you thank you.
Next we have Ellen times.
Thank you madam chair Ellen
pines representing the
disability coalition as previous
speakers and the sponsor and her
experts have pointed out health
insurance is important to both
individual health and public
health and although New Mexico
has made significant progress in
reducing its uninsured rates we
still have a lot of New Mexicans
who don't have health insurance
and many of them actually
qualify for affordable coverage
but don't even realize that
house bill seven excuse me two
seventy two will help to respond
to that situation and familiar
are we supported and urged the
committee to do so as well thank
you.
Thank you.
Our next a Boko Estrada.
Either Madam chair of members of
the committee this is a cause
Estrada on the coverage
innovation officer with the New
Mexico Human Services Department
we want to thank thank
representative Thompson for
bringing forward this bill our
official stance is neutral as
there will be additional cost to
the Medicaid budget from
additional enrollment however we
did leave the demographics study
with the urban institute looking
at New Mexico's uninsured
population and as a department
we want to ensure that every New
Mexican has access to care and
we think house bill two seventy
two is a good bill to help ease
access to that coverage thank
you.
Thank you I'm next we have Karen
Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee care walk with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
for all the reasons that all of
the other people have stated we
stand and strong support we we
need to get all New Mexico's
health and all of New Mexicans
health insurance and this is an
excellent way to do it thank you
very much.
Thank you and last we have Linda
Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
nurse practitioner council and
the American college of nurse
midwives The New Mexico chapter
and we stop we stand in strong
support of this bill because
providers are acutely aware of
the people that are out there
who don't have access to
insurance and don't have access
to good good health care so we
stand and support.
Thank you.
Next we will go to the committee
and
First of all
is there any objection.
Or questions on the.
Substitute.
And I believe I moved it for
discussion.
Any objections to adopting the
substitute.
Hearing none seeing on your bill
has been substituted now on the
on the substitute Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Townsend for
bringing this forward I have I
know I don't have the substitute
front of me so I apologize if it
if the substitute bill fixed
what I'm getting ready to ask
but.
In the.
FY R. Y. C. the FIR is huge
first of all and I know you and
I I was involved in your
discussion about how sometimes
that by ours are a little bit.
Possibly not as good as they
should be I know no disrespect
who wrote it at all but one of
the questions on the technical
issues under the TRD technical
issues Madam chair
representative Thompson did your
substitute fix all of the TRD
technical issues Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative that
there still will need to be some
changes to the farm if people
are filing on paper and they
will need to have a place to to
check
and then there will have to be
at a box checked especially when
you if you file online so there
will be
some associated costs with
getting that up to date to you
know getting it built in
so we we actually we couldn't
fix their propped their issues
because their issues are what
the bill is about so if we fix
their issues and didn't have a
place to check that there would
be no reason to do the bill so
I'm I I hear where they're
coming from and and I am far
from an IT expert but my guess
is that they are making changes
to their former frequently based
on changes of tax rates or
whatever may be happening so and
we do all kinds of tax things in
this body every year and and
that does require some.
Some tweaking at the very least
out of the form so so I'm we did
not fix that because as I said
fixing it would kill the bill
essentially.
On that point there was you did
delay the implementation till
twenty three correct to give
more time correct correct
January one twenty twenty twenty
three yes thank you madam chair
out for pointing that out I did
see that that was an issue but
one of their other issues on the
at the very bottom is TRD notes
the bill specifies a taxpayer as
an individual subject to the tax
imposed by the income tax New
Mexico and and it seems like
this would include individuals
that are not residents of New
Mexico.
Madam chair and representative
Armstrong I'm if that is the
case then then when that
information is sent to the
exchange they would be able to
determine whether they qualify
our New Mexico Medicaid or our
health exchange if they were
from out of state they just
wouldn't qualify.
Okay so that will be Adam chair
representative that would be
handled at the time of filling
it out the other thing is
I noticed in the back of the
bill how it states all of these
agencies.
R. Madam chair representative
that are going to have to.
Do.
Upon request.
Our fill out information is that
correct why do you need that
Madam chair representative.
Gabby handle that one madam
chair.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong if I'm understanding
correctly then referring to the
that portion of the tax code
it's getting amended and of it
should be at the already
existing this that are eligible
to receive information so we're
just modifying into at the
exchange.
And that is different and the
sub.
Okay.
Now this is kind of a confusing
bill for me madam chair I I
understand that that what you're
wanting to do and then again the
FY are is pretty significant.
A hundred fifty one million
dollars.
Over a three year period.
And so that's concerning to me
to do does that this tier do
happen in their budget Madam
chair representative to
implement this and all the other
entities that are involved.
Madam chair and representative.
Those costs are not necessarily
a result of this bill.
Everyone is trying to get people
who are qualified enroll in
Medicaid so that's essentially
what this is you're being I'm
and and we we this committee all
know is that we do get a federal
match for Medicaid and which is
increased right now so if you
actually look at.
At at most of the cost madam
chair it is coming from the
increased enrollment in Medicare
Medicaid Medicaid I'm sorry I
usually don't make that mistake
so I'm.
Give me did you have something
else to add.
Madam chair representative all
at is that we did have
conversations with HSD about the
figure they were using for
estimated enrollment and how was
much higher than what we
anticipated based on the
Maryland are all meant and
understood that they were going
to make a new FY are with
different control numbers based
on the committee so.
And and when did they get the
committee some because FY are
that I madam chair and
miss Rivera is a dated two
twenty four.
Madam chair representative they
probably got thank you.
The stop after that so that has
not been included and madam
chair and representative I know
I know I don't need to tell you
but the FIR process has been
Slow and painful more more than
normal this year so we're I
believe they're struggling just
to keep up with our the first
FIR sport well although
hopefully that we with bills
that have been introduced so in
terms of them going back to
revive something it it may it
may not have happened yet Madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative that you know I
agree on the FY are like I
stated earlier but it's killed a
lot of money bills this year
are.
Especially when it gets to tax
so here you.
I'm here I'm in the boat with
you and there's a giant hole
with the bond about we're
sticking.
So okay that's all I have right
now thank you madam chair thank
you Representative
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
Thompson thank you so much for
bringing this important bill
forward I want to make a comment
on Representative.
Anderson's Armstrong's
thoughtful comments the coming
through of the F. I. R. some of
my questions were answered in
that exchange and thank you for
always being so diligent and
thoughtful in your questioning.
A bill that has easy enrollment
program in its title and you've
done your homework I applaud.
By a Representative so many poor
northern New Mexicans in poverty
and this.
Easy access or simplifying
demystifying even of how one can
be rules is so needed so I will
stop there and I look forward to
voting for this legislation are
very much aware.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and yeah
that the FIR is daunting you
look at very complex again I'm
not saying anything bad I'd like
complexity but there's a lot to
it there's a lot of big numbers
in there there's a lot of
information I'm so one of the
question did have to think
Representative Martian did ask
most of the question I had and
it was a key issue by HSD and
says that
To required modifications that
Aspin integrated eligibility
system to exchange relevant data
with TRD determine eligibility
for Medicaid he's real time
eligibility problem local law
there's a whole bunch processes
and steps that has to go to it's
a the estimate cost for this
work is one million five hundred
eighty two thousand five hundred
seventy dollars do we have the
money to do that.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord this took that out the
information will now not go to
HSD it will go to that to that
exchange
thank you I saw that and again
it's when I'm working from home
is a little more challenging my
assistance most amazing sisters
she prints everything out for me
and hands it to me so I have to
go in search through things
there
I just have another question.
Anything in the past I was just
curious about this one we don't
do anything in the past to try
to reach out to these fifty
seven thousand people and if we
don't we are because you know
when you run for office you can
get data and you know data and
there's data this person does is
eight years old that have we
done anything to try to ever
reach out to the house to get
the mineral Madam chair
representative large you have no
idea
never been health they are
they're than commercial there
have been public there have
there this this is just or.
One B. exempt yeah I mean
everything setting home pencils
with kids from school that
anything that anybody has ever
thought of that was reasonable I
believe has been I and there's
just a small subset
unfortunately it's not it's not
really that small of people who
for one reason or another I'm
and it's really hard when you're
doing a TV commercial or a
health fair to get into deep
detail about what they might
qualify for they don't know
their adjusted gross income all
of those things so this is an
attempt to.
You continue with that but make
it easier for the people who
just so far have not either have
not heard of that which you know
which may be or who think that
they just can't afford it.
Thank you to my question yeah
the employers there's quite a
bit information again I like
information but then when you
have a sub we and we and we'll
ask questions we don't have the
FIR for this managers that
correct then that yeah that's
correct the FIR is not been
updated yet thank you I
appreciate that thank you will
have.
Thank you I'll just say a couple
of things and and I appreciate
Representative Lord yes there's
been lots of different ideas
about outreach and it's really
hard to really drill down and
target the exact individuals
that you need to reach I am
doing a public kind of outreach
campaign this is the most
specified down to the individual
idea that has ever come forward
and it combines then of
screening for either Medicaid or
purchasing on the exchange with
our with or without subsidies
depending on your income and it
I so I think it's a great idea
and the health insurance
exchange.
it is geared up and has always
have to screen for Medicaid
before they can go ahead and
roll someone and health
insurance I have to check for
Medicaid first so it that's a
process that they know and are
comfortable with and.
the reason to one additional
reason to delay until.
Twenty three is the health
insurance exchange is in the
process of of having total
control of their enrollment
right now the use of federal
enrollment and they don't have
complete control and that that
new control is also integrated a
more closely integrated with the
Human Services department of
Medicaid for information
exchange so
I think this is
this is a great idea and I I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it forward and the advocates for
coming up with this idea art or
finding this idea going on in
other states and bringing it
bringing the idea here
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair I move for due past
due past.
As amended or within the
committee sorry do not pass for
house bill two seventy two and a
due past due past for the
committee separately to do some
yeah.
Thank you and I heard
Representative bash as a second
and go ahead and call the roll.
Sanderson.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative made by the
house.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no within text formation please.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Your muted ma'am.
Yes thank you.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative Louise cut off.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Vice chair Joanne Ferrari.
Yes.
And
madam chair Deborah Armstrong
going to go back to
Representative Anderson.
Anderson is yes Anderson GS and
and so does the chair.
Thank you.
So I have a total of ten and one
excuse nine nine four and one
against that's right nine one
and Representative Lord you
wanted to explain your vote yes
thank you it's not that I'm
against the bill is just I I'm
I'm a details junkie and I
really wanted to see the FIR so
hopefully by the time it gets to
the floor all have seen that
been able to read that in detail
Marshall thank you that was why
my renewable thank you thank you
thank you Representative next we
have Representative bash and
house bill one fifty one.
Yes.
Is that you have experts yes
madam chair I have Connie V.
hill and Jason marks.
Thank.
And Jason marks.
We're gonna.
Go ahead and.
House bill one fifty one creates
the bridges across New Mexico
collaborative process.
The bridges across New Mexico
initiative brings together
stakeholders in the region in
regional meetings to develop
regional and statewide plans to
address local behavioral health
and substance abuse needs.
Stakeholders who will be part of
the process.
regarding local government our
local government officials
judicial branch representatives
legislative representatives
business law enforcement and
other community members.
The regional meetings and
development of the plans will be
professionally facilitated by a
behavioral health consultant
engaged by HSD through the
normal competitive procurement
process.
Following the stakeholder
meetings the consultant will
prepare a draft plan and submit
it to the behavioral health
purchasing collaborative and the
B. H. these comments will be
addressed in the final plan
which will be presented to
legislative interim committees
the budget for the project is
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars which covers the cost of
meetings facilitation and
preparation of the plans.
With that madam chair I would
like to turn it over to Connie
Vigil.
Go ahead.
before we started I just did do
you have committees of or
amendment I can't remember you
have a committee sob is that
right.
I think the committee so okay so
yes
and I assume the audience will
care about what that is so it's
in your presentation and your
experts could also explain
The the major changes and for
the some.
Go ahead.
Can everyone hear me yes go
ahead.
Thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee an audience my name is
Connie B. hello I'm a native New
Mexican I received my education
and medical research technology
in teaching our New Mexico tech
you and that's going to.
Do you see in other labs and I
served as a director for habitat
housing I'm president and
founder of greater Albuquerque
business alliance member of the
Bernalillo county behavioral
health prevention and drafter of
H. B. one five one title bridges
across New Mexico for over
thirty years my family home and
business has been located
between the two largest homeless
service agencies in the state
this bill bill is accumulation
of seven years of discussions
with business owners providers
city government legislators law
enforcement cabinet secretaries
judges judges and the governor
herself residents and businesses
across our state experience the
devastation from untreated
mental illness substance abuse
and homelessness every day this
bill is especially for those who
have sadly lost the battle and
for future generations to
prevent their potential problems
thank you Representative bash
the legislators from both
parties to help improve the bill
an advisor Jason marks Regis is
a bill that will fund and create
the first ever statewide
comprehensive action plan by
coalition to address the crisis
the king the issues previously
described New Mexico is dying
we're number one in this nation
and alcohol related to us as per
the CDC August twenty twenty
report we're also number one in
the fastest growing state of
homelessness.
Endemic has made the crisis much
worse with over eighty one
thousand US test from overdoses
in one month alone twenty twenty
is the highest number of
overdoses ever recorded in the
United States in a single year
cities and counties across New
Mexico at ONS in taxes to their
citizens to burden to solve the
crisis but but that'll only
increases New Mexico does have a
behavioral health collaborative
this bill is going not going to
duplicate their efforts to
behavioral health collaborative
was created seventeen years ago
by statute and it consists of
fifteen agencies resources and
the governor's office to improve
mental health and substance
abuse services in New Mexico we
look forward to working with Dr
phone and Dr Tracy Collins and
staff to complement their work
the coalition will not consist
of state agencies but ask
Representative.
Now she stated it will widen its
scope to include independent
statewide groups that will
assist the collaborative in
achieving its goals with diverse
representation from public and
private organizations local
government including law
enforcement behavioral health
judges businesses advocates
housing coalition's medical
experts counselors and tribal
representatives from every
community we will strive to
accomplish the board goals to
build residential treatment
facilities across the state for
individuals of all ages
struggling with mental health
and addiction number two to
build long term transitional
housing for those coming out of
incarceration treatment or other
circumstances that create
homelessness for families and
individuals three to improve
drug prevention programs in
schools elementary through high
school and to review the
effectiveness of DWI laws and
enforcement.
And we hope to combine all
possible sources of funding
including private local state
and tribal with a focus on
federal funding making sure that
all communities have grant
writing experts to work with our
congressional leadership to
bring more federal dollars back
home to New Mexico.
Through facilitated meetings to
groups will create a
comprehensive action plan
specific to the needs of their
own community the local focus
will actually help straight
strengthen our existing be able
help programs and actually
enhanced efforts of the
behavioral health collaborative.
We will work closely with the
collaborative as they used to
two hundred fifty thousand
dollar budget ask to hire a
behavioral health policy expert
to facilitate twelve statewide
regional meetings and six
locations one possible such
agencies policy research
associates will compile input
for meetings comprehensive plan
action plans for every region
and then the collaborative will
review and approve their action
plans for future implementation
and legislation.
This bill is not us to fund a
substance abuse treatment
feasibility study task force for
another committee but the
creation of a statewide action
plan.
By using a coalition approach
New Mexico legislators will
assure the best possible outcome
by using all interested
stakeholders resources and
individuals from across the
state to solve our behavioral
health crisis immediate action
is required before this crisis
over text our communities as it
has done in so many locations
across our nation.
APD chief Harold Indiana stated
in last Monday's journal article
about a homeless man who was
shot by a PD this isn't just in
Albuquerque issue I urge
legislators from across the
state to respond to this crisis
and work together to make the
services a top priority.
Thank you again Representative
bash for your leadership in
bringing this critical
legislation forward and also I
would like to thank members of
this community and you know who
you are you have talked to us
and have already expressed their
willingness to participate in
the coalition meetings.
In their regions once they begin
thank you very much madam
chairman and members of the
committee.
Chair I don't know if Jason
marks wants to make any comments
or if he just wants to answer
questions all.
Here Representative acts if you
like I can briefly discuss the
changes in the committee
substitute verses the introduced
bill.
That would be great go ahead.
Thank you.
Just to summarize.
Once the first change is in
response to.
Some suggestions from
legislators.
The sponsored change the number
of regions from three to six so
was originally northern central
and southern New Mexico and now
it's six regions and for
convenience the region's follow
the department of transportation
regions and those are
Given in the bill next on if
people look at page
Three the committee substitute
lines five through eight there
were a few changes based on
PED's response to the.
PED's analysis and so
As it concerns the develop
having a collaborative
we're consortium look at that
drug abuse prevention
it was inserted in consultation
with public education department
and evidence based and agent
developmentally appropriate that
was revised and then the.
Next change which I would say is
the largest change.
What is to clarify how.
The bridges across New Mexico
collaborative process interacts
with the existing behavioral
health purchasing.
Collaborative and that
If you would focus on.
Page four of the bill.
The process has been clarified
to state that a draft.
Plan will come out of the
collaborative process which
again
involves regional stakeholders
coming together with
professional facilitation they
will come up with the transplant
the professional facilitator
will then present that to the
existing behavioral health
purchasing collaborative.
Comments from the collaborative.
will be addressed in the final
plan.
And it will be presented to
alleged of the legislative
interim committee and that is
the.
That begins at the bottom of
page three line twenty three
thank continues through on line
for.
The line nineteen on page four
and it describes the process of
creating a traffic plan getting
weak responses from the
behavioral health collaborative
incorporating those reflecting
those in a final plan and having
a presented to a legislative
interim committee the last
change was to change the budget
the original budget was at fifty
thousand dollars that you're in
the introduce bell and that was
not enough for.
For what the original bill had.
In terms of three maybe three
regions in meetings it should
have been somewhere around
seventy five thousand dollars
but when the number of meetings
was increased to go from three
to six regions and then
additional process steps were
put in place to have a draft
plan at the the new budget
estimate is two hundred fifty
thousand dollars and my
understanding is that.
The budget estimates are based
on talking to an entity that
does this kind of service I want
to be clear that this bill was
not drafted to be wired for any
particular vendor
vendors were contacted to find
out how much it should be
budgeted to hold.
A number of stakeholder meetings
and prepare reports and do
presentations but this will go
through an RFP process under
the.
Under the secretaries direction
and resolved with a competitive
procurement of the most
qualified lowest cost Senator to
facilitate these meetings to
prepare the plan.
I believe we're ready to stand
for questions madam chair okay
thank you we'll go first to our
poll take a poll of those in the
audience and support or
opposition.
You are here in support or
opposition of house bill one
fifty one.
Okay looks like we've got it
we've got a ten year and support
Levin and support and one in
opposition.
And we will go now to the
audience those who wish to speak
in opposition if you raise your
hand.
If anyone wants to speak in
opposition
price Pittenger.
He was there.
Those who wish to speak in
support.
We will start with Nicole
Go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Nicole on
average and I'm here on behalf
of the beauty way foundation in
Albuquerque interfaith.
House bill one fifty one begins
to address health issues by
examining the scope and need for
behavioral health housing and
substance abuse issues in our
state I've been personally asked
by our federal Senator together
data on indigenous communities
in need but it's near impossible
especially when our goals not
behavior health our system
substance abuse issues at I. our
place of worship understand we
cannot just keep throwing money
at problems without having done
the research this bill does the
research reports to you the
state legislature then allocates
money where the findings lay
formulating a broad range of
education services and making
treatment accessible to people
across the state especially in
rural areas right now we're
services can be virtually
nonexistent New Mexico deserves
an elected body that wants to
preemptively make our state a
better place on behalf of the
beauty way foundation
Albuquerque interfaith
respectfully ask you to vote yes
on house bill one fifty one
thank you.
Thank you our next we have
of lily.
go ahead will you can introduce
yourself.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
New Mexico First.
And I'm during our town hall
about body mind and spirit we
had conversations all across New
Mexico and then brought people
together for a statewide
conversation this.
House bill one fifty one is very
much in alignment with the
wisdom and the experiences of
New Mexicans who are really
looking for greater coordination
planning an impact on positive
outcomes when it comes to
behavioral health thank you so
much and we strongly encourage a
do pass.
Thank you next we have Loretta
Naranjo.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
okay also Debbie long the boss
so we'll be talking after me my
name is the red in that envelope
is I'm here representing
Albuquerque interfaith in Santa
Barbara Martinez town
neighborhood association we are
asking that you support and vote
yes for H. B. one fifty one
bridges across New Mexico
behavioral consortium the state
city and county need to have a
comprehensive plan to actually
create solutions this bill
begins to deal with the long
term issue we have that drug
addicts who have behavioral
health and mental health
problems these people bring
anxiety and disruption to their
families and create havoc in the
community with crying
destruction of property in our
neighborhoods a vision that
deals with these people to have
an opportunity to be successful
we'll definitely have a positive
impact for a healthy community
and a strong commute at any
strong economy thank you for
this opportunity to speak.
Good morning my name is Debbie
want to foster and I would like
to thank you for allowing me to
speak on behalf of the business
sector I am here to support and
help to gain your support for H.
B. one fifty one bridges across
New Mexico behavioral health.
This bill provides and allows
the state to build a foundation
from the bottom up along which
has become a long time issue of
homelessness the objections
which.
Contribute to the end result of
homelessness have been
approached from the top to the
bottom versus the bottom to the
top with no support your little
support from city and county
representatives.
The end result of homelessness
has resulted in the negative
impact of revenue to businesses
by deterring customers it has
also.
Become a social injustice an
injustice financially to the
revenue and values of our
properties is created violence
threats and fears in our
communities.
Due to the mental health issues
that come with this most
recently my cells and in
neighboring business were
threatened at gunpoint by a
homeless man this is happened on
many occasions there been many
evenings in which I've had to
circle my property for.
Hours at a time in order just to
try to enter my property without
fear or harmless being hard.
I feel that this bill would
provide you bring new people
from all sectors to come to the
table to build a comprehensive
plan for this I request your
support for H. B. one fifty one
thank you.
Thank you in our next we have
Tony.
Go ahead Tony.
Know yourself.
Tony need to on mute yourself.
There you go go ahead.
Tony we're still not able to
hear you.
It shows you unmuted but.
We can't hear you will come back
to you in case you can fix the
microphone on your and we'll go
to Steve Ross.
Representative.
Steve Ross.
Yourself and go ahead.
Can you hear me now yes yes
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Steve
Ross I serve as the executive
director of the supportive
housing coalition of New Mexico
in our organization our mission
is to end homelessness by
providing permanent supportive
housing to individuals and
families experiencing homeless.
With behavioral health a mental
issues the reason why I wanted
to speak in favor of this bill
is that in our work and we up
provide housing to some well
over a thousand individuals and
families.
We have where we only managed
seven low income housing
properties and we also have a
contract with the city and hud
with vouchers that help homeless
individuals and families get
housing we work with about a
hundred and fifty.
Landlords throughout the city.
What we find is that even though
we're happy to tout that on a
two year average we have about a
ninety percent.
The success rate of keeping
people stably housed I really
wanted to speak to the ten
percent that fall through in
these are primarily where we see
these individuals these families
where the type of housing we're
providing is not working.
What we really need in this
state in our communities is the
ability to help those
individuals that really need
more support they need more
ongoing assistance in their
living to really get them to a
point where they then then can
become stably housed in really
return to their part in living
and being part of the community
so again this is where I I see
the problem organizations like
us really are challenged with
being able to find that
particular type of having
support again giving the type of
situations that we see with
those experiencing homelessness.
So once again I would urge the
committee to support this bill
thank you very much for your
time and for allowing me to
speak.
Thank you.
And.
Let's see we've Townsend Steve
Steve Ross was that are you that
we just talked to.
Yes it was madam chair okay
thank you I'm we were going to
go back to someone that we were
having trouble with I just want
to make sure it wasn't you.
and we have Bryce Penk Jr.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you hear me
yes go ahead great thank you I
wanted to legislative the the
spirit of this bill is something
that the behavioral health
collaborative supports in terms
of identifying needs and gaps
for kids and adults suffering
and substance use and mental
illness however I stand
collectively with the behavioral
health collaborative members in
opposition of this bill this
morning because it creates and
establishes a separate at
coalition for some of the very
initiatives that the behavioral
health collaborative is working
on including rebuilding
community based services for
children and families reforming
our current sixteen residential
treatment centers total of about
six hundred and seventy budget
through building bridges
initiative which will create a
trauma informed environment as
well as increased family
involvement in the use of
evidence based practices and
that is well under way and also
with regards to planning on
substance use disorder and
working with the HSD in the
department of health on the
adult twelve residential
treatment benefit which isn't
bad news coverage under the
Medicaid waiver and there are
each currently and it's designed
to bring more state to scale for
availability and regions thank
you for your time can you tell
us who you're representing yes
ma'am my name is Bryce Denton Jr
and CEO The behavioral health
collaborative and I'm
representing that behavioral
health collaborative thank you
thank you breast thank you.
Okay.
And Tony will try you again.
Tony you yourself.
Turning your muted on your end.
Hi this is Tony can you hear me
yeah there you go all right go
ahead.
Hello yes go ahead okay I'm
sorry hi my name is Tony
Sancious I've been operating a
parking management company
downtown for over a decade and
I've seen the homeless crisis
exacerbated self year by year by
year so much so that we had to
put live.
Banners for all parking
customers
Tourists that call in just out
of here if they can even part to
grab lunch because they're being
can have in harassed we've had
individuals almost come into our
office building and can our
office workers in fear we are
completely locked up we had a
lock up.
Our office building with the
bars cameras magnetic locks.
And it's just out of control.
And I urge you to support house
bill one fifty one thank you
thank you Tony.
Okay it will go back to the
panel
And.
First we need to take care of
the substitute and if I haven't
already I'll move it for
discussion and questions on the
substitute or or will of the
committee on adoption of the
substitute.
Move adoption.
Hi I'm also helps okay we've got
a promotion the second to adopt
the substitute is there any
objection to adopting the
substitute.
Seeing none hearing none your
house bill one fifty one has
been substituted.
and we will go on did you want
to say anything else
Representative before we start
with the committee questions.
Madam chair do you have a
question real quick please yeah.
Website and I don't see the
substitute I just see the
introduced on there yes yes so
it won't be on the it will be on
the website on the legislative
website until it comes out of
the committee it is on the share
file thank you okay.
Representative are you ready to
go to questions yes please okay
first I have
Representative Anderson.
Let's see there I am yes ma'am
line up.
Madam chair representative
I'm very interested in your
bills I have basically two
questions I think short answer
answers will surprise spread one
is I'm concerned about.
Hearing some.
Concern within the behavioral
health.
Community about what could be a
this is.
Something that is is is not
unifying as intended to do
duplication
And in those sorts of comments
so
as we as we try to go forward in
in in find gaps and fill gaps my
first question Representative B.
as.
Health committee will be meeting
to interims during the life of
this and it it really struck me
now what is that this our
collaborative is going to be
doing I think it's called the
collaborative
but what is it that your bill is
going to be doing that the
interim health committee would
not be doing.
Question.
The.
We're James R. Connie like to
answer that question.
Madam chair.
Engines to March here.
The intention of this is not to
be.
Okay or divisive it's to be
complementary and the.
The bridges across New Mexico
consortium brings is regional
brings together stakeholders
each regional area each region.
To formulate a plan and it will
be presented to the
collaborative existing and today
you'll get both perspectives and
it is to.
Bring additional energy and
involve local communities that
are not currently involved in
the process today.
Thank you for that response
Madam chair representative.
I I I I accept that
complementary idea although I
heard some concern this morning
raised that it needed to muster
a greater of of complementary
the support of in this
behavioral health area then my
next question madam chairman my
final question is simply
yes the adopted committee
substitute still refer to north
central and South and said
Geographic diversity question.
Madam chair.
Hello.
Go ahead I'm sorry I'm to answer
Representative helps question on
the amendment out of state since
that does not are have northern
central and southern anymore it
was due to conversations with US
senators across the state to
come up with the idea that it
would be more equitable to have
six regions that as Jason
mentioned for the transportation
meeting districts so that we can
reach further to the more rural
areas of New Mexico and make it
fair for everyone to be able to
attend meetings secondarily I
got an email from Dr Tracy
Collins we have communicated
with her and she's just as of
last night would love to meet
with us I believe if that maybe
on this prices are comments on
maybe because our sponsor and
our our our coalition basically
has not yet been able to discuss
this with the collaborative but
I can assure you that I got an
email from Dr Chris Tracy
Collins and she wants to set up
a meeting with us as soon as
possible so there really is no
there's a misunderstanding in
that respect we would we would
love to entertain those future
meetings with our collaborative
to to us on how we can actually
complement and work in the local
areas to get down to the
grassroots of these issues thank
you.
Thank you very much for that
response to and I'm pleased also
to hear that we abandon the
north central and South so I
won't dwell on that
I did want to simply say that
yes I think that when we deal
with behavioral health issues
from the state perspective.
It's it is important to include
D. O. H. and CYFD among others
but I hear that often reported
in the Appropriations Committee
that these three agencies have
forged a working relationship
that did not previously exist
and and I believe that can be
easily included in house bill
one fifty one Madam chair
representative it was only I
think six year down maybe ten
years ago of that we dismantled
the of the behavioral health
rural behavioral health systems
in New Mexico by executive
action and that of course.
Ultimately ended up being at
Danny and Daddy and in the sense
that one twelve agencies work on
a dead end in the sense of the
claims that the state may I
turned out to be false claims so
I think H. B. one fifty one
represents the next step forward
in rebuilding rural behavioral
health care.
Which means that in New Mexico
we cannot have a behavioral
health care system it is
complete unless the rural
component is there as well madam
chair thank you very much that
concludes my question.
Thank you I'm next we have
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair so what
looking through the substitute
and what I need is help walking
me through this bill I want to
make sure that I understand
what's about to happen here.
So it looks Human Services for
Michelle they're gonna have a
bridges across New Mexico
behavioral health consortium and
I'm looking and it's going to
include bipartisan
representation house
representatives in the Senate
Representative for the New
Mexico congressional delegation
representatives from the
administrative office of the
courts including local judges
representatives from the
business sector which all
include planners and architects
Representative some
organizations primary functions
are behavioral health long term
transitional housing center
sense want to make sure that so
these are the people that are
going to come together in this
organization that's the first
part of the question into how
those people be kept.
Madam chairman.
Other usual meetings where
someone is actually appointed to
the Canadian side.
I'm we will.
Use a professional groups such
as policy research associates
that facilitates meetings such
as these all across the United
States they are professionals at
reaching out to people in the
communities and we will make it
known to everyone that people
are welcome we want community
input as far as anyone that's
interested in being involved and
everyone that's interested in
being involved we feel that far
too many times and so far as
city government is concerned in
our behavioral health
addressing these issues so many
people are left out yesterday
R. surest nanny consols called
me to tell me that their offices
school on board because they
sometimes are also left out so
I'm just saying that we want to
include a broad scope of our
previous enforcement judges
everyone in our communities so
that we can take a true
wholistic approach let everyone
chime in because we can have
some really good new ideas
coming forward and I believe
this is a new approach Santa Fe
it is it's not the same
Committee type of meetings but
we will welcome any and all
people and respectful
communication to come up with
our regional solutions thank you
for the question on miss work.
Thank you madam chair yeah I
would suggest maybe that and
this so is what I'm
understanding is optional you're
going to try and find people to
community who want to speak for
the community you may I see that
you did add organizations
primary functions of behavior
health I guess second kind of
include law enforcement but the
main one include law enforcement
or state and at the discretion
of this board to add any other
members that they feel would be
welcome to this okay so I want
to make sure madam chair that
the goals are.
Let's see so we're gonna develop
a drug prevention program
through twelfth grade include
volunteer sure you'd be in a
speaker series are we're going
to review potential construction
of residential treatment
facilities access current use an
adult residential treatment
facilities review transitional
housing develop a drug
prevention programs we knew
current DIY plants and discuss
availability regional substance
for counseling programs today
cover that is that basically the
goals of this bill chair.
Answer that yes.
Thank you I just want to make
sure thank you Madam chair
representative I just want to
make sure that I have the goals
down on that.
Okay so.
I understand on the purpose I
understand of who's being
included and how they're being
included
how does this.
Not to conflict with so you're
saying it's complimentary that
it doesn't conflict with nine
dash seven six point four the
inter agency behavioral health.
Purchasing cooperative okay so
look at all these people already
that are ready working together
so you're not necessarily
working with them you're going
to be a collaborative on the
outside that is going to offer
suggestions is that correct.
Representative Lord yes I'm
referring to the exact statute
we actually our goal was to
complement in every way I'm in
nine dash seven dash six point
four inter agency behavioral
health purchasing collaborative.
A section B. five states they
will contractor operation of one
or more behavioral health
entities to ensure availability
of services throughout the state
this is a complementary and in
that respect and also in the
original bill which
came across as an act.
One statement says that
providers and state agency
representatives together may not
constitute more than forty nine
percent of the council
membership so our interpretation
of that fact on H. B. two seven
one way back when it was first
initiated seventeen years ago
was that part of the goal was
also not again just agencies and
nonprofits you could go to Santa
Fe I'm I have been involved in
the collaborative meetings
myself for the past year I've
attended them in Santa Fe my
personal experience was there
was no representation from
cities counties business people
it was mostly just the state
agencies and the collaborative
itself and also any nonprofits
you could manage to use step
away to Santa Fe so again I know
I have been attending I have we
have all been in conference with
multiple of those individuals
and including
on the governor's appointed
health person.
So we are in communication I'm
sorry that we haven't yet been
able to actually sit down and
talk that we again look forward
and as I got the email from Dr
Tracy Kearns our new
Representative.
And our cabinet secretary of
health we look forward to
working with forest your doctor
phone and all of the above
because we truly believe that
we'll get down to the nitty
gritty and the communities and
be able to help support them in
ways that they have not yet been
able to reach out thank you for
the question Representative for
thank you thank friends and that
on that point as I just want to
Representative and and Connie
can you also elaborate on how
it's not duplicative of the
local collaboratives that are
part of the US system of the
behavioral health collaborative
thank you.
Yes madam chair in regard to I'm
not exactly sure I mean.
If you look in the communities
there's I I'm not aware in the
City of Albuquerque I'm part of
that behavioral health.
Program in the county through
the prevention committee
I have spoken and there's many
many non profits associations X.
cetera involved in this issue
and we will hope to bring them
all in our again we're
approaching it from a different
viewpoint on madam chair we're
we're looking at.
Of what's going on in our
communities and we cannot ignore
the fact that today our
policemen's hands are tied due
to previous and issues with
killings exciter of our homeless
individuals and we're really in
a crisis in our treatment
centers to be providing services
for the behavioral health court
judges so you know and not
expect yes we may be overlapping
somewhat but we are working we
are planning to work directly
with behavioral health court
judges such as Mr Snyder she's
on the advisory court of the the
administrative office of the
courts Supreme Court drug court
advisory board and she is
totally on board with reaching
out and help in to support the
drug court judges behavioral our
health court judges who across
the state have it indicated to
me personally that they have a
huge lack of these facilities so
in support of the drug court
judges and success of those
programs which through
initiatives from former Supreme
Court Nakamura was directly
involved in work directly in
line with what their premise is
is to provide this the long term
residential treatment for these
individuals not to put them in
jail but to give them a long
term deep seated help that they
need to succeed.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair for that
that good question to to.
Going further than what I just
asked so madam chair so it would
I guess my understanding I now
understand what the goals are I
understand to group of people
coming together and from there
they will probably ask for bills
to be written lobby do things to
make some changes in the local
community in probably at the
state level.
My question is
This fifty thousand dollars for
the Human Services Department
for contracted behavioral health
policy experts so is a one time
fee to hire somebody is out on
going pain fifty thousand
dollars here what exactly is
this person going to do and
who's going to hire them and and
and do the background on them
thank you Madam yes
Representative Lord if I may
madam chairman and members of
the committee I believe you're
looking at the old bill
Representative Lord it's been
amended and substituted so I
think when you're you're wording
refers to the original bill to
answer your question again it's
going to be up to the
collaborative itself through the
RFP process as Jason marks
indicated to hire the agency we
are looking specifically at
policy research associates
because they are well known and
well respected entity that works
with cities and counties all
over this the nation to
basically bring these
comprehensive plans to fruition
on another aspect of of hiring
an independent agency as I read
in the original bill for the
collaborative was that that that
would be some of what they would
do actually is to you know hire
independent agencies to also
help oversee the bigger process
so again it's going to be an RFP
process R. E. I'm sorry what the
policy agency that I just
mentioned has done work and
growing up County and again
they're well respected but it
will be an open RFP process for
any agency that could possibly
do this work to come forward and
assist us and yes to answer your
question one a one time fee
For those meetings to be held
across the state and again bring
the the again we want full on
disclosure and working directly
with the collaborative they will
be approving the entity they
will be hiring the entity and
they will also.
Be doing the final approval of
the plans thank you for that
question representation with.
Thank you thank you madam chair
so that lease now it looked at
the substitute now on this final
questions here.
Okay down here it is some of
section two year appropriation
to and now we have two hundred
fifty thousand dollars is
appropriate to the general fund
to the Human Services Department
for expenditure for fiscal years
two thousand twenty two two
thousand three to contract with
professional Bayview behavioral
health policy agency to develop
a statewide action plan to
present to the Human Services
department and the legislators
so now we have two hundred fifty
thousand dollars set aside can
you explain to me what exactly
that is for.
Based thank you madam chair.
Representative Lord madam chair
and members of the committee
again I think there's a little
confusion Representative four
that two hundred fifty thousand
again is to hire the policy
agency to facilitate the meeting
statewide.
And to bring the data together
from those meetings and write
comprehensive plans for these
six regions in the state of New.
Thank you thank you for
answering that and madam
chairman last question isn't
there any or could there be
since this is a group that's
trying to come together and
volunteer their time although
they're getting paid per diem
that is trying to work together
to make the community better
isn't very nonprofit or
something else that you could
use volunteers or something to
put that information together do
we have to hire somebody for
that large amount of money.
Representative Representative
Lord again I think you're
referring to the old bill.
There is no per diem in the
substitute bill
to answer your question the non
profits in our community are
doing very hard work senator Mr
Steve Ross and and any other
nonprofit that we widely respect
for the work that they are doing
in behavioral health and they
are in the trenches doing the
hard work there is no entities
non known to us in the nonprofit
sector in New Mexico that would
be as professional and as as as
our expert having the expertise
as the policy research
associates or other behavioral
health policy programs that help
to develop programs these
agencies across the United
States so to answer your
question now on the nonprofit
issue we want to hire a group
that does this professional
across the nation thank you very
much.
Okay and last question is thank
you madam chair for answer may I
see that on this one that you
did take out the per diem so on
this two hundred fifty thousand
dollars which is programs and
general fund to the Human
Services Department for this one
here is that going to be every
year that is going to be two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
is that going to be an ongoing
expense thank you madam chair
Representative Lord no it will
not the time frame is indicated
in the substitute it's a one
time appropriation to hold
twelve statewide regional
facilitated meetings again this
as attorney Jason marks
indicated initially when we
contacted the agency we wanted a
specific amount they gave us an
amount of seventy thousand four
three regional meetings okay we
extrapolated with input from our
representatives and senators
that we needed more rural
indicate in meetings and that
brought forward the six.
And so the the cost is basically
seventy times two times six
instead of three so that's where
we came up with that fund it is
one time and one time only thank
you.
Thank you madam chair that's all
the questions that I have a
yield my time.
Thank you our next we have
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and Representative
bash thank you so much for
bringing this bill forward as
well
Representative Anderson touched
on one of my questions when I
heard.
I believe it was Bryce hitting
your from the behavior health
collaborative have some
opposition incentives so
detention you give me a little
bit of pods
want to talk about that in a
second but in general I've spent
about fifteen years the last
fifteen years really working on
the preventive side of these
issues from homelessness and
recovery and mostly with use and
prevention I've been part of the
Rio Arriba community health
council from about twelve years.
And watching this epidemic in
the region like Rio Arriba the
movement in the needle is very
very minimal we have made
progress with with do a.
Gratitude in the last five years
but it's not enough.
I applaud the effort to create a
bridge in a of the strategy of
collaboration
I think it's super important.
I have seen in my own County.
And I'm not supposing that this
is the case so I don't want to
offend anyone in this whole
paradigm but I seen it in my own
County when an agency or an idea
or an individual comes up with
something that is already being
done there's a tension there in
a sort of a a cringing back and
I would urge that we expand we
think of the people most
impacted by this tragic pandemic
that we're trying to address all
of the intercepts are so
important be it through the
justice system early
intervention J. PO through the
prisons through homeless
interventions I think we have to
do better and I I believe that
this is is a way forward I
appreciate the movement from
fifty thousand to two hundred
fifty I think it's more
proportional and commensurate
with the challenge
I guess what I'm saying is that
I I support this I'm inclined to
vote for it and as it moves
hopefully into law that I might
have a hand in in working to
make some of those collaborative
moments happen in a more
meaningful way I guess kind of
skirting the issue of the
tension that I'm hearing from
the existing collaborative we've
been working for decades on this
issue and we have not seen the
movie we need.
In closing the most effective
thing that I have seen is the
lived experience the peer
network support networks I have
to say watching someone who.
Was immersed in addiction and
incarceration and manage to
rehabilitate they are the
clearest and most effective tool
we have to utilize in this war
against this tragic the pandemic
so I will stop their I yield
back thank you.
Thank you our next
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for all the information it's
a lot of information one of the
things madam chair and
representative that I wanted to
find out is.
How long have you been working
on this issue.
Madam chair representative.
Representative madam chair and
members of the committee.
The greater Albuquerque business
alliance formed as a five one
two six in twenty nineteen.
We were a group of businesses
that were under siege basically
having fires and attacks and
analysts tragedies in our
business sector you're in
Albuquerque and we formed
initially to start.
Actually grade gables village of
trans transitional housing
project and we're still in the
works on that so to answer your
question as a I want to state
see sextants and since twenty
nineteen with analyst meeting
since with all of our
representatives and anyone who
would come to talk Dan Hochman
mowing us to Senator to subpoena
and we've tried to form a
coalition of sorts with the
nonprofit's inviting them such
as to cross Jennifer Burke Weiss
and her husband were going to be
at this meeting I run serenity
mesa so what and to answer your
question mark personal
experience from leading this
charge is over seven years on
many of you and our health and
Human Services Committee now us
and and on a personal basis I
was also part of the wells park
neighborhood association so so I
would say not respect it's been
a long time there's a least
seven years of of interactions
talking with the judges and most
recently this topic came about
through collaborative meetings
we were having the same meeting
some as I mentioned several
representatives on a run board
on that conversation and also
our volunteer architect Ron burn
sting he's doing work with on
the behavioral health of the
county and his idea of building
a comprehensive plan was how we
grew to this initiative and
we've been getting very strong
support of legislators on on a
bipartisan basis and I also do
believe there's just a little
bit of miscommunication because
we haven't had the opportunity
to actually talk to the
behavioral health collaborative
members at this time so we're
looking forward to opening those
discussions thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you misty health for those
answers one of my one of my
issues that I have with the bill
is that it kind of seems the
cart before the horse it sort of
seems to me Madam chair
representative that the
behavioral health collaborative
should be the one.
Talking about forming this group
instead of the group.
farming without even talking to
the behavioral health
collaborative I know that madam
chair and others on this
committee are we're always
stomping our feet holding our
breath trying to get more
funding for
New Mexico health councils that
should be involved in this as
well because they are boots on
the ground across the state of
New Mexico the other issue that
I have Madam chair
representative is I'm I'm glad
that they've they've created a
six region but if you look at
the D. O. T. region a long
skinny line that goes down
through the middle of the state
it's it's not a really good
representation madam chair
representative of can you go
You are there and a really good
representation of like myself
in district forty nine I
represent a district six three
and one.
because I'm so spread out I know
redistricting is coming but it
is they are really big regions
and some of our Madam chair
representative I'm I'm afraid
that.
This is more of an urban.
issue I don't know unless we
include health councils in this
and I honestly believe that the.
Behavioral health collaborative
which is a state agency already
should be taking the lead on
this so those are my comments
madam chair I appreciate what
you're trying to do and I will
make my decision after I hear
more testimony thank you madam
chair representative.
Representative Armstrong members
of the committee on sorry keep
chiming in
On this issue we can Kurt we
concurred with some.
Actually Senator gained Kernan
on the issue of the six
districts Representative
Armstrong okay if you look at
those districts one of them
include expanding smaller
communities are I I would be
assure you that your area that
I'm very familiar with this I
want to Mexico tech will be
easily accessible in the Deming
area on and if you look at the
six district are regions for
transportation I believe those
are very equitable to the
smaller communities again to
voice our concerns your concern
that we have not communicated
are senator Jerry or to see Pino
came to meetings with us back in
October and he reached out to
doctor brown I have tried
multiple times to reach on this
price your hand also I've
reached out to Tracy columns
just as she was appointed I've
gotten feedback from Tracy
Collins as I said yesterday
she's very much willing to meet
with us and we hope sincerely is
that Miss price partner Dr phone
will also be amenable because
definitely two hundred fifty
thousand to make it better as
representatives from
from northern New Mexico stated
is that we need to do everything
we can this isn't about a turf
war anything of construction
that we're trying to step on
toes we're just trying to really
bridge this gap and services I'm
working collaborative right
thank you very much thank you
madam chair and Connie and but
the problem that I have is that
we create all of these
collaboratives and all these
different initiatives and then
no one talks to each other I
mean we I've already seen
memorials I have a memorial.
For the health councils
I to do a study and I mean we
just we created all of these
different things but then to
bring them all together madam
chair is is what the state
agencies and my mind are tasked
with doing is bringing them all
together gathering the
information and then bring it to
the health committee are one of
the next draft legislation bring
it to the interim health
committee draft legislation that
brings them all together that
comes up with the with an answer
so I believe trying to find the
answers I believe in your
ability and and your efforts to
try to find the answer but I
just get concerned when we're
creating another collaborative
when we already have the
behavioral health collaborative
thank you madam chair.
Thank you
and representative and and your
experts
thank you for the substitute
it's at least better than the
original bill but I share the
some of the same sentiments that
have been expressed and our
about at confusion and overlap.
Of efforts and.
There is no doubt that we don't
have enough behavioral health
services in the state that there
is there is no doubt we were
fragile system.
the for our twenty thirteen when
all of that behavioral health
providers under Medicaid were
their contracts were cancelled
we did not have good of focus on
behavioral health or support
from the administration of
following that so we had
a number of years under the
previous administration where I
don't think enough attention
still was was paid and and we
have a great need stats no
doubt.
However in order to really move
something forward it takes focus
and working together and so I'm
really alarm that you haven't
had a conversation with the
behavioral health collaborative
and just to give a little bit of
history
because I was part of as the
secretary of aging and long term
services I was part of the
original behavioral health
collaborative so I do know how
it was organized and what the.
Intent was which was to cut
consolidate of behavioral health
a budget and establish
priorities it it was set up of
agencies but also part of that
design was local collaboratives
that works and those local
collaboratives were not
established by transportation
districts they were established
by judicial districts.
And those local collaboratives
and many many communities
combined efforts with the local
health councils
and so there have been
integrated there's actually an
existing alliance of local
collaboratives and so and those
the information in the and the
input from the local
collaboratives feeds into that
larger.
come behavioral health
collaborative structure there's
a director to behavioral health
services there's an executive
director to the collaborative.
there is a lot of effort going
on and all the different
departments and again I am I
absolutely agree we don't have
enough.
But to form another
initiative of
advisory councils or or
Some kind of collaborative
that's not organized in the same
way and doesn't have the same
responsibilities and feed and in
the same way seems to me like it
just.
It creates a bigger just
spinning our wheels kind of
effort it seems to me that
a concerted effort to.
Talk with the with the
behavioral health collaborative
to expressed concern that not
enough input from of from
business or whoever else that
you are wanting to gather and to
work on getting them funding to
do what you're asking to do
which is facilitated meetings
and communities.
it would be a worthwhile effort
to try and support them to do
more outreach and inclusion in
their planning but they develop
a plan that were reviewed and
revised every couple of years
they report regularly quarterly
to LFC.
a report annually to the interim
committees
and again no doubt there's not
enough of services in the state
that that's a given but how we
prioritize move forward
harnessed the funding get local
input including consultation
with native American communities
which you don't mention at all
is all part of that structure
and so that structure may need a
little shaking up I don't have
a coral necessarily with that
and get more people involved
But I think this is the way to
go and so
This I'm I'm not I can't support
it for those reasons but
And I see you I've got a sorry
Representative Ferrary into your
hand before he launched into
mine or maybe you raised it
sense but could you for
questions.
Thank you madam chair I was I
took my hand down earlier so I
could present a bill and
Senate education so thank you
for recognizing me
I
kind of have a different
perspective than what you were
describing when I in the early
nineties set up community D. W.
I. groups around the state it
included behavioral health as
well as D. W. I. prevention
groups and enforcement and so I
appreciated working with
behavioral health and also the
Department of Health to bring
together all these people for
their own community but then to
have a broader perspective at
the state level of working
together and what could be done
and I think that's what this
bill is going to help you even
though we have in Los crucis are
of Los crucis three which is
includes a behavioral health
groups but then there's other
things going on with you know
groups such as Oxford house that
are trying to help
People who are getting out of
prison to get into a.
Home that they can be
responsible to and help with the
rent I think what this bill is
trying to do is bring together
different issues other than just
behavioral health but how
behavioral health impacts all of
these different things such as
even D. W. Y..
And I think what they'll find is
it's not so much the penalties
we need to increase in D. W. are
get the enforcement to our
channel people into the system
once they are stopper D. W. why
either because of drugs or
alcohol or
any type of impairment so I I
think this concept could really
work a lot better than just some
of the behavioral health people
getting together but to be more
inclusive and also to go around
the state and bring people
together and then have that
report and then also to share
Opportunities
from all those different groups
to work together so I do support
this bill and
I I hope they can get the
funding to go with it so thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative bash and and your
experts.
Thank you what's the will of the
committee.
Rick a motion for a do pass but
I would love to explain my
thoughts if we vote on that.
Some of
the table.
A substitute melt motion to
table takes precedent
Delores you want to call the
roll on a motion to table.
Motioned to table Representative
Phelps Anderson.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes to table.
Representative Brittney bought a
house.
No to table.
Representative can.
to table.
I'm sorry.
No to table thank you
Representative Stephanie lord.
You're on mute yeah thank you
for pointing that out.
No to table.
Representative Marian Matthews
your cable.
Representative Roger Montoya no
to table.
Representative Louise.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Sorry.
No to table.
Representative Anderson is a no
to table.
Madam chair Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes.
We have four.
To table and six not to and one
kids were back on a motion of do
pass and did I have a second.
I'll second okay analysts and
the second are you want to call
the roll.
And this is.
This is a motion to not passed
house bill one oh one fifty one
but I do passed a committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty one.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong no
and I'd like to explain.
But.
Yes.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes.
Rep Marian Matthews.
No.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Liz Thomson.
No.
Joram Ferrari yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
No and I think I've already
explained my my rationale
Strong
six yes the and one excuse okay.
So you have a do you have a do
pass
Representative bash and
representative Armstrong to
explain your vote thank you
madam chair I just a it's like I
stated before we just need to
work on this more and include to
behavioral health collaborative
US secretary and all that
they're doing before we put the
cart before the horse thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative Matthews did you
wanna.
Yes can I I'm sorry I should
have sent I can split my vote
before I have other people were
very eloquent and on not sharing
their their concerns about this
and I have the same concern at
that.
Did look at that duplicative
efforts and so forth I think
this is well intentioned and I
would like this group to
continue to work with other
groups and see if we can't move
the state along in terms of its
behavioral health thank you.
Thank you I.
I didn't answer when my vote but
it pretty much Representative
Matthews summed it up for me I
think I think this is needed but
I think we need to have all the
people at the table before we
come up with how we're going to
move forward I'm and when I
heard that the collaborative
have been involved that was kind
of being kind of a oh wait a
minute moment for me so I
totally agree with the concept I
just think we need to make sure
we all are going at pushing and
pulling in the same direction
thank you madam chair thank you
and Representative my comments
are exactly the same I I don't
disagree that that on some of
this work needs to be done we
need to look broader but I just
feel really strongly it has to
be done
not just on paper in
collaboration with the
behavioral health collaborative
but really together so by the
time we get to the floor if
you've got the collaborative on
board and the Human Services
department and and those are on
board and endorsing down I'm
fine but and if you don't and
also continue to be a no.
So but thank you and thank you
for the committee substitute
because it was all significantly
better I think I would like
state.
I would like to say something
madam chair.
We're we're going to have to
make.
An amendment to add law
enforcement before we present
this bill to the next committee
and I think that it would be
wise if we also added our native
American communities are
indigenous communities.
In that and so we will discuss
that and
Make that amendment.
Thank you.
Yeah in the in the behavioral
health collaborative does formal
very formal consultation with on
native American
on behavior health so.
Your Representative Anderson
with the real quick additions
that two things one I might
suggest Representative bash that
she think about addressing the
amendment in this committee
because the Appropriations
Committee which I also sit on
with Representative Armstrong
and others
is only really looking at the
money aspect and so when you
brought in the the purpose or or
I just think it may not be as
receptive business committee
would in considering broadening
the constituencies that are
covered and I just simply wanted
to also echo my sentiments that
you expressed to the
representative when the bill
gets to the for
that some of those issues could
have better answers thank you
madam chair.
Right.
Thank you thank you and our
comments Representative are
meant as constructive
For moving on this effort
forward because I understand
where you're trying to go and
there's like I said there is no
doubt we need more engagement at
a community level and in
behavioral health so thank you
again for for bringing at.
So next we have house bill two
fifty nine.
Yes Representative Dow in the.
Madam chair just promoted her.
I'm R. Representative Dow do you
have experts you want us to
bring over on house bill two
fifty yes yes.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have an expert witness however
co sponsor chairman young Garcia
meeting here I do not know if he
was gonna make it.
And madam chair and
representative.
We don't we don't see them we
can watch form or if you tax
your something just holler and
we'll bring them over.
Thank you madam chair and
members of.
House bill two fifty nine is is
is one look at it as one and a
half page bill and basically
what it does is acknowledges the
fact that as we raise minimum
wage and we're not even
addressing the sick leave or any
cost or margin the family paid
leave due to a health emergency
that we will increase the
contracts so it increases the
reimbursement so that the
contractor and subcontract to
that contract are held harmless
for any wage increase resulting
from an increase in a moment so
we Lujan since two thousand
nineteen raise the minimum wage
by over three dollars and for
example child care assistance
federal program of which the
state contracts with folks from
low income families very similar
Medicaid we have not raised the
reimbursement from house speaker
services since minimum wage has
gone up.
Last.
Last sixty day session we heard
from folks I'm sure we will
today those folks that are
providing services on behalf of
the state and it's typically for
most vulnerable populations
typically are basic services so
some example of our state
contractors so not not state
employees but we contracted
funds to provide services on our
behalf child care home health.
These at nursing homes not state
run nursing homes private
nursing homes are reimbursement
rate doesn't cover are increased
cost of doing business it's
people doing director for
disabled folks in their homes
hospice care providers are folks
that are running were structures
those meals on wheels to
homebound seniors who are
indigent even within your mail
sites so these are the types of
contracts we're we are not
raising our reimbursement rate
to those contractors to meet the
rising cost of doing business
and in this bill we're simply
addressing the rise of minimum
wage and also for questions.
Thank you we'll go first to the
audience and do our poll and see
if there's folks here in the
audience in support or
opposition.
To house bill two fifty nine.
Looks like we have nine in
support and to an opposition.
In the audience.
So we will first go to
opposition anyone with wishes to
speak in opposition if you raise
your hand.
Charlie Marquez.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee I actually meant
to raise my hand to support it
are your to your your fast on
the trigger there's no.
Sorry.
That's all right we have we
didn't have anyone else raise
their well let's go to
I will come back to Charlie
thank you.
And go to
Well he was there and maybe
there isn't anyone that wishes
to speak in opposition I just
voted so we'll go to our if you
are here in support raise your
hand.
Hey.
Okay and
we'll go first to Charlie since
we had you up there first.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
On behalf of the association of
developmental disabilities
community providers and also on
behalf of New Mexico health care
association motion we are such a
Medicaid
Providers of services which we
stand this support of this just
because it's critical to our
well sustainability.
Well so I hope you all can
support this.
Thank you next Stacy Johnson
Davis.
Hey good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Stacy Johnson Davis on the
vice president of business
development and government
affairs with HB specialists we'd
like to thank the sponsor for
introducing the bill and I'm
speaking and strong support of
house bill two fifty nine as a
durable medical supply company
ninety seven percent of our
revenue is derived from
providing life sustaining
services to patients and their
home such as oxygen and
ventilation and in turn we bill
Medicare Medicaid or commercial
contract for those services
while many industries such as
retail stores are grocery stores
are able to pass the increased
costs of doing business as would
occur with an increase in
minimum wage by passing those
costs on to the consumer H. me
is not able to do that we are
reimbursed based on set
contracts and fee schedules with
Medicare Medicaid centennial
Care and commercial health plans
we're not able to simply
increase our reimbursement rates
to offset an increase in cost of
doing business we are currently
contracted as a durable medical
equipment with the state of New
Mexico through New Mexico
Medicaid and centennial Care and
we service New Mexico state
hospitals with liquid oxygen and
patients throughout the entire
state of New Mexico with a
multitude of items such as beds
oxygen when care supplies and
other equipment that allows
patients to remain in their home
safely we stand in support of
house bill two fifty nine and I
thank you for your time.
Thank you our next we have a
Dennis are.
Thank you madam chair Dennis you
are representing Addis
corporation which operates amber
Care in the state we do
specialize in personal care
services home care services and
hospice care services for highly
vulnerable population and a
principal source of our income
is through the Medicaid agency
we strongly support this
legislation we have not opposed
minimum wage increases in the
past but we do need some
recognition in our contracts
with the state for these
increased cost thank you very
much.
Thank you next we have
Angelo.
Hello good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Angela Garcia and the
president of the New Mexico
childcare and education
association and I'm the owner of
the toybox early learning
centers in Los crucis I am
coming in before you this
morning in strong support of H.
B. two fifty nine and we think
the sponsor for bringing it
forward as a child care center
owner ninety five percent of my
revenues are generated from
state child care assistant
contracts for our most
vulnerable children childcare
providers have not had an
increase in reimbursement rates
in almost seven years so when
the minimum wage passed two
years ago providers complied
with the new statue under the
existing reimbursement rates
that means cuts were having to
be made in many other areas.
As mentioned before many
businesses are able to pass
those costs on to their
consumers but in the childcare
industry that simply does not
have an option madam chair
members of the committee many
providers that serve our most
vulnerable populations operate
under state contracts and this
bill will ensure that minimum
wage increases allows for less
hi it's elsewhere and less
closures we stand in strong
support of H. B. two fifty nine
I thank you for your time and we
hope that you support this bill.
Thank you next we have Meggin
Lorino.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care we Representative home
health hospice and personal care
service agencies across New
Mexico and I am here and strong
support H. B. two fifty nine
personal care services is a
Medicaid benefit that allows
Friel New Mexicans to meet a
nursing facility level of care
with everyday tasks such as
bathing dressing toileting my
staff White House work and meal
preparation these tasks allow
individuals to remain
independent and stand their home
the meeting reimbursement rate
for Medicaid personal care
services as less than fifteen
dollars an hour that
reimbursement rate must cover
not only wage costs but training
and supervision of staff
administrative functions for
scheduling billing and more
along with an employer would
employer tax share of social
security workers compensation
and unemployment compensation
and travel time home is the
safest and most preferred care
setting however we cannot insure
access to care in the home while
increasing the minimum wage
unless the state Medicaid
program concurrently and most
importantly proportionately
increases payment rates and by
proportion I need to include
wages and indirect costs
providing a living wage is
essential to maintaining quality
staff for this challenging work
yet Medicaid limits what an
agency can offer compensation
again we we are here to support
H. B. two fifty nine.
Thank you.
Hi Jason Espinoza.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza.
Sure lobbyist both with the
national federation of
independent business as well as
New Mexico child first and both
organizations stand strong
support of the legislation a
from the child first perspective
a lot of of our most vulnerable
populations rely on many of
these contracted services with
the states we're worried with
the minimum wage increases and
the inability for these
providers to
manage the costs of what's going
to happen we're worried about
the result of decreased access
to these services so increasing
the contract proportionally with
each increase will ensure that
vulnerable populations across
the state have access to the
services thank you madam chair.
Thank you and I don mills
Montana.
Hi I'm done with the here and I
support eighty two fifty nine I
believe that the respite care
providers need increased being
investment to provide quality
care and I support HB two fifty
nine thank you.
Thank you that was the last of
public comment we have.
And.
We'll go to members of the
committee.
Representative Matthews.
You.
I'm thank you madam chair and
that Representative Dow thank
you for bringing this bill
forward
But I've been to several
meetings perhaps I think you
were probably maybe as sharing
them I can't even remember at
this point about how what a
constant problem this is and we
increase the minimum wages but.
That workers don't actually get
the increased because of the way
these these contractors
structure.
So I'm I'm I'm happy to support
the bill but I do have an
additional question two
questions actually first of all
we spent a great deal of time
yesterday talking about sickly
required sickly that
are these these workers to
typically do they get do they.
Do you are they paid sick leave
is part of their employment.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that question and if I
would have had time to present
my amendment it was actually
adding compensation to the
contractors so that they could
find the one is imposed in house
bill twenty but what happens
with can you hear me you're
you're breaking up a little bit
okay yeah you're pretty muffled
yet your mouth but it is kind of
hard to hear you.
Let me.
Okay I'm putting in my ear
pieces that better.
Excellent thank you okay okay
thank you so thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative Matthews and most
of these employers do give
flexible paid time off it may or
may not be categorized depending
on the size of the company there
are many you know I represent
rural New Mexico and they have
they don't have the scale of
operation for the robust paid
sick leave that was proposed in
house bill twenty most of them
at at their employees accrue up
to two weeks of paid time off so
eighty hours unpaid time off but
it's flexible it's not at our
you know it's vacation time or
sick leave they can take it how
they want and that's what most
people do however as we raise
the cost of minimum wage those
are not mandatory benefits and
so I think come health is a
really good example where we're
paying them less than fifteen
dollars an hour I think it's
thirteen dollars and sixty seven
cents an hour that we're paying
them to now cover minimum wage
at any any compacted increases
they would give to their
employees who have experience or
expertise plus the cost of the
matching questions for the
employer as well as liability
insurance and all the other
requirements that go with doing
their their their of service so
that people think about big
companies but really in your
rural New Mexico their mom and
pop shops that have very little
overhead they cannot charge the
difference to the customer to
cover these new costs and they
do not have a scale of operation
there are new no new more
customers for them to to scale
up to offset the six cost.
Madam chair representative death
thank you for that answer
if the if the if the legislature
passes a sick pay bill.
I'm mandating a category of sick
pay for state for for employees
private sector employees in the
in the state will that add.
Would that be an added I want to
say this.
Well the structure of the
reimbursement situation be able
to accommodate that we're not I
wasn't a hundred percent clear
in your answer on that.
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Matthews this
bill just touches minimum wage
which I like in less there is a
need proportion increasing the
cop and the contracts then that
we paid for doing fee for
service it's always an unfunded
mandate so not only is the
minimum wage an unfunded mandate
so as the sick leave house bill
twenty and I we ran out of time
before I was able to offer an
amendment but I was going to
offer an amendment that we
increase the contracts
accordingly on house bill twenty
but this is just in regards in
wage that's another unfunded
mandates that we have virtually
ignored as we we pass these off
to small businesses because as
you heard in testimony a
restaurant can raise the cost of
fries and a soft drink but these
are caps prices feed for service
Medicaid federal programs we do
not allow these vendors these
contractors to to charge the
customer the difference the
client the difference.
Madam chair representative Dan
thank you
The money has to come from
somewhere and I was looking at
the FIR and I'm wondering
It seems to me that in order to
comply with your bill assuming
it passes HSD would need to have
some additional financial
resources in am I
misunderstanding and sort of the
the domino effect of all of
this.
Madam chair representative
Matthews unfortunately you're
not you're exactly right and
this is the third year that
those folks that are building
the budget have largely ignored
this crisis that is brewing we
are already losing access to
services folks who have
diversified programs are
dropping things like the
personal care and the home
health because it is now not
something they can sustain and
so it is it's it's compounded in
the rural areas and I continue
to introduce this bill and I'm
so grateful to chairman of
Miguel Garcia for seeing the
need as well and continue to try
to elevate the issue.
Then Chairman representative gas
so we're really kind of between
a rock and a hard place if we if
we protect the workers were
probably going to reduce the
services at absent some and
additional increased HSD we're
probably going to reduce the
number of people or the services
to the to the people who receive
the service I mean we.
It is really the tension here
might and the expanding that.
Madam chair representative
Matthews there is always the
balance between expansion of
eligibility or access to
services verses the funding
that's available to meet them so
most of these programs are where
programs having waiting lists
that that is not the problem the
problem now is that the cost is
exceeding the reimbursement
rates and unless you have a
large scale of operation and
that you have a little bit grave
here you have diversified
services you have to stop
providing the services that are
not adequately funded.
So I I'm not aware of any of
these programs having waiting
lists okay.
Representative Dow
it madam chair I'm sorry Madam
chair representative death thank
you for that answer and I.
It that's reassuring there are
not waiting list and that we're
not leaving people telling
unserved and I will
will be supporting your bill
thank you.
Okay Representative Armstrong.
Madam chair and if it's the
right time I'd like to move it
to pass.
I have a motion for a do pass.
Thank you madam chair I have a
second and before we go to that
I also wanted to to say a couple
things and I I don't know that I
have questions but
thank you Representative Dow for
bringing this forward it is a
conversation we've had many
times in the interim committee I
don't have and
it going back probably
To
when insurance health insurance
was then mandatory
the and.
Are looking at rates and and I'm
not being adjusted for years and
years even though
budget and minimum wage how has
gone up and it it we don't take
the global look particularly for
programs that can't recoup their
costs in any other way they
don't have another market if you
will to
to questions to their own lease
State
funded programs.
Our publicly funded programs
essentially.
And so I guess I do have a one.
Question and and that is I know
this is for services but is
there any distinction in the
bill from those entities who are
really are reliant almost
exclusively if not exclusively
on state of public funding are
like the the programs are or
whatever verses those who are
have other lines of business
where they might
have a mechanism to cover some
additional costs.
Thank thank you for the question
madam chair and it does not make
a distinction it just the
contract means any agreement for
purchase or services and the
services of the person
furnishing of labor time or
effort by the contractor
subcontractor so it's basically
we are going to cover the cost
that we're mandating were
imposing a cost on there for
recovery.
Thank you for that that's what
that's how I read it as well but
this is a huge issue and I'm I'm
going to support it but I to.
I don't think you have much luck
of getting through House
Appropriations.
I'm just wondering madam chair
it's it's always it's always
conversation and maybe if I
presented legislation and so I
remember next year.
I and I'm wondering along those
lines if you have thought about
doing a memorial or Joint
Memorial that asked somebody to
really study this and look at
what the cost would be and what
kind of programs are and are
impacted and report to to LFC.
Thank you madam chair you know
what I will go ahead this being
the third year that I presented
this bill I will go ahead and
get that memorial drafted if you
you guys want to sign on to send
me a text or shoot me an email.
Yeah because that keeps the
conversation going in a more
formal way it is figuring out
who will lead that study it may
be Medicaid HSD because it's
largely Medicaid that we're
talking about but it's not
completely so
or a consortium of.
Agencies and you know with a
memorial they can I guess ignore
it but
I do think that keep the
conversation alive.
A potentially a more formal way
instead of your bill getting one
committee hearing and then dying
and that in appropriations so
because this is a really
important
topic important issue.
Thank you that's my that's my
suggestion Representative
Montoya did you have.
An additional question for
COVID.
Sure Representative Dow it's
good to see you I I'm inclined
to vote for this bill but I have
a question about the process how
integrated have you been with
the CYFD on building this piece
of legislation.
I'm thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Montoya
I you know it's interesting
because the way of the put out
new rules in January the public
comment was due out right we are
starting our let right before we
started legislative session and
so I thought the general counsel
at CYFD I ECECD is now in charge
of the childcare portion talks
to the secretary and multiple
people I was I did find written
public comment which I don't
know how much that really helps
of the lawmaker but and and I
also listens to the public
comment and it was an exciting
time when they go out to rules
for CYFD because they they
expanded eligibility but it's
it's also was disappointing time
because during that rulemaking
process they did not raise the
rates so for the third year in a
row for the third year in a row
with the cost of minimum wage
going up in a it in a need for
raising those reimbursement
rates there for the third year
in a row there was no proposed
rate increase but very very
active in engaging with them
about that and and and by the
way I think they want to see a
rate increase they need money to
do that and so it's very just in
regards to early childhood we
listen to people saying how
Ability to make meaningful
investments in the early
childhood portion of child care
assistance that's how that's the
welfare reform that's how
parents working go to school
that's how they keep a roof over
their head it is the
foundational level of mind
massless hierarchy of needs that
there has been no rate increase
to to cover the cost of care.
And I would I would also add
that
The majority of child abuse
neglect in the state is with
children under three and many
times they lack basic care so
it's great to have people
advocating for these high
quality initiatives across a ton
of money but we're under funding
the foundational level of basic
state health and safety this is
where they get their
immunizations this is where
we're sure they get screenings
this is where their parents are
able to work and go to school
and where they receive three USD
emails a day during those very
formative years.
Madam chair and Representative
Dow might line of questioning is
really kind of related to the
previous bills where there was
this notion that the behavioral
health collaborative wasn't
fluidly integrated and it's kind
of from from the perspective of
citizens legislators it's it's
on you know and I just want to
make sure that when we're
looking at these critical
critical decisions that the
agencies are actually at the
table hashing it out and finding
the best product for New
Mexicans so that's I will stop
their thank you thank you thank
you madam chair thank thank you
and
Yeah I I guess my last comment
is I I don't want to see this be
an impediment to raising minimum
wage for for people as.
To have a living wage but we
need to acknowledge that we
have.
Services for some of the most
vulnerable people in the state
that that's part of the cost of
of doing that is the cost of
those not just businesses it's a
cost of the state
when we are raise.
Raise
minimum wage and hello the
people are living house so I can
make a living and.
By their health insurance our
weather what and feed their
families
Representative Sanderson.
Representative Phelps.
Thank you had to get on muted
Representative Anderson votes
yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes.
Representative Brittney badass
yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative eight Thompson.
Your that ma'am.
Yes thank you.
Vice chair Joanne Ferrari yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
Yes.
Total
ten and one excuse.
So Representative value you have
a do pass on your bill and.
Could like an appropriation
thank.
I'm sure they're gonna be very
eager to give a four hundred
million dollar no.
but it's it's important so thank
you for keeping the conversation
alive
house bill two eighty four our
admin hearings for some CYFD
actions and do you have any
experts for this.
I thank you madam chair I do my
co sponsor is Senator Candelaria
and it looks like he's on the
Senate floor right now which
will make it extremely difficult
for me to the legal aspect of
this I do believe my coat my one
of my other co sponsors Meredith
Dixon is on.
Perhaps Ryan I don't I can't see
who's waiting.
After Meredith Ryan lane Jacob
Candelaria.
I need to if senator Candelaria
is not there I'd like to move in
Jason Espinoza.
I got J. Senate.
That should be it.
And I didn't the are you said
Ryan.
Okay our.
Yeah Representative Eli yeah I
don't see.
I don't see
I don't see him.
Let me let me text in real quick
okay and we can watch important
he's a liar at least.
Okay gosh okay.
All right so I'm gonna give
madam chair members the
committee I'm gonna give a
little bit more background on
this since Senator Candelaria is
not here
many of you know that I have
worked with children who are at
risk for over twenty two years
including doing emergency
placement for CYFD and for
foster children within a safe
healthy places for them and so I
have been looking for solutions
and I have been watching what
has been happening since I've
been elected anything from an
independent ombudsman to the
current bills that are floating
around which I support by the
way for the sub to Care Corning
council to be able to weigh in I
would support reforms to
children's code just anything to
protect our children from
continuing to be harmed and
abused any of you guys have read
the subs to Care courting
Council report for this year
there are children who have been
moved thirty forty fifty times
if you've been watching the news
just in the last few years the
number of children who have died
who have been lost who have been
permanently damaged while in
CYFD custody.
And so there are bills floating
around this is yes this is a
higher number I'm because it's
hard the hard work the
meaningful worry is the biggest
reform is the hardest to do it
also comes with the biggest
resistance especially from the
establishment and the
bureaucracy who controls the
situations and so
This bill is what I think and by
the way what we got on a call a
lot of people from the Kevin
asks lawsuit some other folks
who are interested including
senator Candelaria and said what
can we do this year that can
help address some of the
anti retaliation that can give
people a place to go to have a
voice outside of CYFD and it was
senator Candelaria who said wait
a minute we already established
administrative hearings office
they are an independent appeals
for a couple of different issues
we can add CYFD to this so that
people can have a place to go
outside of CYFD so that's the
purpose of Senate bill two
eighty four.
the first time that I knew that
this bill was necessary.
I'm sorry like we talk about
things that are deeply.
To your core it's hard to
testify.
There was a family that I've
known for over twenty years they
adopted a teenager at first they
were foster parents to a
teenager who had no on and he
was immediately up for adoption
he was troubled he had substance
use issues he was struggling in
school they adopted him when
they adopted him he had multiple
disorders and diagnoses he grew
up and as an adult he continued
to struggle he merry he had two
little girls which I had the
privilege of watching grow up.
He continued to struggle to the
point where CYFD removed the
children from his home they
replace with the biological
grandparents this is a Hispanic
of bilingual family and so they
place the little girls in the
care of the grandparents who
were they were the care giver
and that is where the children
had bonding and that is where
the children had trust.
He was going back there we go
back and forth between the
grandparents there's pretty much
consistency between the bio
parents and the grandparents who
did Representative foster
kinship care.
At one point while the children
were in the care of the
grandparents doing kinship.
Foster care the fund put his
fist through glass he was he was
under the influence what is this
through window what the main
artery in his wrist and he was
dying so he was in the hospital
on life support the grandparents
recalled.
At that time you could only use
an approved foster parent for
respite care they called another
foster parents said we you take
our granddaughters of which they
were they can ship care giver we
take our granddaughters while we
go to care for our son who's in
the hospital.
They laughed that the foster
family said yes they were placed
with a foster family after two
weeks the son died they pull the
thanks taken off life support
and send Dodd when they came
back they learned that the
foster parent had filed
abandonment charges against them
and CYFD substantiated the
abandonment charges they were in
the hospital with their adopted
child.
Who died and within months they
they pulled their CYFD kinship
care these of the bio
grandparents who were the same
race and spoke the same language
as the children pulled their
kinship care foster care
license and put the children up
for adoption of which they were
adopted by the elderly white
family that filed the charges of
neglect against them no appeals
no due process it happened
really quickly and so I learned
from their story some of the
things that were going on so
house bill two eighty four
utilizes the administrative
hearings office to provide an
independent impartial and fair
Avenue for stakeholders within
the CYFD will persist to resolve
administrative disputes with
CYFD as it currently stands if
an individual wants to protest
the decision by CYFD the only
place to protest the decision
made by CYFD is to CYFD itself
see why these current
administrative resolution system
is completely internal and is
itself a source of retaliation
against grievances including
foster parents and relatives
seeking to protect the rights of
youth in foster care.
In the in the fiscal impact
reports the righty contents were
provisions of this bill are
duplicate because see I do
already have an administrative
process to address protest
related to these decisions what
CYFD fails to understand is that
this bill addresses the
perception and what I believe is
a real conflict of interest
inherent to the existing
internal administrative process.
In the current process you have
a hearing officer there's one
CYFD has one who's appointed by
the right the secretary who then
overseas review and report back
to CYFD on the decision.
So in fact we received
information from sources that
choose to remain anonymous many
people will not testify today
but if you're getting emails
that I've been getting since
this bill was introduced you
know there is an issue so these
people want to remain anonymous
and they want to be out of this
testimony process because of
fear of retaliation.
Here's a quote the current
appeals process is an absolute
joke CYFD workers will receive
an appeal in writing than the
worker and supervisor within sit
in a county office review the
written protests for no more
than thirty seconds this is an
in an employee mostly just
talking about the decision
they've already made the call
the field office to get everyone
on the same page there's really
no real process in the court.
House bill two eighty four
creates a simple and logical fix
to this broken and unfair
administrative hearing process
it moves the administrative
hearings outside of C. I do
administrative hearings office.
The administrative hearing
office was created in two
thousand fifteen by the New
Mexico legislator in order to
adjudicate administrative
hearings and if they're affected
and impartial manner independent
of an executive agency that is
party to the proceedings
shifting administrative appeals
to the administrative hearing
office eliminates the appearance
of a conflict of interest
inherent in the existing
structure within CYFD.
The inspector general which
directly says resolve these
issues is also an employee at
few acting CYFD in those
dealings with CYFD all this does
is put people on an even playing
field equal footing a balance of
power that's what we're looking
for it increases transparency
independence and knowledge in
the handling of those
administrative hearings this
will foster better environment
and instill more confidence and
our child welfare system and I
do want to turn this over to
Jason Espinoza he worked with
senator Candelaria on the
passage of the administrative
hearings office in two thousand
fifteen.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza here on
behalf of the New Mexico child
first network.
And and to the representatives a
point just want to provide some
background on the the
administrative hearings office
back in two thousand fifteen I
have the pleasure of working
with senator Candelaria and
Representative Harper to create
the administrative hearing
office through the New Mexico
legislature and the reason that
we're here today is the exact
reason that the administrative
hearings office was first
created I'm in two thousand
fifteen there was a problem with
tax protest so the this is very
similar situation when a
taxpayer wanted to protest the
decision by the tax department
they had to go in front of a
hearing officer who is an
employee of the department so
that perception and perhaps the
reality of a conflict of
interest and bias was inherent
in that administrative hearing
process so the legislature
bipartisan Lee I think there's
only one vote against during the
entire legislative process
recognize the inherent conflict
of interest and said let's
create the administrative
hearings office an independent
impartial office that will
oversee these hearings so that
both the department the
executive agency as well as the
tax payer in that instance are
on the same but that is really
what we're looking to replicate
here with this legislation the
same problem exists within CYFD
we're trying to put on even
footing utilizing the
administrative hearings office
additionally when the
administrative hearings office
was created in two thousand
fifteen and Brian van dans and
who's the chief hearing officer
I know this is on the line as
well and and they're neutral on
this but you can answer any
questions the intent was always
that this wasn't just a problem
within the taxation and revenue
department the intent was always
to look at how can we grow the
administrative hearings office
to take on more administrative
hearings throughout all state
agencies because this is a
problem that exist just within
the inherent.
Administrative hearings office
administrative hearing process
so this is really just the next
step in the evolution of the
hearings offices to take on
these hearings to create more
fair more enforced impartial
process to protesters and
decisions by CYFD and that madam
chair happy to answer any other
questions and I know
Representative Dixon is also
appearing may want to speak.
Go ahead Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for hearing house bill two
eighty four this morning I want
to just elaborate and sort of.
highlight why I think this
legislation is so important.
I am currently working on two
other pieces of legislation
that deal with children and this
committee has previously heard
our testimony on house bill two
oh two and what I'd like to note
is that both the substitute Care
Advisory Council and the.
Our attorneys in the cavernous
lawsuit and advocates have all
stated the importance of having
an independent review process
and it recommended setting up an
ombudsman no this is not setting
up an ombudsman but it is a very
practical solution to an ongoing
issue and.
What I think is good about house
bill two eighty four is that
it'll provide the independence
and impartiality
that we need in a functioning
system of review
the current internal CYFD
administrative appeals process
is inherently a conflict of
interest and by taking of this
process outside of CYFD
which one I think we can all
agree is an agency that
historically has lacked
transparency
this is critical to a
functioning grievance process
and.
The administrative hearings
office has been set up to handle
just this type of
Grievance and I think that this
is a very good solution to a
complex problem and so I
appreciate are you hearing this
bill and your support thank you.
And madam chair also Marian
Matthews is also one of our
cocoa Sanchez.
I'm go ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for The presentation I
would just wanted to add a
little bit more information on
the sponsor of this bill I'm a
sponsor of to to
which at Representative Dixon
mentioned and I'm the house
sponsor on SB three which is a
substitute Care Council bill and
that bill
I I saw it had great promise of.
And substantial product promises
when he put it that way to
provide some independent of
review of the CYFD actions in
certain cases it isn't HSD bill
at this point and a it
It does provide some non
recapped tally Asian language
and it does provide some review
but not as broad as what is
being proposed by the
administrative hearing process
and it seems to be.
Stock in the Senate forever I'm
not sure it's ever even to get
to the house but if it does I'll
be happy and will continue to
push on it because I I do think
it's a good bill but is not
gonna solve all these problems
none of the other bills that are
pending in this area we do focus
as directly on this hearing
question of independent hearing
question as.
Two eighty four so I just wanted
to provide that additional
background.
Thank you.
and we'll go to the are you
ready for us to go to the
audience Representative.
okay and no amendments or
substitution.
Madam chair not unless it's
needed to get it out of this
committee okay thank you
So we'll go to a our poll first
and see who's in the audience
that might be how many in the
audience might be in favor or
support of house bill two eighty
four.
And if you're neutral you can
take a side with doesn't matter
went.
When you
Give testimony okay so it looks
like we have
US thirty three people here in
support and I in opposition.
And we will go on now to the
audience and we'll go to
opposition first so if you are
in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Opposition.
Okay and we have
up.
Rebecca look at first.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca like it I am the
chief children's quarter turning
for CYFD protective services
you Representative the rarely
opposes or supports bill and
it's not expanding informal
opposition to HB two eighty four
however we have significant
issues with the bill as written
at I would like to summarize for
some reason the issues I would
like fortunately near CYFD nor
the administrative hearings
office which is administrative
administratively connected to
DFA were consulted concerning
the legislation.
And just before you start I just
want to make clear
Rebecca I think what are your
suggestions from CYFD are really
important so ignore the clock.
Thank you very much madam chair.
So the first issue CYFD would
bring up is that it HB two
eighty four would involve
significant costs both to the
administrative hearings office
and to see where the
administrative hearings office
would have to added to the
existing administrative hearings
office staff and would really
represent an entirely new
function.
For that office that would
require infrastructure and
substantive training.
The CYFD would also bear
significant costs to
Because they would have to find
staff to participate in the
numerous additional hearings
that would occur under this act
and also would be required to
reimburse the administrative
hearing the office for any
necessary contract hearing
officers.
This area
that's a significant issue if
the H. B. two eighty four would
jeopardize federal funding for
child welfare services in New
Mexico and that is because.
The bill would would fast in
added administrative of hearings
office
they would excuse me they would
vest the bill would best be
administrative hearings office
with finding decisions outside
of CYFD which would violate the
single state agents requirement
for federal funding under title
Corey of the cells social
Security Act and total forty is
the major funding stream for
child welfare system in New
Mexico.
The third significant issues
CYFD has with the bill is that
it does duplicate many existing
grievance and hearing procedures
many of which have been
established under the current
administration as part of its
child welfare reforms two eighty
does welcome independent
oversight.
To ensure compliance with
federal and state laws and with
regulations and that
that that CYFD believes about
oversight supports our
commitment to continuous quality
improvement that is essential to
ensuring the best possible
outcomes of support and services
provided to New Mexico's you've.
CYFD point down it was mentioned
in the in the opening of the
about the bills that Senate bill
two forty two does make changes
to the substitute care Advisory
Council and it makes changes to
expand the existing council's
independent oversight and
monitoring of the children youth
and families department and that
is in independence
agency that is not attached to
CYFD.
There's also other
administrative hearings are
available for foster parents who
want to yield a revocation or
suspension of their license or
who would want to yield benefits
amounts so those do first go to
a hearing officer that then
gives recommendations to the
cabinet secretary the cabinet
secretary makes a determination
about whether to whether the
secretary agrees or disagrees
with those recommendations from
the hearing officer if the if
the secretary ultimately.
Find against the person having
taken the yield that person has
the right to to further appeal
to the District Court.
So the oversight doesn't stop
the administrative hearing
process does not stop with with
CYFD it only starts there.
Also CYFD has developed and
implemented this past year new
grievance policies and they were
implemented for specifically for
foster parents for parents and
youth that were part of the
requirements under the and
Kevin a settlement agreements.
The last area I'm sorry the at
the next area of concern is
that.
That eight eighty two eighty
four impermissibly creates an
administrative hearing process
that makes binding decisions
that are currently within the
jurisdiction of the children's
court so if you service the
jurisdiction of the children's
court can make those.
to make decisions regarding
possibly regarding case planning
to regarding medical and mental
health care an issue such as
that.
The.
The ability for numerous
individuals who are not parties
to the peace in a glass case and
who are not directly impacted by
the way if these actions and for
those people to request hearing
greatly expands the ability of
people who again are not
directly impacted to challenge
the way these actions.
So this really runs counter to
the theory of legal standing
which requires an injury in fact
to a person bringing a legal
challenge.
There's also significant
concerns in this is last that
the about the confidentiality
that.
H. P. two eighty four greatly
expands the the number of people
and and the types of individuals
who can challenge actions by the
way if he which would then
necessitate releasing
confidential information that
parents children you in our
cases have an expectation will
remain confidential.
So with that
madam chair I am available for
technical assistance and in
addition Annemarie Luna who is
our acting division director
protective services your
division director is also
available.
Thank you.
Thank you that's helpful sticker
found in you between you and and
Annemarie we may need to
a call on the next I have Brian
vandalism.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brian
Fenton's in I can everyone hear
me okay I've had some trouble
jumping into a I just want to
make we can hear you fine very
good thank you I'm the chief
hearing officer the
administrative hearings Office
of the administrative hearings
offices neutral on this bill I'm
here primarily to answer any
technical questions about the
hearing process in the work to
the administrative hearings
office I'm gonna give you just a
little bit of background based
on some of the things I've heard
today and I've I've never had
the opportunity to be in front
of this committee before so some
of you may wonder a little bit
what we do as to Representative
time explained we are a neutral
and independent hearing office
and right now we conduct an
educated administrative hearings
under the tax administration
act.
The property tax code to motor
vehicle code implied consent act
and the health insurance premium
collection tax act and last year
we were also given expedited
proceedings hundred Medicaid
provider in managed care act
this bill would create a new
substantive subject area for
hearings that we would educate.
However if you all decide to
move this bill forward we are
subject matter experts on
conducting fair and independent
administrative hearings and I'm
confident that my attorney
during officers and I'm
confident in their ability to
quickly get up to speed in these
matters I did just want to
clarify a few things that came
up in the FIR and some of the
comments this morning and we did
submit a pretty con
comprehensive FIR and I can
repeat everything in the FIR but
one of the things that's come up
a couple times is that because
we're administratively attached
to a DFA that we're somehow DFA
string officers it is true that
technically under the statute we
are administratively attached to
DFA but since we were created in
twenty fifteen DFA has always
treated us as a standalone
independent agencies agency
other than submitting our budget
through DFA DFA place no active
role under supervision and
defense always honored our
independence because they
believe it's our our role to
educate executive branch
administrative hearings fairly
without any interference so I
just want to clarify that we are
not DFA hearing officers we are
stand alone agency dedicated to
doing fair and impartial
hearings involving executive
branch agencies again I'm not
gonna reiterate everything in
our FY are I will remain if
there are any other technical
questions about the work we do
or anything we provided in our
committee and the FIR thank you
very much.
Thank you Brian of will come
back to you if we've got
questions specifically for you.
And two members of the audience
who wish to speak in favor.
Start with Karen wedlock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen would walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
secretary we stand in support of
this bill we recognize the need
for an outside party process for
people to be able to challenge
CYFD however we would like to
sponsor to consider that people
may still not want to avail
themselves of this process and
or may not be financially able
to hire an attorney to go
through the process in addition
these people may also may also
still be in fear of retaliation
from CYFD even by going to an
outside entity so they may not
be willing to go through the
process these considerations may
have to be part of the oil
making process but we would
encourage sponsor to consider
amending the bill to address
some of these concerns.
Potentially not requiring an
attorney to adjudicate these
actions maybe a special advocate
with child welfare experience or
the state paying legal costs to
the plaintiff prevails we thank
the sponsors for bringing the
spell
in addition we also would like
to encourage the social security
administration still has its own
administrative pre hearing
process and might be willing to
come on board with an exception
for the forty.
Modifications.
Thank you thank you I'm
Alexander Harrison.
And we have we have the clock up
I've been letting people go a
little bit longer and not
cutting them off right minute
but please try and stick as
close to that then it as you can
I'll I'll try can you hear me OK
yes correct and okay my name is
Alexander Harrison and I was a
relative foster parent for about
thirteen months and I have
currently been involved in a
protracted administrative appeal
process that is been going on
for a longer than I was a
licensed foster parents.
I have a blood relative who was
removed from our care of about a
month or two before the doctor
comes close to be completed.
Since that time no family has
been able to see him he has not
been placed with family.
We can get the information
regards to that and I've been
stuck in administrative
hearings.
Basically since about December
of twenty nineteen so secure
visor Council was blocked from
attending those which they
should have been allowed and
they also issued a report.
Saying that CYFD is
administrative to process was
not following the current loss.
So.
The whole process it does need
to be fixed so I am strongly in
support of this bill thank you
thank you.
Our next we have Ivey Woodward.
Madam chairman and committee can
you hear me OK.
Yes go ahead okay I'm my name is
Judy Woodward and I am a former
W. why it the employee a former
supervisor who various times
over order to different
department I can be and bear
testament to how broke in the
appeals process with into the
YFC and therefore I can in favor
of house bill two eighty four
because I have been in the
trenches of child welfare and I
have seen first hand the why and
the retaliation against both
myself and the former employee
and again what you're hearing
and I do believe that house bill
two eighty four in the answer to
alleviating a lot of this.
I do understand the need for
amendments for title forty
funding because someone who was
an employee of CYFD I do
understand how important that
federal funding is to not only
the infrastructure of you why it
do but also to meeting all of
the needs of the children which
I believe should be everyone's
first and foremost concerns.
however I challenge everyone
themselves why an agency that
that's transparent at CYFD
claims to be would fail to
embrace a bill that would help
alleviate the liability
associated with self regulating
any potential met that
neutralizing the potential for
any pending or future a lot you
and what
I'm fired so thank you for your
time.
Thank you Judy next we have and
McKinney.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amit Kenny I am strongly in
support of HB to reduce for
after living in New Mexico for
over thirty five years I've had
the privilege just recently of
being called foster honorary
foster grandmother by dozens and
dozens of children and becoming
friends with dozens if not
hundreds of foster families
until I became friends with
foster families and heard their
stories firsthand I would not
have been aware of the need for
this legislature and I believe
that would be true of most
caring trusting and well meaning
residents of our state including
elected representatives because
of the confidential nature of
caring for our New Mexico
children in care children's
stories can not be publicized
our need in New Mexico for
creating independent
administrative appeals procedure
for grievances against Iraqi is
imperative as a safeguard you as
a way to further improve child
welfare in New Mexico currently
if someone anyone has a concern
or grievance against CYFD bacon
report this privacy who without
any transparency review it and
decide it these concerns are
made on behalf of our most
vulnerable populations children
the state is a guardian for for
my professional background in
business I cannot think of any
other population who cannot
pursue a grievance within and
with an independent oversight
agency the that the Attorney
General or other independent
oversight I am speaking today as
I know there are many who would
like to but are afraid to speak
up I ask you all to vote in
favor of H. B. two eighty four
to put our children first I
believe at least thirty nine
states have independent
oversight in process and I
believe that New Mexico does
need to during this this let's
have states thank you so much.
Thank you I'm next we have don
Montana.
Hi don my to hear foster parent
and also a pediatric nurse I
would just like to say that.
I'm so sorry my to.
We take.
I apologize I just like to say
that there is no funding that
whatever excuse lack of support
for those fighting for the
future of our children of New
Mexico where we fall last in
many statistics in that as a
nurse in the hospital we have
patient advocates and Jaco who
make sure nurses and doctors are
doing what they need to do I ask
you for the advocates for the
foster parent and agencies who
also support the children
I would like to say that I hope
that no company or agency would
ever be able to hide behind
confidentiality and that there
would be appointed people who
could know the information that
it would not be breaking
confidentiality to share with
the committee or such that this
bill is asking for I support H.
B. two eighty four thank you.
Thank you we have Joe Jones.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead and it's Jill Jones I'm a
former foster parent of almost
twelve years I support this bill
and I quickly want to.
Tell you why am I still on.
Hello.
Yes.
Go ahead.
In two thousand nineteen and we
became foster parents of
children that were placed in our
home and when it was clear
statewide you was going to
seriously endanger the children
by putting them back with
biological parents who had no
proper training or safeguards to
protect them I spoke up for the
kids who cannot speak for
themselves I was told by the
White the employee I was
returning to local and they may
have to remove the children from
my home and without due
diligence at the children were
returned by statewide you to
parents to never just
demonstrated the ability to care
for and protect them.
The parents disappeared with the
children who are still in CYFD
custody and they were never
reported missing or endangered
by USD so at that point I did
what any mother of missing
children would do in a desperate
attempt to find them I went to
social media and share public
information.
On the baby six months later was
abandoned and North Carolina
hospital by the biological
parents she had severe brain
injuries burns to her body and
she's now permanently blind and
the parents were later
apprehended by U. S. marshals.
Did to see what the retaliation
the baby now blind along with
her siblings were placed in new
foster homes even though we
wanted them back desperately
because we loved and cared for
them statewide TSN's revoked my
license they're suing me and
I've been forced to obtain an
attorney for trying to protect
the children statewide you would
not there are many other foster
parents like me who are now
afraid to speak on a child's
behalf due to retaliation please
stop the statewide the
retaliation and punishment of
people trying to improve
statewide do and implement their
grievance process for the
children who don't have a voice
temper foster parents are afraid
to speak up for them I'm asking
you for your support on this
bill and thank you from the
bottom of my heart.
Thank you next we have more see
all over.
Our.
Once you're allowed to talk I
can't see the whole name so I
apologize I cut that off and.
Good morning my name is Marcy
over Star we have the
opportunity to give a voice and
due process to our children
today thank you for standing up
for our most vulnerable children
with a do pass today I'm a quick
court appointed educational
decision maker for children in
foster care.
Former school psychologist and
current special education
administrator I recognize what I
believed was a child with a
disability in my home a request
to the new valuation but the
case worker for CYFD disagreed
with me at the next screen
meeting almost a dozen CYFD
representative showed up to say
that my request for evaluation
was unwarranted
you you mentioned was denied I
was forced to stay complaint
through PED in order to get this
child the evaluation services
that were ultimately found to be
very needed as this child did in
fact have a disability making
him eligible for services.
Dispute resolution process
services and compensatory
services for over a year we're
legislative and the systemic
problem at the school was
addressed and training was
provided to the district as you
may know the PED dispute
resolution process is
independent and impartial our
children deserve this
independent and impartial
process as well they need this
regarding their care and
services and it's imperative
that the others can speak the
others can speak for them when
they are unable to speak for
themselves thank you very much
thank you next we have Angelina
Maldonado.
Hello my name is Angelina
Maldonado and I'm a former
licensed foster parent and also
court appointed special advocate
and early intervention provider
in the two years that I have my
license I fostered approximately
twenty five sweet adorable and
fun loving kiddos I have been
able to collaborate with CYFD in
several different ways and I
have also experienced several
different methods that conflict
within the department of managed
currently any sort of disputes
are in adequately handled and
there is no transparency or
accountability within the system
I honestly believe that if there
had been a fair and independent
review process in place I foster
parent experience would have
gone much differently and I
would possibly still hold a
foster parent license I would
still be providing a loving safe
and happy home for these
children eighty two eighty four
will create a fix for this
broken CYFD administrative
hearing process while keeping
every child's best interest in
mind at all times and not
letting personal emotions drive
decisions for these kiddos we
need to work together to make a
difference and be the positive
change for New Mexico's most
vulnerable children so I urge
you to support house bill two
eighty four thank you thank you.
next Maryland back.
Thank you madam chairman
chairman and esteemed committee
members my name is Maryland back
and I like so many others I'm a
former licensed foster parent
through the state of New Mexico
in my time as a foster parent I
care for thirty nine children in
my care ranging from newborn to
seventeen and a half years old I
think it's interesting that
there are at least thirty five
people who were on that and the
committee when you ask for
support because since we already
named Rebecca like it and then
return on the call and had five
separate people text me that
they have to jump off for fear
of retaliation they are afraid
to speak out and they have
jumped off the call and I want
to include that one is a mental
health provider who's fearful
that if she continues to speak
out against CYFD she will lose
her license I've had so we I I
like this bill because it is for
all stakeholders specifically
including the child the child
attorneys including guardian of
items and use attorneys
relatives not just foster
parents.
Our parents foster parents comes
from the ability to make
empowered choices about the
children in our homes and feel
like advocacy for those children
in foster care is less listened
trusted respected and valued by
other stakeholders as a
community we have to remember
that CYFD is bound to serve our
foster youth they work for us
for decades this agencies
decisions have happened under a
cloak of darkness and secret W.
and for decades retaliation has
thrived as part of its culture
we know that the current
internal grievance system has
not only scratch the surface
about systematic retaliation
outside an independent review of
agency decisions as long overdue
I strongly support house bill
two eighty for moving us in the
right direction the culture
created is someone to an abusive
relationship where one partner
threatens the other by telling
them if they speak out of turn
stand up for themselves they
will take with the children in
care which is why so many
licensed foster parents why
students mental health provider
providers license school
providers and even agencies like
conspicuous new they're not
speaking out on this because
they are afraid if they speak
out in support of HB twenty four
they will lose their license
which CYFD controls thank you.
Thank you our next we have a J.
Esalen Gonzalez.
Hello my name is solace.
I have specific experience with
you why do you try to withhold
and walk information.
For information of the child in
my family's Care.
Due to fear of retaliation that
is all I can say at the time but
I had and seen the trauma and
stress has called on the child
and my family and just from us
having this child I can see the
love we have for.
Amendment and so many other kids
and I just wanna make sure every
kid is protected because this
one was sent and so I strongly
support H. two eighty four thank
you so much for your time.
Thank you.
Yes.
You need over thank.
James Dunkley Cruz deceased two
thousand nineteen with family
under CYFD approval.
Hello miss Sanchez deceased two
thousand twenty aged out of
foster care just a few months
earlier.
Samantha Rubino deceased two
thousand twenty with family
under CYFD approval.
Eleven month old baby Johnson
who died at the San Matteo hotel
in April two thousand nineteen.
Three month old baby Carson who
was abused in Albuquerque so
badly that she is now one.
One month old baby Serrato two
mile to seize two thousand
twenty.
One of the day yes school
fractures and reading and
writing right which will
permanently blind chair was
kidnapped in two thousand twenty
with her family along with her
siblings under CYFD approval.
Governor's Alice was six in two
thousand twenty one under CYFD
approval while he was with his
brother.
Taylor ranch Jane and John Doe
tortured in December twenty
twenty.
These children and many others
have all died or experienced
things that no child should ever
have to when you are under CYFD
sole discretion my name is
Christy Bremer and I am an
adoptive parent three CYFD
foster care system and I
continue to be an advocate and
mentor for children in care.
I'm not supported this bill
because it was I want more
support from CYFD I support this
bill because it's about the
safety and well being of the
children in foster care in New
Mexico CYFD is failing them this
bill might not be perfect but it
places that track on CYFD is
unfettered power by creating an
outside an impartial entity to
protect the children and CYFD
care so we can prevent situation
like the death of James Dunkley
Cruz from ever happening again
thank you for your time.
Thank you next we have Ashley
Salazar.
Good morning thank you so much
for allowing me to speak I'm
immediately I'm a motion on I
apologize I am I am one of the
parents or former foster parents
at this point full of speaking
out about what is happening
up until three weeks ago I had
my son in my home I was previous
behavioral health care
coordinator who had extensive
history with them I became
licensed foster Hamm and
throughout the whole process
that would help to get license
to within my home he
progressively showed behaviors
and the more I told CYFD that I
needed support the more push
back there was I was told there
was no respite available that I
needed to figure this out that
my family needed to help you to
create parenting unfortunately
three weeks ago he became
physically violent towards me
and at that point I expressed
that he required more services
and did say that he needed to go
on respite because it was not
safe for either of us that
moment I was I received a call
the next morning after I told
you I FTE but I wanted to know
what the next steps for they
told me at that point the next
steps were up to me because I
needed to find out what he
needed when I told them I needed
more support I received a call
fifteen minutes later to tell me
he would not be returning to my
home.
Thank thank there was a meeting
I was told that there was a
grievance process however was
not given any information I was
told that they would staff
amongst themselves what the next
steps more when I reached out to
the P. P. W. I was told that
there the legal guardian they do
not need to listen to
therapeutic recommendations that
will continue
we continue relationship when I
had asked if you could do
respite with the family at this
point I have not received one
phone call back and well I.
You have respect for the hard
work that many good people CYFD
do the fact that I was not even
told about a grievance process I
think speaks very highly as to
the need for this bill to get
supervision and I will say that
right now my hopes of ever
having a relationship with a
child that was in my home for
almost a year that I've known
for more than two years is fully
dependent on this bill because I
have no hope other than that
that I will ever be able to see
my child again.
Thank you thank you thank you
for being here.
That was Michael.
Committee members my name is
Michelle and I have been a
foster parent for over ten years
thank you for allowing me to
speak.
CYFD is own children and family
services plan submitted to the
federal government's children's
bureau in September of twenty
nineteen had a goal of creating
a foster parent regents policy
by July of twenty twenty in the
Kevin just settlement was agreed
that CYFD would develop a
grievance procedure for resource
families by December first of
twenty twenty please note the
distinction between policy and
procedure.
On December fourteenth of twenty
twenty estimate in ever for
these policies and procedures
CYFD stated they would provide a
response by December twenty
nine.
On December twenty fourth
parents foster parents receive a
copy of procedure P. R. eleven
from their social workers which
outlined a grievance process
dated December twenty third.
On December twenty ninth my
request was denied broadened
burdensome the date for response
now is March nineteenth.
My point in all this is that
CYFD is not earnest and
forthright in the development of
the current grievance policy.
No policy was ever changed or
created the applicable policies
The New Mexico administrative
code section eight twenty six to
changes to such a policy would
of course the public with an
opportunity to provide comments
and inputs.
The cabinet settlement was the
forcing function to make CYFD
finally create a grievance
procedure the procedure that was
developed created two levels of
the fox guarding the hen house.
By passing house bill twenty
four this body can create a law
firm which appropriate policy is
derived in a proper in just
procedure implemented by passing
house bill two eighty for the
legislature in public now have
input into this important
process thank you for your time.
Next we have Lauren Lujan.
Thank you madam chairwoman I'm
gonna have been a foster parent
for six years see with these
disregard for federal timelines
due to lack of accountability in
our sense case let us to do our
part in bettering the system the
system is not broken it has been
set up and supported to
accommodate CYFD selected agenda
at any given time just as in the
wizard of oz we have been told
to pay no attention to the man
behind the curtain for years
with the his use manipulation of
policy as a certain mass as a
curtain to master and that it
was arson sister was one in the
midst of our journey through the
department's policies we filed a
grievance with with the governor
Secretary Blalock in the office
of constituent affairs after
being informed by her team of
five medical professionals that
the decision made by the
department supervisor on her
case would cause undue
irreparable trauma the response
to our complaint against the
supervisor was a call from our
case worker and that seems
supervisor asking us if we had a
problem followed by at least two
attempts to remove our daughter
from her home in countless
attempts to revoke a license to
the tune of over twenty five
thousand dollars last year an
attorney within the department
Senator foster parenting case
workers blew the whistle on the
culture of retaliation within
the system is incredibly
uncommon to find any corporation
where all of its departments are
showing the same exact cry for
help singling our children like
a carrot in front of us has
become CYFD is MO twenty many
foster parents and it usually
works our children are not some
toys that can be taken away once
the with this call the table for
breaking policies in months it
is time if you have the answer
to ending independent agency
when they blatantly disregard
the children's best interests
please join us in fighting
crimes against children and
given a sort of do passed to HB
to eighty four will you protect
our children and help us tear
down the curtain thank you.
That's all the public comment
that I have so we'll go
to the committee representative
did you want to say anything
before we go to committee
questions.
Thank thank you madam chair you
know there is just there's two
emails that I received for
people who said they could not
speak that I just think it's
important some of the comments
when these decisions are being
made I'm writing in regards to
the anti retaliation bill once
again I would like to speak
tomorrow but I do not think I
can handle it experience social
worker quote CYFD is going to do
what CYFD is going to do current
delay for foster daughter after
speaking up in court for her
what you say is right but you
just put a target on your back
faster daughter's position
you're fighting against a broken
system trusted lawyer just be
careful don't let them do
anything that would jeopardize
the adoption of your pending
you're kidding about I don't
want any the gender.
Another family who chose not to
speak because they just don't
believe that you get through the
testimony is a aunt who was a
very briefly the kinship foster
home she was involved with CYFD
as of January twenty second
twenty the children came into
her kinship they were completely
illiterate they have been in and
out of the system
they were enrolled in a public
school but it was virtual the
family was retired educator
serving as a learning coach the
children were progressing
greatly in the record meeting
with the public school CYFD
wanted them to attend school and
so CYFD charge them instead of
celebrating the progress of the
children were making because of
one on one learning that bio
family member was providing
thank you charge them with
educational neglect they revoked
the provisional license under an
emergency clause without notice
and without care so they
couldn't even they took the
children so the children were
separated they ran away and they
have been missing since January
twenty third they are the bio
intent of the bio at the
children but because the
children are in CYFD custody
they cannot report them as
missing there has been no no
amber alert these children are
missing since January twenty
third and they cannot report
them as missing CYFD they are in
their custody and there's
nowhere for this family to turn
their stories go on and on and I
am happy to answer any questions
members would have about CYFD
opposition I'm not surprised but
I'm happy to answer any
question.
Thank you so we'll go to
committee members the first I
have is a representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for this bill I'm I do just
want to correct maybe correct
something that one of that that
Pueblo said was that the
complaint procedure within PED
for special ed is
is outside of the agency and
it's not which is why I have
health bill to twenty two so
when you hear me present that
please don't say what what
they're already doing it because
they're not but madam chair.
I'd like the idea of this bill I
think there are there have been
really bad things that have
happened I'm just really worried
about the federal funding I'm it
it can somebody please explain
how that how we are I mean we
are not in jeopardy of losing
that funding.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Townsend for that you know I
just got the FIR we receive the
F. I. R. from the administrative
hearings office two weeks ago we
received the FIR from CYFD last
night so I did reach out to
federal folks in Washington and
we received feedback from them
and what they're saying is that
the only reference they could
find in title I for each plan
referencing the HSD me just read
a quote for car is is there
court proceedings regarding the
removal from the home there it
could not provide a reference
and removal from or moving
families from foster home to
another foster home so we are
not quite sure what CYFD is
referring to in jeopardizing the
funding however they kept
referring to foster families so
there is a line that we could
strike if this committee wants
to do so however we haven't had
enough time to verify that it
would in the jeopardize the
funds another reason why we
think it doesn't jeopardize the
funds is because thirty nine
other states either have an
independent ombudsman or
appurtenant office of
administrative review also
during feedback these testimony
they suggested that they like
Senate bill two forty two forty
two better and they suggested
that the substitute Advisory
Council is independent so if
it's okay for the Serbs to Care
Advisory Council to be the
independent place for kids I
don't know why it would it be
okay for the ministry of
hearings office but we do not
want this bill to die over that
technicality we would fix it you
know the only thing harder than
having a bill referred to
appropriations is having a bill
referred to do just sharing
that's where we're headed.
Madam chair that was my next
question I I I can support this
bill knowing that you're going
to Judiciary and that if there
is something technically that is
out of whack they will catch it
so thank you for that thank you
madam chair.
Needed next we have
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dow and Dixon
and all that are are
participating Representative
Matthews this is us something
that just breaks my heart.
Hi it and discussed me and makes
me mad and all the emotions that
a person can have that's what I
have about what's going on.
So madam chair I'm gonna try to
hold it together.
I have I have been involved in
the building a kinship
guardianship for a niece she's
now sixteen I got her when she
was a day old.
And
And she's doing pretty well but
I was told madam chair and
representative after thirty days
I had to give her back because
they had to close the case.
Even though the parents hadn't
done what they were supposed to
do what they were charged with
doing before they can get their
daughter back.
Ultimately I took them to court.
And I actually one score County.
Madam chair and I can tell you
is that the little girl is
thriving.
Madam chair representative I do
have a question for Mr Aspin
also if at all possible I
wondered help sensible to that
eight H. O. process
How excess of all.
I'll turn it hold on I wrote it
down wrong just one second.
Is.
So.
How sensible how accessible is
the H. eight H. O. process.
And and what they need
attorneys.
You
is it okay to respond.
Go ahead.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong appreciate you asking
that question thank one of the
benefits about using the
administrative hearings process
is that typically an individual
doesn't have to use
Representative a lawyer or
anything else in the process and
that's really the benefit of
administrative law keeps the
process more informal so that
every day folks like foster
parents rather stakeholders have
the opportunity to participate
in the I'm be heard without
having to go through formal
education and so this would
really given the independence in
the in formality of this would
really give these folks an
opportunity to go through a
system.
Thank you madam chair and
mistrust and also that so that's
interesting because you know I
I personally think we you know I
I can almost guarantee you that
no one does anything negative on
purpose I still believe that my
heart that people don't want to
hurt they really don't but
sometimes we need checks and
balances Madam chair
representative in our.
Amongst ourselves so that we
know so that we keep each other
in checks and balances and
sometimes it it we need an
outside source of for this and
madam chair and Representative
Dow did you want to answer any
of the CYFD comments do you have
a response to any of those thank
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that yeah I
appreciate the opportunity I'm
so I I write down five things
that CYFD was opposing and the
first was the cost for the
administration hearing officer
and so what.
CYFD is already staffed they use
one they have they have one
general counsel and they have
one administrative hearings
officer and if you look at the
F. I. R. they suggested that
this would take five but if you
ask the administrative hearing
office what they believe they
needed they believe the needy
needed one general and one
support staff in order to handle
this so it's one full time.
A council and one time one full
time FTE around a hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
The price.
Many of you saw.
And have met and held not only
so when she was healthy just one
legislative session ago.
She's worth a hundred fifty
thousand dollars as well the
dozens of other children who are
currently hard or deceased in
selected care.
We don't believe it jeopardizes
the funding but we'd be happy to
change languages Judiciary if
CYFD had submitted their FIR
sooner we would have already
found the answer but we are
working on it
I think they pretty much
advocated that it doesn't
jeopardize the funds when they
suggested that Senate bill two
forty to a compromise at CYFD
agreed to.
Is independence they suggested
that the sub to Care visor
council's independent so if that
independent counsels okay then
the advisory how hearing offices
also okay the difference for me
and why a I think this bill is
gaining support is that the
substitute care Advisory Council
has nine appointed members for
our representatives of state
agencies and for our pointed by
the governor our only
opportunity this year right now
which likely will be twenty
twenty one before we can come
back and address this again is
this administrative hearings
office to have an appeal outside
of CYFD and then you know they
say they've created this new
appeal process it's going to
District Court is expensive in
as you asked Jason as he
answered you don't have to have
a lawyer to go to the the the of
the administrative hearings
office and so for families who
are low income for folks who are
not able to pay for attorney
fees that that prohibitive cost
is is eliminated and I think
that's that's was their concerns
and I think they're very easily
addressed and again I would just
remind the committee thirty nine
states have an independent
ombudsman or an independent
office of administrative review
within their their child
protective services division
thirty nine.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative those were a
lot of my my questions were
answered.
One of them that you answered
was was the seed is there a C.
I. CYFD process when a child
goes missing.
And there's not a process madam
chair representative I hear you
correctly.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong when the child is in
CYFD custody CYFD is their
guardian and must report them as
missing.
Be considered missing they have
to report a missing even if they
don't know where they were
abouts are.
They still have to report them
as missing and for whatever
reason in many cases they choose
not to.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
Your.
And is there is there any kind
the CYFD that you know of madam
chair representative do they
encourage feedback or
suggestions for improvement for
CAFD.
Madam chair and representative
Armstrong I'm gonna answer that
and then maybe let Jason
elaborate or any of the co
sponsors elaborate on that
because they are full of where
we have like many our our
efforts as volunteer legislators
we set up hi you know boards and
commissions and folks to review
and give feedback you've served
on those committees I serve on
those committees and what we
have in New Mexico three statute
is the coordinating care
Advisory Council they give
feedback to see right at the as
it is currently written CYFD
doesn't have to acknowledge or
provide feedback to them so if
you read the most all it I'm I'm
gonna go ahead lodges and take
it from there.
Madam chair members the
committee Representative
Armstrong.
I think the the number of bills
relating that to CYFD that both
Representative then you
Representative Matthews as well
as Representative Dixon of talk
about that they're carrying all
go to the point that there needs
to be more constructive feedback
in there also needs to be a
willingness from CYFD to be
receptive and responsive to that
feedback and I think that's
really what you know Senate bill
two forty two with
Representative Matthews is
seeking as is to really put
teeth in that the substructure
Advisory Council the force that
conversation and and I think
here with house bill two eighty
four is really looking at how do
we get.
But stakeholders and the
executive agency building site
CYFD I'm getting funding when it
comes to these grievances or
protest in in relation to
certain CYFD decisions because
right now and I think Miss back
pointed out in her testimony
it's sort of on health the power
relationship you know unhealthy
power dynamics where you're
protesting to that same agency
to hold your license who can
determine where that child in
your home can go.
You know it's it's inherently
biased and so really creating
this check and balance outside
of the agency is really needed.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and Jason for
those words I I couldn't agree
with you more and and of course
not throwing stones but
whatsoever but wanting to make
things better and that is our
job as legislators is to to
provide or have someone point
out the issues and and try our
best to to find a solution and
that's what we're supposed to do
we're supposed to provide
solutions so I I appreciate this
so much I won't belabor the
point but I look forward to to
supporting this bill and anyway
that I can help move this
forward and and anything I can
do please feel free to reach out
to me anytime thank you madam
chair.
Thank you our next we have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry
it took so long
madam chair I just had a real
quick question to the sponsor of
I I heard much of the arguments
of four in support of your bill
I I would may have stepped out
was there in the opposition I
was curious.
Madam chair did we hear any
comments from C. Y. F. the this
morning question.
Thank you Mr chair Madam
chairman and thank you
Representative yes the only
opposition was from CD and I I
am not surprised by that many of
us have been working to bring
meaningful reforms to CYFD and
that you know the hard things at
their the hardest lists are
often the ones that are most
important and there are there
are several bills this session
that are steps in the right
direction and one of those is
the bill that sat at senator
Matt Representative Matthews and
Representative at Dixon are also
part of it Senate bill two forty
two the the administration is
supportive that bill and it had
so many changes to it that it
creates it remains are circular
internal appeal process that is
not independent and is not
affordable to the average person
who would need to make this
appeal that is why I brought
this bill
they at this they they brought
out five points at they were
opposed to and I where you on
when I answer those.
Thank you for the question I.
I believe so if if I could just
jump ahead because I know we're
government short Representative
Madam chairman of is division it
I want to be cleared your bill
does not.
What with what we're trying to
do if and when we passed Senate
bill two.
to sixty two.
Thank you.
Yes madam chair and and
Representative Anderson these
are these do not compete with
each other they support each
other.
Thank you very much I wish you
luck best luck thank you madam
chair.
Representative Ferrary you're
needed.
Thank you have to take over for
the chair I thank you
Representative for offices.
This next.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to move it to pass.
Okay we have recommendation a
motion for it to pass a second.
Okay is there any objections we
do roll call.
We do roll call clearer okay go
ahead.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes Representative Britney but
off yes.
Representative Karen bash.
I'm sorry yes thank you
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Excuse me.
Yes thank you Representative
Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Louise.
Yes short explanation.
Representative Liz Thomson yes
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Joanne Ferrari.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
boat.
And madam chair is excused.
One excuse.
Thank you.
Okay so you have a do pass on
your bill Representative Dow on
house bill two eighty four
I'm sorry was that as amended or
you were fine on this one madam
chair there's no amendments.
I'm sorry.
Can you say that.
Madam chair there are no
amendments okay thank you
And with the ten four one excuse
and Representative process would
like to explain his vote.
Fragmented what did you call me
madam chair.
Yes.
I just wanted to thank all of
the sponsors to this bill for
Bringing this legislation
forward and I I was interested
in this.
I've been hearing about this and
it's been already over a month
and a half I went to one of the
talks and so I'm very very proud
of that broader for and so I
appreciate them bringing us up
to par with the other thirty
nine states or trying to at
least less.
Thank you Representative Thomson
would you like to explain yes
thank you madam chair and what
as I said before I do appreciate
and support the concept of of
giving families a place to go
but I am terrified of losing
federal funding so I'm I I ask
you that you please get it
cleared up before you go to
Judiciary or they well are.
They will they will not be kind
I'll just put it that way thank
you madam chair.
thank you Representative Thomson
and I just like to explain my
vote also the same concern is
not having that is duplicated
agency that might jeopardize our
federal funding would be
tragic so that in some of the
other concerns but I do think
that this bill
just like we've seen in
guardianship are court appointed
guardianship mostly some of the
retaliation the things that you
don't have a quorum process to
make complaints that
we hope to fortify and that also
so I think this is something
that many of the foster parents
would be even more successful
and assured of their
Right as a foster parent to help
their
Oster child so thank you very
much I think that's it for
agenda today.
There are should be no more
bills on the agenda I'm sorry
I'm trying to find it.
It so thank you committee and
thank you audience for joining
us and and your experts
we will stand adjourned until
Wednesday morning at eight
thirty.
Thank you.
Thank you have a good afternoon
everyone.
You too.
By.
Thank you Sir Douglas to provide
less.
