I apologize for the delay.
The uh
As I tell the freshman.
In the roundhouse clocks are
merely a suggestion, so, um.
We do the best we can, but
again, my apologies. OK, we are
ready to go, Representative
Cates, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee members. Um,
uh, I'm here to uh present House
Bill 42. It's an appropriations
bill, as many of you already
know, CMS requires the state of
New Mexico to do a rate study
every 5 years. And um the last
one we received the results in
December of 2022. The state so
far has only asked to um.
For funding for certain
categories in the state rate
study, so some of these
categories have not had a rate
increase for 8 years.
Plus, and so this is a simple
appropriations Act to make sure
that we are whole from the state
funded rate study so that they
will fund their own rate study
and my expert witness is Jim
Copeland. I'd like to turn it
over to him. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jim
Copeland, executive director of
the Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community
Providers, and thank you for the
time.
Given to us today, uh.
As Representative Cates was
saying the last rate study was
conducted in in 2023, uh, and
there were 7 services under the
Developmental disability waiver
that did not get a recommended
rate increase, uh, there is
money in the, in the healthcare
authority's request for 2026 for
fiscal year 26.
That talks about rate increases
for providers and, and that's to
sustain the rates that are
currently in existence. Uh, if
you'll remember there was money
appropriated, uh.
And a request sent to CMS in
September of last year, uh,
those rates have been approved
retroactive to July 1 of 2024.
But there were 7 services that
did not receive a rating
recommended rate increase in
those 7 services 4 of them are
our supported living, uh,
services, the 24 hour a day, 7
days a week, 365 days a year for
support for people in our
supported living homes. I will
correct that statement that I
just made category 4 of
supported living received a 1%
recommended rate increase.
Category 4 serves the most
medically and behaviorally
involved folks on our
developmental disabilities
waiver.
Categories 12, and 3 received no
recommendation for a rate
increase.
Uh, also customized community
support, uh, did not receive a
recommended rate increase
customized in-home supports, uh,
living with family or
independent living or natural
supports didn't receive a rate
increase, so this, this bill
requests funding to fund a 7.39%
rate increase, uh, for those 7
services.
It would require uh an amendment
state plan amendment being
submitted to CMS to approve
those rate increases, but
without this funding those
services, the supported living
services and the customized
community support and customized
in-home support rate services
will not have received a rate
increase since 2019.
There is a rate study that's
currently being scheduled for
this calendar year 2025. There
is a vendor that is being
selected to perform that rate
study, uh, but those rates
wouldn't be available for
implementation until fiscal year
27.
And in the the 8 years since
those services have received a
rate increase, we've increased
the state minimum wage. We've
uh.
passed the healthy New Mexico
Workplace Act that requires
providers to provide paid sick
leave to their employees and
several other statutory
requirements.
And we've just got to be able to
to get these services back on.
A a stable funding source, um,
as you've heard numerous times,
providers are having difficulty
hiring staff to staff these
supported living homes and these
other services, um.
It's it, there are providers
that are on moratorium because
they can't hire staff to serve
additional people and it's just
imperative that this funding,
uh,
be implemented, it would require
the healthcare authority to
submit a state plan amendment.
Uh, to get CMS's approval to
draw down the federal match for
these dollars they would be
eligible for the federal medical
assistance percentage match from
the feds.
you
I'm good. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
just one quick thing just for
our audience members, obviously
the committee is very familiar.
What is a rate study? So rate
study is required for the center
of Medicaid, Medicare services
to determine all the different
categories of services for our
most vulnerable citizens, how
much does it cost to provide
that service. They are required
to get that information. They
got that information they paid.
For the study, they selected who
got the inform who uh could uh
uh conducted the survey and then
these categories have not been
asked to be funded, um, and as
you know through our intern and,
and Mr. Copeland has a very
eloquently stated, the industry
is struggling, and so we this
with a small investment under
understand Medicaid dollars are
matched 4 to 1, some say 5 to 1.
And, um, and so it it is a small
request to be sure that this
industry is helpful. I always
stand for questions. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. We will go to the
audience. Is there anyone, if
you are on Zoom in opposition to
this, please raise your hand.
And in the audience is there
anyone in opposition.
OK, is there anyone on Zoom?
Oh
So Vicente Vargas, are you in
opposition?
I apologize, madam Chair, I am
in support, so I will lower my
hands and hold on.
OK, so who in the room is in
support.
OK, and then we will go to
Vicente. Go ahead, Vicente.
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
um, I appreciate
you're very, very faint voice,
so give us a second to see if we
can, or if you could turn up
your share, is that any better?
get closer.
Is that any better, Madam Chair?
Um, not, no, the people in the
back can't hear you at all.
Well, I will try to speak up
there you are
from above. There you go, madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Vicente Vargas. I'm
the executive director for the
New Mexico Health Care
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living. We
represent long term care
facility or membership includes
long-term care facilities in New
Mexico. We stand in support of
this bill, um, especially since
rates have rebasing has not
occurred, um.
since 2019, costs um for
operating, um, the services that
these providers uh represent
have increased, especially since
COVID, and we are, um,
Also, um, you know, facing a, a,
a employment, um, shortage, and
this will help it to um retain
and recruit um pro uh healthcare
workers, um, and, and, and
workers in these uh in these
healthcare set in these
settings. So, um, I appreciate
this. Thank you very much.
And
Thank you.
Thank you, Vicente. So is there
anyone in the room who would
like to speak in in support of
this bill.
Come on up.
Um,
oh shoot.
OK, my mistake, no, your, your,
no, stay there, stay there. So I
didn't know there was, there
were other people on Zoom, so we
will go ahead with the people in
the room and then we'll go back
to the zoom. So go ahead, Jim,
not very much. You might want to
come up closer to the mic. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, uh, Jim Jackson for
disability rights in New Mexico.
But first, I want to thank the
members of the legislature for
uh helping the governor and the
waiting list for the DD waiver,
um, and, uh,
You have money in, hopefully
you'll have money in house Bill
2 to continue the serving all
those people that were taken off
the list and into service, but
we still have a real significant
capacity problem in our system,
and these additional funds will
go a long way to making sure
that as people enter the service
system, they're actually able to
get the services that they need.
Uh, I would only offer the
suggestion as the bill moves
forward that you might want to
be a little clear about that
this is the purpose of this and
how you want the healthcare
authority to spend these
dollars, um, but we strongly
support this uh uh position and
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it forward. Thanks.
Thank you. Next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Rebecca Sanford.
I'm the president and CEO of
Atalante Development Center and
as a provider, we have certainly
experienced a significant
increase in our cost over the
last several years without and
corresponding increase in rates
and so
I stand in support of this bill,
and it could make a significant
Thank you and we'll go back to
Zoom, so Patsy Romero.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
can you hear me now?
Yes, we can. Yes. Uh, I'm Patsy
Romero, president CEO of Santa
Maria El Midador. I'm an
intermediate care provider for
adults with intellectual
disabilities, you know, for all
the reasons stated here today,
we absolutely need to have an
increase in the rates for the 7
Services that we uh that we
talked about this morning. If
you try to operate services that
were responsible for providing
with rates from 8 years ago, it
is virtually impossible, but
what I wanna talk about, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee are the recipients of
those services. We have a huge
need in New Mexico to continue
to provide services for some of
the most vulnerable in our
state, and they
can't even get the services
right now because of the
moratoriums, because we just
can't afford to continue to
serve them, and their lives are
the ones at risk this morning. I
know we talk about providers,
they do the very best they can
to continue to provide those
services, but we forget about
the very vulnerable people who
are in great need of these
services. So, Madam Chair, I ask
you and the members of the
committee to consider the
appropriation which will make a
big difference for New Mexicans,
and I express my deep gratitude
to representative cases for
bringing this forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you. Next we have um Dick
Mason.
Yes, um,
members of the committee, I'm
sorry, I had trouble signing on.
Are we on HP 42.
Uh, yes.
Oh, OK. OK, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Dick Mason. I'm a board member
and a registered lobbyist, um,
for the League of Women voters
in Mexico. The league stands in
strong support of HB 42 Medicaid
waiver
um waiver provider reimbursement
rates. The league
Well League of voters in New
Mexico supports the health care
system that provides a
comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexico
residents. Medicaid coverage is
an important part of that
providing that coverage and in,
in order to provide that
coverage, it has to be a
sufficient number of providers
to deliver that coverage.
Given the low reimbursement
rates in Medicaid. Many
providers, particularly those
in, in um spe specialties choose
not to participate.
The waiver, if granted, will
allow HC the Healthcare
Authority to start to address
that problem.
So, um, the league wants to
thank um
Representative Kates for
introducing HB 42 and urges the
committee to give it a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you, Dick. Um, we have
Angeli.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
Thank you. Uh, my name is Angeli
Tafoya. I am the executive
director of Ultima Specialized
Family Services, and I would
like to speak in support of
House Bill 42.
And just stress the importance
of everything that everyone has
said so far with supporting the
people that have not received
the rate increases thus far.
As we noted yesterday with the
temporary freeze, but
potentially possibly could
affect Medicaid funding. It's
very important that our services
are funded appropriately so that
we can support all the people in
New Mexico in our IDD community.
Thank you.
Thank you, Angelique.
Um, OK, I think that's it for
public comment.
Did you have any follow up?
No, I, I do believe Madam Chair
is a co-sponsor on this film.
Thank you. So just before we get
started on, on the committee,
within the past 3 weeks. I'm a
part of the disability community
have been for more than 30
years. I have gotten
Emails from two different
parents, um, one of them both
have sons with autism.
One of them
was found to be
Being beaten with the broomstick
in a group home, um, and that's
what happens when we can't pay
enough staff and we and we have
to take the staff that's willing
to do that hard work at the that
low rates and another one, it
was a a young man who's an
loper. He, the, the single staff
person had 3 clients, and he got
away and she couldn't leave the
other two to go after him. He,
he just went inside.
someone else's house, and he had
to go for a competency hearing
in front of a judge on Monday.
He's nonverbal, um, and needless
to say, the families are
freaked out and scared and
concerned and so my son you know
uh to be upfront, my son is also
in a group home, um, and I will
say with their short staffing, m
my other son picked him up for
an outing, 28 degrees out. He
was in shorts and a t-shirt with
no coat.
So there's just, there's not
enough people in quality people
who you can't make a living
doing it, so I will go to the
committee for questions.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative Kates,
and I'm sorry, I didn't get your
name, sir.
Jim Copeland. Jim Copeland.
I names and faces, I apologize.
There's, there's a lot of them.
Um, appreciate the opportunity
to, to look at this bill and
before I get started though, I
would like to um introduce
Um, our analyst Aaron Diaz, and,
and Lisa Tory is our other
analyst, specifically for
health, and she is sick. As many
of us are, beware, everyone here
in the audience, use your hand
sanitizer, maybe even elbows
instead of hugging because,
yeah, it's going around already.
So, um, yeah, but welcome
everyone and um good morning to
the members of the committee and
Madam Chair. I, um, I don't know
how many of you know that I'm,
I'm the nurse on the committee.
I
the, the clinical background and
understanding of a lot of what
we look at, but the, the
reimbursement, the insurance,
all of these things, I am still
learning and so I have questions
about this, although, you know,
um, Representative Kate I'm very
supportive of, of the goal here,
which is to pay our providers,
um, much better than they, they
are right now. So, so, um,
My first question, Madam Chair,
would be,
would be
About, about, um, the rate
study. You mentioned the rate
studies are required. You said
they're required by whom?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative C and
the center of Medicaid,
Medicare.
It's a federal requirement.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
I understand that their website
is down right now. We've tried
to access it. I don't, I'm not
sure if you knew that, but um my
analyst told me she's tried to
look things up for the last day
or so and hasn't been able to
get to that. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I was aware that
it was down briefly yesterday
and, and not, I'm not aware of
the status right now. OK, thank
you very much, um.
And just a reminder, everyone,
please silence your phones.
Thank you for the reminder. I
have a new
Um, Apple Watch that I don't
know how to work. And so I'm
gonna put it in my bag. Thank
you. It's brand new, um, so next
question, as far as service
providers go, Madam Chair
Representative Cates, can you
give me an example of a service
provider?
Madam Chair Representative, are
you asking me to name service
providers like Autolante,
Altair,
um,
Better living, ACA, which is I
think the largest service
provider across the state.
Thank you very much. Um, and is
this money intended to increase
the pay for caregivers. I, I
understand that it is
representative, um, Madam Chair,
how do we know that the money
will be
Uh, we'll actually be given to
the people who are one on one
with the patients who need that
money.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. This
is a federal requirement to have
a rate that a study that will
indicate how much per category.
Providing that service costs.
The state gets to pick.
Who is surveying.
And the state receives the rate
study.
So we have it established by
their own states.
Uh, process that this is how
much the rate costs, and they
have not paid that.
For many years, and, and is part
of that cost.
OK. Thank you for that, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative.
I know that uh my, my questions
are a little bit out of order,
but I know there's 6.3 million
from the general fund, um, to
the healthcare authority for the
purpose of providing rate
increases to service providers.
Um, and this is a, this is a one
time, although I see recurring,
but please explain the
recurring.
for me, please.
How do we
Could you just talk speak to
that for me, please.
Madam Thank you, madam. I'm, I
apologize, Representative Madam
Chair, I just wanted to clarify.
So, um, it is to make the rate
study whole so so once this has
been um
Successfully funded, that is the
rate and so the reoccurring is,
you'll still have to pay that
rate until the new rate study
comes out and asks for that
rate.
So
Madam Chair Representative, when
does the new rate study occur?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I believe
Mr. Copeland said that they've
already started the process now
when I tell you they've started
the process, it still takes, it
takes um a good part of the year
for the RFP and then a good part
of the year to gather the data
and then they have to analyze
the data, so, uh, Mr. Copeland,
can you tell us when the rate
study results will be uh
offered.
Yes, ma'am, Madam Chair
Representative Jones, the, the
rate study vendor is currently
being decided now by the
healthcare authority.
The rate study is to take place
during calendar year 2025.
Uh, it typically takes 6 months
or so for the providers to
answer all of the cost reports
and submit all of their data and
that sort of thing so we're
hopeful that the rate study will
be completed and, and be able to
inform the health care
authority's budget request for
FY 27.
So it will be done sometime this
calendar year, but typically not
before the legislature meets
again to take those rates, you
know.
to get them implemented.
So help me understand, Madam
Chair, Representative Tates, is
this money for that period in
between and and only that period
in between the rate study coming
out, this hasn't been decided
yet or or begun yet. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So this is to
make whole the rate study that
came out in December of 2022.
And when and so that if this is
funded.
It is not retroactive.
It is only going forward, but it
will meet the rate that was
established by the state's
study.
Then when a new study comes out,
there will be a new request to
meet that study. OK, I
understand that. Thank you very
much, Representative.
Um,
So, I have a question here. How
does the proposed increase in
the provider reimbursement rates
compared to private sector
alternatives. Are there
opportunities to incentivize
private solutions to address
provider shortages more
effectively. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. So the DD waiver
program is an entitlement
program mandated by the federal
government for our state to
provide. These are questions
that you could ask our state
agency.
as they are structuring how the
DD waiver and that service
that's mandated is provided
specifically in the state of New
Mexico.
And just to reminder, this is a
one-page bill that's going to
appropriations, so I'm gonna
tighten up the questioning and
we don't take care of the
appropriations part. I wish we
could, but we can't. Um, so
let's keep it, it's like I said,
it's a one-page bill. We have a
bunch of bills today, so I'm
gonna ask that you stay strictly
with the bill.
I understand. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you
Representative. I appreciate how
eloquently you speak to this
topic, and we probably should
get together and discuss it
privately at, you know, at some
point when we have time, spare
time, yeah, um, that would be
great. Um, so I think I do have
a better understanding based on
what you're saying. I appreciate
that and I know how important
this bill is, um, I
I know we've had this
conversation about um the DDA
waiver for uh medically fragile
children and I, I at one time
worked in that program and I
know how important it is.
to a New Mexico, so I appreciate
the questions. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Anyone else with a question, uh,
representative, go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Representative, members of the
committee and the community.
Thank you so much for being here
and being part of the process.
Um, I have a just a small
question, Madam Chair
Representative, if I can ask, it
is about the funding, but it's,
it's a small question with your
permission. Um, I know that the
6.3 million comes from the
general fund, and I am a
businesswoman, so today it'll be
a lot of questions about bills
regarding funding because I
represent a very fiscally.
Conservative district and I just
want to make sure that I'm doing
good with my vote to represent
my district, um.
The funding generated within the
state budget, will it ensure
that it doesn't divert from
resources and other critical
priorities and will there be
federal matching funds to offset
exponential.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
appreciate, uh, fiscal
conservatism, I please uh
communicate back to your
constituents that Medicaid
actually um because there's such
a large match. There's a 4 time
match. It actually will bring in
revenue to our state, so every
dollar we spend, we will get a a
a minimum of 4. so yes, it will
provide a federal match. Um,
your insurance is something
beyond.
on the one page appropriation.
I'm not sure how to answer the
first part of your question.
No, you answered that
eloquently, Madam Chair
Representative. I believe that
it is vital to increase uh
provider reimbursement rates,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I live in a rural part of the
state and we have provider
shortages and I just wanted to
thank you for advocating for our
healthcare industry and
specifically advocating for myr
part of the state. It is much
needed. So thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. Any other
questions?
Seeing none, I will entertain
emotion. I'll move for a due
pass.
OK, so we have Representative
Ferrari with the motion and
Representative Anaya.
Um, with the second, is there
any opposition?
OK seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Good luck in appropriations.
OK. And we are going to go a
little bit out of order in case
you weren't here or didn't hear
earlier, we are rolling House
Bill 53, um, as the expert
couldn't get here.
Um, so let's go to house Bill.
40.
Go ahead, representing. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm here
to present um how pill, sorry
42, a 40, I'm sorry, house 40.
I, I wanna, uh, bring to the
committee's attention that this
is also sponsored by Whip
Martinez and Representative
Chavez. Um, so for many of you
know that accessibility is a big
issue for me. Um, uh, in 2014,
uh, there
was a final rule from CMS
requiring the individuals with
disabilities are in the
community, 80% of the time, so
they're not housed in the in and
not able to go out into the
community. This is a wonderful
idea, but uh the logistics of it
is very difficult, and one of
the barriers is having access to
sufficient adult changing
tables. If you are spending your
life in a chair, um, you may
need to have an adult changing
table.
And if you have a caretaker that
is helping you, you don't want
to put them at risk, either the
person in the chair or their
caretaker to lift and um and to
be able to move them. We also
have a wonderful, beautiful
state we want to share with
everyone, and so, uh,
accessibility is not only the
letter of the law, but it is
also financially beneficial for
us. So the more of our state
parks and accessible.
we can bring, um, uh, we believe
that it will be beneficial for
all. This bill is part of a
national program called
Traveling with dignity.
And uh it is set up so that we
can provide hydraulic changing
tables in state-owned or
state-funded buildings that have
2400.
People per per year they can go
through it, that already have an
existing family or gender
neutral bathroom on site, they
would be eligible to install a
hydraulic changing table to
increase. This will be housed in
the Department of Tourism and
our overall vision is for either
our residents in New Mexico or
travelers and they can make
they.
plan to see our great state by
knowing that they have clean,
safe areas to be able to
accommodate with their needs
are, um, to increase their
accessibility. We are not
looking for, this does not have
an appropriations because this
will be rolled onto a capital
outlay and I will be talking to
each one of you individually
asking for a capital outlay so
that we can provide the
Department of Tourism a budget
to be able to install these uh
tables.
I have 2 expert witnesses here,
um, one is Rebecca Stanford,
who's the CEO of Atalante. I,
I'll give her a couple minutes
to um to speak. Go ahead,
Rebecca.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity. So working in
the fields um of folks with
disabilities and seniors as
Representative Kates mentioned,
it is incredibly difficult to be
out to enjoy the great things
that our state of New Mexico has
to offer, whether it's a state
park or it's um a play or it's a
Going to baseball game. Thank
you. Um, any of those things,
um, folks who need the personal
care service they need to be
changed. The only option is to
do that on a bathroom floor or
possibly in a vehicle or to not
go or to stay home. And so this
has a significant impact on
individuals with disabilities,
and also people who are visiting
our great state.
If they want to go and
experience those things. It's
really hard to do that because
there's not a place to provide
this personal care.
So this bill helps address that.
It's addresses that. It's not
focused on small businesses. It
is not focused on smaller
venues. We're looking at, um,
large venues, 2500 or more
capacity or places where there
are that many visitors, so state
parks, rest areas, um.
Large um amusement parks, large
stadiums, and we have a phase-in
approach to 2032 to hopefully um
give um public buildings and,
and commercial places, time to
implement this.
Thank you, just to clarify, it
is for large stadiums and large
places that are state funded.
Um, I, I, uh, I have Kim legit
my right and if you'd like, do
you want to make a statement?
OK, let her make a statement,
oh, OK, she doesn't want to make
a statement, but she is here for
technical questions, and we
rest, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, so in the room,
is there anyone in opposition.
Hopefully they're scared to
raise their hands.
Um, on Zoom, if you are here in
opposition, please raise your
hand. OK, um, it doesn't look
like it in the, in the room, if
you are in support, please raise
your hand.
And if you would like to speak,
um, please do, but we will limit
it, um, so if you wanna speak,
please come forward to the mic.
Or we can just go with the show
of hands.
OK, OK. So let's go um to the
Zoom uh Vicente Vargas.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I, I'm Vicente Vargas
with the New Mexico Healthcare
Association, New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living, we
represent um nursing facilities,
assisted living facilities, and
intermediate care facilities for
individuals with developmental
disabilities. Many of the
residents that the that um my
membership and our membership,
uh, cares for would benefit
greatly from uh from this type
of uh.
that uh that the that this bill
would uh support. So thank you
very much and we stand in
support.
Thank you, next we have Patsy.
Madam Chair, can you hear me
now? Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, and
thank you.
Uh, this legislation forward 35
again my name is Patsy Romero.
I'm president CEO of Santa Maria
El Mirador. I provide
intermediate care for adults
with intellectual disabilities.
35% of the clients that I serve
are on a wheelchair and
desperately need this type of
service, you know, oftentimes if
we take our clients out to the
baseball.
and isotope game or we take them
out to visit some of the uh
beautiful places here in New
Mexico, we find that we have to
change them inside the van, or
we have to place them on the
floor.
Take care of their personal care
needs and their dignity is
always paramount to us. And so,
Madam Chair, we believe that
this particular legislation will
certainly uh show that New
Mexico understands the personal
care needs of the of this
vulnerable population, and I
think it goes a long way for
showing the type of state that
we are in and the care that we
put.
as priority for the residents of
New Mexico. So thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I really hope that you say yes
to this legislation, and we move
forward with something positive
for our vulnerable population.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Thank you.
Next we have Steven Timmer.
Stephen, please unmute yourself.
Uh, can you hear me? Yes, we
can.
All right, I, I apologize,
technical difficulties. Um, I
can speak from personal
experience, having had uh my
late brother who was on the
spectrum. I witnessed, uh,
people, um,
Uh, his, his fellow classmates
that had um disabilities that,
that would, that would very much
benefit from uh what this bill
is providing. It's these folks
have lived at such, are living
in such a disadvantage in their
families, um, having something
like this would at least allow
them to, uh, the joy of
enjoying uh parks. It could be
just going out for a picnic or,
you know, as, as someone
mentioned, just going to a
baseball game, uh, life is
dealt these folks and and their
families, um, uh, uh, such a, a
disadvantaged hand, um, to allow
them the opportunity to, to take
advantage of the things that,
that many of us take for
granted. I think would be, would
be greatly appreciated uh by
those families and and deep down
the people that are that are
struggling with, with the
disabilities that, that would
require this. So thank you very
much for taking this bill under
consideration.
Thank you, Steven. Next we have
Tomasita.
Good morning, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee. My
name is Tomasita and I am a
mother of a child with physical
limitations. And I've
Sorry, this is
Emotional for me. Um, Mabos
hierarchy of needs suggests that
social and belonging needs,
which includes friendship,
intimacy, acceptance is amongst
the top 3 pillars for a person's
foundation to thrive.
I personally find this to be
true, not only within my life,
my personal life.
But as I have grown to
To get to know the community of
all the families impacted with
families with limitations.
And the
The isolation that we all go
through is very impactful. A lot
of us tend to have to, you know,
travel out of state to different
Um, locations that do have some
of this accessibilities in their
facilities and museums.
Um, Disneyland, Disney World,
which could be very expensive,
and this is a lot of money that
I would like to invest into my
own state and believe you me,
there are plenty of individuals
traveling state to state looking
for facilities like this. So I
believe New Mexico could be one
of those states to sit not only
for our own people in our state,
but to bring travelers in 2023,
I believe. We had the first hot
air balloon.
Wheelchair accessible, hot air
balloon, that is the capture,
people are already putting it on
their bucket list, but we need
to provide these services, these
places for them to have a safe,
clean, and dignified space for
the change. Thank you.
Thank you and thank you for, for
your courage in speaking out,
um.
So that looks like the end of
the um
of the zoom. So we will go to
the committee for questions and
just a reminder, we have a long
agenda. I believe we have 29
bills in this um committee
already and um Saturdays are
getting closer and closer, so I
ask you to please um keep your,
keep your questions to the point
and brief. Thank you.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair representative,
thank you so much for allowing
me to ask some questions, and
before I do, I'd like to make a
couple of comments. Um, thank
you for those of you that have
been brave enough this morning
to share your story that takes a
whole new level of courage, um.
I am an older mom. I have a 2
year old and I've been in the
position with just a very
healthy 2 year old where I had
to get down on the floor and
change her in a filthy restroom,
and that is, it's terrible, and
so tough to do that for an adult
is even worse. And so my heart
is breaking and hearing the
stories and so, um, I want to
preface some of my questions
with my heart is breaking, but
I, I need to also ask some money
questions so that
I do write also by my district.
Um, the New Mexico Tourism
Department estimates reoccurring
fiscal needs of 612,000 for
staffing and compliance
monitoring over 3 years, but the
figure may rise with broader
implementation. Is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair. No, it's
not. OK, excellent. OK. And my
next question, Madam Chair
Representative is um
What is the estimated total cost
of implementing and maintaining
these adult changing stations
across all covered facilities
and how will the state ensure
these expenses are not an
unfunded mandate for public and
private entities.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
will let my expert witnesses,
um, speak.
Um, I will say that the way this
bill is structured is uh a
hydraulic uh adult changing
tables, we estimate will cost
150 to $18,000 each. Now that's
a broad cost. If you're
It, it could be much more than
that if it's an odd place to put
them or whatever, so that's why
we are asking for capital outlay
of $25,000 from each legislator
to cover the full cost of the
installation of the bed. I will
defer to my subject expert, um,
who may understand more about
maintenance. OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative.
In other states where we have
seen this implemented. I'm most
familiar with Tennessee and the
cost for implementation, um,
Tennessee took a different
approach. They did grants, um,
up to $10,000 and those grants,
um, from what we have seen have
covered the installation costs.
Um, the highest one that I know
of was a retrofit of a
recreation center, so a
retrofit, meaning an existing
family restroom, and that was
about 23,000.
So maintenance, uh, to my
knowledge is not significant. I
don't have exact maintenance
costs, but I can certainly um
get that for the committee in
the future, but in terms of
installation, um, that's why
we're looking for about 25,000
each in capital outlay, that's
about the cost, the tables vary,
um, from anywhere from the low
end of 5000 up to a high end of
12,000 for the powered height
adjustable tables.
And Madam Chair representative
and those presenting, um,
That's, it could be a 23K per
install or up to you gave some
different numbers there.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative, up to
that amount is what we have
seen. It varies. It is gonna
vary depending on if it's a
retrofit or new construction or
retrofit to an existing family
restroom, so construction costs
vary depending on the site and
the and the facility. I
understand that, Madam Chair,
representative, um.
So what are you looking at for
your total cost for your first
year in the initiative. So thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, we are not
mandating X amount of.
Tables, what we are asking is
that we begin this program that
we want to be the state, we want
the state to lead in
accessibility and understand
that it's not only a dignity of
travel, but it's a great revenue
generator as well, and it's a
safety concern, and that we are
going to fund it just through at
this time period with our
capital outlay. If we get 112
enough funding for 112 beds.
That's how many we're gonna.
is
um if the governor would like to
match that, we would very much
appreciate it. So thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you so much for
clarifying. Um, I have another
question. How will facilities
with space or infrastructure
limitations comply with the
requirements, particularly in
older buildings or venues that
lack the adequate room for
additional restrooms or
equipment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So in the bill, it does
state that uh a requirement
would be in existing family or
gender neutral bathroom. So
usually those do have
Children, table, uh, changing
tables in them and and since
we've only started providing um
A family bathroom since the 80
ADA was implemented, they
usually are in compliant and
would be able to accommodate it
uh an adult changing table.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. I do have
another question. Um, what
mechanisms are in place to
monitor and enforce compliance
for facilities meeting the 2500
occupancy or annual visitor
threshold.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I, I, I promise you I did not
ask the representative to ask
this question, but since she
did, I will be carrying a bill
to begin the Office of
Accessibility, so please look
out for that. OK.
Awesome. I have a follow-up
question to that. Um, how the
New Mexico tourism department
state parks handle the added
administrative burden, or is
that going to be covered in your
next bill, madam Chair
Representative.
I thank you, Madam Chair, you'll
have to ask the department. I'm,
I'm not, I'm not clear about,
no, that's very honest. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative
I'm gonna ask that you not
question I mean.
The questions that you need
answered, but
That you're being very
particular and and reading
questions and we have a lot of
bills and so I would, I would
prefer that you actually um ask
questions that are pertinent to
your
To the bill. Madam Chair
Representative, thank you so
much. Um, these questions are
pertinent to the bill and to the
constituents that I represent
because it's regarding money and
accessibility absolutely so they
they are pertinent and these
questions have been written down
in advance because I want to
produce thoughtful legislation.
I don't want to rush legislation
because I have to go back and
answer to my constituents why I
voted a certain way, Madam Chair
Representative. So thank you so
much for
Answering my questions that
actually ended my questions, but
they were very pertinent to this
bill, Madam Chair
Representative.
Any other questions,
excuse me, Representative Jones.
Yes, um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
I appreciate the opportunity to
look at this bill. I have a
whole new perspective on access
and access to the needs of those
who are disabled or temporarily
disabled with my disability. So
I certainly appreciate the, the
opportunity to look at this. My
problem with this bill was no
appropriation.
So the fact that you are going
to address that with cap outlay.
I think provides a, it provides
an opportunity for bipartisan
support of this effort. Um, I do
still have um some questions. I,
I'm concerned about um about
public buildings, please clarify
this. Um, each public building
has to have at least one
universal adult changing
station, correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
Representative are uh uh.
So they must be state owned or
state funded buildings have 2500
individuals that passed through
that building a year.
And have at least one family or
gender neutral bathroom
available. And then, yes, they
would, they would, they would
install one adult changing
table.
Most likely in that gender
neutral bathroom.
And that is, that's the vision
for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So if they don't
have a gender neutral bathroom
or family restroom, would they
be required to
build one or renovate for one.
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. If they are
completing a $50,000 or more
renovation to the building, then
yes, they would.
If, if there's funding
available.
Thank you, Representative. I do
see that in the bill.
Thank you so much and, and let's
talk about that, you know, I,
I've said many times in this
committee, Madam Chair, that I
have um
I serve a district that has um a
high number of um people who are
below the poverty line. So I
need every dollar of cap outlay,
but I know my district would
benefit from this and New Mexico
would as well, so I'd like to
talk about that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
was
In another committee when the
discussion of
Funding and funding it with
capital outlay.
Um
What happens if we can't
convince enough members to put
up capital outlay, or if you're
capital outlay dollars are
already committed to another
project. How is this going to be
funded?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, minority whip. I,
uh it is uh the the Department
of Tourism are only going to
spend the money that we give
them, so I am strongly relying
on you, uh, whip as a co-sponsor
to help us get this funded.
I, Madam Chair, I, I
I
would love the day that all my
members do exactly what I ask of
them, um.
Unfortunately, my caucus is full
of very, very independent
thinkers.
Um
But as, as is the case in most
um.
Districts
There's meetings that happened
before a session.
And a lot of those capital
outlay dollars are committed at
that point.
Um, my, my only fear is
In that case, do we, do we wait
a year to implement this? Does
tourism kick in the money and
hope that we put more money in
their budget next year, exactly
how.
How does this uh I'm still
trying to wrap my head around
how it would be funded. Uh, uh,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you minority Whip. It, it is uh
funded, it has an 8 year.
So we'll be, we'll be asking for
more than, uh, you know, we'll
be here several years asking to
how we can increase the uh level
of sites and um and as uh
legislators, I would hope that
you would identify spots that
you could see that there would
be benefit for accessibility.
And, and I'm just gonna jump in
here. So essentially they get
they get built or
Equipped as the money is
available, so it's not like we
have to do 100 buildings this
year if we don't get capital
outlay for that will do the
number that of capital and on
and on.
Madam Chair. Think Madam Chair,
11 last question. Do we know how
many facilities this will
affect.
Across the state
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, no,
we do not.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that
might be an interesting number
to look at, um.
We might want to reach out to
Department of Tourism or GSD.
To figure that out.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Any other questions? OK, I will
entertain emotion. I move a do
pass on House Bill 40. OK, so we
have a motion from
Representative Ferrari, a 2nd
firm representative E. Chavis,
um, Jennifer, will you take the
boat, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavis. Yes.
Representative and Chavez.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative A Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Yes, and Madam Chair
Representative, may I please
explain my vote after.
Uh, Vice Chair Herndon.
Yes.
And Chair Thompson. Yes.
by a vote of 9 to 0 if you have
a due pass.
And we will go back to
representative Center for test
for a one-minute explanation.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative for providing the
explanation from such such a
humanistic perspective, but what
really sold the deal for me
apart from my heartstrings is
that you are going to get it
funded by Capital Outlay, that
is brilliant. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you. Next, we will have
House Bill 55.
You may have to take over
cheering too if I can't get this
voice to X-ray. So it's House
Bill 55 Medicaid for personal
care services.
So if you are an expert on this,
um,
I don't know Representative
Herndon, do you have an expert?
OK, whoever the expert is, come
on up.
it's fine.
Whenever you're ready, Madam
Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, we come before the
committee today with House Bill
55 and House Bill 55.
It's a piece of legislation that
will give the authority to
implement a minimum Medicaid fee
scheduled for personal, personal
care services that requires
managed care organizations and
Fee for service arrangements to
reimburse personal care service
provider agencies, at least
$53.23 dollars 50 cents per
hour. Right now, Madam Chair,
what we are most concerned about
is that individuals who are
taking care of.
Uh, other individuals who are on
Medicaid are not being
reimbursed at a livable wage,
and we're saying it's time to
change that, and so we have done
a lot of research and we are
ready to put forth the $23.50
amount that these individuals
are paid. They should be paid
for the work that they're doing,
Madam Chair, I'm proud to let
you know that I have 2, I have
two experts here with me and I'm
gonna have them to introduce
themselves right now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Adrian
Smith. I'm, I'm with the uh New
Mexico Caregivers Coalition. I
appreciate your support for this
issue over the last 3 years,
which we've worked with the New
Mexico Association for Home and
Hospice Care, and I'm here with
my colleague Megan Norino.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Megan
Lorino. I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care.
Beam
We have another statement to
make before we go to questions.
Madam Chair, thank you for the
concept of this um bill that
we're bringing forth today,
House Bill 55.
A little bit like you heard it
two bills ago at the beginning
of this agenda, um, one
difference is a major difference
is the personal care services
program is provided through the
turquoise Care Community
Benefit. Uh, there are 32,000
New Mexicans who were served
through this program in places
all throughout the state.
We have set up a problem of wage
parity, so the caregivers of uh
those with developmental
disabilities are being paid more
through the reimbursement rate
increases, then the personal
care services caregivers, we
want all caregivers to be paid
more, but right now what we are
afraid of is a coalition
representing caregivers is that
if you're um a caregiver working
for an elderly person, you may
very well leave that job to go
work for an agency um that
may be providing care for people
with developmental disabilities,
which is having its own
workforce crisis.
Madam Chair members of the
committee also I just want to
point out that this 15%, this
bill represents what we
understand to be a 15% increase
to the reimbursement rate that
goes to the aggencies that hires
and trains and manages these
caregivers with all of the
statutorily required
requirements, um, and.
Based on what we understand from
healthcare authority that 15%
increase would be a.
$23.50 reimbursement rate for
those agencies, uh, we have
actually worked with the bill
sponsor and uh have an amendment
to take that exact language out
because we do not want statute
to hold us back from future
increases that we hope will be
realized by this group, um, a
15% increase would be
monumental. It would help to
recognize so many unfunded
costs.
that our providers have absorbed
over the last few years that
I've spoken to y'all about those
include increases in in minimum
wage that did not also recognize
all of the other payroll taxes
that increase, um, that also
recognizes some of the cost of
um the sick leave bill and um
the cost to administer the
electronic visit verification
that's required for this
program. That's quite
cumbersome, I'm an
administratively burdensome for
our providers to.
manage. So we have been behind
the ball for years and coming to
you all trying to tell that
story. We're really thrilled to
be able to work directly with
the direct caregivers, so we
have employers and caregivers,
um, on the same page, leading to
the same drum and we, I think
can stand for questions.
Thank you. So anyone in the
audience on Zoom if you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you.
Um, in, in the room, anyone in
opposition to this bill. OK
seeing none.
It doesn't appear that there's
anyone on Zoom in opposition. So
in support in the room, please
raise your hands.
OK, if you would like to speak,
come forward, but don't feel you
have to.
And as usual, it's 2 minutes.
Madam Chair, thank you. My name
is Stephanie Welch for the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and we think the
sponsor for introducing this
bill, and we support it be
giving work need to be paid fair
wages. And right now the funding
that the state's providing is
suppressing wages for these
folks, and so it's keeping
people out of this workforce.
It's pushing people who are in
it, out of the workforce, and
it's not recognizing how hard,
difficult, important this work
is in the health and safety
risk.
But these workers face. And so
we appreciate the committee's um
evaluation of this issue and
urge you to pass the bill. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, hold on one
second, Jim. We're gonna, we're
gonna, the PT and me can't stand
you all bending over the uh the
micro physical therapy if we
have to do that.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson here for
disability rights in New Mexico.
Um, first, it's a, a really
quick background, um, this is a
program that's offered through
the Medicaid program, so by
definition, we're talking about
low-income people, and we're
talking about, um, a service
that's funded uh with largely
federal match, um, and this uh
program serves actually
primarily uh elders with
disabilities, but also other
people with development with
with
b il ities that aren't in the
developmental disabilities, uh,
service system. So these are the
services that help people stay
at home and not have to go into
an institution like a nursing
home or whatever, and I think as
folks have pointed out, there's
like 32,000 people, and as we're
all most some of us getting a
lot older than we'd like to
admit, um, as we get older,
we're gonna need more and more
of these services, and so we
have to pay the people who are
providing these services to help
people get dressed.
out of bed, uh, eat, uh, things,
uh, you know, cru crucial day to
day activities that support
people with disabilities, um,
it's really important that we
pay these people, um, enough so
that we can uh we can uh uh.
Achieve the level of services
that folks need because our
population is getting older and
more people with disabilities.
So we encourage you to support
this bill because it will raise
the rates of the providers um
can pay those direct care
workers and uh we appreciate
your support. Thanks.
on Zoom we have Diane McCash.
OK, now I'm unmuted. Thank you
committee. um.
I had a friend reach out to me
recently who was reaching out,
could you please introduce
yourself. Oh, I'm sorry, I was
muted at that point. This is
Diane McCash, um, and I was just
wanted to share. I had a friend
reach out to me who was reaching
out on behalf of another friend
who's um desperately searching
for care for her elder, more
elder than me, um, mother, and
as having a really hard time
securing that care, so I think
anything that can
hope
People in this situation, um, be
able to hire care, um, will be
really needed. Thank you.
Thank you, Diane. Next is Tory
Brooks.
Hi, my name is Tory Brooks
Malga. I am the founder of
trauma healing and Prevention
Services, and I should be
receiving in-home care. However,
In 2016, the income care person
who was supposed to be at my
house so that I could be sent
home from the hospital, um,
suffered a stroke and the person
that they sent and her steed,
um, had an ankle monitor on and
Attempted to coerce money and
clothing out of me.
Over the past 8 years, I have
learned how underpaid are
in-home healthcare providers are
or home care providers are, and
that at this point in time, New
Mexico is losing these home care
providers because they are going
to call center jobs instead so
that they can afford to pay
their bills and pay childcare
for their children and
It is negatively impacting.
People across the state in some
of the worst ways and
We need to change this. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next, we have Tommy
Hernandez.
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Tommy
Hernandez here, public policy
director for the Alzheimer's
Association's New Mexico
chapter. Our chapter represents
over 46,000 New Mexicans who are
currently diagnosed with
Alzheimer's disease or some
other form of dementia and
approximately 80,000 are unpaid
caregivers to this population
group. One of the policy
priorities at the state level
for the association is to ensure
an adequate workforce.
A family caregivers and also uh
direct caregivers who belong to
agencies or other entities that
uh serve our population.
Further, one of our, one of our
policy priorities is to ensure
that
Quality care is certainly being
looked at and addressed on a
continual basis. We feel that
this bill of legislation
addresses both of those policy
priorities of the Alzheimer's
Association, and we respectfully
encourage the committee, Madam
Chair, to please vote to move
this bill forward. Lastly, we'd
like to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward. That is
all. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Tommy. Next we have Leeann
Lorenzo.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Leanne Lorenzo. I am a
member of the Pueblo of Laguna,
and I am also the community
engagement manager uh indigenous
women rising, uh, reproductive
health, sovereignty,
uh organization based here in
New Mexico, and on behalf of my
organization and my community,
um, I support HB 11. Too often
families need to take time off.
To care for their
Um
Loved ones and we are
multi-generational organization.
So, um, any unpaid time off from
work can have deva devastating
consequences and we are scared
for families who are less than
one paycheck away from being
homeless.
And that's an issue that
involves all our cities and
towns here in New Mexico and I
would like to thank the sponsors
for of the bill and
Thank you for letting me speak.
Thank you next and finally we
have Gabrielle.
Thank you, Leanne.
Good morning. My name is
Gabrielle Dietrich, and I am the
executive director of NAI New
Mexico. Nami New Mexico
represents individuals with
mental health conditions and
their families all across New
Mexico and the population that
we serve includes individuals
who make use of personal care
and we know that this issue is
important to them. Therefore, we
stand in support of this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you very much. So, um, we
will go to the committee for
questions.
Uh
Representative in Chavis.
Um, I just had a quick statement
and and I agree with this bill
and I'm so glad that you brought
it. I just know that CMS
suggested an 80% increase and
so, um, just wondering why we
asked for 70% and then knowing
that we'll probably be back here
asking for another increase, um,
and I know that was for 2030, I
believe, but just just wanted to
ask that question. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, you're exactly right. So
this gives us a little time, but
New Mexico will be.
at the head of the game if uh
this bill passes. Thank you for
that.
And Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, I think the rationale
for us on the 70/30 is to us
that feels like the more
appropriate, uh.
Assessment and what we're hoping
if the Medicaid access rule is
enacted nationally, we are my
association and others are still
working to influence that it
would look closer to 70/30 as
the 80/20 I think is not
appropriate and would be really
harsh for providers. So if we're
going that way, we would like
for New Mexico to hopefully be a
stand, a better standard that
folks could look to, and that
was the rationale.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. That's all I
have. Thank you. Any other
questions? Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. Um, I have
one question. What do the
personal personal care services
include.
Madam Chair, representative
Senator Cortez, uh, personal
care services is broadly
described as activities of daily
living and independent
activities of daily living. What
that really means is assistance
with bathing, cooking, uh, or
meal preparation, cleaning,
toileting, so it is pretty hands
on care that folks need support
with in order to remain
independent and something that
we hit on, but I want to
emphasize is that, um.
People who are receiving this
benefit through Medicaid, they
have been determined to have
what's considered a nursing
facility level of care, meaning
they need that so much support
with those activities of daily
living that they would be
eligible to be in a much more
expensive setting, that is a
nursing facility, but with the
support of direct caregivers
coming in and providing that
hands on very person. I mean,
let's underscore that term
personal care, um, they are able
to remain independent.
and in their homes and in their
communities, which is where we
all have know that that's where
folks prefer to be and want to
be. So this is a uh.
While there are costs associated
with providing this care. It is
a much more affordable cost and
a much more preferred cost to
keep people where they want to
be and with dignity. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative.
That's exactly what I was
looking for the specifics.
Any other questions?
I will entertain emotion.
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
motion for a due pass.
So we have a motion from
Representative Kates and a
second from Representative
Ferrari, Jennifer, what you call
the role, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez. Yes.
Representative E Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
He's excused. OK.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Yes.
Vice Chair Herndon? Yes.
And Chaer Thompson.
Yes.
by a boat of 9 to 0, you have a
new pass.
And I was sitting, this is worse
short, we're in the session a
week and I'm sitting here
thinking, where's Pamela?
Where's Pamela?
So we will next go to HB 36,
which is the board of Optometry
powers and duties.
With Representative Hackman B.
Hill and
Looks like in her, her experts.
Whenever you're ready, Madam
whip.
Wait for the vice chair to
return to her seat.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
this is House Bill 36.
Thank you for the opportunity to
present this important bill,
which aims to modernize and
expand optometrists' scope of
practice.
Better?
Right. Um, I know scope of
practice bills are sometimes
difficult and I know that this
committee has heard their fair
share of them, but this is an
incredibly important scope of
practice bill, and uh we're
gonna go into why. This bill
authorizes optometrists to
perform in-office laser
procedures for treating glaucoma
and after cataract surgery care.
House Bill 36 is rooted in the
principles of accessibility,
efficiency, and patient-centered
care. In today's healthcare
landscape, many patients face
unnecessary delays and financial
burdens when referred to.
specialist for procedures that
could be safely and effectively
performed by optometrists, by
enabling optometrists who are
already highly trained in
diagnosing and managing
conditions like glaucoma and
other ocular disorders to
perform these minimally invasive
laser treatments, they can
bridge a critical gap in care,
particularly for underserved and
rural communities. This
legislation ensures that the
expansion of optome.
Optometric services is
accompanied by certification
requirements from the New Mexico
Optometry Board to uphold the
highest standards of patient
safety.
It's a practical solution that
reflects advancements in
technology, medical education,
and the evolving needs of our
healthcare system. Uh, Madam
Chair, we also have a uh an
amendment that should have been
passed out to the committee.
And um I can go to the amendment
now if you want or I can
introduce my experts. It's up to
you, manager.
Oh, give us just a second to
pass it out. So I I need a
motion to um thank you to
discuss the amendment. OK. Any
opposition? OK, we are on
discussion of the.
Madam Whip, however you prefer
to do this, we can, you can take
us through the amendment.
As you go through the bill or
you can go through the bill and
then go back to the amendment,
whatever works.
Thank you, Madam. So, so we'll
just generally go through the
amendment as it's kind of part
of the bill introduction, and
then we can get into the weeds
in it a little more. So
initially House Bill 36 would
have permitted optometrists the
ability to perform interior
chamber paracentesis and the
intracameral placement of
sustained drug eluting implants,
however, following discussions
with several ophthalmologists,
um, several of whom I I see are
represented here today. Um, we
have determined that removing
these provisions is in the best
interest of all the
stakeholders.
Additionally, the original draft
of the bill included language
reinforcing the patient
protection language enacted in
2019, which prohibits online and
virtual eye examinations.
However, this provision was not
carried over into the final
draft of this bill. The
amendment I'm presenting today
addresses both these concerns,
ensuring the bill reflects the
balanced and collaborative
approach, and uh we remain
committed to working with all of
you to pass this common sense
measure, which will reduce
barriers to care, improve health
outcomes, and enhance the
quality of life for countless
and.
Of individuals across the state
of New Mexico, and with that, I
want to introduce my experts,
Madam Chair, um, to my left,
this is Doctor Sarah Bortz, and
to my right, this is Doctor
Dwight Thibodeau Thibodeau.
My French degree finally came in
handy, Madam chair.
And that will stand for
questions.
Thank you so much. Let's, uh,
let's have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
So moved and 2. OK, so
representative Ferrari and
Representative Anaya, is there
any opposition to adopting the
amendment. Seeing that you have
amended bill.
So we will go to um to the, if
you are on Zoom in opposition,
please raise your hand if you
would like to speak.
Uh, and if you are in the room
in opposition, please come
forward and we will limit it to
about um
1010 in person if we have that
many and and 5 online.
2.
Go ahead. Oh.
What did the
Could.
Go ahead and try, there's a mic
in the ceiling, although it
hasn't been picking up real
well, so you can start if it.
The courts are not very, where's
the handheld and if we could get
a room attendant to.
But, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chara Thompson
in distinguished members of the
committee. My name is Rebecca
Lane here and I represent the
New Mexico Academy of
Ophthalmology.
We are your eye surgeons of New
Mexico where all MDs and DOs. We
are committed to providing high
standard of care and safety for
patients.
You know, my role is to, well,
we all believe that um
ophthalmologists, uh, we're
highly trained. We've gone
through rigorous schooling 4
years of medical school, 4 years
of residency. I did additional
training in pediatric
ophthalmology. My heart is for
the underserved and those who
don't have a voice, uh,
optometrists are all part of our
practices. I respect them
deeply. They care for our
patients. However, they do not
have the surgical and medical
experience to properly know when
to have wisdom to do these
procedures, um, and, um, went to
refer appropriately. Um, we
would be, we are not the first
state in the nation to do this.
However, uh, especially with the
removal of the anterior chamber
paracentesis, it's still an
egregious bill. When you look at
the words, they're removing the
word minor from in-office
procedures and it gives their
board undue um legislate like
optim
powers
Um, so, for me, I became an a, a
physician and a pediatric
ophthalmologist really did take
care of those without a voice,
and I know each of you committee
members were elected by your
constituents to care for your
patient or your constituents and
decreasing the standards of care
by allowing optometrists to
perform these procedures,
decrease the safety and cannot
ensure their their uh safety.
And just to reminder, that was
number one, so count back if
you're number 11, you can
you don't, you can sit down as
someone up here said. So 9 more,
yeah.
Thank you.
Hi, good morning, Chairwoman
Thompson and distinguished
members of the committee. I'm
Doctor Krista Haidar, a
pediatric eye surgeon in
Albuquerque. I want to speak to
the myth that this bill would
improve access to care for New
Mexicans. This experiment has
been done in other states, and
it has been proven wrong.
A 2023 article published in a
major medical journal shows no
increase in access to care in
states where similar bills have
been passed. This bill will not
improve access to care. It will
reduce the quality of care.
The urgent need in New Mexico is
primary eye care, which
optometrists are trained to do,
and we need them to do.
This includes diabetic eye
exams, glaucoma screenings, and
comprehensive eye exams.
These surgical procedures in
this bill are low in demand, and
there is not a long wait for
these procedures. Even in rural
settings, there's about a 1 to 3
week wait.
Again, I must emphasize this
bill will not improve access to
care, but it will drastically
reduce the quality of care.
Please do not risk patient
safety for the false promise of
increased access to care.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Distinguished members of the
committee. Uh, my name is Nolan
Adams, and I'm an
ophthalmologist working in
Albuquerque.
I would like to start by again
saying that we deeply appreciate
optometrist colleagues, and we
worked together with them to
ensure that New Mexicans receive
a high quality of eye care.
However, we have distinct roles
in patient care.
An optometrists don't have the
training or expertise to be
performing surgery. And these
lasers are surgical instruments,
which can cut as deeply and
sharply as a scalpel.
The current certification that's
been recommended involves taking
a 32 hour weekend course with 2
days of lectures and only 4
hours of simulated time on
models and props.
The real surgical training
required to perform these
surgical procedures involves
training with real patients,
managing unexpected
complications and learning
patient-specific variations,
which can only be accomplished
through the hundreds of hours
spent with direct supervision
and patient care.
The complications of these laser
surgeries can include spikes in
eye pressure.
Inflammation inside the eye,
cataract formation, and in rare
cases, even loss of vision.
These complications exceed the
experience and abilities of
optometrists to manage. And for
this reason, we're recommending
that for the safety of Mexicans,
laser eye surgeries be performed
by ophthalmologists. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Angelina
Villa Adams. I am president of
the New Mexico Medical Society
and represent physicians in
whole.
Well, I appreciate the
amendment, eye surgery is
invasive, delicate, and
complicated. New Mexicans
deserve the standard of care
that is on par with the rest of
the country. I want to bring
your attention to a letter sent
to you by the American Medical
Association or the AMA in strong
opposition of this bill.
Our ophthalmology colleagues
spend years to be proficient in
providing safe and quality eye
surgeries to ensure the best
outcomes for patients.
Healthcare takes a team.
And the surgical part of that
eye care should be performed
with extensive training in
years, not hours. Optometrist
and ophthalmologists can and
should work together for quality
care.
Please oppose House Bill 36 to
continue safe eye care for your
constituents. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Barbara McEnany. I'm a former
president of New Mexico Medical
Society and of the American
Medical Association. I also have
been a patient recently to get
ophthalmologic surgery for
cataracts and then required
laser surgery. When you laser
something, you don't just cut
it, it vaporize.
It's gone. I thought when I was
going to have my surgery. Did I
want someone who had had one
year of clinical training after
a four-year degree, or did I
want someone who had had 12,000
to 16,000 hours of clinical
training. I am theoretically
licensed to practice both
medicine and surgery in this
state. I'm an oncologist. There
is no way I would do surgery
because I am not trained to do
so.
We need to make sure that people
have the right training, the AMA
data does show that people do
not go to underserved areas,
they practice in the same urban
areas that everyone else wants
to live in, and this will
decrease the quality of care.
Surgery should be done just by
trained surgeons. Imagine
closing your eyes and never
being able to open them again.
Hello
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Doctor
Thomas. I'm a radiologist. I'm
not an ophthalmologist. I have
no financial stake in this bill
one way or the other does not
influence my practice. However,
I am speaking on behalf of my
patients and the health care of
the residents of our state.
Physicians go through 4 years of
medical school, internship,
residency, and sometimes
fellowship training.
I feel having uptometrists
perform.
Laser surgery is a mistake for
our patients. I don't feel that
they're adequately trained.
And on
Half of the healthcare of the
residents of our state. I urge
you to vote against this bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman
and distinguished members of the
committee. My name is Tao Win. I
am a 2nd year medical student at
the University of New Mexico. I
am from Albuquerque and I went
to practice and become a doctor
in New Mexico. I want to become
an ophthalmologist that takes 12
to 15 years of training. I
believe passing this bill will
compromise patient safety, and
it will discourage younger
doctors such as myself from
training here and staying in our
state, a state where we already
have such a
why physician shortage.
So again, I hope you will vote
no on this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and all
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Margaret Miller.
I am a, uh, triple boarded
anesthesiologist. I practiced 23
years in academic medicine and
achieved the rank of associate
professor at the University of
Southern California, and um I
would just like to comment that
I'm very concerned about the
rise of mid-level practitioners
and the quality of care that
they provide, I have witnessed
this.
With my own eyes, and in this
case with regard to the
ophthalmologists, again, I'm
concerned when you do a surgical
procedure, and I've witnessed so
many as an anesthesiologist.
You have complications, and who
will take care of these
complications. You need a fully
trained medical physician to
deal with complications of the
eye.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Aaron
Snyder. I'm an emergency
medicine physician.
Louder. Sorry, my name is Aaron
Snyder. I'm an emergency
medicine physician. I represent
the New Mexico chapter of the
American College of Emergency
I work across this state in the
Southeast in Carlsbad and
Roswell. I work in Los Alamos. I
live in A, excuse me,
Albuquerque. I am very concerned
about this bill because the
emergency department is the care
that all of you receive at
nights when there's a
complication. All of these
people work day shifts Monday
through Friday, they do surgery
Monday through Friday, unless
it's emergent, and then they
come to me and my colleagues, by
expanding scope of practice for
non-physicians.
You are increasing malpractice
problems, you're expanding
complications that we take care
of in the emergency department,
and we have to call our
colleagues to fix. I urge you to
vote against this.
Yes. Uh, good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name's Edward
Aoyang,
um, U Y A N G for the record.
I'm a professor of surgery and
the vice chair of education in
the department of surgery at the
University of New Mexico. I come
to you speaking today not as a
representative of UNM but in my
other role as the chapter
president for the American
College of Surgeons, the largest
international surgical
organization representing over
90,000 surgeons in over 45
countries.
Ophthalmology is part of our
society. Um, I am not an
ophthalmologist. I'm a general
gastrointestinal surgeon, but I
have been involved in surgical
education and training my entire
career here in the state of New
Mexico. And as has been stated
by my peers as well as other
physicians and other
disciplines, procedures are
highly risky and sensitive
procedure, and especially when
you are operating and performing
procedures and uh delicate
structures, you want the most
Skilled and trained individual
to do so. And to that end, uh,
my opinion is that
ophthalmologists should be the
ones doing this procedures, and
I urge you to vote against this
bill. Thank you.
OK. Thank you all. So we will go
to Zoom, so I have James Amar
and Ben. So go ahead, James.
Thank you. I was just on muting.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and distinguished members of the
committee. Can you hear me
adequately?
We can't, don't forget to
introduce yourself.
Yes, ma'am.
My name is Doctor James Chodas.
I'm an ophthalmologist. I'm
chair of the department of
ophthalmology and visual
Sciences at the University of
New Mexico, and I also serve as
a residency program director for
our ophthalmology residency
training program.
I was a faculty member and also
a residency program director.
At the University of Oklahoma,
when the scope of practice for
optometrists was increased
there.
And I saw firsthand harmed in
harmed patients, the negative
outcomes that followed.
Lasers cut tissue, and our
instruments of surgery.
Please do not let anyone tell
you otherwise. Eye surgery is
not trivial.
I trained for 9 years after
college to do what I do now,
including 4 years of medical
school and then 5 years of
clinical postgraduate training.
All of the latter working with
real human patients.
No number of PowerPoint
presentations, videos, or work
on plastic dummy eyes during
weekend courses can replace or
substitute as training to
perform surgery on the extremely
delicate visual system. I
believe this bill will harm the
vision of New Mexicans that I
took an oath to protect.
Thank you so much for hearing
me.
Thank you. um Amar.
Yes, thank you very much, Madam
Chairwoman and distinguished
members of this committee. My
name is Amer Joshi. I am an
ophthalmologist at the
University of New Mexico and
also at the VA Medical Center. I
stand in strong opposition to
this bill.
When I think of this bill, I
think about an airline analogy.
In order to get a plane safely
to its destination, you need
highly skilled mechanics keeping
the plane functional, and you
need pilots to fly the plane.
Both groups are highly trained
professionals whose jobs are
critical, but they are not
interchangeable.
When your plan is running late,
you don't tell the mechanic to
hop into the cockpit and fly the
plane. And when there's a
problem with the engine, you
don't let the pilot have a stab
at it. Likewise,
Ophthalmologists and
optometrists are both critical
parts of the eye care system we
have in New Mexico. I greatly
respect what our optometric
colleagues bring to the table,
but we are not interchangeable.
As you've seen in the testimony
today, data both within the
state and in other states uh
with similar acts have not
improved access to these eye
care services. In addition,
What these bills do do is that
they reduce quality and safety
of these services. And for all
of these reasons, I stand in
strong opposition to this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Nick, we have been.
Good morning, madam.
Chairperson and distinguished
members of the committee. My
name is Ben Harvey. I'm an
ophthalmologist in Oklahoma. The
question is, is optometric
surgery safe? The answer in
Oklahoma is no. I present a few
of many cases of optometric
complications. Number one, yeah
capsulotomy laser was performed
on a patient. The optometrist
chose the incorrect lens and
accidentally focused the laser
on the retina rather than the
capsule, the the retina was
lasered, the patient is
permanently blind in that eye
and will never see again. 2,
optometrists perform laser to
the iris.
9 uncontrolled hemorrhage
ensued. The optometrist then
moved to the other eye,
performed the same procedure,
which also bled uncontrollably.
The patient had be urgently seen
by an ophthalmologist to treat
the resulting uncontrolled
bleeding and elevated eye
pressure. 3. Another patient
presented for glaucoma
evaluation in my clinic. History
revealed she had been receiving
regular eye examinations at the
optometric school in Taliqua,
Oklahoma. They failed to
diagnose her glaucoma, but they
were repeatedly lasering her
vitreous floaters, resulting in
elevated pressure in her eyes,
which worsens glaucoma.
For an optometrist wanted to
perform a laser in the iris to
treat acute angle closure
glaucoma. He had no access to
that laser at the time, so he
referred the patient to me. The
patient was misdiagnosed and
actually had a completely
different type of glaucoma,
neovascular glaucoma. Not only
would the laser have been
unnecessary, but it would have
worsened the patient's
condition. 5. Another patient
followed for months by two
optometrists for a red painful
eye with no improvement. The
patient finally went to the ER
for pain and was diagnosed by
the emergency room physician, a
medical doctor.
With acute angle closure
glaucoma, then referred to the
ophthalmologist who finally
performed the definitive
treatment, which was a laser to
the iris. Due to misdiagnosis by
two quote unquote laser
certified optometrist, scar
formation occurred, requiring
much more invasive glaucoma
filtering surgery to the
patient.
6. Another patient presented to
an optometrist complaining of
visual distortion in one eye.
Review of records showed no
documentation supporting the
need for laser surgery, but the
optometrist performed laser
surgery on the iris of both
eyes. The patient sought a
second opinion because symptoms
were not alleviated. The actual
diagnosis was made by an
ophthalmologist revealing a
wrinkle in the retina. The
optometrist's records gave no
indication that the, the laser
was actually necessary. Thus,
the patient received an
unnecessary procedure. To
summarize, optometric laser
surgery in Oklahoma is fraught
with complications. What are
is only a fraction of
misdiagnoses and bad outcomes.
To claim otherwise is untrue.
Medical acumen learned in
medical school is the only way
to know when to perform a
procedure and when complications
occur, how to deal with them.
Your constituents do not deserve
substandard care. Thank you for
your time. Thank you. OK. So we
will go, if you are on Zoom in
support, please raise your hand
and we'll come back to you. If
you're in the room and in supply
support, please raise your hand.
OK, so if, if you would like to
speak again, we will take 10 in
the room. There's no need to,
to, I mean, don't feel
pressured, but if you want to,
that's fine. And then we will
take 5 online if there, so if
you would like to speak, come
get in line if you don't just
stay where you are.
Um, Miss Madam Chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Doctor Daniel Mays and I
practice in Lee County. I am one
of the only 3 optometric
businesses, um, practicing eye
care there, there is no
ophthalmology in Lee County, I
had to refer my patients 2 hours
to Roswell and to get a Yag
capsulotomy, it takes an average
of 6 months to get them
scheduled, and the patients have
to wait that they cannot go into
Texas because the
ophthalmologist does not take
New Mexico Medicaid and this.
would really help the access to
care for these patients, and I
hope that you will support it.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Steven
Sanabria. I'm a 4th year
optometry student, currently
working as an intern clinician.
Um, throughout my didactic
coursework, I've gained
comprehensive education on the
foundational theory of laser.
The history innovations of
practice of the procedures and
um the indications, potential
risk factors and overall benefit
of the procedures.
At the moment, as I'm looking
forward towards uh graduation, I
know that when
Looking from where to practice.
Working with laser is a deciding
fact and only for me, but for
the rest of my cohort and for
future optometrists to graduate.
We look forward to providing
care in places where we can
expand the scope of care and
also expand access to
healthcare. Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Emily
Kosakowski. I'm also a 4th year
optometry student finishing up
my last externship in our 3rd
year, we take a course titled
Injections and lasers. We
extensively review the history
and evolution of common ocular
procedures, laser procedures,
um, specifically, we spend a lot
of time discussing selective
laser trabeculoplasties for
glaucoma and yeah, capsulotomies
for after cataract surgery, we
discussed the indication.
complications, risks, management
of the complications and risks
and expected outcomes.
Uh, to go along with this, we
have a lab component where we
have time practicing with the
lasers on model eyes to pass
this course, we must
successfully complete a
proficiency performing these
procedures.
As I transition from student to
doctor and I'm navigating where
I wanna start my career. It's
important to me to find a job in
a location where I'm able to
practice the extent of my
education and training. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Angela Morgan,
and I'm president of the New
Mexico Opt Optometric
Association, and I'm standing
here on behalf of our members to
to um let you know of our full
support of this legislation, and
we believe it will greatly
increase access to care for our
patients, as well as attract new
doctors to the state.
Good morning, um, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Um, I'm Doctor Craig Plattner. I
have the privilege of practicing
in New Mexico since 1988 as an
optometrist. I've been very
thankful for the privileges that
the legislature has granted me
as an optometrist so I can
provide greater care for our
patients.
Um, one of our optim or
ophthalmologic colleagues was
concerned about managing the uh
side effects of having, uh,
laser procedures, um,
optometrists do that already as
far as managing inflammation on
the inside of the eye, uh,
through medications, both
topically and orally. In
addition, um, there's other
complications that can be had by
having uh laser treatment and
like retinal detachment, that
kind of thing, and a general
ophthalmologist who was doing
these types of procedures is
referring to the retinal
specialist in those.
instances anyway. So, um,
optometry is ready, willing and
able to help the citizens of the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you all for your comment,
um, whips, I almost called you
whipsipinsky.
And it's early in the session.
Do you have any follow up or are
you ready for questions? Um, at
this time, um, Madam Chair, I
think we're ready for questions
with the understanding that we
would like to um add additional
information as to exactly what
the educational requirements are
for these procedures and um why
safety statistics on safety as
it's been practiced in other
states.
OK, um, so I have Representative
Ferrari, Representative
Martinez, uh, hold on.
Oh
Ferrari, Martinez.
Jones. OK, we will start with
Representative Ferra. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, you're going to
present more information about
the education first.
Um, Madam Chair, um, uh,
Representative Ferrari, chair,
we can, um, or we can answer,
in, in response to a question,
it's up to you. Well, um, that's
exactly what I was going to ask
you about because as working
with um my optometrist group,
um, they have assured me that
they have the um educational um
capacity and for years they've
had it and that this will help
our rural areas too to get the
um treatment.
that they might need an
emergency situation, especially.
So yes, if you will please
explain more about that. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Is representative,
uh, Sheriff Ferrari. I'm going
to defer to uh Doctor Bortz,
who's gonna give you all that
information now. Good morning
and thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Sarah Bortz, and
I've been practicing optometry
in New Mexico for 15 years and
I'm a past president of the New
Mexico Optometric Association. I
am currently the clinical
director of Pacific Cataract and
Laser Institute.
In Albuquerque, where greater
than 90% of our patients are
referred in by their family eye
doctors. Therefore, diagnosing
appropriately and more than half
of them are doing all the
postoperative care as well, and
we've been doing this since the
1990s. I think you know a little
bit about the bill, but
something that I want to
highlight is that these are in
office procedures, not going to
an operating room, not requiring
general anesthesia, and we use
the microscope that we use on
every exam every day to perform
these procedures.
Regarding our education,
optometrists complete a
four-year doctorate program
including didactic Laboratory
and clinical training dedicated
to eye care in the visual system
and all systemic correlations.
Optometrists complete 10,000
hours of training, treat over
2000 patients before graduating,
passed 3 national board exams,
state licensure exams and a
certification course if they
choose to do these procedures.
I want to be very clear that
optometrists are currently
performing surgery in the state
of New Mexico. There's more than
12 procedure codes that are
covered for optometrists,
including the use of scalpel,
which one of my colleagues
mentioned, that's something that
we do now and is in our toolbox
to help our patients.
Some people mentioned issues
regarding access to care and we
of course want to serve our
rural communities, but even in
our urban areas, there's an
access to care issue. If you
called um I associates of New
Mexico today and your family eye
doctor and you need Miss Jones
to get in for treatment of her
secondary cataract, the average
wait time for the evaluation is
about 1 to 2 months, and then
the procedure takes place after.
Some people may argue that these
treatments are not urgent, but
if we're meeting medical
necessity for these treatments,
these patients are currently
visually impaired. They're at
risk for falls, debilitating
falls. They're not meeting legal
driving requirements, so either
they're driving unsafely or if
they're avoiding driving, that
is compromised to them and other
physical and social ways.
Regarding certification for
this, the New Mexico Board of
Optometry will establish the
educational guidelines
specifically for optometrists
licensed in New Mexico who wish
to obtain certification to
perform these procedures that
are consistent with other states
that have approved lasers for
optometrists. It is very
important to note that 2 date,
more than 146,000 in office
laser procedures have been
performed by optometrists with
my education.
and my training with only 2
adverse events reported to state
boards.
I'd also heard some concerns
regarding malpractice. I want to
be very clear that malpractice
rates for optometrists in states
who already perform these
procedures have not increased,
and if we compare our
malpractice rates in New Mexico
to our neighboring optometrists
in Oklahoma, the rates are
comparable.
For 40 years, optometry's scope
of practice in New Mexico has
evolved alongside advancements
in education and training,
though fought by organized
medicine and ophthalmology in
every case, no scope of practice
has ever been reversed.
This bill ensures that New
Mexico patients continue to
receive safe, effective, and
timely care within their
communities.
I want you to know that I have a
letter of support here from
Doctor Robert Ford, who is the
CEO of Pacific Cataract and
Laser Institute and is an
ophthalmologist.
He's been working with
ophthalmologists closely since
1985, including in Alaska where
we do have a location and
optometrists are already
performing these services.
I welcome any questions that you
may have. I want you to be fully
informed with accurate
information. And if we may, uh,
Madam Chair, I also want to
defer to Doctor Thibodeau just
in case he wants to add anything
about the uh regulation process.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Dwight
Thibodeau. I've been practicing
optometry in Santa Fe for over
30 years.
I've been licensed in 6 states
and uh two of which I could do
laser procedures if I resided
there.
I'm President-elect of the New
Mexico Arme Association and
served as vice chair of the New
Mexico board, and also a
clinical adjunct faculty member
of the Illinois College of
Optometry.
Relative to training and
certification, uh, for doing
these procedures in New Mexico.
I'll speak on behalf of the
board of optometry as required
in House Bill 36, the New Mexico
Board of Otry will develop and
administer the traditional
requirements for performing
these laser procedures through
the board.
rule process.
I'll over, I'll give you an
overview of the requirements
that we envision.
The applicant will have an
active neumesco license to
practice optometry and is in
good standing. The applicant
will provide proof of
satisfactory completion of a
course of instruction, not more
than 5 years prior to
application of credentialing
provided that the course is from
accredited school of optometry,
osteopathy, or medicine. It's a
minimum of 32 hours, clock hours
in length is sponsored by an
organization approved by the
board and includes the following
didactic classroom instruction
on.
or physics, hazards and safety.
Laser biophysics.
And tissue interactions, laser
indications and
contraindications.
Laser application for open angle
glaucoma, narrow angles, angle
closure glaucoma, and or
posterior capsulotomy, um, in
cases of post cataract clouding
of the capsule.
Um
Potential complications in
post-op care will also be
covered, and as well as medical
legal aspects of these laser
procedures.
This also includes Proctor
clinical or laboratory in vivo
or in vitro hands-on procedural
experience and participation.
It's important to note that
these certification requirements
are consistent with
The other 12 states that have
approved lasers for
optometrists.
And the requirements pertain
only to those practitioners who
desire to perform these
procedures and will have no
effect on our general optometric
licensure requirements.
In other words, this will not be
a barrier to those interested in
a license here.
And from a non-leisure state and
do not wish to pursue
certification.
Thank you for your attention.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
thank you, um.
Uh, representative for bringing
us forward, I think it's really
important that we um make
available for um.
You know, everyone to have that
after care of, you know, uh,
cataract surgery or uh glaucoma,
release of the pressure, um,
procedures, and I think this
will uh this uh expansion of the
scope of practice for
optometrists will aid in that
and make it so that
ophthalmologists are available
to do even more of the important
surgeries that people need and
might have to wait in line for
um.
They're having to take their
time for this post-op care or
other um emergency type care. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. Um
OK, so we have uh Representative
Martinez, uh.
Minority whip Martinez, and, and
I would like to remind the
committee that we will stick to
what's being amended, which is
um a few lines on page 63 and a
few lines on page 6. So with the
rest of it is already existing
law, and so we don't need to
discuss that. So let's stick to
the amendments. So
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um.
Maturity.
Um, I, I just have a couple of
questions. Um,
So this is being done in other
states. Is that correct?
12 other states to date.
Oh, excuse me, Madam Chair, I
know I already went 12 other
states. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and
Majority whip
Out of those 12 states, how many
complications have been
reported. Madam Chair, uh, uh,
with minority whip Martinez, um,
I believe that the statistics
that were quoted before 145,000
procedures to specific um
adverse reports, but I'm not
sure if that's for all of the
states, I'm going to defer to my
expert.
That is correct of all those
146,000 surgeries. That's over
multiple states with two adverse
events reported to the boards.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and uh
Majority whip so.
I mean, I hate to put it this
way, but a lot of the alarms
that were raised in the
opposition.
Don't seem to bear out in the
actual numbers.
Is, is that a fair assessment?
Madam Chair, um, minority whip
Martinez, I, I, I mean without
being a a statistician myself,
um, all we can do is give you
the numbers that we have
researched and that we have
quoted and that we have
verified, and those are the
numbers that we have.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that, um.
You know, we, we have a very
rural state and my concern is
Coverage in
The rural parts and, you know,
right outside of my district,
you have places like Cuba.
Um, although it's, if they get
referred to an ophthalmologist,
they, they drove into
Albuquerque.
Tatum.
What about
Far-reaching
places like
My family in Espanola.
About your, I mean, it, it
creates a burden on those people
because.
It's not only around the metro
areas that you have eye
problems.
Um
So that is, that is my concern,
and I'm leaning towards
supporting this bill with the
amendment.
Um, because I just think
We need to think about.
All New Mexicans, not just
people who were close to medical
care in the metro area.
Uh, but I will continue to
listen to debate before I make
up my mind. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you. Next we have uh
representative Nicole Chavez,
and it was brought to my
attention, Representative
Chavez, that your name is
spelled wrong on or is that
right?
It's spelled wrong on one side.
OK,
just it, it's been noticed, so
thank you manager from this
angle it looks like Nick Lowe
Chavez.
If I was taller.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative. Well, I
am also concerned about the
patients and know that we have
an access to care issue that I'm
really worried about, um, but we
don't want New Mexicans unfairly
injured if these procedures are
too complex, and I also want the
highest standards, even for
rural healthcare, um, so I think
I'm, I'm really torn, so I'm
continuing to listen, so I just
have 3 questions um that
hopefully will
Help in my decision. Uh, so the
first one is, do we know what
the average miles away, the
average New Mexican is, um, from
an ophthalmologist.
Madam Chair,
I do not know that off the top
of my head. I know that we do
have a map that demonstrates
every county where
ophthalmologists are located
versus every county where
optometrists are located. I can
have that for you very quickly.
That, that would be amazing if
you could pass that out. So, and
while we get that, my next
question is, do we have a
backlog of these laser
procedures and what does that
backlog look like currently?
Madam Chair, Representative.
The answer to that is yes. A lot
of it's insurance dependent, you
know, we have to get our
services at different places
depending on where our insurance
contracting is, which is another
access to care issue for a whole
different day, um, so the big
guy in our state is I associates
of New Mexico, so I have asked
my optometry colleagues who are
actively referring patients for
these procedures. And as, as
recent as this week, I've had,
um, doctors and patients tell me
it's about 1 to 2 months.
and typically another 1 to 2
months wait for the actual
procedure itself.
Thank you so much. So 1 to 2
months for the appointment and
then another 30 to 60 days to
actually have the procedure that
is in urban areas, um, rural
areas would probably be an even
longer delay.
OK. Um, and then my last
question because I know there
was some back and forth and
questioning that um
representative Martinez had
asked, um, about the reporting
mechanism. Is there a true
reporting mechanism regarding
the other states right now that
are currently tracking these,
these events.
Be chair representative, um.
The study that was um
Brought forward in terms of over
100,000, 140,000 procedures and
uh associated a low level of
complications was, was a study
done recently, um, and it was
based on, um, an Oklahoma law
that made optometrists report to
their state board on every
procedure that they did.
Um, they no longer have that in
place because it was so time
consuming.
Um
The study
Can be attacked in terms of
That's a very low number
relative to other studies that
show complication rates across
the country, no matter who did
it, or higher.
But the study was reporting on
complaints to state boards,
which were probably more
associated with more serious
conditions. Complications do
occur at a higher rate than
that, but complications are
handled by the providers and the
people that are doing the
post-op care already, and so
those complications were not
reported because there's there's
short term complications, uh,
like pressure spikes, um,
optometrists have been handling
those, uh, doing the.
Post-op care on those procedures
for years.
So is there a national database
that's ongoing that we can go to
to see what complication rate
is? Not really.
OK, that was what I was afraid
of. Um, those are all the
questions I have right now,
Madam Chair Representatives.
I'll continue to listen to
debate.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Representative Hochman v.
Hill and presenters, um, I think
we all know that access to care
has been, it's the umbrella over
what we've addressed and how
this health committee and this
bill really shows how important
it is that we make good
decisions for quality of care
is, as well as access, so
appreciate the the um compelling
input on both sides and uh I
have, I have a few questions.
I noticed in the bill that the
board of optometry decides
credentialing and
qualifications.
And there are no baseline
training requirements or
continuing education
requirements outlined in the
bill.
So while some optometrists may
have received that training uh
in the procedures, the bill is
not limited to only those
optometrists. Um, how many of
today's practicing optometrists
in in Mexico have this training,
and is the board of optometry,
which is composed of
non-surgeons.
Um
Do do they have the right entity
to have the oversight of
surgery.
And cheer, um, representative.
Optometry schools teach those
procedures now and have for at
least 5 years.
To
It's certified in this state.
We're only gonna go back 5 years
before you have to take another
certification course, even if
you completed one in optometry
school.
So, as I mentioned, all the
certification requirements were
there in that long list, and
those are similar to all 12
other states that have this law
passed. And again, the
complication rates are really
low.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Um,
Do I understand that the
certification
Uh, is only required every 5 or
an update for that certification
is only, only required every 5
years.
Anyone that wants to
Do these procedures has to take
the certification course, um,
unless they have completed the
course in optometry school
within the last 5 years.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So how
often is there a so-called
refresher course or um how often
does an optometrist who may not
always provide these surgeries
and do them. Um, how often are
they required to recertify or
that sort of thing that would
make sure they're up to date on
being able to do these
surgeries.
Madam Chair, Representative in
the state of New Mexico,
optometrists are required to
complete 22 hours of continuing
education every single year.
That's actually high compared to
other states, so we are
regularly an active continuing
education all the time. I wanted
to reference back to something
you asked a moment ago, you
know, how many optometrists are
currently able to do this now in
New Mexico, you know, thinking
forward, what would be the
implementation. I want you to
know that this certification
course we're discussing starts
this weekend.
in New Mexico. That course had
to be capped at $50 to or excuse
me, 50 participants to ensure
that everybody's getting good
quality training or updating, I
should say because this is not
taught in a weekend course. This
is taught during our 10,000
hours of education during school
and all of our patient
encounters, so as soon as next
week, we may have as many as 50
ODs who have passed this
certification course, which
help, which will help speed with
the implementation because I do
feel this is time.
sensitive.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Does that include um uh
hands-on training, or is it
just?
At his classroom training,
including the use of lasers that
will be on site.
Thank you. And does the 22 hours
of continuing education credits
that you referenced, does that
Is it um, does it have to be
Geared toward this surgery, or
could it be any area of
optometry. It can be diverse,
you know, we do have a subset
for therapeutics and
pharmaceuticals. We have to have
a a minimum amount of hours for
that within the 22 hours each
year.
So is it possible for an
optometrist to never
Include in those 22 hours, um,
addressing the surgeries that
we're, we're discussing here.
Madam Chair, Representative.
As my fellow colleague here,
Doctor Dwight Thibodeau is
discussing the certifications
not mandatory for all
optometrists. These are for
optometrists who choose to do
that and those same optometrists
are going to choose their
continuing education as well. If
you have that motivation to grow
and hone those skills and
provide that care.
And I understand, I understand
that most, for the most part,
those people will be
professionals and want to do
that.
Is it possible that there would
be optomes optometrists who
would choose not to, Madam Chair
Representative, I can speak to
this directly, working in a
surgery center where most of our
patients referred it are
referred in, but not all
optometrists to do that choose
to do the postoperative care.
Optometry in general is a very
cautious profession. We've done
a very good job of governing
ourselves, and I think that
speaks to how in the past, no
legislation brought forth in the
last 40 years have been repealed
or reversed
first, so I've seen firsthand
how optometrists choose whether
it's skill or a lot of times
it's it's regarding insurance
contracting if they choose to
provide certain services.
I really appreciate that and I,
I see an optometrist, and I
trust him.
Exclusively to with with with
the uh with treating my eyes
because I don't have any uh need
for further treatment so far
with an ophthalmologist, so I do
appreciate that very much. Thank
you for that answer. Um,
So this bill, I'm always
concerned about what the bill
allows though, you know, not
just what you say will happen.
After we passed the bill, but
what, what does it allow, you
know, so that's the reason for
that question. This bill doesn't
designate specific laser
procedures, correct? Or have we
covered that with the amendment?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
it didn't address specific laser
procedures with specific
instruments because technology
is changing constantly. If we
mention SLT to lower pressure.
Uh, selective laser
trabeculoplasty, that would rule
out.
Micro pulse trabeculoplasty,
which is also used to do that.
Um, so we're trying to keep it
as general as possible to allow
for different instruments doing
the same thing. What we did
limit it to.
are the treatments for glaucoma
and prevention of glaucoma, as
well as opening the capsule when
it becomes cloudy after cataract
surgery. OK. Thank you for that.
Um.
How many of each of the specific
laser treatments.
Each type of injection
requested.
Each exact type of surgery would
be allowed.
That that would be allowed has
each and every optometrist in
the state performed as of this
date. Do you know that?
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't have exact numbers on
that. Um, I could investigate
further and I think a lot of
that's related to schooling and,
and where you completed your
doctorate degree.
And Madam Chair and
How manyoptometry students have
have performed these.
these procedures.
All optometry students
graduating in the last 5 years
of all the optometry schools who
have affidavits from those
schools have performed these
procedures in their training.
Thank you very much. And which
states have data that
optometrists performing lasers
have shown improved access to
care and decreased costs.
Madam Chair Representative, I
can't speak to that directly,
but I did hear my um fellow
ophthalmologists discussing how
this does not improve access to
care and I would like to get
some more information on you
about that, because that was not
New Mexico data, those were
other states. Thank you very
much. And yes, I, I realized
that because it, I have
information that says that in 22
years in Oklahoma where similar
legislation was passed, there's
been no increase in access to
care and no proven decrease in
cost either.
Are you familiar with that data?
Will you please repeat yourself?
Um, that in the 22 years in
Oklahoma where they passed
similar legislation that there's
been no increase in access to
care and no proven decrease in
costs.
Yeah.
Madam Chair Representative
regarding access to care, I
would like to get some more
information for you that's a
little bit unique to our state
regarding cost, I have come
across data that has shown me
this actually decreases cost
from a Medicaid standpoint.
Oftentimes these procedures are
done by ophthalmologists are
currently being done in surgery
settings, whereas we would be
doing them in an in office
setting, that can decrease
follow-up time, facility fees,
and of course social costs
related to driving additional
appointments, etc.
Thank you very much for that.
I'd be interested in seeing
that, yes, um.
So, although I, I do, I
understand the need for rural
access, um, I also trying to
balance that with maintaining
the standard of care. I feel
like optometrists,
ophthalmologists definitely have
their place and it also as as
team members for treating
patients, um,
I think we just need to be very
careful about uh patient safety
and at this point, that is my
greater concern.
And I appreciate your testimony
very much and, and I appreciate
the opportunity to look at the
bill. I'm going to be presenting
some bills that are similar in
nature and trying to increase
access, so very much
appreciated. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, I do have a
question, and it should be no
surprise in the room that it
always goes back to the economic
and fiscal impact, being that
I'm a businesswoman, um, I do
have a question regarding uh the
forecast of costs, regulation
and licensing forecast, it will
cost 40,000 in the fiscal year
202026 to implement necessary
changes to the New Mexico Plus
licensing.
system. So who would cover those
costs?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Senator Cortez, um, I know that
information was included in the
fiscal impact report, but um
we've since been, uh, it's been
corrected and that that specific
cost is going to be incorporated
in the RLD budget, so there will
be no additional cost other than
what the line items are and
they're given to RLD as part of
their budgetary process through
House Bill 2. OK.
And just for everybody in the
room in my constituents
listening, can you give us what
RLD is the acronym for.
Thank you, Madam Chair and uh
Representative, I guess I've
been here too long. The
regulation and licensing
department in the state of New
Mexico. Wonderful. I just wanna
make sure, Madam Chair and
representative, that everyone
listening can follow, um, and my
other question was about has
there been an increase in
lawsuits for malpractice in
other states that have passed
this and you eloquently
addressed that.
So thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and doctors
presenting, um, I just wanna
thank both sides for presenting
your perspective. It did not
fall on deaf ears, and as you
can see, even in some of my
deliberation with our our
amazing Madam Chair. I'm very
thoughtful about every vote that
I make and making sure that I
represent the constituents in my
district, and so I, I just want
you to, to know that I'm a
doctor in my own field, um, in
it entirely.
different industry and so I
understand the grueling
education requirements. I
understand credentials um from
ophthalmologists, but I also
understand that optometrists
have gone through extensive
education and training as well,
and while the credentials are
different, they are still
extensive, and I live in the
rural part of the state and from
experience, it is a matter of
access and I have a dear friend
whose mother waited 9.
months. She was 9 months out for
a procedure and my constituents
have pleaded and I have taken
both sides into consideration,
but I was also elected to
represent my district and so I
am in full support of this bill
because I represent District 62,
and it is in a rural part of the
state. And so thank you both
sides, and thank you for the
presentation of this bill, Madam
Chair and Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
thank you presenters. Uh, I'd
like for you to just provide
some uh background and data. One
of prior to this bill being
brought, I think it was uh
mentioned, Madam Chair, that
there were at least 12 other
procedures that the optometrist
can uh can uh perform and so
those are uh additional uh
scopes of scope of services that
they are allowed to produce.
What has been
Has there been a high negative
impact as a result of those
services that were allowed.
I'd like to give an example, a
common example, one of those
services, Madam Chair and Vice
Chair.
If you get something in your
eye, maybe a metallic foreign
body or a leaf while you're
doing yard work. It is extremely
painful and it is considered a
minor surgical procedure for an
optometrist to use different
tools, sometimes um it can be
even what's called a diamond
burr or brush that we use on the
cornea. Sometimes we just use
forceps and things to remove
foreign bodies from the cornea.
Another example of current
surgical procedures that are
reimbursed to optometrists in
New Mexico would be what we call
lumps and bumps, you know, if we
have a visually significant bump
in our eye, you know, that's
something that we would be able
to excise and just like our
colleagues sent to pathology to
confirm that it is a benign
lesion. So with respect to the
past 12 uh additional scope of
services that you are allowed to
do or they have not been a, a
high number of adverse uh.
consequences occurring from
those. Is that what you're
saying, Madam Chair, and Madame
Brazil, Madam Chair, vice chair,
a little clarification when I
was referring to 12. I was
referring to 12 surgical
procedure codes that are
reimbursed to optometrists at
the same rate as they are
reimbursed to ophthalmologists.
So not 12 separate scope of
practices that have passed over
time, although scope of practice
did have to be passed in the
past to enable us to do those
procedures. So your question
was, do we see an uptick in
complications or?
Issues, um, I would like to
delve into that further and get
some statistics for you. Um, do
you have additional information?
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, um, they're actually
closer to 30 procedures that the
board has uh deemed that fall
within the scope of practice.
Um, we had an increase in scope.
About 10 years ago, that added
um these anterior segment
eyelid, conjunctiva, corneal
procedures to our list of
approved procedures for
optometrists, and I have not
seen or heard of any pattern of
problems associated with those.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
presenters, you have mentioned
that there would be uh
continuing education if this
scope of practice was granted.
How would this continuing
education be different from what
the uh phthalmologists are
receiving, or would it be the
same type of uh continuing
education.
Madam Chair and vice chair, I
can't speak to ophthalmologists
education, but we are currently
required to receive 22 hours of
continuing education, each and
every year. That's a current
requirement for all
optometrists. So your question
was, how might that education
change or further include laser
education, so as the board of
optometry and the New Mexico
Optometric Association worked
together, particularly the
association who helps organize
our um events.
we provide education, we would
request more speakers to come
in, speaking on behalf of these
types of procedures are meetings
relatively large, but most of us
are in one room at a time.
There's not two rooms going. So
if our association is providing
these services, it would be part
of the education provided by the
New Mexico Optometric
Association to include laser
information that's within the 22
hours already required.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, presenters,
thank you for your response.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. I
sing no more hands raised, I
will entertain emotion. I'd like
to move uh do pass for
housefield 36.
OK.
OK, so we have a motion by
Representative Ferrari in a
second, by E Chavez, you, oh,
let's make the correct motion,
so the, the motion
as amended.
Thank you. So go ahead,
Jennifer.
Representative Anaya.
Yes, and explained my vote.
Representative Kate.
Representative E Chavez.
Representative N Chavez.
Um, pass.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
I'm voting no, and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez.
Yes.
Vice Chair Herndon. Yes.
Vice chair Thompson.
Vice chair. I'm sorry, Thompson,
we're already here and uh
A week into it and we can't
even,
yes.
And um Representative Chavez.
You so.
Yes, yes you said no.
Oh
I'm sorry, I'm required to ask
you again if you say pass.
That is correct.
Um, I'm going to say no, and I
would like to explain my vote as
well.
So by a vote of 7 to 2. You have
a due pass.
And we will go to Representative
Anaya, and then Jones and then
Santa Cortez, 1 minute to
explain your vote.
All right. This is actually
really, really difficult. Um,
I'm really appreciative of
everyone uh who came to talk to
me about this. From what I
understand historically, scope
of practice changes have been a
knockdown, drag out fight,
regardless of who is trying to
change their scope of practice.
So taking that into
consideration, one of the things
that I drilled down to was, OK,
aside from any kind of fear
tactics or whatever, I'm going,
OK, what is the actual data in
front of me.
You all will come to find that I
am always um asking about
patient safety first. I really
want to appreciate the sponsor
for adding this particular
amendment because I was about to
vote no on this bill without it,
um, because I know we have the
data for the um
For the procedures, uh, for a
couple of the procedures, but
not for all of them. And so I
just wanna to appreciate and
thank the sponsor, um, for that
as well. Thanks so much.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, thank you for everyone
who's had input on this, this
really important bill. Um, I'm
open to learning more before we
get to the floor of this bill
continues to go that direction,
but at this point, I am um
trying to balance that access
and quality, I think that our
vision is so important, we need
to make sure that um we're,
we're doing the right thing
there. So I appreciate everyone
again. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative,
um,
And Chavez or
the low, Nick Clo today.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives, um, I'm really
torn to and and I really liked
that that amendment was there,
that was when I was stuck on to
absolutely vote no, so I would
like more information before
this gets to the floor, so
hopefully we can have some
conversations because just the
fact of the guidelines haven't
yet been created. I have a
little concern of if somebody's
already had the training or
certification in the last 5
years, does that mean now they
don't have to if they're going
to be performing these new
surgeries.
And then I'm really just gonna
look into the AMA and why they
strongly oppose this
information, um, but I just want
further information to really
have a solid boat on the floor,
so thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Oh yeah,
just, I can't remember which of
our two freshmen it was who
asked someone to um explain what
an acronym is, and thank you for
doing that. We, we, we tend to
get into the lingo and although
I would guess most of this room
and but it's appreciated.
OK, next we will go to um
HB 56, Madam vice chair,
Medicaid reimbursements for
birth centers, and again, if you
are here for if you are here for
the Vvagus nerve stimulation,
um, we have rolled that.
So
do we have enough to vote?
We'll see.
Even if we
Sorry, we, we need to move on,
um, excuse me.
Excuse me.
So just and it um
We, we still do have a quorum. I
keep losing my vice chair, who
is right in front of me. I'm
scared for 50 days from now.
Go whenever you're ready,
Representative Hendon.
And, and if we do um lose our
core and what we can do is
continue to hear the bill, hear
the public comment and make it
the first order of business on
Friday to go back and vote.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we're now looking at
House Bill 56, and the bill's
purpose is to address the
decreasing accessibility for
pregnant women, particularly
those living in rural areas to
access to birthing-related care
by improving the Medicaid rate
of reimbursement for that care.
So, Madam Chair, I am happy to
uh have an expert with with
witness with me today, and I
would like her to introduce
herself.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. Um, my name is
Carrie Robin Bruder, and I'm
actually taking off my
professional lobbyist hat for a
moment and I'm introducing
myself as a board member, um, on
Darlo's birth and Health
Center's board, um, we're a
volunteer board, uh Darlo's is a
independent, um, locally
controlled birth center that is
both state licensed and
nationally accredited. Uh, we,
as representative
and said, believe that birth
centers could play a larger role
in this state when it comes to
addressing some of our maternal
healthcare deserts, uh, birth
centers offer a out of hospital
birthing option for pregnant
patients, uh, for low risk
birth. We think that that
expansion of birth centers
potentially across the state
could be one of the ways that we
are trying to ensure our
newborns and our mothers have
the
very best care possible. Uh, on
the one pager that I know many
of you saw yesterday and we have
additional copies of up here,
you'll see that there is a very
stark difference between
reimbursements that happen for
hospitals for non-complicated
vaginal births and for what's
called normal newborn. This is a
newborn that doesn't have any
complications, um, hospitals are
reimbursed as much as 3 times
the amount that a birth center
is, so all this bill is meant to
do is make sure that there is
ity between the dollars that are
awarded to hospitals for
non-complicated vaginal birth as
there is a birth center. Um, and
we look forward to the
discussion and the passage of
the bill.
Madame Chair, with that we are
uh open for questions. Thank
you. So, um, if you are here, if
you are on Zoom in support.
Excuse me, please raise your
hand and we will come back to
you, um, in the room, anyone
here in support.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the, as I said,
it's not required.
Um
But if you would like to come
on, come on.
They have the Darth Vader thing
here.
Or is that not working? OK. It's
not working well enough.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jason Thompson. I'm,
again, I'm not here as a
professional lobbyist. I'm here
just on a personal matter, one
for my good friend Carrie and
the representative because we
all, I have some, me and my wife
have some personal experience
with this particular issue, my
wife, um, was also uh treated by
Dara Luce, and we had a really
wonderful experience with them
and we're able to get some
firsthand experience of the
value that they give to the
community here and around the
state. So I'm just here to
support the intent of this bill
and the proposals.
give them the parity that they
deserve to continue to serve
their community and, and expand
uh this option for folks. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. Oh, we have a lot of
folks. So uh uh all we will only
take 5 online comments, but I
have recognized that your hands
are raised in support. So it
looks like Kimberly, Tory,
Danica, Steven and Roberta will
be our, will be our 5, and
remember it's 2 minutes.
So go ahead, Kimberly.
Kimberly, please go ahead.
I'm so sorry.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Kimberly
Garley and I'm a volunteer with
Indigenous Women Rising. The
organization and I are in
support of this bill, aiding to
give pregnant people more
control and choice of their
birth story by reimbursement at
the same rate is provided to
hospitals will empower our
communities and encourage more
of these centers to open. It is
my personal opinion, at times,
the delivery process in
hospitals can fill two clinical
disconnected from the divine
nature that being a pregnant
person, bringing new life into
the world truly holds. I'm
grateful for the options we can
provide our citizens and hope to
continue to expand on programs
that provide cultural and
personal care in such important
and intimate moments. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Tory.
Madam Chair and committee.
My name is Tory Brooks Malga. I
found a doula by donation three
decades ago, and I volunteer
with indigenous women rising. I
have supported hundreds of women
through pregnancy, labor, and
delivery in multiple states
across the US as well as in
Mexico, Guatemala, and Belize. I
strongly support the increase in
Medicaid reimbursements for
birth centers for the following
reasons. Our federal government
is currently making decisions
which are already increasing
infant and maternal morbidity
rates.
Following the federal
government's choices, New Mexico
has witnessed a rapid loss of
berthing facilities and berth
providers.
New Mexico has been losing
record rates of providers due to
Medicaid reimbursements still
being based on outdated
payments.
States like Washington and
Oregon and the Pacific Northwest
have some of the lowest infant
maternal morbidity rates which
is credited to their
long-standing traditions of
homebirth midwives and
freestanding birth centers being
appropriately compensated and
encouraging and supporting low
risk births to have minimal
interventions, saving money in
the long run. Madam Chair, I
would like to see New Mexico
join the evidence-based
maternity care model.
Pardon me.
My peers in Norway are blessed
with that keeps the cost of
maternity rate care down while
reimbursing providers at
something closer to a living
wage than what we are seeing
right now.
Thank you for caring about the
people who are actually impacted
the most by this decision. The
infants who have a right to an
evidence-based birth instead of
a litigious-based birth, their
parents and their providers.
OK. Thank you. Um, so I see we
have another person in person,
so I'm gonna let her go ahead
and then we'll come back to the
um 3, so if it the only ones we
will hear from on Zoom or
Danica, Steven and Roberta. So
if your hands are raised after
that, I'm sorry, we won't get to
you. So let's go back to
In person
Hi there, my name is Gloria
Doherty here, and I am
representing the New Mexico
Nursing Association, the New
Mexico nurse midwives, as well
as the New Mexico nurse
practitioner counsel, who are
all in support of this bill with
hospitals closing down labor and
delivery units across the state
because of healthcare shortages
and funding reimbursement
shortages. This is a necessary
way to improve access to our
rural areas and improved choices
and quality of care to.
the rest for all of our state.
Thank you.
We will take one more, but
warning, please get, get your
booties up here. Thank you. Oh,
sorry, thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, and members of the
committee. My name's Rachel
Lorenzo. I'm the founder and
co-executive director at
Indigenous women raising. We
have an emergency fund, which is
our midwifery and Doula fund,
um, we serve native folks all
over the country who do have low
risk pregnancies and are unable
to afford, um, midwifery and
care, we have a fully subsidized
native folks who are seeking to
um give birth whether at home or
in a birth center with the
midwife that they choose, um,
partially because a lot of
midwives in New Mexico do not
accept Medicaid because the
reimbursement rate is so low at
about $1400 per birth, and
that's not sustainable um for uh
midwives businesses, and we are
in full support of this bill
because it should not be on
nonprofits.
to help subsidize low risk um
pregnancies when seeking
midwifery care. Thank you.
Thank you. So we will go back to
Danica.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Donnicarones, and I
am a wife, daughter, and mother.
I am also a full doula and birth
justice manager with Bold
Futures.
I reside in rural southern New
Mexico, and I'm expecting my
second child this summer.
I am here today to speak in
support of S HB 56 from the lens
of these intersections.
Birth centers have a
long-standing history in New
Mexico as a beautiful blend of
personalized care for pregnant
people and medicine rooted in
traditional and cultural
practices.
If we hope to begin addressing
the rampant maternal mortality
and morbidity crisis our state
faces, voting yes to this bill
is a step in the right
direction.
This will not only give existing
birth centers a more sustainable
budget to operate under,
therefore improving care to
communities, but will likely
incentivize additional providers
to open birth centers in parts
of New Mexico currently
suffering without local
maternity care.
There's an opportunity now to do
this without placing an
additional burden on our
midwives who are well equipped
with life saving skills.
As a doula, I look forward to
the day when birthing outside of
the hospital, is as normalized
as birthing within.
As a Latina mother, I yearn for
the day that we cease to lose
black and brown parents to
preventable circumstances, and I
thank you for the opportunity to
speak about HB 56, and I urge
you to vote in support of this
bill.
Thank you, Steven.
Uh good
good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. Uh
again, my name is Steven Timmer.
Uh, my wife and I are attending
uh Daralos and we are expecting
our, our first daughter to be
born there, uh, in, in April,
and
I'm here because I, I, I do
sincerely believe that um, you
know, expectant mothers should
have the opportunity to bring
their children into the world,
um, but when an organization
that that empowers women, uh, to
give birth naturally and believe
in in in the natural process of,
of, of birth. And if it's a
low-risk pregnancy, I really do
but I, from what I've been
experiencing there and what I've
been learning, I think it's in
the best interests of
of the mental and, and physical
um health of, of the mother. Um,
That, um, the neturs be allowed
to have be happen, allowed to be
happening naturally and um to
have this service available, uh,
to, to, to folks that are that
are less fortunate. I, I, I
think is is very much needed,
um, and that's why I do believe
um that, that I asked for this
committee to please support HB
56 and opening up that
opportunity to to those that are
that are less fortunate.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you. Next we have Roberta.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Roberta Orbach. I'm a
retired CPA New Mexico
certificate number 3340. I have
had the honor to serve as an
analyst for the New Mexico
Senate Ways and Means Committee
and have professional background
in medical reimbursement
systems. I am an advocate for
access to care, quality of care,
and, um,
Darlos, uh, was my daughter's
selection to be, uh, my grandson
was #7 in the Darralos birthing
center, and I have been, uh, not
necessarily close but close by
to the center ever since then
for the past 14 years. Um,
My daughter serves as a medical
biller there and now it has the
honor to serve on the board of
directors. Um, I am aware of the
insurance contracting issues
that we have in the state. I am
aware of the uh inequity uh
between the hospitals and the
birthing center's payment
systems, and I, um, there is an
equal Rights Act and there um is
a provision that
ent ities uh have are considered
to be in many instances, a
natural person having the same
rights as a person, and
therefore, it's my belief that
hospitals should have um the
same equal rights as birthing
centers and uh birthing centers
need to be um available as an
opportunity for all New Mexicans
and all areas of the state.
Um,
The equal rights, I, I believe
that there's an a legal issue
here that birthing centers have
a legal right to equal pay for
the services rendered,
especially if it's under the
same medical billing code.
Um, so thank you so much.
Thank you. OK, we will go to the
committee for questions. Any
questions? Representative Senne
Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I know that
the emphasis is Medicaid
reimbursements for birth
centers, but I just wanna ask,
are any Medicaid dollars going
to abortions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee ur centers do not
perform those procedures because
they are the ones who are seeing
babies that are actually in the
birthing process. Madam Chair
Representative, thank you so
much for the clarification.
That's all I have.
Representative N Chavis,
followed by Representative E.
Cha. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Um, it's really
not a question. I just want to
say that here in Bernalio
County, um, I think we have the
only birthing center um in this
state and so I would really
recommend um anybody that's
looking into that or wanting to
know more about it, go to
Darlo's. It's, it's a beautiful
facility in the North Valley and
so just because I represent
Vernao County, I just wanted to
point that out. Thank you.
Thank you, and we have been
excused from the floor, so, um,
so we're, we're cool there and
we'll try and get further. Go
ahead, representative Chavez.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. I just have a quick
question. Um, there was in, and
I don't remember who said it,
but there was a, um, in the
testimony discussion about um
additional services for in areas
where hospitals are not
providing um where there's not
obese, not providing the
service. Do you have a sense of
Of how many counties those are
and are there birthing centers
there already, um, up and
running, but they just need the
Medicaid reimbursement to
continue.
Madam Chair members of the
committee and Representative
Chavez, 1 in 3 counties in New
Mexico is considered a maternal
health desert. There's currently
only 14 rural hospitals that are
offering labor and delivery
services. So right now there is
Darlo's, which is a state
licensed and nationally
accredited birth center in
Bernallio. There's then 2 other
birth centers that are licensed
but don't have national
accreditation, one in Santa Fe,
one in Espanola.
The vision is that if we can
make the bur center model
financially sustainable through
Medicaid that would provide the
incentive for more birth centers
to open in those communities
where the labor and delivery
units have closed, so they do
not exist right now because the
finances don't work. So the hope
is that if we can let this bill
happen, it is um in the
legislative finance
recommendation that then we can
start building out this model
over the next couple of
Years to address some of those
access to care. And then just
one more question, um, Madam
Chair Representative, I know
that you and MH.
Um
Educates midwives. Does, do you
know, well, 2, maybe 2
questions. Do the other schools
of nursing, I'm assuming that
they do um have a program for
midwives and then 2 are any of
the birthing centers, um,
providing, um, for lack of a
better word, residencies for
those midwives.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and Representative
Chavez. I'll answer the second
question first. Um, the birth
centers do participate in
preceptorships for the nurse
midwives so that they have
clinical training in the birth
center process. Um, so that is
happening right now as to your
first question, I know that UNMH
has a certified nurse midwife
program and there are also
certified nurse midwife programs
in schools across the country. I
believe that UNM is the only
certified nurse midwife program
in the state right now. Um,
there are other
Registered nursing programs, but
the CNN program I believe is
housed at UNMH right now. And if
I'm wrong, Gloria will make sure
to correct me as soon as
committee is over so that we can
clarify that with you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, seeing no further
hands, I will entertain emotion.
I'd like to make a motion for to
pass. OK, and this motion by
Representative Casson a second
by um
In Chavis representative in
Chavis. So is there any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due past
6 to 0.
7. I'm sorry. I can, I can't
count it. There's my vice chair
in front of me. I don't count.
Thank you.
OK, and next we will move on to,
just a reminder, we are excused
from the floor, um, to House
Bill 58, mental health programs
in schools funding. This is the
uh representative Herndon Da
being featured in in HHS, Madam
Chair, I was looking for my, uh,
My expert, but that's OK. We'll
present this bill without the
expert, and Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm directing
your attention to House Bill 58,
and this is primarily an
appropriations bill to the
public education department to
support mental health and
wellness rooms in school and
also to prevent suicide, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I just want to let you know that
one of the first schools in the
state of New Mexico to have
mental wellness rooms was El
Dorado High School.
The reason that they have the
mental health rooms is because
they had the highest rate of
teen suicides in the entire
state. So one of the things that
we found is after that that
mental health room was placed
there. Students were given a, a
person in the room who had been
trained in psychology,
sociology, behavioral health, so
they could talk to them about
what they were feeling and what
they were going through, so that
we could actually continue to
grow our own and not lose our
students. So during the past.
2 years we've had the
opportunity to provide 14
schools with mental health
rooms. I was able to visit the
last one, which was the New
Mexico Academy for the Media
Arts and watch those students as
they talked about and thrived in
terms of how they were uh
growing and, and evolving with
their behavioral health. It was
quite impressive and Madam Chair
and members of the committee, we
need to do this for every single
school. Unfortunately, we don't
have.
have the funding that has been
available right now with what
has been requested is $1,750,000
which would be $125,000 to 14
schools around the state, not
just in Albuquerque or in the
metropolitan areas so that
students will have a room to go
to and talk about how they're
feeling and what they're going
through. So with that, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
one of the things I just want to
add as a final statement is
that.
We're looking to the University
of New Mexico and every other
university and college within
the state to allow their
students that are studying
behavioral health, sociology and
psychology to be interns in
these schools, and once we pass
the counseling compact, we will
have enough professional
individuals to make sure that
the oversight is available for
the interns with that, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, I stand for
questions. Thank you, madam, uh,
vice.
year. So in the room, well first
on Zoom, if there's anyone in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and we will come back to
you in the room. Is there anyone
in opposition.
OK, seeing none and sing none on
Zoom, we will go to support if
you are in in support on, on the
Zoom, please raise your hand if
you are in the room in support,
please raise your hand.
And if you would like to make
public comment, you are more
than welcome.
Again, we will have a maximum of
10 people. Doesn't look like
there's a huge rush though.
Good good afternoon or good
morning, Madam Chair. Um, thank
you for, um, your time. My name
is David Burke. I'm the director
for Serenity Mesa Youth Recovery
Center.
Um, and I'm also the board
president for Nami Albuquerque,
stand in strong support of this
bill. We speak to far too many
families who've had somebody
that's been lost to suicide or
struggles with mental health. A
lot of the kids that come to
Serenity Mesa could use these
services or could have used
these services, um, I think it's
gonna be a great deterrent for
our youth and in their struggles
with their mental health also,
uh.
If if we always talk about
crime, this could be a tool
where kids who are being bullied
or kids who are bullies, or kids
who are struggling, um, can seek
help and find help, um, far too
many trauma and there's not
enough resources for our youth
and I stand in strong support of
this bill, thank you.
Thank you, so online, we will
have Tory and then.
Addin, I don't think so.
Well, we'll see. Go ahead, Tory.
Hi, my name is Tory Brooks
Malga. You've heard me already
this morning, Madam Chair, thank
you for letting me speak again
to this. Um, this one is not
gonna be as well collected
because this one hits very close
to home.
In 2012, my foster daughter
committed suicide after being
bullied for 2 years and not
getting the support from Sandia
High School staff and teachers.
In 2019.
My son.
Died by suicide.
After also being bullied, he had
broken his arm, was in a lot of
pain, was regularly being
bullied at school, had students
draw penises all over his arm,
all over his cast after he had
to have surgery for his broken
arm, came home that day, told me
how much he loved me.
And
Then
Left a letter that was an
excellent critique of everything
that is wrong with our society
today.
Suicide is not a imperfection or
a weakness on the part of the
individual. It is a reflection
of how profoundly sick our
society is. We do not value
women. We do not value children.
We do not value education. We do
not value health. We can say we
do all that we want, but our
funding and the choices that our
government makes proves to our
children on a daily basis that
they are not valued, they are
not wanted, and the only way
that they are seen is as a
source to be exploited.
We need to change this or we're
going to see an ever increasing
epidemic of children who choose
to leave this world rather than
suffer any more in it because
they do not have any control
over what is happening to them,
and they do not have the support
that as our future as the
generations as the next at 8
generations. This land has
dedicated itself to and everyone
has failed our children. Thank
you so much for hearing me and I
apologize. But like I said, this
one hits close to home. Thank
you. Thank you, Tori. Thank you
for sharing and um we we cover a
lot of subjects that that we
need to have a tissue box at
each, um, it's very appreciated
and so sorry for your loss,
Tory, losses.
We we're working to do better.
So, um, questions from the
committee.
Representative Senator Cortez,
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you so much for sharing
such a heartbreaking story, and
I agree with Madam Chair
Representative, we are working
tirelessly to do better for our
people and most importantly, our
children. Um, I do have some
questions, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, regarding
economic and fiscal impacts, of
course, um,
How do schools comply with this
bill if there is no space for a
wellness room, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madamei and Representative
Senator Cortez, what has
happened with respect to the 14
schools that have been granted
these uh funds. They have found
a room within the school and
they have converted it to a
mental wellness room. So they
have used the funds to put
furniture to put uh activities
to put uh support in the room
and a place for the behavioral
health specialists to sit, so
they have not built anything
new. It's a matter of converting
space.
that is in the school and each
school has found a way to make
that happen.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I know in in my community I
spoke with our superintendent I
was up at 4 a.m. this morning
calling people and um spoke to
him very early in it and in our
district there is no space,
Madam Chair representative, and
there's not any room that could
be converted, so just for the
sake of indulgence given my
district, Madam Chair
Representative, what would a
school do that does not have a
single room available.
So, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez,
let me just say that we don't
force this uh idea or this
concept on any school. So if
schools don't have the provision
in there, we will have to work
out something for them, but up
until now the schools, the funds
have been given to schools who
have asked for the rooms, and so
those rooms have been, uh, the
funds have been made available
to them. And please know we
never force anything on a
school.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. I'm always against
uh.
Forced mandates, um, I know I'm
in government, but I'm always um
a proponent of moving out of the
way, um.
Getting government out of the
way and getting power back to
the people. And so thank you for
clarifying that, Madam Chair
Representative. Um,
I think that
Given what our society has
experienced even in just the
last 5 years, I think that
everyone can agree how important
mental health support is and so,
um, the questions I have, um, I
never want them to detract from
how important mental health
support is. Um,
So the schools and I just wanna
clarify the school's madam Chair
representative that you are
helping their 14 schools,
correct?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Senator Cortez, thus far we've
only had the funding to support
14. Many more 45 schools
actually asked for the mental
health rooms.
And
to understand.
So there are 14 schools
currently funded, and this bill
is to continue that funding or
to add an additional 414,
thank you, madam. Thank you for
clarifying, Madam Chair
Representative, and I want to
understand um the fiscal
component completely, Madam
Chair Representative. So right
now,
There are 2 appropriations from
the general fund to public
education department in fiscal
year 2026 for $300,000 for
training and services to
schools, staff, students, and
community members. The second
appropriation is 1,750,000 to
support the operation of mental
health rooms in New Mexico
schools. Now, is this a request
for that additional funding or
it's already in the.
appropriations, madam chair
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative Senator Cortez
for allowing me to explain that
the $1,750,000 is not currently
appropriated. It is a request
for appropriation for 14
additional schools that will get
$125,000 each.
Uh, for both, uh, funding for
the personnel that would be in
the room and for making sure
that the room is appropriately
equipped for the, with the uh
furniture and other amenities
that need to be in there to help
with the proceedings, to help
with the room, I'm sorry, that
there is $300,000 which is
actually uh appropriated and
asked for in this bill, which
would go to a program called the
Yellow Ribbon Suicide Prevention
Program. And so that's a group
of people all over the state,
but primarily
located in rural areas that are
concerned with suicide and
they've asked for an additional
amount of money to be
appropriated for them. So there
are two appropriations, one for
the yellow ribbon program and
the other for the 14 um mental
wellness rooms, Madam Chair.
And, and I'm just gonna jump in
here. It does go to
appropriations, so we have
enough work to just look at the
health part of it and we'll let
the money people um deal with
the money. So let's try to stay,
try
led appropriations do their job,
and we do ours because we have a
lot of work to do.
Madam Chair Representative, I
completely understand that, but
I do have another question. Um,
If that money is granted, will
it detract from any other
resources.
From the school.
Madame Chair, uh, representative
Senator Cortez dancers,
absolutely not.
So these are additional
resources that are made
available to the schools when
the schools asked to have a, a
mental wellness room in their
facility.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you so much.
And I believe that concludes my
questions, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you. So we will go to
represented E. Chavez, followed
by Representative Ann Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
don't have any questions, but I
did want to make a comment. I, I
think that this is a great idea
in terms of putting mental
health rooms in in schools, um,
I
I think that many of you know
that I have a
Young person in my home.
Um, who recently graduated from
a high school in Albuquerque. I
was speaking at one point in
time to one of the teachers
there.
And he told me that he had 7
kids.
On suicide watch.
I don't think that a teacher
should bear that responsibility.
I think that
Supporting this legislation.
Will help
Definitely.
Because teachers need to be
focused on teaching, right? Not
figuring out which kid is going
to commit suicide or if they
are.
Um, I think that we need to give
As much support as we can and
we've had a lot of discussion
during the interim, especially
in terms of supporting their
families and supporting our
kids, especially our at-risk
kids.
This is one way to do that.
And I think that um if we can
move to a place where every
single school in this state has
a mental health room. I think
that should be our goal. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative An
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Vice Chair for
bringing this in, um, I just
wanna to first point out that um
to anybody that had concerns
about this bill and additional
mandates to the school systems.
Um, I'm glad that you pointed
out that this is not mandated,
we're not putting this
additional burden on school
districts, and it's just for the
schools that have asked for this
programming. Um, I received an
email from a young man named
Andrew who attends El Dorado and
he.
Had amazing things to say about
um their wellness room, and so I
just want to point out and, and
thank you so much for your
testimony, um, especially, um,
on the loss of your son, um, I,
I know that is hard to state,
but I wanted to say that, um,
you know, when my, when my son
was murdered, um, Manzano High
School called for, and it was
during the summer, uh, a day to
bring in his fellow classmates,
his fellow teammates.
it's on the wrestling and
football team, um, and they had
mental health providers and let
everybody know that they would
have a safe space there at
Monzano High School for these
students to be able to talk
about their feelings and as we
know, teenagers already have an
overwhelming, um, hormone
changes and emotions, and I just
think that this is amazing and I
wanted to thank you for bringing
this because it is needed. I
know that we have healthcare
providers and health systems
that have.
Wellness Rooms for doctors, um,
especially during those COVID
times and so clearly, if we know
it's very important for
providers, why would we not want
to make it important for our
youth, so thank you.
Thank you sing no further
questions, I will entertain
emotion.
So, um, and the second
you pass.
OK, so we have represented each
of us with the motion and
representative Cates with the
2nd. Is there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a duty
ass.
6 to 0.
OK, continuing with the Pamela
Herndon show.
Um
So defibrillators in every high
school, which is HB 54.
Whenever you're ready, madam
Vice Chair, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you, Madam Chair, we have
an expert witness on Zoom. His
name is Jacob Willis, and he is
in Utah.
Could we please bring him up?
to the screen.
while they're working.
While we're working on getting
him pulled up. Representative,
why don't you go ahead and
introduce your bill.
OK, there he is. So go ahead,
madam, madam chair, could we
please ask one of our, uh,
administrators to please come to
the table.
And, and just for everyone's
sake, we would like hand hand
handoffs handouts in advance as
the chair needs to approve them,
so, um, so just try and get them
to Jennifer or um the room
attendants in plenty of time so
that I can take a look at him
and we can uh make sure that
they're
Up to standards.
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and Madam Chair and
members of the committee, we are
bringing forth you House Bill
54, and this House bill focuses
on external defibrillators in
high schools.
Madame, 2 years ago, this
legislature passed Senate Bill
450 and Senate Bill 450 required
that.
Individuals primarily coaches
and athletic individual and
athletic trainers, be trained on
the use of defibrillators. But
what it didn't do is it didn't
provide the defibrillators at
the schools. So now what we're
doing, we're bringing forth a
piece of legislation that will
have defibrillators in every
single high school. We are
starting with high school,
that's the way where we're
seeing, uh, most of our kids who
have been uh having some sort of
illness or adverse effect uh
with.
to some aspect of cardiac arrest
to make sure that those high
schools not only now are
trained, but also that we make
sure that the defibrillators are
in the schools. In addition,
Madam Chair, we are also
requiring some additional CPR
training we want to make sure
that our teachers, our trainers
and people who are in the
schools also have some
additional training, if indeed
an emergency arose. With that,
Madam Chair, I'd like to
introduce you to two of
experts, uh, first I'll, I'll
let them introduce themselves
and then my expert who is on
Zoom.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Mahesh
Sita. I'm with the American
Heart Association.
sponsor is here with them. I'll
let her introduce herself.
Thank you.
I was trying to get here, thank
you, Madam Sherry, it's an honor
to be here. First time in this
committee, um, we have been
working with this young advocate
for a year and we are very proud
to come and present uh our our
come to you.
And Madam Chair, I'd like to
present my uh expert who's on
the Zoom.
Would you introduce yourself,
please.
Yes, ma'am. Madam Chair members
of the committee, my name is
Jacob Willis. I'm a college
student from Utah, I was
previously stated, I am here as
a volunteer for Simon's Heart.
Thank you for the opportunity to
be here.
Thank you and welcome.
Uh, with that, Madam Chair, we
will go to the committee.
Oh, did you want
Uh, Madam Chair, we'll stand for
questions. Thank you. I
appreciate the brevity, um, but
we are excused, so.
So let's see, on online, if you
are in opposition, please raise
your hand, not online, on Zoom.
So we have a webcast and Zoom.
So if you are on Zoom or in and
are in opposition, please raise
your hand. Is there anyone in
the room in opposition?
OK seeing none.
Um, either place, OK, if you are
on Zoom and are in support,
please raise your hand.
And in the room, um, please
raise your hand.
If you are in support.
And then um we will take public
comment.
In the room, so go ahead.
Hi, my name is Aaron Snyder. I'm
the, uh, New Mexico emergency
medicine emer New Mexico,
American College of Emergency
Physician chapter president, we
strongly support this, we see
people all day come to the ER
from school's facilities, they
come for passing out like,
excuse me, falling down, uh,
there's sports events in the
evenings. I think that if you're
going to have mandatory
training, and you're going to
have people of all ages with
significant healthcare
backgrounds in these events,
it's really important that they
are DC.
in a timely manner, not 2030, 40
minutes an hour after the event
occurred and they arrived in the
ER at that time, the help is
essentially uh futile. So we
strongly support this bill.
And
Jacob, did you want to speak in
support it it, Madam, madam vice
chairs that, that the plan yes,
ma'am, that is, OK, go ahead,
Jacob.
Thank you, Madam chair members
of the committee, thank you
again for the opportunity to
speak today. I am fortunate to
have played a small role in
supporting the creation of HB
54, and I'm speaking in strong
favor of this piece of
legislation. As we look to
protect the lives of our own
children and students. This bill
is a crucial and vital step
towards saving lives during
cardiac events.
The need for AEDs in schools is
undeniable. The survival rate
for individuals who experience
an out of hospital cardiac
arrest in the United States is
only about 10%.
However, the survival rate jumps
to 70% when an AED is used
within 3 minutes, and when that
AED usage is coupled with CPR,
the survival rate goes up to
95%.
It's a common misconception that
cardiac issues are exclusively
life threatening to adults only,
when in reality a school-age
child dies from sudden cardiac
arrest in the United States
every 3 days, making it the
number one cause of death on
school campuses.
ADDs are as necessary as fire
extinguishers, and used in
schools much more often than I
think we actually realized.
Just this past week, a 16 year
old sophomore named Randy in
Oklahoma collapsed to the floor
during a basketball game.
Because his heart stopped
beating. His opponent, Magnus
ran to grab the AED in the
school and immediately
administered CPR, saving Randy's
life. In a video of their
reunion days after the event,
Magnus tells Randy, quote, There
was no way you were going to die
on that court. I wasn't going to
let you, close quote.
Through the passing of HB 54, we
are echoing the words of Magnus
and telling our own youth that
we won't let them die.
Equipping each high school with
an AED is not just simply
another safety measure. So the
implementation of these devices,
we are ensuring that we are
prepared for the worst case
scenario, giving us a chance to
turn what would be a tragic loss
into a saved life.
This is my reasoning for the
strong support of HP 54, as it
will undoubtedly make a
difference in many lives. Thank
you.
Thank you. OK, we will go to the
committee. I have Representative
Kate. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'll be brief. I just want to
applaud the sponsors for this
bill. Thank you so much. I was
on the floor in that 2023
session, and I was like, what?
Why are, why is this not funded
and so once again, what a great
representation from our
representatives that have
remembered the the the issue and
went forward. I mean, uh, your
expert witness very eloquently
put it, but um.
Many continual uh continual
heart defects, um, don't present
in and accept an adolescence, so
many times they're athletes, we
never think that there's a
vulnerability, um, and so I
applaud you for this. It is an
investment in this equipment,
but it's easily um uh used and
um and what a a a great gift for
our community. Thank you very
much, representatives both.
Representative and Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I spoke
again with our superintendent
regarding this issue from my
district and in southeastern New
Mexico, we already have an AED
program district-wide. It's, um,
every campus has been deployed
in its accessible to the general
public, the nursing staff in our
district maintains the program
and the mill levy budget covers
the cost of equipment and
supplies. Now, is that
different?
For the northern part of the
state, Madam Chair
Representative.
So Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Senator Cortez,
every school does not have a
defibrillator. And so what we
want to do is to make sure that
they do. Unfortunately with the
school that you described, the
administration has already
reached out and taken care of
that issue. They won't need any
more assistance from us, but
there are a number of other
schools that haven't, and may
not be in the same uh situation
to be able to support the school
with the defibrillators, Madam
Chair Representative, um.
the mill levy budget was not
available to cover the rest of
the schools in the northern part
of the state, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Senator Cortez, I don't know the
answer to that. All I do know is
that I'm gonna have my uh my
co-sponsor to help provide a
response. Thank you, madam chair
uh Representative Senna Cortez,
you say that, uh, the, he say he
covered with his own operational
budget, right with the male levy
budget, yeah, so um what we are
trying to do, Madam Chair, here
is to provide specific budget
for that. So the maintenance in
the in the future and the
training, it will cover.
To this. So I'm sure he will be
alleviated from that budget, um,
by providing extra resources for
this. And and just to put in
there, not all school districts
have access to mill levies, OK,
which is Madam Chair
Representative, and that that's
what my question was. Thank you
for clarifying, Madam Chair
Representative, um,
I want to make sure that I
understand, Madam Chair
Representative, is that it will
be a mandate, but there will
be no support to provide the
mandate, schools will have to
cover their own cost. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative? Uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Senator Cortez,
that is not correct. So the
funding that we are looking at
will one provides the
defibrillators to provide the
training, and 3, make sure that
the defibrillators are always
working. There needs to be um
Batteries that have to be
replaced, it won't do them any
good to have a defibrillator
that doesn't work. So the idea
is to make these consistently
available to every school.
Thank you for the clarification,
Madam Chair Representative. So
my next question is, where does
the money come from?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee from the general fund,
OK.
I think that covered all of my
questions. Let me just make sure
that it did cause I had some
written down.
And I just want to clarify,
Madam Chair, representative,
that the mandate AED placement,
it would be in the 230 publicly
funded high schools in New
Mexico.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and representative
Senator Cortez, that is correct.
And my next question is
regarding equity, Madam Chair
Representative, why not middle
schools and elementary schools
of the committee representative
Senator Cortez. That is an
excellent question. If I get the
additional money, I'm happy to
make that happen. Our focus was
on the high school's uh
primarily what we were finding
based upon our research is
that's where the majority of the
incidents were occurring, so
we were addressing those first.
If you would like to help us
expand the uh extent of this
bill. We are happy to make it go
to mid schools and elementary
schools also.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, for clarifying
that. That makes a lot of sense.
I think that's all of my all of
my questions, you clarifying,
Madam Chair Representative, that
the money is coming from the
general fund and it's not a
mandate without support, which
was my greatest concern.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. This
is such an important
responsibility for taking care
of our children. We need to make
sure that our funds are where
our legislation is.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Vice Chair. Um, I
just wanted to thank you for
this. I know that there was an
uproar and a lot of parents
concerned, including myself,
when they did remove
defibrillators from the APS
schools because the battery
upkeep and training so the fact
that you are funding this so
that schools don't have to worry
and us as parents in the school
districts can be OK and at
that these are here. I, I would
love to help you, um,
In the middle schools as well.
So thank you.
My school district's gonna be
very happy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
gonna take you up on that offer,
Madam Representative. thank you,
um.
sponsors than Mahesh. So I, I'm
just gonna put in a shameless
plug for a bill that I've got
coming on Friday, which will add
to newborn screenings, a
questionnaire for families, and
if there is a family history of
cardiac issues, then a um an
echocardiogram will be done
before the infant is released
from the hospital so that
Folks know immediately if there
is some sort of cardiac issue or
I mean, at least that's the
hope, so, so be here on Friday
and be ready to vote. So I will
entertain emotion.
Mountaineer, I move and it's not
amended. I didn't miss that, um,
or, uh, do pass for house Bill
54.
OK, so we have a motion from Rep
Ferrari and a second from Rep E
Chavez. Is there any opposition?
Let me, let me
So by a vote of 7 to 0, you have
a due pass.
Next, we will go to and we're
just gonna keep on working until
they call us from the floor and
say we need you or tell the
floor adjourns. Sorry, but this
is your life now, um, so we're
going to HB 52, uh,
representative Garcia and rural
healthcare tax credit
eligibility. So whenever you're
ready.
Go ahead
And representative work we still
have a another.
One bill after you, so if we can
keep it brief and
Oh, never mind, we do not have
another bill, as the expert
witness, um, was unable to stay
around, so this will be our last
bill and maybe we can make it to
the floor today.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I do have an expert, and I guess
she's on her way at Linda
Siegel, but we'll start.
And uh hopefully she'll catch up
and be here.
After I'm done with the
presentation.
Uh, we gonna start as a s, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
House Bill 52 adds the following
health practitioners to our
rural healthcare practitioner
Tax Credit Act.
And the credit in these in this
instance is a $3000.
tax credit.
The additions, the, the
positions that we are adding
with House Bill 52.
Uh, our licensed nurse
practitioners.
Uh, emergency medical
technicians.
Uh, paramedics.
Speech, language, pathologist.
Occupational therapist.
And chiropractic physicians.
And Madam Chair, um,
The rural healthcare
practitioner Tax Credit Act.
was established in 2007.
It's a two-tiered credit.
A $5000 credit.
And a $3000 credit. The $5000
credit was mainly for the doctor
class.
All the doctors are included in
that $5000 credit.
And the other professions fall
under the $3000.
Uh, credit.
And the purpose for the rural
healthcare practitioner Tax Act,
and I was present on that vote.
was to retain current
practitioners in rural New
Mexico.
As an incentive.
Also to recruit.
Uh
Healthcare practitioners in the
rural areas and also just as
significant is to reduce work
shortages in our rural areas.
And Madam Chair.
Uh
There were some additions made
to the
Tax credit, uh, bill in 2009.
Where we brought in some
specialized.
Nurse practitioners.
Um
And uh
And no new add-ons.
Uh
We added until last year.
When uh representative uh.
Jones and I.
Introduce a piece of
legislation.
That brought in the following
healthcare professionals.
Pharmacist
Registered nurses,
Social workers.
Behavioral health counsel and
therapist.
Physical therapist and certified
midwives.
Madam chair
This was an 11-year battle that
I pursued.
In terms of bringing these 6
professions on board.
And uh
Also, uh, Representative Jones
was instrumental in also
clarifying some language.
That, uh, disqualified
registered nurses for the full
credit, but due due to her
language, we were able to kind
of rectify that.
And in 2024.
Uh, that piece of legislation
that me and Representative Jones
introduced, made it into the tax
package.
Of which the governor signed.
And in the, in those editions.
Uh, we added 5600 new
practitioners that would qualify
for the credit.
And Madam Chair, um, that from
the nemescal care, New Mexico
Healthcare Workforce Committee.
Found that 23% of the new
additions, the licensed nurse
practitioner, emergency met.
Medical technicians, paramedics,
speak Chinese pathologists,
occupational therapists, and
chiropractic physicians.
23% of these new additions.
are practicing in Ro New Mexico.
And these new positions, uh,
would entail.
1,343.
New
Practitioners into the $3000
rule.
Uh, tax credit.
Madam Chair, the Healthcare
Workforce Committee.
Which was created as part of
that 2007 legislation.
To basically do research
regarding
Uh
Healthcare practitioners, uh,
throughout our state.
The 2023 report of the
healthcare.
Uh, Workforce Committee.
found that there are
900 occupational therapists.
In our state
23%, approximately practice in
rural New Mexico.
Yeah, Madam Chair.
New Mexico is 65% rural.
And under House Bill 52.
07 OTs would be eligible for the
credit.
The Healthcare committee
Report
Also discovered that we have
approximately 2000 speech
pathologists in our state.
Approximately 23 are practicing
in Rome, New Mexico.
Yeah, Madam Chair.
New Mexico is 65% rural.
And under House Bill 52,
approximately 460 speech
pathologists would be eligible
for the credit.
Also under the health care data
of 223 report.
500 chiropractic physicians.
In New Mexico.
Approximately 23% practice in
rural New Mexico.
Yet
65%.
of New Mexico is classified
rural.
Under House Bill 52,
115 chiropractor physicians
would be eligible for the
credit.
And Madam Chair, the report does
not include reliable data.
For EMTs and paramedics and
licensed nurse practitioners.
But
The FIR used tax and rev data.
Uh, for these estimates.
And they estimated that we have
approximately 500.
Uh, licensed nurse practitioners
in rural New Mexico.
And if we apply the formula,
Of approximately 23%.
Of those 500.
Um
Uh, residing in Rome, New
Mexico, then we come up with an
a a pretty close estimate of
about 115.
Uh, nurse practitioners would be
eligible for the credit. And
lastly, Madam Chair.
Yes, I made a hit on the general
fund for adding these new 6
positions.
I
A measly $2.5 million.
And I say that measly.
Because last year when we
brought in kind of the heavy
hitters.
That hit on the, on the general
fund was $12 million.
So I think we have a good chance
of seeing this measure go all
the way through tax and rev and
come out in the tax package
based on the small amount of a
hit.
On the general fund.
And I would, I like to yield to
one of my experts, uh, and she
can introduce herself.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Linda Siegel. I represent many
healthcare providers, but today
I'm here on behalf of the
occupational therapist, and I
have worked on this legislation.
With Representative Garcia for a
number of years to expand.
The number of people, the number
of providers covered under this
act.
It is, it is really absurd that
we pick winners and losers of
healthcare providers. If every
healthcare provider is valuable,
which they are regardless of
what category they are, they're
doing services to our patients,
then we need to include them in
the act, and I believe that this
last effort here will bring all
the licensed healthcare
practitioners that operate in
the state under the Act.
And we'll see what kind of
impact it can have on, on the
rural areas when I, um, every
month I get a report from
workforce Solutions, about all
the healthcare providers.
Uh, advertise jobs that there
are, and they do do do
duplicated. That's how they say
it. Do you duplicated, a job
advertisements and in the
December report.
There were advertised jobs for
574 occupational therapists.
Well, that's, that's all that's
half of the total number of
licensed occupational therapists
we have. We think the number is
the most current number is
around 1200.
So, we have a desperate shortage
of all providers of every single
category, and that's not new
information to you all.
So anything we can do to
encourage people to get them out
in in the rural areas and, and
working, I was just on the phone
with an occupational therapist
who lives in farmington.
But goes 2 days a week to
gallop.
Because there is no occupational
therapist there. Now, will a
$1500 credit, I mean a $3000
credit changed that. I don't
know, but it could probably
help.
So any, this is one of the many
things that we can do to help
expand our workforce of all
providers throughout the state.
Thank you.
OK, thank you very much. So on
Zoom, if anyone is here in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and anyone in the room in
opposition.
Casing no and seeing no one on
Zoom, OK, if you're on Zoom in
support, please raise your hand
in the room if you're in
support, please raise your hand.
If you would like to speak, you
can come to the middle. Again,
it's not necessary, but totally
up to you.
So
Hello, members of the committee
and Madam Chair, thank you for
having us today. My name is
Doctor Jessica Franco Chavez. I
am a naturopathic doctor and
I've been practicing in New
Mexico for several years. Excuse
me, in rural community in New
Mexico.
I'm here to ask for your kind
consideration to be added as a
friendly amendment to the
practitioner list of eligible
and licensed practitioners for
us as naturopathic doctors and
providers under HB 52 because we
are currently missing.
As you can imagine living in New
Mexico, we do have a health
deficit by national standards
and our quality of care is
extremely limited. So every
resource to support ourselves as
practitioners for our patients
counts.
Incentivizing new practitioners
to stay local or move to New
Mexico to thrive in our rural
area is key.
The efforts to do so are here
under this House Bill 52, that
would include us as additional
eligible healthcare
practitioners. You may recall
the bill at the end of session
of 2018 SB 135 naturopathic
doctors practice acts sponsored
by Gerald Ortiipino.
This was passed, including
naturopathic doctors under the
New Mexico Medical Board, and
since then, we have been
professionally licensed.
I was the government political
liaison officer at the time and
was helpful in getting that bill
strategically passed. I hold
license number 0004 and later
became president of the
association.
It is with my enthusiasm that I
believe we are eligible to be
practitioners on this new bill.
SB 135 retained our robust scope
of practice that reflected our
four-year accredited
naturopathic medical school
training, and just to note, we
are the doctors whose expertise
is in mental health, we are
reversing chronic disease
mindfully.
And we do want to make sure.
That time.
Thank you so much.
Richard Romero, I am a
registered lobbyist representing
the New Mexico speech and
Hearing Association. We are in
full support of this bill and I
want to commend these two people
here, Representative Garcia, who
is my house member, my
legislator, and Linda Siegel, an
old friend of mine, for pushing
on this. It's taken 11 years to
get to this point, and we
appreciate their hard work. I
have Doctor Adrian Bratcher, who
is a professor at Eastern New
Mexico who will
be chiming in.
Answering any detailed
questions, but we do have quite
a shortage of uh SLPs throughout
the state and we ask for your
support. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm getting much
better at this. Thank you. Uh,
so my name is Aaron Schneider.
I'm the New Mexico American
College of Emergency possession,
uh, presidents, and we support
this bill. Um, I want to
highlight an example of why
recruiting to rural areas is
difficult and how this can maybe
impact recruitment. A friend of
mine is starting an ambulance
transport company for Las Vegas,
New Mexico, because there is
zero transport companies.
He has to wait, he's an
emergency medicine physician. He
works at the hospital there. He
has to wait for a helicopter to
transport people from there to
Santa Fe or to Presbyterian or
UNM in Albuquerque costing $35
to $50,000 for patients that
require getting in a car, but
have no transport.
He is trying to establish this
um transport company and needs
EMTs to be able to drive the
vehicles, but he cannot recruit
them because cost of living in
rural New Mexico is higher than
living in the city. I also work
in Carlsbad, Roswell, my
colleague here works in grants,
Portalis, Dimmings.
We see this every day. I also
want to highlight that anybody
wants to co-sponsor this, an
amendment would actually be
quite helpful because my
colleague here who works full
time as an emergency medicine
physician does not qualify
because the hour rate is too
high. The standards in emergency
medicine is to work 120 to 130
hours per month. And if you do
that, you actually do not meet
the um qualifications for
full-time employment based on
this language. So a sponsor that
would like to talk to me about
wearing that cap and meeting the
standards that are provided by
other states, I'd be happy to
speak to you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Doctor
Michael Kaplan. I'm a speech
language pathologist, and I'm
the vice chair.
Each language pathology,
audiology, and hearing aid
dispensers licenser board, and
we stand in strong support of
this legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members, my, I'm a lay
person, um, and I want to
support.
Read by our naturalathic doctor
here. Um, I have been
Served and provided care by both
conventional, I guess,
conventional doctors and
naturopathic doctors, but uh the
and I greatly appreciate the
sport of representative Garcia
and Ms. Siegel, but I think we
have to include the naturopathic
doctors. Um, in this, uh, that
there be amendment amendment
proposed because uh
Um, full disclosure.
My daughter is a naturopathic
doctor, and she works uh for the
Santo Domingo Pueblo, and she
has received great accolades.
They deal with addiction, they
do with chronic illness, they
deal with overall wellness and
um Andrea Bustamante has helped
me greatly, and I think it is a
Of vacancy that has to be filled
in this legislation, they have
the they have comparable
training to conventional
doctors.
And um, so there's no reason.
That they are not in this list,
especially when they commit so
much time and so much effort to
total wellness of the people
they serve. Um, so I appreciate
your time, but I would greatly
appreciate it if, if an
amendment could be uh especially
with what uh Representative
Garcia and Ms. Siegel said, we
have a vacancy. We have a hole
in our system that requires
medical prac.
ers um, to be available to serve
the vulnerable vulnerable people
and those that want to remain
healthy, uh, in our rural
communities. So I thank you very
much. Thank you.
Thank you for present
presenting, but in general, and
the place to add up is to go to
the sponsor that we in public
comment and and I I appreciate
it, but I just for future
reference, um,
Yeah, I, I, I get you. I, I, I
agree with you, but, but, um,
that's just not how we generally
work, is, is by having the
public come up and ask for
amendments to the bill per se.
Um, so we have one more, I
believe.
Hi there, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Gloria Doherty
again for the New Mexico Nursing
Association, and we support this
builly. It has added licensed
practical nurses, nurse
practitioners already had it.
Um, so they are a very important
part of our healthcare
workforce, working in our
skilled nursing facilities, our
long term care facilities and
they are the bread and butter of
a lot of our long term care
needs, so they deserve this
little break to help recruit
over to our rural areas as well.
Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom.
We have JC then Dana.
And then Colton and Adrian. So
go ahead, JC.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Doctor JC
Moore. I am a chiropractic
physician and president of the
New Mexico Chiropractic
Association. Uh, we stand in
full support of this bill and
ask for your support and thank
the sponsor and his expert uh
for her testimony. Thank you.
Thank you, Nick. We have Dana
Gray.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dana Gray,
Executive director of Desert
states Physical Therapy Network.
We'd like to thank
Representatives Garcia and Jones
for their continued efforts in
regard to this bill, while the
network is comprised of 30
independent private practices of
physical therapy and
occupational therapy. 14 clinics
are located in rural areas.
Rural clinics struggle to retain
and recruit staff, a tax credit
for rural occupational
therapists could provide
incentive for therapists to
serve in these much
underserved communities. We
stand in full support of House
Bill 52 and urge your support as
well. Thank you. Thank you,
Nick. We have Colton Dean. OK.
Hello,
Madam Chair, members of the
community. My name is Colton
Dean. I'm an EMT paramedic. I've
been working in both urban and
rural areas of New Mexico since
2008. And currently I'm in
nursing school at UNM Valencia,
and I strongly support uh this
bill, uh, I also want to thank
the sponsors for including EMTs
and paramedics as they are, uh,
many in the rural community work
in a volunteer basis, and I
think this tax credit will
help them. Thank you.
Thank you, and that's all for
public comment, so we will go to
the committee and I do have to
say, Linda, I, I expect that the
ceiling to open and lightning to
hit when you said there are no
other professions because I.
Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Chair, before you go to
the committee, can I uh make,
make a statement.
Regarding some of the comments,
um.
Uh, those individuals that spoke
in regards to the naturopathic
physicians.
If they could get with me after
this committee hearing.
And uh I need their contact
information so I can put him in
contact with our drafter.
And have an amendment ready for
tax and rev.
And also the individual that
mentioned the EMTs in terms of
shorting their hours.
Uh, we had a similar scenario
last year with the registered
nurses and we were able to
correct that.
So if the gentleman that spoke
on behalf of the MT regarding
tweaking those hours so that
they could qualify if he can get
with me also after the hearing,
get his contact information, put
him in contact with the draft
term will correct those in the
in the next committee. Thank you
for offering that
representative. So questions
from the committee,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I have 2
pieces and I just want to say
that I love tax credits, um, and
I want to clarify that there are
no hidden costs, correct, Madam
Chair Representative.
No hidden cost, uh.
Just that $2.5 million dollar
hit on the general fund.
That the state is not getting,
but it's going into the pockets
of the practitioner. Right.
Madam Chair representative,
thank you so much and my next
question was, is that if Madam
Chair Representative is it if
you would entertain a friendly,
um, amendment to include the
natural pathic doctors. I think
that is fabulous and I am in
100% support of that. I believe,
Madam Chair Representative that
retaining and attracting
healthcare providers to our
state is vital, and I just wanna
thank.
You personally for fighting for
New Mexico, but specifically
fighting for rural New Mexico,
which is my people. So thank you
so much, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Representative N
Chavis. Did you have questions?
Oh, my imagination, um, so I'd
seen no other hands, I'll
entertain emotion, Madam Chair,
I like to make motion to
approve.
To pass, sorry, OK.
We have a double second. So
Representative case with the
motion and Representative E.
Chavis with the 2nd. You gotta
be fast around here.
So, is there any opposition to
this bill?
Seeing none, let me count by a
vote of 7 to 0, you have a due
pass.
Mhm
And with that, um, I'm not sure
if they are still on the floor,
but um if they are, we, even if
they are, we are in recess until
Friday morning at 8:30.
0,
I'm not sure if I announced this
before, but we, we did roll
over, um, HB 53 and HB 46, so
they will hopefully be on
Wednesday, uh, no.
Today is Wednesday, Friday.
OK.
Hi.
we
