My expert, I have la pearls next
to me. She has decades of
experience in family law, um, to
quickly explain that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
That is loud.
So, without getting too
technical, um, a birth
certificate is a presumption of
parentage and presumptions can
be overcome.
versus judgments which are due
full faith and credit
nationwide.
So here in New Mexico, if you're
a married couple, same-sex
couples marriages are
recognized, and you get on the
birth certificate when the baby
is born in the hospital.
Even, you know, and we're only
talking about couples who
conceived through assisted
reproduction. This law also
applies to opposite sex couples.
It, it, the, the issue is when
you travel to other states.
Um, there has been some
movement, particularly since the
Dobbs decision, the Supreme
Court decision that overturned
Roe versus Wade. There is
language in that Dobbs decision
that is reducing some right to
privacy issues, and there have
been now 3 cases nationwide
where states have decided they
do not wish to acknowledge the
presumption of parentage in a
birth certificate?
Or in a same-sex relationship.
And so this judgment.
would give you an expedited
adoption process. It could
happen within 30 days, where you
would get a court order from
An adoption court, and that can
travel.
Throughout the end of the
country and be recognized or
affirmed in other states.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenter.
I will entertain emotion.
I moved the Du pass, Madam
Chair.
And I was, and we have to
postpone the vote until we get a
quorum, but
We will move on
to um we will move on to nothing
because I don't see any
sponsors.
Um
So give us a minute. Let's see
if we can wrangle up a sponsor.
It's not on there.
She asked if we could hear her
bill, but it's not in the
committee or on the agenda so
I guess we could give it a shot.
What's the worst that can
happen?
We probably don't want to know.
OK, so,
So Rep Jones says she's on her
way, so
Hopefully, um, we'll be doing
5:44 shortly.
And I have texted um.
Some of the other sponsors, so
again, just uh be patient.
And for the committee yesterday
when I was doing announcements
at the end of the day, I was so
ready to say 9, let's do 9 a.m.
and I thought, oh no, we better
OK, so now we have a quorum and
we have a motion on the table
for a due pass for Senate Bill
417. Karen, can you take the
role?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kates.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes. Representative Jones? Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Yeah,
now.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes.
6 to 1, we have a do pass. By a
vote of 6 to 1, you have a due
pass, um, and for those of you
who just got here, we are
rolling 5:31 and 5:34 both at
the request of the sponsor, and
they are rolled indefinitely to
be worked on in the interim. So
Representative Jones, are you
ready on 5:44?
OK.
All right. Well, our agenda is
just disappearing
we only have 2 left, yes, 542
and 543. I have a texted
representative Vincent.
Oh, he's, oh, OK. I was so busy
looking at the papers.
OK, so you are here for 5, 5:43.
Correct? Yes, ma'am, Chair. OK,
whenever you're ready, go ahead.
I think I'm going to join him.
Would you like me to join you?
Let me find my folder real
quick. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members. Um,
5403.
Hospital 543, um, is relating to
healthcare and it clarifies
consent requirements for minors
receiving health care. Um, there
are just 2.
Changes to the uh to the act.
Um, on
Page 1 of the bill, it just
defines minor, which means an
individual who is under 18 years
of age.
And then on the very last page,
page 4.
Um, is a new section G, and it
just says nothing in the
reproductive and
gender-affirming Healthcare
Freedom Act shall be construed
to allow a minor to receive
gender-affirming health care or
reproductive healthcare without
parental consent in any manner
that is not otherwise provided
for in law.
Um
It is, there, there are uh
provisions in law that allow a
minor to be able to uh get uh
health care without parental,
uh consent.
And uh those are uh uh
petitioning.
Uh, the courts, if necessary,
but other than uh that.
Um, this is just meant to ensure
that uh children uh who are
getting potentially uh
Um
Life altering.
Uh, medical attention that that
a parent has to be uh notified
and give consent. So, um, madam,
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, the reason this
is important is because
The concern is, in particular
for underage, uh, um, girls in
particular, uh, concerning, uh,
being taken to receive abortive
care that there are no
Uh, parameters around reporting
if if there is abuse or if the
person is being taken to uh
receive that uh uh abortion, uh,
because of being compelled by an
adult male.
And
Um, in concerning, uh,
The gender affirming care, um,
we've, we've been, we all know
that this is a big deal, and we
know that uh there is a lot of
depression and other things
surrounding that. And, uh,
Just wanting to make sure that
parents are involved and
notified.
Um, and help with that decision,
in particular, um, we don't
believe that the
Emotional uh issues go away, uh,
just because of a
Uh, just because there is a
procedure that's done, the
The medical issue may be
handled, but the emotional issue
is not.
So, um, that's what I have and I
would uh leave the room for my
co-sponsor to give some comments
as well.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I, I wanna
just cut to the chase and say I
think this, I think we all
remember those of us who were
here, a few of you weren't, but
2 years ago when we did pass
HB7, there was an just an
outrage from the community,
especially parents about
Um, the fact that we didn't
include anything in that bill
that would give them the right
to be involved in their
children's health care
decisions. So the way I see this
bill is that it's not taking
away the, the um the possibility
of, um, and the need maybe for
um reproductive services or
transgender care, that sort of
thing. It's not taking that
away. It's just allowing parents
to be involved, and
It, it fits into that place
where I feel like there was the
most objection from the
community. I know from my um
My community, uh, my district,
there was an outpouring of
opposition to that, and it was
mainly surrounding parental
rights. I'd also like to speak
to um
To my lived experience as a
nurse and having worked with
children quite a bit over the
years and even having seen
patients who are being treated
uh with transgender therapies
that I feel like um
There's, there's quite a need,
two things I will back up just a
bit and say we've heard many
times from from this very desk
here that our children don't
have the brain development to
make decisions that are really
life changing, life altering,
and uh we've heard that.
From pediatricians, from
behavioral health specialists
and so forth, um, and so I think
we need to keep that in mind.
And as far as the clinical
aspects of treatment for
transgender therapy to be
specific. I know that I've given
many of the medications that are
involved. I've worked with
surgeons who've been involved
with those types of surgeries
and they're, they, they are life
altering, life changing. We
Let me, let me back up and say
this. I have seen.
corporate hospitals.
For teams of physicians.
From pediatricians to
Um, psychologists.
Gynecologists, urologists,
endocrinologists.
Um
And lock hands with big pharma.
To what I feel is take advantage
of this transgender movement
that we've seen among among
children especially, and they
are creating.
In, in, in many ways, not, not
every time, of course, but, but
their goal is to create.
Lifelong patience, because these
young people who may be making
decisions, um, that they really
don't have the information or
the brain development to make.
are making decisions that could
in fact ruin their lives and
make them permanently dependent
on our healthcare system.
So, um
I think that
That is my concern, and that is
my, my lived experience anyway
that that I'm I'm very concerned
that um
Children have
The, the input from their
parents, the people who love
them most, the people who know
them best, um, in making these
decisions and, and that's what
this bill would do. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. We will go to the
audience, anyone on Zoom in
support of this uh bill. Raise
your hand and I'll come back to
you. Anyone in um the audience
in support.
OK, I don't see any hands, so I
see.
Oh
Michaelayla, that's, I'm
guessing. Oh wait, it's moving.
OK, Michaelayla, Karen, and
Jody. So go ahead, Jodie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I am Jody
Hendricks, and I am the
executive director for New
Mexico Family Action Movement.
Today I speak in support of
House Bill 543 because every
child deserves the loving
guidance of their parents,
especially when facing major
life decisions.
As parents, we want what's best
for our kids. We celebrate their
strengths. We help them through
struggles, and we guide them
through uncertainty, but right
now some of the most life
changing medical decisions, ones
with irre irreversible
consequences are being made
without parental involvement.
Every child deserves support.
Many gender questioning youth
are also struggling with
anxiety, depression, or past
trauma. They need time, therapy,
and the people who know them
best, their parents, walking
alongside them. This bill isn't
about denying care. It's about
the right care. Major medical
interventions like puberty
blockers and cross-sex hormones
have lifelong effects, but
parrots must be involved to help
their child navigate these
decisions safely. We can all
agree that children shouldn't be
making life altering choices
alone. This bill gives families
the opportunity to work together
so that children receive the
best possible care, not just
quick answers but thoughtful.
Thank you. Uh, I'm sorry, I
didn't remind folks that it's
one minute and there should be a
a countdown timer on your
screen. So
go to
Makayla, I'm sorry if I
pronounced that wrong.
Can you hear me? Hello? OK. Hi,
I'm Michael Peterson, and I'm
with the Freedom Families United
as a parent of three kiddos, I
know that no one cares more
about a child's well-being than
their own family.
Kids are not emotionally or
mentally ready to make these
life altering medical decisions.
And that's why House Bill 543 is
so important, it ensures that
parents are involved in these
critical choices rather than
allowing minors to be influenced
or pressured into treatments
that they may not fully
understand, um, you know, we
have the right as parents and
the responsibility truly to
protect our kids, to guide them
through these difficult
decisions and to ensure that
they don't make irreversible
choices that they might regret.
No one should be making these
decisions for our children,
except for their parents, or
like us. This bill is about
safeguarding families,
reinforcing parental authority,
and protecting kids from being
pushed into medical
interventions, they aren't ready
for. Please vote yes on House
Bill 543.
We had 3, but I don't see any
more hands.
So, oh.
Caring.
Did we just hear from her? OK.
So, um, no or yes. OK, OK,
Karen, go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just wanted to
reiterate with the first two
speakers have said in support,
and I stand in support of this
House bill. Thank you.
OK, thank you. Um, I, OK, and
those in opposition, if you are
in opposition on Zoom, raise
your hand and I'll come back to
you if you are in opposition in
the room, please raise your
hand.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center.
OK, so we will go back to Zoom.
00, OK. I'm sorry.
Good morning, everyone. Um, my
name is Quentin Ampersand. I'm a
law student working on behalf of
registered lobbyist Juliana Kub,
who represents Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains. We stand in
opposition to HB 543 due to the
unsafe situations that would
force minors into.
Um, Planned Parenthood once, um,
all people to have access to
safe and accurate medical care,
that means allowing young people
to seek care on their own terms.
Most young people do talk to
their parents about seeking
medical care and the ones that
do not talk to their parents
have really good reasons why we
need to trust the judgment of
these young people and offer
them ways to seek safe and
medically accurate care.
I was fortunate that growing up
I could talk to my parents, uh,
and for anything that I needed
support with, but not all of my
friends were in that position.
Some of them needed to access
birth control and weren't able
to talk to their parents about
it, but because they were able
to access this care, they were
able to make safe and informed
reproductive health decisions.
Lastly, as a trans person, I
wanna say that this type of
legislation sends the message to
our trans kids that we don't
trust them and we don't.
Support them and so on behalf of
Planned Parenthood, please vote
no.
Thank you, thank you.
Seeing no one else in the room,
we will go to Molly. Go ahead
when Molly. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Molly
McLean, a practicing physician
in Albuquerque. I've been
providing gender care for nearly
10 years and have worked with
almost 2000 families in that
time. I have never started or
even change gender-affirming
medications without deep
engagement from parents. This
isn't just because it's part of
the evidence-based standards of
care, which it is, it is very
much a part of every guideline
already to have
consent.
The more important reason that I
think it's vitally necessary to
engage parents is because like
all kids, trans and non-binary
kids need and deserve as much
love and support as they can
get. If we didn't focus on
supporting the whole family
through their child's gender
journey, it would be harmful to
our patients, and therefore
against the Hippocratic oath.
The last thing any kid needs,
but especially trans and
non-binary kids right now is
more isolation and separation
from their families. I would
urge a no vote on HB 543. It
won't protect kids, it won't
protect.
Families and legislating already
existing medical standards will
not set a positive precedent for
recruitment or retention of
healthcare clinicians, which New
Mexico.
Thank you. Thank you. OK, I did
both sides, right? OK. After
last night, it's just a blur.
Um, so I will go back to the
sponsors for any comments, and
then we'll go to the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
actually, uh, the, the, the, the
doctor who just spoke, um,
actually in, in my mind, uh,
Made it clear that what we're
suggesting here is something
that should be defined correctly
in New Mexico law because New
Mexico law currently doesn't
agree with that. Currently, New
Mexico law states that uh that
miners can seek this care
without parental involvement and
what we just heard now is that
uh we're at odds with the
Hippocratic Oath.
And that, um, parent involvement
is very needed here. Um, Madam
Chair and, and members, um,
Nobody loves a kid more than the
parent, not a doctor, not a
school teacher, not an advisor,
no one loves a child more than a
parent.
And having to allow a child to
go through this and without
Directing them back to the
parents is a huge mistake.
Um
We
And in New Mexico, there are,
there are definitely some guard
rails to protect children. As a
matter of fact, uh, Madam Chair,
some of those guardrails.
have been more than guardrails,
about
2 years ago, I was contacted.
By a parent out of Albuquerque.
That, um,
Reached out to me by email.
On what
She described as a phony email
account and contacted me on a
cell phone, which she described
as a burner cell phone.
And the reason was she, as she
reached out to me because we
were in in some of these
conversations, uh, here in the
legislature, and I had written,
I believe, an op ed in the
Albuquerque paper and she
reached out to me and said that
she didn't want to give her her
name.
Because her family
And she's she's she
self-described herself as a
liberal.
She goes, I'm a liberal, I'm a
teacher. My husband is a
scientist.
And we
Generally are left of center on
everything.
But she described the situation
where her 15 year old son had
come to them.
And had uh told them that.
that he was questioning his
identity.
He
Went to them, and so what they
did is they went to their
doctor. The doctor who was who
had graduated from UNM, uh,
didn't have any expertise in
this arena, so I went right back
to UNM because they have a
pretty good referral service, a
system within UNM and they were
directed to someone in the
health sciences department that
dealt with these issues.
And they went back for a return
visit to the doctor. The doctor
said, OK, well, this is how you
get the hormone blockers, this
is how you do all of these
things in advance of
transitioning.
That wasn't what the parents
were expecting. They're
expecting there to be a
conversation.
There was not a conversation. It
was a direction towards this,
towards affirming care.
There was no other option given.
And when the parents said, well,
we were hoping that we could
have a conversation, and what
they did was they gave the
parents.
Some other people to talk to,
and these people were
Directed as well to only give
one option, which was affirming
care.
These parents then
Uh, talked with her child, said,
look, we don't want to go
through this now. We, we support
your decision, if this is what
you want to do, but we don't
want to be involved.
When you're 18 years old, you
might change your mind, and if
we help you with this, you're
gonna be angry with us.
We would prefer
That you wait until you're 18,
it's just 3 years away.
The next thing that the the
parents found themselves was a
knock at the door from CYFD.
Uh,
they had been reported as being
unfit.
And
The CYFD came in and said,
you're obviously, this is
obviously a homophobic
household, it's an unfit
household.
Um, and, um, you need to, your,
your, your, your child is
suicidal.
And if you don't go through with
helping your your child
transition, um, we're gonna,
we're gonna have to deem this as
an unfit household.
And
You have 2 other children, we
may have to take them away from
you as well.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
I don't believe anybody who
supports
Uh, transgender care.
Supports taking the family out
of the equation, or having
family members threatened the
removal of their children.
The reality is
Parents
More than doctors.
parents more than school.
teachers
Are the best
Guide for a child doesn't mean
the child's gonna take that, and
if the child ultimately
determines the parents are, are,
are not in their best interests.
There are opportunities for them
to be able to go after that.
But, but Madam Chair, what, what
this merely does is it reaffirms
the Hippocratic oath, reaffirms
that parents need to be
involved. Thank you. And we're
gonna try and keep things brief,
even though we are ahead of
schedule. Um,
So I will go to the committee,
so any questions?
Seeing no questions. Oh,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
ranking member Montoya and
ranking member Jones. I do have
several questions. Um, the first
one is, what are the risks of
puberty blockers at such a young
age. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cortez. I do have um I
do have a list here, puberty
blockers, very, very serious
possible complications with bone
density loss, delayed growth and
development, unknown long-term
effects because these
medications are still
experimental in in young people,
uh, and for this purpose, they
are considered off label.
Um, fertility concerns,
emotional and cognitive impacts
and the risk of never desiring
cross-sex hormones if puberty
blockers are in fact given the
hormone therapy even more
serious risks with
cardiovascular.
problems, um, increased risk of
blood clots, blood pressure,
high blood pressure, heart
disease, and stroke.
Infertility, uh, extended
hormone use can lead to
permanent infertility.
Liver dysfunction, uh hormone
therapy can impact liver enzymes
and function, mood changes and
mental health effects, hormone
changes can contribute to mood
swings, anxiety and depression.
Increased cancer risk, estrogen
therapy may slightly increase
the chance of breast cancer,
testosterone therapy can
contribute to ovarian and
uterine abnormalities,
irreversible changes like
deepening of the voice, facial
hair growth, or breast
development can be permanent,
even though often we've heard
that.
Those changes are not and that
they're reversible, they can be
permanent, and then there's the
need for a lifelong medical care
that I've already mentioned in
regards to hormone therapy. It's
not something that you can end
at some point and be
transitioned. It is creating a
lifelong patient.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative.
So what I'm hearing is there
could be lifelong
Adverse effects to puberty
blockers. Absolutely, um, Madam
Chair, Representative, lifelong
effects and an untoward um
effects, some of the same issues
can be caused by puberty
blockers that we are trying to
treat. In other words, the
depression, the anxiety, mood
swings, and so forth, very much
can be caused by these
medications. Thank you,
Representative Madam Chair
Representatives, so.
Right now the situation is kids
can receive gender affirming
care without their parents'
knowledge, and they could be.
Undergoing adverse effects and
their parents don't even know
why their child is having health
complications because they do
not know what they're on.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
Madam Chair Representative, do
you know what age a child's uh a
person's brain fully develops.
Um,
thank you for that,
Representative, Madam Chair,
Representative.
We have heard, uh, time and
again, as I stated earlier, from
pediatricians, behavioral health
specialists, and many others
involved with young people that,
uh, and caring for young people
and who've studied.
Juveniles and our minor children
for many years and who care for
them, that the human brain
doesn't fully develop until um
around mid-twenties.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Madam Chair Representative,
could you agree that until a
child's brain fully develops
that they would need emotional
guidance in big life choices.
Uh, thank you for that,
Representative. Madam Chair,
Representative, yes, and that's
what this bill would accomplish.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair Representative, I'd
like to make a statement and it
might sound a little extreme
because I have a, a 2 year old,
but my 2 year old has an
affinity for dinosaurs, and she
loves dinosaurs, and she wants
to be a T-rex, um, obviously,
she's 2 and her brain's not
fully developed, she would
definitely change her mind by
late teens, early twenties. Um,
I know that's an extreme and I'm
not being persnickety, Madam
Chair representative, but it's
just an example of
Kids
being able to change their mind
before their brain fully
develops. Would you agree with
that metaphor, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you for
that statement. I know it does
sound extreme, but we all know
because we've all been, we've
all been teenagers that even in
that period of our lives that we
have a lot of questions about
who we are, what is our
identity, and there are a lot of
changes that take place, and so
I would never
want to go back and do that
again. And I thank God that I
did have some guidance from
parents, grandparents, and those
who loved me uh to, to make
decisions that were um
That were good for me, so
on that, on that point. Um, I
have 4 boys, um, and they're all
now between 33 and 39 years old.
Uh, none of them have tattoos.
And I've got to tell you how
that happened. First off, they
couldn't get a tattoo underage
without my consent.
But
I did something to them whenever
they'd bring a girl over to the
house that they liked, which was
show the young lady pictures of
how when they were little boys,
their haircuts, the clothes they
wore, because my kids grew up
through the child mullet
hairstyle phase.
Uh, pretty embarrassing for them
by the time they were in high
school. Um, they also grew up in
the phase where there was uh the
neon clothing and the gino jeans
that had the, the pant legs that
were this big, so we'd show
those pictures.
And what I would tell my boys
is, if you want to get
Your ears pierced.
Feel free, because you can
change your mind unless you do
those gauges, but if you just do
your ear piercing, you can
change your mind later.
But you can't change your mind.
With a tattoo.
And I said, you had your
hairstyle this way, you had
these clothes back then, and
back then you begged us for
these clothes and that
hairstyle.
But now you're embarrassed of
it. Now you regret it.
And I said, in a few, and if you
would be forced into this for
the rest of your life, you
wouldn't do it. That's how I
kept my boys from getting
tattoos to this day, they don't
have tattoos.
The reality is this is, and by
the way, still today, you can't
get a tattoo with without
parental consent.
This is way more important.
Then a tattoo.
This is life altering, and it's
irreversible.
And so
big metal decisions decisions
like this.
There needs to be someone who
loves the child, not someone
who's interacting with the child
and has compassion. Today I met
you today. I feel sorry for you
over the next several years,
I've built real or I I built a
relationship with you and I feel
for you.
That is not the same as the
lifelong love that a parent has
for a child.
And parents need to be involved
in these decisions.
Madam Chair ranking members
Mentoya and Jones, um, I know
that everyone probably knows the
kind of community that I come
from a very conservative
community, and I've had
conversations with parents about
this, and spoken to very
conservative families that said,
you know, we don't support the
process of transitioning,
however, if my child became an
adult, and they chose that for
their life. I would love them no
matter what. I would love them
and
I would support them, even
though that's not my belief
system, Madam Chair
Representative, but their
outrage was they don't get to be
part of it right now when their
child is not emotionally
developed, their brain is not
fully developed, and they could
be taking lifelong medications
that could have an adverse
impact on them and the parent
would never know parents just
want to be part of the
decisions. And I'll end with
that comment. Thank you for
indulging.
me, Madam Chair and ranking
members Minui and Martinez.
Madam Chair,
representatives.
Appreciate the guts that takes
to bring a bill like this before
this body.
Um
few questions. Is there anything
in this bill that would stop
gender affirming care.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Mr. uh, um.
Mr. Whip, um,
No, uh, there, there are
mechanisms currently in law for
for children if, if there is
what as was suggested, and maybe
danger in the home. There's
There's options, legal options
that can be had.
But, uh, and Mr. and Madam
Chair and uh Mr. Whip.
Uh, the reality is,
At 18 years old.
They can make these decisions
for themselves, and what, what
I've, what we've heard from
Madam Chair from the folks who
have det transitioned or trying
to detransition is anger at
their parents.
Why did you not stop me? Why did
you not intervene? What we've
done in New Mexico is we are not
allowing parents to intervene.
We're not allowing them to even
have a conversation.
Um
And uh but.
If, if when they hit 18 years
old, if they are determined that
this is what they they want to
do with their life, they can do
it.
And is there anything in this
bill, madam Chair Representative
require the train.
Um, Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Chairman or Mr. Whip, no.
And is there anything in this
bill prohibits.
Um
Reproduct, um.
Madam Chair.
Mr. Whip, no. Once again, it
just requires until the age of
18 that a parent that a parent
has to be involved, Madam
representative, so the only
thing that this bill does is
Um, re-inject.
The parent
Into these decisions. Is that
correct?
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Whip,
yes, um, and very much.
Like, uh, what has happened with
my boys who decided not to get
tattoos after
They were able to do it. They
understood later on that there
were other consequences too.
Getting tattoos. There was uh
whether or not uh uh somebody
would hire you for a job or
Or
Not making the mistake of
putting the girlfriend's name on
your arm that you all the
unintended consequences are
avoided while they're under 18,
and then when they hit 18, they
will have a more developed mind.
To be able to make these
decisions for themselves.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
I want to direct everybody.
Lines 23 and says a minor means
an individual who is under 18
years of age.
Um
Madam Chair Representative.
Can you join the military under
the age of 18.
Madam chair, um, Mr. Whip, not
without par uh parents signing
off, I believe a 17 year old can
enter the military, but the
parents have to, have to agree
to allow the child to enter the
military.
Chair of Representative in
Many cases.
18 years old is a cut-off for
making.
Legal decisions.
Um
Buying alcohol, buying
cigarettes, getting a tattoo.
Doing a lot of crazy things in
life, is that correct?
Um,
Madam Chair, and, yes, uh,
Representative Martinez, uh,
exactly, we've deemed that.
Children, uh, under the age of
18 are not mature enough to make
those decisions.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, it may not look like, but I
had a killer mullet, and I, I
have.
tattoos, and I have, I have.
Sons that have tattoos.
It doesn't make me love them any
less.
I understand that there are
situations where
Some kids don't trust their
parents, or there's violence in
the home or there's abuse in the
home.
Um
Madam Chair Representative or
their legal um remedies to those
situations. Um.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, yes, there are legal
remedies. There are you can
petition the courts.
Um
In, in, and it's because there
are situations, Madam Chair, and
Representative where there might
be danger in the home.
But what the, the way we have
this uh the the law currently,
it basically assumes that
Danger in the home is rampant.
And that we can't trust most
parents. What's happening is
most parents are not having the
opportunity to lovingly go
through the process with their
children.
And it leaves the children
isolated.
There these children make these
decisions on their own.
If there's regret, they go
through the regret.
On their own.
The there needs to be family
involvement.
In any major decision just so
there is the family structure to
help.
Protect
And, and, and cherish the child.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, I, I
have 33 children of my own and 3
stepchildren.
Some of them have made decisions
in life that I don't agree with.
But I love them.
Um, as a Christian,
I'm not called to judge people.
called to love people.
And I can't imagine.
Any of my kids going through
something like this by
themselves.
I would love them, no matter
what.
And I hope that
Uh, this committee would allow
parents to be um
Loving parents, supportive
parents.
To be involved in these types of
decisions.
Twice down in full support of
this bill.
And I hope that
Parents are once again allowed
to be part of these decisions.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I will go to the
committee for a motion. I'd like
to make a motion for a due pass,
please. OK. 2.
Madam Chair, I still have, um,
oh, I'm I'm sorry, I didn't see
you. So, OK, no, it was my
fault. No, it was my fault. Go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Representative for
bringing this forward.
Um, Madam Chair Representatives,
um, would you agree that not
everybody has
Yes, um, madam, uh, a
representative now chair, um,
yes, and I, this would not apply
to them where they are not
parents. If there's a legal
guardian, it would apply there.
Madam Chair, representatives,
um, the reason I ask this is
because as much as I wish, even
folks who have parents or may
have guardians. Um, they're not
always in folks' lives,
especially if we're talking
about LGBTQ youth.
Um
And so, Madam Chair, um,
I know that we heard a bill
recently that um I think we,
many of us agreed that we
shouldn't put standards of care
into law.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I know it
was stated earlier that the
current law states that children
can
Dictate their own care, but
Madam Chair Representative, the
law is actually silent on it in
Madam Chair Representative, it's
silent on it because we
shouldn't be putting standards
of care into law, and this would
start to dictate the standards
of care that the doctor spoke
about, um, a little bit earlier.
And Madam Chair, um,
representative, um, I believe
there was a statement about
having a tattoo earlier, which
I'm a very tattooed person. Um,
but Madam Chair Representative,
there was a statement, I believe
that was made by the
representative, and correct me
if I'm wrong, um, that you can't
receive, you can't get a tattoo
unless you're over the age of
18. Is that correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
Madam Chair and and uh and uh um
representative, yes, and there
are, there are legal
Um
potential legal ramifications
that we can go leave
ramifications that we have taken
out of the uh.
The Health Care Act that we're
referencing today.
Um, where you can go if a, if a
child were to go and get a
tattoo, get.
Um, blood poisoning or something
like that, there's legal action
that can be taken. We've taken
that out of uh gender affirming
care where there is no uh legal
Action that can be taken if, if,
if it is not handled right or if
it is uh done or the child feels
like they have been pushed into
it by an adult. Thank you. Thank
you. The reason I ask that is
because as a young person who
was under the age of 18, I got a
tattoo anyway. Um, Madam Chair
and representative. So what I'm
saying is if we don't have the
means of making sure that things
like this are safe.
children are not gonna seek them
out anyway. And so Madam Chair
Representative, I just wanted to
use that, um, as a question, but
also as a point.
me as a young person also went
to seek um uh a tattoo
elsewhere. Madam Chair
Representative, I won't belabor
this, um, but I will be
explaining my vote.
Thank you. So we have a motion
on the table by Representative
Senator Cortez and the second by
Representative Martinez.
For for due pass on um
HB 543 Madam Chair, substitute
motion to table. OK, so that
motion, do I have a second?
Um,
that, that motion takes
precedence, so Karen, will you
take the role on a um motion to
table.
Representative Anaya.
Yes, to table and explain my
vote.
Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes.
Representative in Chavez. No.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes, to table.
Representative Jones, no to
table.
Representative Martinez a table.
Representative Senna Cortez
noted table.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
5 to 45 to 4 year bill has been
taken.
Thank you. And um so we have
Madam, I'm sorry, I'm sorry
getting ahead of myself.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um.
What I try to do when it comes
to really contentious things
like this, like dig down and
think about like.
OK. Here are the values we
share.
The values we share are
We are both trying to figure out
how to make sure that young
people's lives are the best they
can be.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I know we talked about adverse
life life effects, um, but I
think the reality of the
situation is that gender
affirming care saves lives. It
saves young people's lives. Um,
it saves them from suicide, but
also if they're not, you know,
on the brink of committing
suicide, it also saves them from
a lifetime of trauma.
And so Madam Chair
Representatives, I know there
was talk about, um, and I think
we might have a bill. I can't
remember now, Madam Chair
Representative detransitioning
and so Madam Chair
representative, it's a little
confusing to me for you to say
these things can't be reversed,
and there are options on the
table to
The transition, which I don't
believe is a reality in the
medical community. Um,
Madam Chair Representative, the
last thing I just want to hit on
is we have a lot of young people
who are going to the doctor who
know that those are safe spaces
to be able to disclose a lot of
things. And Madam Chair
Representative, I understand
that folks can't join the
military until they're 18, but
they definitely can get pregnant
before the age of 18, and many
of our children are of
childbearing age now early and
earlier and earlier, um, at the
ages of 10 and 11, um, and for
us to put into law.
They wouldn't be able to make
their own medical decisions
until they're older and we even
talked about brain development
happening at the age of 25. So
we don't think that young people
are ready to make their own
medical decisions until their
brain develops, which is already
at the age of 25. I don't
believe um that we're making
good, um, medical decisions, um,
we as politicians cannot be
making these decisions, which is
why I'm so glad, Madam Chair,
um, and Representative that we
have somebody.
Who is an expert in gender
affirming care who testified in
opposition against this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
OK, thank you. Thank you so
much. Next, we will go to um HB
542, um, and
She just was here.
If you see Representative Doo,
can you tell her where?
So for those of you who may not
have caught everything all we
have left is House Bill 542,
we've either hurt the rest or
they've been rolled.
So as soon as Representative Dow
gets back in here.
And we will go with HB 542. 0,
OK.
Sorry, I got a text from
Representative Dow that she was,
and then she disappeared. OK, go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I apologize for we've had a
little confusion this morning,
she's trying to help next door
with another bill. So, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. This is relating to
taxation, creating a childbirth
income tax credit to be enacted
by the legislature at the state
of New Mexico, and with that,
Madam Char I stand for
questions.
My kind of presentation. Um, so
if there's anyone on Zoom in
opposition, raise your hand.
If there's um anyone in the room
in opposition.
OK, seeing no either place in
support on Zoom, raise your hand
and I'll come back to you, um,
in supporting the audience.
OK, so I will go to
Jodie and then I, I was gonna
remember how to pronounce your
name.
But I can't make Mikael, I know
that's not right, but go ahead,
Jody.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I urge you
today to support House Bill 542,
a bill that provides real
financial relief to new mothers,
encourages family stability and
strength in New Mexico's
economic future, bringing a
child into the world is a
beautiful but costly experience.
Medical expenses, childcare,
postpartum needs can be
overwhelming, especially for low
and middle income families.
House Bill 542 eases that burden
by providing the $7000
refundable tax credit to mothers
who give birth.
This is not a handout. It's an
investment. Just as we offer tax
incentives, incentives for
businesses and green energy, we
should support the next
generation of New Mexicans. It
encourages family growth at a
time when New Mexico's birth
rate has declined by 24% over
the last 15 years, which poses
long term risks to our workforce
and economy. It promotes
financial independence rather
than expanding government
welfare. Families know best how
to use their resources in this
bill ensures that they have the
support they need. So please
let's stand with New Mexico
families and invest in our
future in vote, yes, on House
Bill 542. Thank you.
Thank you.
Micaela.
Yes. Uh, don't worry about
saying my name wrong, everybody
does. It's my kale, Peterson.
OK. House Bill 542 is a critical
step towards supporting families
in New Mexico this um financial
burden. It's definitely a
financial burden of having a
kid, like Jodie said, um, a
child is overwhelming sometimes
the childcare alone.
It can cost an average of over
$10,000 a year, raising two
adult children to, uh, you know,
bringing them to adulthood now
exceeds $800,000. On top of
that, many new parents face a
significant drop in income,
making it harder to afford even
basic necessities. This tax
credit would provide real
relief, and it would help cover
medical bills, infant care, and
household expenses during one of
the most financially stressful
times in any family's life. So
studies show that financial
strain impacts
Both parents, mental health and
a child's development, and this
bill directly eases that burden.
If we want to support life,
strengthen families, and invest
in our future here in New
Mexico. House Bill 542 is a very
smart and necessary step
forward. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, I will go to the committee
for questions.
Madam Chair, if there are no
questions, I'd like to reserve
my comments to make a motion for
it toresentative Herndon, and
then Ferrari, um, Madam chair,
uh, thank you very much and
thank you presenters with
respect to the $7000 credit, is
it with, with, with
With regard to a person's
income.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you so much, Leader
Armstrong, for helping me fill
in for John, um, for
Representative Block who has
lost his voice. Yes, and so
representative members of the
committee, I think there is
bipartisan support and a very
clear and um a lot of folks on
both sides of the aisle, very
excited to see a baby bond that
was inclusive of all children
and um we want to back that up
and say that we believe that
that should be for all children.
When we see a surplus like we're
seeing in the state.
Um, that, that we're clear that
we're gonna help every family
with healthcare, medical
expenses, the rising costs of,
of having children. And yes,
ma'am, this is for all.
All residents.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
uh thank you presenters and so
with respect to the income, if
it's a refundable credit or or
individuals going to have to
include the money into the
income tax return the next year.
Madam Chair and Representative
as in with other uh refundable
tax credits that we have, yes,
it would be on the short form.
And Madam T, um,
Madam Presenter, what is the
effect of this tax credit on the
basic um
Budget of the of the state as
we're looking at the income
credits that might be applied
here, where else is it gonna be?
Madam Chair Representative has.
I mean, every time you have a
credit, something's gonna be
lost. What's gonna be lost here?
What is the effect of this $7000
credit. Well, it depends on
Madam Chair representative, it
depends on the take-up rate of
who chooses to apply, um, so if
you take $7000 and if 100% of
families chose to complete the
short form, then you would
multiply that times 20,000.
That's our average birth rate.
Madam Chair and Madam presenter,
if you utilize that much money
in terms of a credit that means
other programs are going to be
affected. What are the other
programs? Tell me how you got
through this, Madam Chair
Representative, absolutely
nothing because the baby bond
has been it's exactly as the
baby bond's been accounted for,
um, this gives this instead of
having a commission, I think the
bill is like an 8-page bill.
It's been rolled in
appropriations. I don't know if
it's coming back, but it, you
know, it created commission to
create the framework to
determine eligibility, it had,
you know, this will actually
save a little money, um, as far
as the administrative part of
it, because we wouldn't have to
form all those commissions. It
just simply says, you have a
baby, you get a tax credit.
It's, it's much cleaner, it's
much simpler and um the the
funds have been accounted for.
For the with the state in many
different ways. So I guess there
may be a picking and choosing of
it, and I think that that's what
the tax committee um would be
looking at for their, their tax
budget. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, madam dear, and
representative for bringing
this, um, on behalf of your
colleague, and I was just
wondering, do you know how many
um.
Children in the coming years
that they're expecting or but uh
how many birds there were in the
past year, Madam Chair
Representative, our birth rate
has been declining as well as
our population, we are, we are
gaining some population, but the
population that we're losing are
the families of childbearing
years. And so we're, we're
around 20,000, but that has been
declining.
OK. And uh Madam Chair, uh,
representative, do you, um,
So this will help everyone
whether they really need it or
not. Is that true? Madam Chair
Representative, I think everyone
has um unexpected expenses when
they, you know, and, and, and
have things that they need. I
mean, I've heard, you know,
about childcare, how important
it is for us to have childcare.
For everyone. Um, I think right
now our childcare eligibility is
at 450% of poverty. That's,
that's almost every New Mexican,
it's almost universal, so, you
know, I, we chose not to pick
and choose who needs the tax
credit or not, we chose to say
everyone who is helping us
address, um, our population
decline, everyone who's going to
be citizens and contributing to
the economic growth and
development. Everyone who has a
baby that we believe needs to
have, uh, the most
resources possible, maybe
they'll use it for a down
payment on a house, maybe
they'll use it for childcare,
maybe they'll use it to take a
little extra time off work, you
know, so, but this, this puts
the decision in the hands of the
of the resident.
Madam Chair and representative,
do you know why they chose CYFD
to um issue the certificates of
eligibility, Madam Chair and
Representative, that I do not
know.
I'm sure I, I would, if, if you
choose, um, as we do often in
this committee to let it go
through to tax, I would suggest
that they amend that.
Madam Chair and representative
to go to Department of Health
who representative. I,
I, I think that, uh, is it, is
it Department of Health, it's
vital Records that determines
birth certificates, but it would
seem that you would just add the
birth certificate and do it
through tax and revenue, to me.
Yeah, I'm not sure how they
would even be more well
equipped, um.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all.
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Um, for
being a substitute. Um, Madam
Chair Representative, I know you
emphasize the word resident, and
I was just wondering, Madam
Chair Representative residents
signed in current New Mexico
law.
I'm sorry. Resident is defined
in current Mexico lots, someone
who lives in the state. Thank
you, Madam Chair resident. So I
just want to clarify what this
include undocumented folks as
well. Yup.
Thank you. Thank you. I have a
couple of, of um
Oh, I'm sorry. Go ahead,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I will
be brief, um.
Representative Do.
Um, I'm not an economist, but
The $7000 goes to everybody.
Including people who
Make enough money to pay taxes
into the system.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair and Representative
that everyone who has a child
born in the state, who is a
resident who chooses to file a
tax return, short or.
Expanded.
would be eligible.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's,
that's all I had.
Thank you, and I just did the
math, um.
Representative, and it's 140
million, 7000 times, um, 20,000,
so that's a a chunk of money.
And so I, I just wanna um point
out to the committee.
Page 5 in the age.
FIR and
I forgot that the X is not met.
So if you look down the columns,
there's not a single thing
that's principle that's been
met, um, a principal from the
tax side of things. So, so with
that, uh, I will go back to
Representative Senator Cortez
for a motion.
still moved, Madam Chair.
OK, do I have a second?
OK, so that was represented
Martinez, OK.
Will you take the vote?
Representative Anaya.
Pass.
Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative Ann Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez?
Yes.
Madam vice chair? No, and I'd
like to explain my vote, Madam
Chair.
No. Oh, sorry, I need to go back
to, um, sorry, yeah,
Representative Vinaya, uh, yes,
and explain my vote.
Madam Chair.
No.
Uh, 6 to 16 to 2, sorry. OK.
On 62.
Sorry, let's get our math, um,
so by 5 to 2, you have a due
pass and
representative um Anaya to
explain her vote. Did someone
else say that? 5 to 3. Herndon,
OK, go ahead, representative
Anaya. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
will just say the two things
that I really appreciate this is
that it includes all taxpayers,
um, and that it includes gender
neutral language, so thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Representative Herndon, thank
you, Madam Chair, and Madam
Chair, any time for the number
of years that I've been working
in tax, anytime that we have a
tax credit, there's always
enough setting uh provision, and
so with the $140 million being
included with the projected
perspective of this, I think
it's too difficult. I think you
need to amend this. It needs to
be less or there needs to be
some other consideration because
other people are going to be
hurt.
Thank you, Adam here.
Thank you, and with that we have
completed our agenda, and so,
uh, for those of you who didn't
get potatoes.
On Wednesday, they're reheated,
reheating in my office, so 3:14,
so please go get some.
Committee adjourned. Let's go to
the.
