Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, here, we have a
cor, we have a quorum
representative Martinez just.
So we are going to start with
house Bill 303. We heard all of
the testimony and the public
comment, etc. So there is an
amendment that if we could get
passed out now, um, we will
discuss the amendment if needed.
And then take a vote.
Um, if you could hand it to her
and let me.
Yeah.
sure
OK, so we have the amendment,
um, and is it 231-154.1.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I do not have a copy
of the amendment. I think it was
sent to the committee.
OK.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, that's correct.
Thank you. So I will go to the
committee for questions or um
On the, on the, oh, first I need
a motion to um discuss the
amendment. I'll make that
motion, Madam Chair. OK. Um, so
any questions or
And, as I said, we're just doing
the amendment.
I have questions about.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
chair, uh, uh, thank you for
bringing us back. Can you, um,
And, and I'm sorry, we just got
this analysis, so it says.
Can you speak to CD CYDF.
Holds that the bill overrides
the ability for law enforcement
to address pressing situations.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that's not true. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, which
you know why they have
misinterpreted it this way,
Madam Chair members of the
committee, the, the striking the
language was um at the
suggestion of the district
Association of Districts
Attorneys.
They must be speaking to the
rest of the bill.
This gives more flexibility, not
less.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative.
Anyone else?
Representative, uh, and, yeah,
Madam Chair Representative, I
just want to thank you for
fixing this so soon. I know
there were a lot of concerns
with the language that you
removed from page 4, and so I
just wanna thank you again. I
know you've been working on this
for many years and there has to
be a solution, and we need to
fix the system so that no more
babies die under the care of our
state, so I appreciate you.
Thank you.
Anyone else or representative
Senator Cortez, Madam Chair
represented that there are no
other questions, I'd like to
make a motion for a do pass,
please.
I
so we have a motion by
Representative Senator Cortez in
a second by Representative
Jones.
OK, I just didn't know what that
voice came from. Oh, actually,
first we have to adopt the
amendment.
OK
No, that was to discuss make a
motion to adopt.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment?
OK, seeing none, you haven't
amended.
Bill, and we will go back to the
original motion of a Du pass.
And yet, Jones was the 2nd.
Representative Anaya.
No, explain my vote.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
No.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez? Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, no.
By a vote of 5 to 3, you have a
due pass.
And Representative Anaya to
explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair Representative, as
you know, my some of my biggest
concerns are the fact that there
are so many false positives that
happen with testing, and there's
um the amendment that you
brought doesn't necessarily fix
any of that piece. Um, also
schedule one is, of course, um,
pot as well is included in that.
Um, so I still just have issues
with um section 4, but thank
you, Madam Chair and
representative.
Oh, and I didn't.
I didn't announce that we must
be out of here by 10:30 or a
little after the HEFC is having
a press conference and I don't
think they want to sit here
talking from here while they're
doing a press conference.
Imagine that. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you. So next we
will have Representative Anaya
on House Bill 364.
364 is uh Anaya.
No,
it was actually it was there on
Friday.
Yeah.
Uh
Go ahead.
Is it not in your binder? Oh,
OK, OK.
All right, go ahead,
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. This is yet
another CYFD bill, um, this bill
was brought to me because uh the
current problem is that uh we
have children in CYFD custody
who may not be getting the
federal benefits that they
should be afforded.
Um, Madam Chair, this, uh, bill
would put into law, um, the, uh,
necessity for CYFD to check for
those federal benefits to make
sure that children are receiving
their own money and that that
money is not necessarily going
to CYFD. And Madam Chair
Representatives, um, I also want
to introduce my expert witness.
Um, this is Gary Hapay, and he's
from Disability Rights New
Mexico. I'm very glad to have
him by my side this morning.
He's very familiar with this
issue. And with that, uh, Madam
Chair.
in for questions.
We will go to Zoom in opposition
if you are in opposition, raise
your hand.
And in the room, is there anyone
in opposition?
OK, seeing none either place.
OK, support if you are on
support in support on Zoom,
please raise your hand.
Anyone in the room in support.
If you would like to speak, you
can come, OK.
Immediately a head goes down, so
I think she doesn't want to
speak.
So on Zoom we have Marilyn Beck.
And you have one minute, please
notice the.
The clock on the screen. Go
ahead, Marilyn. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members. My
name is Marilyn Beck. I'm the
founder and executive director
of New Mexico Child First
Network. We have been working on
this issue for the past 3 years
and we are so grateful for the
sponsor and Mr. Haseen for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
it is being, there's a mere bill
in the Senate which will pass,
um hopefully today in Senate
Judiciary, and we just can't
urge ma quickly enough, um, at
no point should the state um be
stealing.
the um federal benefits from
these children and, and so
anything we can do to pass this
bill, pass it quickly and make
sure that the rightful federal
benefits, the dollars of our
youth in foster care, get to our
ears. Um, we just stand in
strong support and thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward. Thank you. Thank you,
Teresa. Therese.
Thank you. Uh, thank you very
much, uh, Madam Chair, and, um,
I, uh, wanna echo Ms. Beck's
comments. We have represented
children who are eligible for
and receiving benefits, they do
not see the benefit of those
benefits. These benefits are
very important to these children
to enhance their care and their
opportunities to um
Benefit and participate in
extracurricular activities and
additional hobbies that CYFD and
potentially foster parents are
unable to support and provide
these benefits are so important
to these children, especially as
they age out. Um, we've seen for
our clients, it's very difficult
to get an accounting. It's very
difficult to track where these
benefits are going, how they're
being used, when they um do
transfer to the young people,
um, it takes time and they
should never
be going to the state. I fully
endorse this bill. I feel that
it's very important for these
benefits to go to the children
and young people, uh, they are
intended for. Um, I also
appreciate the sponsor and Mr.
Hapi and being there to explain
the need further.
Thank you very much, Madam?
I beg your pardon, Madame Chair.
Um, my name is Tesian and I'm
with the Native American
Disability Law Center, and we
have represented children in
CYFD custody for over 10 years.
Lori Lynn.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Laura Lynn Violanta, and
I'm the co-executive director of
New Mexico Can. Uh we stand in
support of this bill and just
want to echo uh previous
sentiments where federal
benefits should go directly to
the young people, um, not to
support their care and CYFD.
Thank you.
So we will go.
To the to the committee, any
questions, um.
Minority whip Martinez.
Representative in Chavez.
OK.
Uh, Jones.
Anyone else. OK, go ahead.
Thank you Madam Chair,
Representative, just one
question, what's happening to
that money now?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I'll leave that to my expert.
For the Garrick, Madam Chair,
represented Martinez, Gary
Alsepium's disability rights New
Mexico.
Currently, uh, for the children
that are receiving Social
Security benefits, uh, there's
usually gonna be a
representative payee, which
quite often has been CYFD. What
ends up happening is they've
been utilizing those funds to
spend on other things for care,
rather than the child having
access to those benefits while
they're in custody, then when
the child leaves care.
Those funds are sent back, any
remaining funds are sent back to
the Social Security
Administration if if CYFD is
representative payee. Reason I
say that representative Martinez
is because we disability rights
in Mexico has a contract with
the Social Security
Administration in which we
provide oversight of
representative payees of Social
Security benefits. In the past,
CYFD has been one of those
agencies we've looked at, and
that has been their policy of
turning over the funds back to
Social Security Administration,
which causes problems because
quite often the child didn't
even know they were receiving
benefits, and then once the
child leaves custody, it's hard
to track them down, to even
provide these funds to them.
chair representative, is this a
written policy?
I think see what Adam Chair
represented Martinez, I think
CYFD would have to say that, but
I think that has been their,
their policy that we learned up
and I think that's what
Secretary Casadis had said back
in 2023 in which she tried to
change it.
I'll I will also add that I
believe Secretary Casados, um,
issued a directive that expired
in March of 2024. So this is
essentially trying to put that
directive into
law.
And I'm sure would it be
possible to hear.
cells.
Go ahead, Madam Secretary.
Madam Chair Representatives,
thank you very much. I
appreciate the time to kind of
explain this. So yes, in fact,
the department had been taking
Social Security benefits. Um,
this doesn't differ between SSI
and RDSI, which are two separate
benefits that we receive for
children in state custody. The
Social Security benefit must be
spent down.
So there's a cap of $2000 that
has to be maintained if it goes
above that, then we risk losing
other benefits for children, and
then they expect the federal
government to use that,
especially if we're paying for
care and support out of federal
benefits.
The directive that they're
speaking of was um done when we
came to learn that RDSI benefits
were being used for care and
support. Um, we had a directive
that was issued that those
accounts that funding would no
longer be used to support kids
in our custody. We set up
accounts with the um
State treasurer's office for
them to maintain those accounts
for kids. To date, we have about
half a million dollars in that
account and 41 recipients that
receive RDSI benefits and those
will then go to those kids, um,
if they age out or leave the
state's custody, that money will
follow them. Um.
And the directive expired, but
we put it into policy.
So Madam Secretary, what is
RDSI?
Um, it is, um, I wish I had
somebody here that could better
explain it. So Social Security
benefits are benefits that kids
get, um, if the RDSI, um.
I don't know what they are.
But it, oh, here comes Dawn, she
can explain it.
Just trying to keep acronyms,
Madam Chair and Representatives.
So RSDI is retirement survivors,
disability income that is based
off of typically children are
receiving that if they have a
deceased parent based on that
deceased parent's work history.
That is solely based on that,
whereas SSI is based on a
child's own disability. It is
income and needs based, so it
can be reduced based on other
sources.
Pardon me, of income. All right,
thank you very much.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martiz, just to clarify too,
when when a child has SSI
benefits, Social Security
Administration says you can't
have over $2000 accumulated or
you're cut off from SSI
benefits. So that's why that has
to be managed properly.
A way to the way a remedy for
that is setting up what's called
AB accounts, in which through
this treasury's office as
Secretary Casados mentioned in
which you can have up to $15,000
accumulated in resources to
that, so that you won't run
afoul.
Of losing your supplemental
security income, but there are
two things, supplemental
security income is like what it
means, supplemental. This means
like sometimes it's a child
might only have maybe $400 in
survivors benefits from a
deceased parent. Well then you
have supplemental security
income that supplements it to
bring it up to like a $700
threshold level, and I'm gonna
ask folks to please keep things
brief and to the point.
I think Madam Cha just seems
like this bill would solidify
the policy.
Let's see if he has, so thank
you for all that.
Thank you, Representative N
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this forward. I do have a dear
friend, um, who fosters children
and said at the age of 2 when
she got a child, they were
evaluated for Social Security
for, for mental health,
behavioral health disorders, and
the child is now 17. She doesn't
know whether she has Social
Security or not, um, because the
foster parents don't get that
money. They have the $600
whether it's there or not, so.
It's my understanding that now
that money would then be
bucketed if they were approved
for SSI and when they age out,
they get that money.
For the child themselves now
that they're an adult. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair representative,
that's my understanding.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, that is correct, that it
wouldn't be be accessible. I
could just add to why this is so
important for kids in foster
care, kids in foster care has
been found that they are victims
of identity theft quite often.
And and that because so many
people have their personal
identifiable information than
other individuals have utilized
that on utilities and other
things, and a child doesn't even
know that until they leave
custody because
That would be one of the things
that would be good when you're
teaching financial literacy to
do, do a credit report, see if
you've been victims of of
Of identity theft. And finally,
we know that 30% of kids at exit
custody naturally end up being
homeless.
Just a reminder again, we're
staying on the bill and brief.
We, we have a drop dead
timeline, so thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. This is a
wonderful bill. I think it's
going to help all of the
individuals that are aging out
of foster care. Thank you so
much. OK, we have Representative
Jones. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You'll be glad to know that my
questions have been answered.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair may I make a motion
for a pass, OK, so we have a
motion for a due pass by
Representative Gates in a 2 by
Representative Senator Cortez.
Is there any opposition? OK,
seeing then you have a due pass
on it.
7 to 18.
If you're sitting in front of
me, I lose you, so, um.
OK. Next we will have House Bill
343.
Oh, she's not here. OK. Um,
And we are going to have to roll
3:44.
Because we didn't get the
substitute until this morning.
3:44. Excuse me.
And I'm not, did we ever get it
electronically? No, so we still
don't have an electronically.
Um,
Oh, OK. So we're gonna go to
Right
Oh
me
So I get, we are going to um
4:30. So whenever you're ready,
representative.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair members of the Committee,
and we're back.
Um,
oh good. Here's rearana. I was
like, I will do my best to fill
in for Repserana, but together
we make one whole brain. So here
she is.
Take a deep breath and then you
are the one thing you can, the
one thing you can predict in
this building is
unpredictability, so stay ready.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I am
Representative Sarahana and my
co-sponsor is Representative
Anaya, and we have other experts
that will introduce themselves
when we when we need them, and
um I'm here to present House
Bill 4:30, the Health Data
Protection Privacy Act.
This proposed bill aims to
protect your personal health
information when it's handled by
companies other than your doctor
or hospital. And here's what
that means. Companies must
clearly explain how they
collect, use, and share your
health data.
This ensures you know exactly
what's happening with your
information.
It puts guardrails on these
companies. They can only use the
health data for specific reasons
related to their service, for
example, if you use a health
app, we all use these Fitbits or
most of us do, um, you can use
your data to track your fitness,
but not for unrelated purposes.
Before us company shares your
health information with others.
They must get your clear
permission. This gives you
control over over who sees your
data, you can also ask for it to
be deleted.
Companies are required to take
steps to keep your health
information safe from
unauthorized access or leaks.
It provides enforcement for
misuse of personal health data.
If companies don't follow these
rules, they could, they could
face penalties. Again, the goal
of this bill is to give you more
control over your personal
health information and ensure
it's kept private and secure,
right, so we're gonna break this
into two parts so we can really
understand the bill. I'll do the
first part and Representative
Anaya will do the second part.
We'll try to be brief. One of
the health information, sorry.
Um, while the health insurance
portable and Accountability Act
HIPAA includes some controls on
on the collection, the use and
and distribution of protected
health information by entities
such as healthcare providers,
health insurance plans, or
health clearing houses that
process health information,
there is still a vast ocean of
of health data that is
unprotected.
The hippo lists and
List of
entities, I'm sorry, does not
cover apps, websites or data
brokers.
Your health data that is
collected directly from
interactions, for example,
adding your health information
into your fitness app or
inferring your for purchases,
your prenatal vitamins,
melatonin for sleeping, Saint
John's Warts for depression,
it's aggregated and sold by
third-party brokers.
From the duke's standard school,
um, sorry, from the Duke
Stanford School of Public
Policy, a report found that 26
of the 37 contacted data brokers
responded to inquiries about
mental health data.
And 11 firms were ultimately
willing and able to sell the
requested mental health data.
And the California Privacy
Protection Agency has found that
dozens of data brokers sell
reproductive health information,
including that of minors.
on my computer so I'm sorry,
Madam Chair.
There's no FIR for this in the
book.
Thank you.
Martinez, um, I.
Yeah, we, we got
Mhm
She's done.
Yeah.
Sorry.
00, it may be here in your
Yeah, it's within your stack.
So I'm sorry, go ahead.
Um, how 4:30 closes the gap on
health care data being used
without our permission. Think of
it as a no surprise statue. Our
health information can be
processed to give us the product
and service we're asking for,
and beyond that, it just, we
just have to give consent.
It is as simple as that. So I'm
gonna go slowly through section,
just exactly what the topic of
each section. So section one,
names the act, Section 2s are
definitions for the bill.
Section 3 lays out the
requirements, including
providing easy to understand
privacy information, tools for
individuals to give consent of
their information and reasonable
access of communication for
people with disabilities.
Section 4
Lays out the prohibited
practices of health data
information.
Section 5 lays out the
individual rights to access
correct or delete your data.
Section 6 lays out agreements
for data processing.
Section 7
Prohibits retaliation against an
individual that exercises their
right under the Acts.
Section 8 gives the process for
enforcement and claims of
violations.
In section 9,
is the bill's limitations, for
instance, complying with current
state and federal law were
subpoena.
All right, Pass it on to my
co-sponsor.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, as I
said, uh, earlier, uh,
Representative Saraana and I are
two halves of one brain. She is
the data expert and I'll do a
little bit of putting this into
context. Um, this bill is really
about big data, uh, big data
collecting our information
specifically our health
information, packaging it up and
selling it to other entities.
Um, so to put this into some
context.
Yes, this is about protecting
things like abortion, gender
affirming care. And it's also
about protecting things like
mental health data, um, as a
representative noted before.
Um, I'm sure many of us use
different types of apps for um
healthcare. I know my I watch uh
tracks my heart rate. Um, but,
uh, I allow it to. I have
specifically opted in and I
said, here is a service that I
would like.
I just want to let the committee
members know that this bill,
because it is based on consent,
that would not be a prohibited
within this bill.
So if you have someone who says,
yes, I want this service, it is
OK. However,
We also have, um, a lot of
issues going on with folks
coming to New Mexico and or our
own folks in New Mexico seeking
abortion, genderharing care
services, um,
Uh, there have been stories of
folks who have been prosecuted
based on this type of data,
somebody coming to a, uh, a
clinic where they may have had
an abortion, and that data that
is being tracked, that location
data being used against that
person.
Um, we also have um incentives,
unfortunately in other states
where um they're calling the
mounty incentives, but
essentially $10,000 bounty if
you can.
Um, let law enforcement know uh
uh successful uh of a neighbor
or somebody you know or somebody
you suspect, um, having an
abortion. And so, um,
This data is something that is
collected and is often sold.
So I just want to um piece to uh
portions of this spell out.
Uh, this bill does not prohibit.
Uh, apps or big data from from
collecting the information, if
you say it's OK.
But it does, ask them to ask you
if it's OK if they package your
data and sell it to somebody
else.
Um, so I just wanted to put that
into some context, Madam Chair
and committee members. The last
thing that I want to touch on,
um, before we leave it uh to
questions, is that, um, we are
also in a bit of an
unprecedented.
Well, no pun intended situation
in which we're not really sure
what will happen at the federal
level. So this bill also does
not touch HIPAA privacy
protections at all. That is, um,
separate from this bill. Um,
However, we're not quite sure
what's going to happen at the
federal level. What will and
will not be protected by HIPAA.
Um, so this would help fill some
of those gaps. And the last
piece is Madam Chair and
Representatives, um,
I'm not sure if folks are aware,
but, um, many of our apps, um,
even if they're not health
related.
Um, also track our location.
So I'm sure you've seen these
pop-ups at different points in
time. Every app has different
settings, um, but, um, sometimes
it asks if I can track your
location. So a good example of
how this bill could be used to
protect folks is that if you are
by chance sitting at um a clinic
for an abortion or maybe not an
abortion, maybe you're just
getting your checkup, your
reproductive healthcare, and
you're sitting there and you're
playing a game on your phone.
That game can
also be tracking your location
data.
What could happen then is you
have, um, places like crisis
pregnancy centers, and of
course big data who could then
ask for that information to be
purchased, and they could use it
for whatever they'd like,
whether that means advertising
to you, um, as somebody who has
visited this type of clinic, um,
or, you know, somebody who is um
targeting ads at you as an
individual based on your
healthcare data.
And so Madam Chair, uh,
representatives. With that, we
will stand for questions and I'm
sure there will be many. Thank
you.
Just a reminder, let's be brief.
OK, we will go to Zoom if you
are in opposition, please raise
your hand, and I'll come back to
you in the room, anyone in
opposition.
If you want to speak, come
forward.
One minute and there's the timer
on the screen.
Hi, Linda Siegel for num number
of healthcare providers and
synchronous at this moment, we
have problems with some of the
language which does not clearly
exempt licensed healthcare
providers, hospitals, it's a
little vague and the health
information exchange and we're
working with the sponsors and
the advocates to come up with an
amendment that will, you know,
exempt all of those entities
that they didn't want to put in
anyway and uh
Do it in the next committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carrie Robin Brunner
with the Medical Society, ditto
to what Linda said, we're
really, really appreciative of
us all working together to make
sure we have the right amendment
for the next committee to make
sure data that would already be
protected health information
under HIPAA is not included in
this bill, so there's not a
conflict between the two, so we
really look forward to that. The
language right now is a little
squishy, but we think we're
going to get there in the next
committee. So thank you very
much.
Thank you. And on Zoom we have
Renzo.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Renzo Soto
on behalf of TechNET. We're
respectfully in opposition to
House 4:30. We think there are
many issues with the bill,
primarily it's overly broad
scope and highly restrictive
requirements, for example, it
currently captures any data
point that has even a
theoretical relationship with
someone's health, uh, extending
the purchases of a number of
products at a convenience store,
for example, or posting videos
and photos on social media. If
you're at a health illness
related charity, uh, it's strict
opt-in data processing
requirements.
Would be one of the most
restrictive in the country, also
highly infeasible convenience
store can't get consents from
every customer, social media
companies can't get consent from
everyone in a photo or video, we
are concerned that this will
effectively lead to a ban of a
wide range of goods and services
in New Mexico, which is more
concerning considering the
bill's unworkable provisions,
preventing denials of service,
uh, because many services can't
be rendered if someone doesn't
consent, as well as the private
right of action. We close by
noting that House Bill 430 seems
more in line with a
comprehensive data privacy bill,
we'd urge the legislature to
consider filed proposals that
provide an interoperable
framework which does include
opt-in consent protections for
consumer health data. Thank you.
Hi, good morning. Can folks hear
me OK?
Yes.
All right, good morning, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Andrew Kingman. I represent the
state privacy and Security
coalition also here today
respectfully opposing HB 430.
What we do support the concept
of heightened protections for
reproductive and other sensitive
health data. Uh, this bill is
not quite ready for prime time.
It is missing critical
definitions such as consent and
targeted advertising. Key
definitions are overbroad. Uh,
this could include information
about the purchase of over the
counter.
or medications, low fat foods.
It could require opt-in consent
to visit a webpage related to a
health topic or following a
fitness influencer online, uh,
signing up for a gym membership,
etc. states such as Nevada and
Connecticut have successfully
moved forward models that better
align the intent of the bill
with the language on the page,
and again, critically, the
presence of the private right of
action exacerbates all of the
issues within the bill because
enforcement would not be
done by the Attorney General's
office consistently enforcing
this complex language, but would
be done by plaintiff's attorneys
looking to.
Thank you proceed violation.
OK, um, in support, if you are
on Zoom in support, raise your
hand in the room in support.
If you would like to speak,
please come to the center.
And I'm gonna be really strict
with the one minute.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I use the pronouns,
and I'm with bold futures and
advocacy organization by and for
women and people of color in New
Mexico and other states, private
messaging. Oh,
my name is Ray. I'm sorry, I
skipped that, OK. In other
states,
Private messages, search
histories,
online payments, health tracking
apps, and even location data
have been used to criminalize
pregnant people for miscarriages
and personal decisions about
their health care.
We know that sensitive health
data is also frequently
collected online and sold for
profit, not only is this a
violation of privacy, but for
communities of color, this can
lead to further surveillance
harassment, systems bias and
criminalization.
All New Mexicans should be able
to use their devices, connect
with one another and access
information without fear. The
most intimate details of our
bodies and lives should not be
for sale. We deserve protection
now. We ask that you vote yes on
HP 430. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Nathan
Savara, and I'm here to speak in
support of HB 430 on behalf of
Equality to Mexico, the
statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization.
Currently, online health
entities are able to do just
about anything with the data
that we input, as it is
unregulated and not protected by
HIPAA. We live in a hostile
environment, government
overreach and increased attacks
on LGBTQ people and those who
seek reproductive or genative
forming care is taking hold in
neighboring states and
federally.
New Mexico needs to take
preemptive action now to protect
the unregulated data that can be
used to harm, discriminate,
harass, and target our
vulnerable populations. For
example, a transgender person
using a medication tracker, a
fitness tracker, and a mental
health coaching app has a
digital footprint of their
genderforming care access, their
daily routines and locations,
and the state of their emotional
well-being. This geolocation
data identity information and
mental health status can be
bought, sold, and misused by
hostile actors. This is
extremely dangerous for anyone
and particularly for LGBTQ
folks. Equality in New Mexico
strongly
that do pass on HP 430 to ensure
the safety and privacy of Korean
trans Mexicans and their data.
Thank you. Thank you. um,
committee questions.
Representative Jones.
Martinez.
Madam Chair online.
Oh, I'm sorry. Jumping the gun,
trying to watch the clock. OK,
I'm sorry, we will go to Zoom.
So Alexandria Taylor.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Alexandria Taylor, the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition of Sexual Assault
Programs. Privacy is the
cornerstone to survivor justice
and safety over half of New
Mexicans have experienced sexual
assault. Survivors of sexual and
domestic violence know how
personal their health data is,
and this bill further
strengthens the protections.
I've worked in shelter services
for 20 years and with advances
in technology, survivors have no
idea how much is being tracked
on them.
And disclosing their location. A
major component of healing after
an assault is having the control
over one's life and safety. We
appreciate your support.
Gwendolen. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Gwendoline
Omana and I share with Tegua
Women United, a nonprofit in
northern New Mexico.
Digital surveillance has
historically put and continues
to put Native American and
indigenous community,
communities at great risk. For
example, indigenous women face
some of the highest rates of
gender-based violence. And with
this data collection practices,
they are now being tracked,
monitored, and criminalized
through digital tools. Abusers
and traffickers use GPS tracking
systems and spyware to stalk
victims. Some agencies that have
been designated to protect
misuse.
Uh, misuse facial recognition
and data collection to other
police indigenous communities
while filling to address gender
violence and provide real
solutions.
Tech companies profit from
selling personal data, making
indigenous women more vulnerable
to exploitation and with growing
reproductive surveillance, their
healthcare sovereignty is being
watched and restricted. Today I
ask you to protect our privacy
and our rights online and thank
you.
Um, Tatiana.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto here with the
ACLU of New Mexico and we are in
strong support of this bill.
Everyone should be able to
access the healthcare they need
without their personal health
information being collected and
shared without their permission
or knowledge, enacting privacy
protections is a crucial step to
safeguarding health care access
for all New Mexican communities.
Additionally, states like New
Mexico that protect abortion and
Gender Affirming care access
will now play an even more
critical role in providing care
to people from states.
that criminalize abortion and
jeopardize access to much-need
health care services. Everyone
should be able to access
healthcare without the added
barrier of fearing for our
safety and privacy, and we urge
a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Molly.
Uh, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, committee. My name is
Doctor Molly McLean, and I'm a
practicing physician in
Albuquerque, New Mexico as a
physician who's worked for many
years in a system that has
worked for many years with a
multiple vulnerable communities
that we have in New Mexico, uh,
passing HB 430 seems like a very
easy decision. Uh, our health
information.
And the health information of
all of all all of our vulnerable
communities should be in the
hands of us as individuals and
not in the hands of big tech,
um, we are seeing what can
happen when the power
distribution um goes stronger to
larger corporations rather than
being in the hands of the
people, um, this bill seems an
easy bill to pass and will help
support people's sense of
safety, people's sense of
consent and people's sense of
power over their own
information. Thank you so much
for DuPass.
OK. Thank you, Patsy Romero.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Patsy Romero. I'm
advocating this morning for the
national alliance on Mental
illness, as many of you know,
individuals with mental illness
are often stigmatized as
dangerous or criminal, and
therefore their private health
information is extremely
important for all of the reasons
stated this morning, Madam
Chair, and then, uh, trying to
respect your, your, uh,
opportunity to move things
forward, no mean New Mexico
stands in strong support of this
legislation, House Bill 430, and
we thank you for bringing this
forward.
Thank you, Patsy. So we will go
to the committee. Did you have
anything you wanted to
Wrap up with before we go to
committee. Um, just one
statement, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
there is a couple of articles
published uh with the National
Institute of Health, um,
recommending legislation such as
this to Congress. Um, they're
called My Data My Health Bills,
and this is essentially New
Mexico's version of that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. So
I have a representative Jones,
minority whip Martinez and
Representative Cates.
Go ahead, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I do have a
lot of questions. I won't ask
all of them, I promise, but um
we'll start with
You know, I'm not a tech genius,
but um, I, I'm pretty sure I can
turn off location on my phone,
isn't isn't that possible to
just turn it off?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um,
It depends on which app you're
using, and it depends on uh
whether or not you've opted into
those services.
Um, so, Madam Chair
Representative, the answer is it
depends.
I'm sorry, the answer is what? I
said, Madam Chair
Representative, the answer is it
depends. Um, some of the apps
will use your location if you
have allowed them to.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. So, so
you would have to opt in the
location to add onto that Madam
Chair representative. I just got
um some more information as
well. Um, it would also apply to
um, websites, websites also
track your location, so it's not
necessarily just within apps,
um, but if you are surfing
websites on your browser, um,
that can also be collecting your
location information.
And so, Madam Chair,
representative, it would mean,
um, within this bill that that
if either apps or um websites
we're using your location data,
they would have to ask you
first.
So, um, as was mentioned in the
testimony, um, I, I know, uh,
one of the um concerns was that,
um, you know, it could affect
buying hat, you know, buying
habits. People could be tracking
your buying habits. They do
right now
just for the record, um, and
yes, we do want to prevent
against that. Um, that is
actually very true. We want to
prevent against it unless um an
individual who is purchasing
that medication or maybe that um
Uh, birth control or maybe that
pregnancy test, um, that they
can say, no, I actually don't
want that data shared.
Just a reminder, we're trying to
keep, keep on time, so brief.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I really
am trying to understand this
though. It sounds to me like,
Madam Chair Representative that,
that even with uh website
searches that there are browsers
we can use that don't track that
actually allow for privacy. I
know the commonly used ones will
track, but there are some that
do not.
So I think it depends on which
browser you choose, if I'm not
mistaken.
Madam Chair Representative, I am
imagining, uh, you mean the
invisible browsers, is that?
I think so. The invisible
browsers, Madam Chair
representative, um, I am
imagining that is it and I'll
pass it to one of my experts for
this.
And just you can just pass it
without having to whoever's
gonna take the question, just
take the question.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Jones, thank you for the
question. Um, introduce
yourself, please. My name is
Lena Weber, policy director with
the ACLU of New Mexico, um, and
you're absolutely right, there
are some browsers and there are
some apps, there are some
companies that do have really
strong security settings in play
already. What this would do is
basically uh level the playing
field and ensure that those kind
of common sense protections and
guardrails that you can use our
data for what you need to
provide the service. Other than
that,
Just ask our permission, that
that's applying across the
board.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and
Uh, representative.
I'm a little confused too about
your references to abortion.
Abortion is legal in New Mexico
up to the moment of birth, for
any reason without restrictions.
So why would we need this here
to protect people who are
seeking abortions.
Um, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I just want
to correct some, some
misinformation for a moment.
Yes, abortion is absolutely
legal in the state of New
Mexico, um, but there are not
abortions that happened at the
time of birth. Um, but I would
like to say, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, because we
have folks, um, who are
traveling both here and into
other states, there's always um
an opportunity for
criminalization as.
are going back and forth either
from here to Texas, from here to
any other state, um, that the
availability of that data to be
bought and sold, it's actually
pretty immense at the moment.
Madam Chair, Representative, I'd
like to correct some
information.
Abortion is legal up to the
moment of birth in New Mexico
for any reasons. We're, we're
not going to politicize that it
is, it's the law. We're
legislators and I'm clarifying
that it is legal, whether it
happens or not right now is not
the issue, but it is legal and
so we're talking about the law,
so I, I think it's, it's if she
can, Madam Chair,
representative, if you can
correct me, I can correct you
because what I'm saying is
actually in the
There are no restrictions on
abortion in New Mexico. So let
me go back to
The second part of your answer.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
Are you saying that people who
OK, let me back up and just say
there are states where abortion
is not legal. Those people
seeking abortion will come here.
Are you saying that their states
will track them to prosecute
them?
Representative Madam Chair
Representative, uh, in short,
yes, um, we have seen, um,
bounties, I'm using Texas as an
example because it's also a
neighbor, but Texas has offered
$10,000
Counties, if you will, or
rewards for anyone who can
successfully prove that someone
has gotten an abortion, um, and
Madam Chair Representative that
um and an easier way to do that
would be to purchase data um
from these big tech companies,
purchased those lists of someone
who was maybe in a geo fence
location at a certain, uh, you
know, within a certain amount of
time. Um, so they could geofence
a location, let's say at an
abortion clin.
Um, that geo location could then
be sold, um, to folks who are
being incentivized to um
expose other folks, I suppose,
is that.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
what you're saying is that
They can be identified as as
being in a location if they
haven't turned off their
location services, which if I
was really worried about that, I
would probably do, um.
They can be identified as being
in a location, but they can't be
sure no one can be sure they had
an abortion. That's not.
accessed, is it, Madam Chair
Representative, it can be used
as evidence, and also just for
clarification, I don't know if
everybody knows or is aware that
it is not just if you're using a
Google Maps that your location
is available, it's actually
while you're doing mundane
things like playing games or,
um, using a browser.
random chair representative. So
let me clarify.
If you're saying, uh, I think
what you're saying is that
Someone who has nefarious intent
can find a location.
And use that in a perhaps a
slanderous way or to uh to
expose this location, I mean
this abortion that was supposed
to have been secret.
But are you referring to the
government?
Tracking this person.
Madam Chair Representative No,
um, the bounties right now are
for everyday folks.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So I don't, you
know, I'm not an attorney, but
it sounds to me like that's a
judicial issue. That's a court
issue.
Not something that we should be
legislating, and I think I'm
gonna stop there because, you
know, we could probably go on
and on, but I, I think that if
that happens, that is something
that should go.
to court that someone should be
sued for for using that
information, not that we should
have a sweeping legislation that
can that like others have said
is very broad, so I'm gonna stop
right there. Thank you,
Representative Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative just
shortly, um, right now it's
legal to purchase that data and
use it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, minority Whip
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
You, you made a pretty
inflammatory statement twice.
That Texas is putting up a
$10,000 bounty on people who in
Texas is putting up this $10,000
bond bounty. Is that a law
enforcement agency, a government
agency, a private person.
I'm very curious about who's
putting up $10,000 bounties on
New Mexicans.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
it is the Attorney General, um,
and there is a private right of
action, um, that is associated
with this as well. I think, I
think.
The Attorney General, if he is
truly putting up a $10,000
bounty on the Mexicans, that is
a problem for me.
Um, I think that's criminal.
Um, I'm gonna go on to my next
question,
it's, it's not on New Mexicans,
it's on folks who are from other
states of bounty like that is
criminal.
Um
Can you clarify something for
me. If this bill were to pass,
Would it
During COVID, the governor put
out a statement that anybody
traveling outside the state of
New Mexico would.
be penalized. Would this stop
the governor from being able to
track me if I was going to
Amarillo. Um, Madam Chair
representative, I am going to
pass this to Diana. I know she
has a lot more uh technical
expertise.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Please introduce yourself. My
name is Deanna Warren,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, for the purposes of this
law, it would.
Prohibit companies from tracking
your location data. So in
theory, any law that was any
prohibition on your movement
would not be tracked um via
these companies. So that
information could not be
purchased.
Madam Chair represented, the
question was,
Would this stop the governor
from tracking me if I traveled
to Amarillo. She's not a private
company. I'm wondering if the
government can continue to track
my movements.
During an epidemic like COVID.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representative, this does not
apply to HIPAA, and it also does
not apply to governmental
entities, um, as much as in our
current context, I sort of wish
it did.
So then I agree with one of the
people that stood up and uh
testified in support of this.
This is the biggest government
overreach bill I've seen yet.
Um
I, I have serious problems with
the way the bill is written.
Um, and I just cannot support
this. There's too many problems
with this bill.
And I hope, I know you have the
votes to pass it, unfortunately.
But I hope these holes are fixed
by the time it gets to the
judiciary because this is
It's a bad, bad bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Kates, thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you
representatives for bringing
this bill forward. We did hear a
lot of um comments and public
comment and I just want to spend
a little time clarifying. So is,
yeah although I understand um
uh.
The
The broad range of issues in
which this bill will be able to
address. But will this bill be
able to cover my purchases at
the drugstore at the grocery
store as it going to make sure
that that data is not sold
without specific information,
uh, permission.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, this bill is consent-based,
and so if that if those
purchases have to do with your
data. Uh, I'm sorry, if this
purchases have to do with your
health, yes.
So I would like to thank you for
bringing this forward. I think
that um
Uh, people of my generation may
not understand that one of our
many assets is our data and and
probably a very valuable asset
and um I tend to play solitaire
when I have uh insomnia and um
and do other things. I also want
the location finder to make sure
it's a safety mechanism for my
elderly mom and my children, but
I don't want my location finder
for uh strangers outside my
family.
So I very much appreciate um
what has been going on for
several decades now, and thank
you for educating, you will have
my support in this.
Thank you, I will entertain a
motion.
I'll second that. OK, um,
Karen, can you please take the
role?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones? No.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes. Madam
Chair, yes.
We have a 5 by a 5 to 4, you
have a due pass.
committee members.
Um, yeah.
So we will, OK, I don't see
representative Armstrong, so
Representative Gallegos.
Whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm pleased to
introduce HB 370. The healthcare
professionals credentialing act.
This bill aims to ensure
healthcare providers in our
communities are not prevented
from practicing based on
economic factors unrelated to
quality of care or professional
competence. Right now, doctors
are leaving New Mexico for
states with less barriers to
practice. Our communities are
seeing a drain of medical
professionals because.
of the systematic challenges of
practicing medicine in the
state.
At a time when we are facing so
many challenges in recruiting
and retaining skilled health
care professionals, HB 370 helps
to ensure that medical
facilities are evaluating
doctors based on their medical
skills, not how they will
support the bottom line. When
making decisions about clinical
privileges.
Representative, you have a sub.
We do. OK. So I will.
Oh, it, it just, it's getting
handed out right now.
And it was, it was emailed and
more than 24 hours ago. So I
will accept a motion to um
discuss this uh
OK, motion by Representative
Chavez. Is there any opposition?
OK, seeing then, you have a, a
substitute bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So, um, this, the
substitute was negotiated with
Healthcare stakeholders, and I'd
like my expert witness or one of
my expert witnesses, Carrie
Robert Burer.
to explain the substitute.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, uh, Carrie Robin
Bruder with the New Mexico
Medical Society. Um, the idea
behind the substitute for House
Bill 307 is very simple.
Hospitals have the role of
ensuring healthcare
professionals who treat patients
in the hospital, whether they
are employed by the hospital or
not are proficient in their
field, and they follow safety
rules established by the
hospital for patients.
And we want to ensure that our
clinicians are following those
rules, also called bylaws as a
condition of them being allowed
to see their patients or when
they are doing something like
renting OR time.
So if a clinician needs all the
criteria established by those
bylaws, the hospital should not
be able to deny the clinician
privileges or credentials to
that hospital simply because the
clinician may be an economic
competitor.
Access to hospital ORs and
continuity of patient care
through access to hospitalized
patients is a critical component
to the survival of our
independent practices. And
that's what House Bill 307 does.
It ensures hospitals can't deny
privileges to a community
clinician who otherwise meets
all of the criteria of a
hospital's bylaws simply because
they may not be employed by that
hospital or not the affiliated
with their medical group. So the
substitute was negotiated with
Loveless.
Who I want to thank because they
pointed out operational issues
with the original bill that
really did need to be fixed, and
the changes are as follows. So
first, the hospital itself does
not grant or deny privileges.
They have a team of medical
staff that make those decisions.
So everywhere in the bill where
you see hospital, we added the
language, the credentialing
authority of the hospital so we
could be more specific about who
in the hospital the bill is
directed toward.
Second, on page 2 line one, we
added language that a
credentialing authority of a
hospital could require an
applicant to agree to follow all
of the bylaws as a condition of
their approval. This is
important to ensure our
clinicians know and are
proactively agreeing to follow
the safety rules before they're
allowed to treat patients.
Third, on page 2 lines 17 and
18. We added that a
credentialing authority could
require membership in a
competency organization. This is
important because being board
certified in a certain
specialty, technically is
considered being part of a
professional organization and
the credentialing authority
should obviously be allowed to
require you to be board
certified and say orthopedics,
uh, if you're gonna be renting
an OR to do a knee replacement.
4th on page 2, line 22, we
removed salaried employment
because hospitals do enter into
exclusivity agreements with
physician groups.
This on page 3 line 7, we added
language to clarify that a
credentialing authority cannot
require a clinician to refer a
certain number of patients into
the hospital. But the authority
can require a clinician to have
made a certain number of patient
encounters in a specific time
frame. This is to make sure a
doctor who hasn't actually
treated patients for 5 years.
Uh, it doesn't get to just start
operating in the operating room.
They have to have a certain
number of patient encounters, so
the hospital knows that.
proficient. And finally, on page
3 line 18, we added a section
that ensures once an applicant
is actually credentialed, they
still have to comply with the
bylaws of the authority in order
to keep those credentials.
That's it. Um, we think that the
bill is a much better bill now.
It addresses a lot of patient
safety concerns while also still
striking the balance of ensuring
art independent community
providers can have access to
hospital privileges, which is
very important for their
economic viability. And with
that, I think we have one more.
Um, so, Madam Chair, I'd like to
introduce Doctor Philip Shields
to explain the immediate problem
that HB 370 is trying to solve.
Thank you for allowing me to be
here. I'd like to give you some
background and some
understanding of how this came
about, um, I'm a neurosurgeon. I
practiced at Christos Saint
Vincent, um, for 23 years.
A sort of semi-retired and then
And pulled out of the mothballs
to help Nexus Health, uh, um.
From an administrative
standpoint.
This came about when uh Nexus
Health.
The sort of the purpose of Nexus
Health was to increase
Um
Access to healthcare in Santa Fe
and in northern New Mexico.
From the moment we opened our
doors, it lowered the cost of
health care by 50%.
So, how does that happen? Well,
the hospital's Presbyterian
prius and throughout the United
States have found in revenue
stream, um, to charge patients
by charging a um they call it
HOPD, a hospital.
Um, office.
Charge, which is a facility fee.
So in other words, when you go
see an orthopedic surgeon and
they charge you.
$250 to see them.
No problem. Well, now they tack
on a facility fee which is about
$800 to $1000 to use their
facility.
So we don't charge that. So that
automatically lowered the cost
of seeing a doctor. We also
offer services at a reduced rate
and one of the biggest ones is
chemotherapy infusion. I don't
know if you know the cost of
chemotherapy, but it is
outrageous. So for one infusion,
it can cost from 36,000 to
52,000 per infusion. We, we
charge
At most, 50% less.
And I don't know if you know
this New York Times article
about the 340B program, which is
a federal program to design to
help people who can't afford
chemotherapy, um, to afford it,
um, there is a company in a
program that is using 340B to
make money, and there was a
patient in Santa Fe, uh, that
was outlined, uh, in the New
York Times article where the
drug
was the drug costs around
10,000, they charged 22,000 and
then they went after the patient
for 2500. We charge less for
chemotherapy and we don't use
the 340B program.
So I could ask you to please
stay on the bill. We have, we
have a very short time in this
room. Yes, ma'am. So the whole,
the whole point of this is that
we, we were to be the nexus
between the hospitals for
outpatient care.
So we opened and things were
going great and then uh Chris is
terminated the privileges of our
orthopedic surgeons or
interventional pain group and
our E and ENT surgeons.
What, what does this, what
impact does that have? Number
one, it decreases the access to
health care for patients in
Santa Fe and in northern New
Mexico. #2, we have a patient in
Chris, we can't follow them. So
if a surgeon operates on
somebody and they have a problem
and they go to the emergency
room at Crysta's our surgeons
can't follow them there.
Number 3, we're having trouble
recruiting doctors. So we had a
contract to a general surgeon
and he backed out of his
contract because
He was concerned about having
enough cases if he could not go
to Christa's. Uh, we have an
infectious disease, uh, person
who's starting, uh, in June and
they are thinking of backing out
if they are not able to practice
at Chris.
Any, any, we have 8 chemo uh we
have 8 oncologists that uh
provide services.
They're opening at a cancer
center and
If they terminate the privileges
of our cancer doctors, that is
really going to reduce oncology
care in northern New Mexico. So
in summary, uh, this bill, uh,
helps provide
Uh, care in New Mexico, um, and
Christus is using this as a
competitive tool to prevent uh
competition in, in northern New
Mexico.
Thank you. And with that, Madam
Chair, we stand for questions.
Thank you. So we'll go to Zoom
if you are in opposition, raise
your hand, and I'll come back to
you in the room in opposition.
Please come forward and one
minute and reminder to stay on
this bill.
Good day, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jacob Smith,
Sandoval with the government to
Change Project, as it is
written, I must stand in
opposition to HB 370. I would
like to draw your attention to
the section C or Section D of
the amended bill not addressed
in the sub bill comments,
excluding UNM Health Systems
from this requirement gives UNM
the ability to continue biased
practice. As a former
credentialing and compliance
member of UNM who worked with
the majority of hospitals across
the state and others across the
country. UNM Health systems
cannot
Nor should not be excluded from
the bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for your time and
committee members.
I'm seeing no hands on Zoom in
support if you are on Zoom in
support, raise your hand, and
I'll come back to you in the
room in support.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward.
Madam Madam Chair, committee
members. I'm Mary Van Sickel.
I'm an OBGYN retired, and I
agree with the bill in my
question. I only have, is the
same that he has. Why was you
and him excluded?
Otherwise, I agree with the
bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Linda Siegel, and I'm
here today speaking just for
myself as a resident of this
community for the last 43 years,
and this is all about
competition and money with the
hospital. You know, we need to
have independent providers out
in the community, so we have
choice and we have options, and
it is perfectly legitimate for a
hospital to have a lot of
requirements about
credentialing, but the economics
of it.
The competitiveness of it is not
a good reason. We need our
providers that take care of us
to be able to also see us in the
hospital. So I strongly support
this bill as a resident of this
county. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Vanessa Alarried, and I
am also speaking as a resident
of New Mexico and somebody
that's also had cancer when I
was younger at 23 years old and
have I if I had not had access
to a doctor and adequate time,
it could have metastasized and I
was told I would never have
children. Luckily I was able to
see my doctor quickly. I think
the more access we have to
providers, the better we have
for the healthcare of our
community. So I strongly support
and urge urgent support for this
bill. Thank you.
OK, thank you. I don't see any
hands on Zoom, so so far I have
minority whip Martinez with
questions anyone else.
Representative Anaya and Kate
and
um
Let me write this down. So Anaya
eats.
Nicole Chavez.
OK, so go ahead representative
Martinez.
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Uh, let's start off with a one
burning question, why is UNM
exempted from this?
Uh, Madam, Madam Chair and and
minority whip, uh, Martinez, um,
they're exempt because they're
teaching hospital, and um there,
it's a closed system due to
residency.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we had conversations
with UNM hospital leadership.
They requested that they be
exempted from the bill because
of within the school of
medicine, all of the supervision
that has to happen, how
residents and how medical
students and how nursing
students interact with patients
and interact with those
supervising physicians
supervising nurses that having
other practitioners within that
hospital is something that
didn't work for them. We thought
that their explanation was
reasonable, which is why we
exempted them from
this legislation, uh, quite
honestly, we haven't heard
within the medical society
membership of any independent
community providers who seek
privileges at UNM, um, there
could be some, but we didn't
hear that feedback and it's
because of that teaching
hospital closed system that they
have. So that's the feedback
that we got when we were working
on this legislation and that's
why they were exempted from it
as introduced and in the
substitute. I'm sure we can talk
more about that though.
Madam Chair representative that
make that makes more sense to
me.
It just seemed always, I, I'm
always concerned about
Bills that come before the body
with a list of exemptions.
But this one makes sense.
So, um,
Before I get into the the
Different questions on the bill.
Is this gonna help rural
healthcare? Um, Madam Chair and
and representative, I believe it
will because that brings more uh
doctors to be available to, to
be able to meet those needs of
of all of our patients, or all
of their patients.
Madam Chair, representative I
become increasingly concerned
about.
The state of healthcare in the
rural parts of the state. So
thank you for that.
Um, I'm gonna go to page one.
Um
Starting in line 19.
Um
Or 18, the end of 18.
A hospital receiving local state
or federal funds shall not deny.
Medical staff membership or
clinical privileges for reasons
other than physician's
individual qualifications.
I think on the face of it,
that's a great idea.
Because we're wanting the best
care in New Mexico.
Can you tell me
If there's a hospital in New
Mexico.
That does not receive.
Local, state or federal, being
that most hospitals will build
Medicaid or, or Medicare.
Madam Chair members of the
committee.
I think the only question mark
on a hospital that may not be
receiving state or federal
funding is there are two
standalone emergency room
hospitals in Albuquerque. You
may have seen their billboards
that advertise really low wait
times. They don't accept
Medicaid, um, and so that's the
only one that I think could be
outside of this, but again,
that's a very, very small
example, every other
hospital in the state of New
Mexico excepts state or federal
funds.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. So why, why
would they not be included in
this? Shouldn't every
Uh, medical facility be included
in this? Madam Chair, members of
the committee, um, I just got a
text that said they do accept
Medicare. So they are under this
bill.
Thank you for that. Um,
So physicians individual
qualifications as determined who
makes that.
Um
So I was on credentials for 15
years
I'm sorry, madam chair.
Um
And um also was on the
credentials committee, so how
credentials are done is that the
medical executive committee has
a subcommittee that is a
credentialing committee. They
review all the credentials and
recommendations of a of a
provider and then that they then
recommend to the medical
executive committee, then that's
approved. The final proof though
is actually to the board of the
hospital. They approve any in
the recommendation from that
committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, so the way I
understand it, there's one.
Overall credentialing.
group that then sends the
Recommendation to each
individual hospital, am I
correct in that?
Each individual hospital.
Um, has their credentialing
process. So Presbyterian has one
Loveless has one, Chris has one.
They, their credentialed within
the bylaws of that institution.
And I'm gonna ask you not to tap
it, it, it really loud with the
mic on.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
So these credentialing um
Commits or they or do they
follow a pretty uniform.
Credentialing process or, you
know, as one hospital gonna be
very different from another
hospital.
Madam Chair, um, the
Credentialing processes uh
follow some national guidelines,
uh, and state guidelines and are
pretty uniform throughout um
each hospital.
So
Madam Chair Representative on
page 2.
Line 13. The credentialing
authority of a hospital shall
not consider the following
factors.
An applicant's membership or
lack of membership in a
professional society.
Decision to advertise lower
fees.
Uh, participation or prepaid.
Group health plan.
And the list goes on, so it's
The way I'm reading this, this
is trying to open it up.
It's, it's a non-discriminatory
bill, is the way I'm reading it,
am I correct in that, Madam
Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, represented
Martinez, that's correct.
What we are trying to ensure is
that a hospital can't say take
Presbyterian, for example.
There's Presbyterian, and then
there's Presbyterian Medical
Group.
What we don't want is for
Presbyterian as a hospital to
say we are now closing our doors
to all clinicians except those
that are members of the
Presbyterian Medical Group,
because that will put very real
independent practices out of
business. For example, New
Mexico orthopedics. Uh, they
perform surgeries in
Presbyterian. It also then
ensures that those independent
practitioners are not faced with
kind of the Sophie's choice of.
If we want to stay in New Mexico
and keep treating patients in
order to have access to
patients, we would have to sell
our practice to a hospital to
become an affiliated medical
group. So the point of this is
exactly what you're saying is to
ensure that those community
providers can continue to have
access to hospitals, so long as
they are meeting all of the
requirements of the bylaws
because those bylaws are
incredibly important for patient
safety and the operation of the
hospital.
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
This committee and during the
interim, the Health Committee
heard a lot about.
Trying to preserve the, the
independence of some of the
Medical groups here in New
Mexico are not.
Forcing them into selling out to
national for profit.
Um, and I've had, I, I spoke to
a surgeon two weeks ago.
was a part of one of these um
Private groups that that has
applied for
A credentialing at different
hospitals.
In my opinion, he is one of the
top surgeons in the country.
He has
Uh, I, I tend to be very
reckless, so I've had
The opportunity for a few
surgeries.
Um, and he was telling me that
it's, it's kind of difficult to
get credentialing in different.
Hospitals, um,
And it's a way of growing their
local practice. Is this bill
going to assist those smaller
Uh, independent practices. Madam
Chair, representative, that's
the intent of this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think
it's, it's extremely important,
especially when we're looking at
programs like Growing our own
medical providers.
Um, that we all get behind a
bill like this.
It's a very no nonsense, Bill. I
think it's very positive for the
state of New Mexico. Um, and I
think it'll help health care
across the board, urban, rural,
uh, so I, I stand full support
and I would urge this.
Committed to to vote in favor of
it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Naya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I
actually, I actually do want to
thank you for bringing this
forward. Um,
Yeah, I feel like here on this
committee, we are all about um
helping some of the smaller
entities over the large
corporate hospitals. I do have
an issue with the language as
written right now. I don't
believe it was the intent, but
on page 3, line 2,
right now, as written, it says
an applicant's practices with
respect to testifying in
malpractice lawsuits,
disciplinary actions, or any
other type of legal proceeding.
Those are some of the um
Uh, pieces that would be exempt
from folks looking at the
credentialing process. Um, I
would just hope, Madam Chair and
representative, that we can get
some clarifying language there,
um, I know that we have, um,
providers who testify as
experts, right? So we have them
who testify as experts. It's a
good thing, um, they do that
either for or against other
providers, um, but just
clarifying language, Madam Chair
and Representative, um, to make
sure that we are, um,
Not barring any actions that
were taken against the provider
themselves in those legal
proceedings. So Madam Chair
Representative, um, would you be
open to, um, amending this
before the next committee just
to make that clarification.
And Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I definitely
would look at the language, um,
that's the point of the bill.
And so, you know, I don't see
that that would be a problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for bringing this
forward. Uh, just for
clarification, uh, just
piggybacking on your discussion
with minority with Martinez, um,
on page one credentialing for
receiving local, state and
federal funds. This could be
donated property, capital
outlay, forgiveness of of
medical education, subsidized
medical malpractice insurance
and on and on and on, correct?
Madam Chair and Representative,
that is correct. OK. So I, and
we already established there are
no hospitals in New Mexico who
have not received some sort of
government funding, and I'm sure
that those funders who are um
making this decisions are to
ensure that there is medical
access throughout the state. Um,
you don't have to answer that,
uh, Madam Chair, representative,
but I absolutely see that. If
you are um doing a
small little cleanup amendment
anyways, I would respectfully
ask you to consider that if we
are exhibiting you and him, and
I understand it's a teaching
hospital, but it is the only
teaching hospital in the entire
state with that is they are
existence because of that, that
this might be an opportunity for
us to um require they maintain a
minimum number of residencies to
accept to be able to um receive
that exemption.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
done.
Thank you, Representative Nicole
Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. I think
that this bill is so important.
Thank you for bringing it up. It
really enhances the healthcare
competition across the state to
make sure we're prioritizing
patient care in the financial
interests, so thank you for that
and thank you, expert witness
for giving your testimony. I
think that really helps out, um,
and I do want to point out
because I know, um, there were
still some questions and just
explain the way credentialing
happens at UNM, um.
Where it is page 3, right here
on line 9 is a good example of
why we're doing this. UNM is a
super supervising provider
teaching hospital, and so that
line right there and this is why
we excluded them is because a
lot of the times hospitals when
they're credentialing doctors,
they want to make sure that
those doctors have performed a
certain number of surgeries. And
when you're at a teaching
hospital, you're not gonna have
that number of surgeries. So
we must exclude, um, you and I
in this, and so that's why it's
so important, so I completely
understand you and I not wanting
to um
Be included in this because all
of their doctors are brand new.
They're residency is new. A lot
of times when there are
hospitals that are credentialing
our providers, they also look at
student loans. Well, I'm sure if
it's a residency and teaching
hospital, these doctors are
going to have outstanding
student loans, which is
understandable, so there are a
lot of factors, um, so when
people are looking at why are we
excluding you and I, those are
really important reasons, um, I
guess my next question is, do we
We have data on a number of
independent physicians who have
been affected by these practices
being denied credentialing.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez, um, I'll
let Doctor Shields tell you the
number of clinicians at Nexus,
um, but what we do know right
now is
If a hospital is denying
credentials to someone they are
not necessarily specifying a
reason why.
The, the good part of this bill
is now if they deny credentials,
they will actually have to tell
the clinician, this is why we're
denying your credentials. It's
because of X reason, not for
economic reasons, and that we
think will provide a lot more
transparency so that the
physicians when they're going
through the credentialing
process or the nurse
practitioners or any other
clinician, um, can have a better
understanding and if it is an
economic reason, they now have
a, have recourse to
be able to correct that problem.
Um, but at next to all at Doctor
Shields say the exact number of
physicians.
So the Madam Chair, the number
of
Physicians and and or providers
that providers affected in the
orthopedic group would be 5.
Uh, in the interventional pain
group uh there would be 5 and
ENT, it affects one, but there
are two other ENT we were
recruiting who um
Did not sign yet because of the
privileging issue.
Um,
And then we have the infectious
disease person that it may
affect.
Madam Chair Representatives,
thank you so much. I mean, I
know.
I've had to use orthopedic
providers for my children, um,
because they played a lot of
sports and then I myself had to
use an ENT, so if I didn't have
a provider that had privileges
to a hospital. I would be in a
lot of trouble, so I'm so
thankful. I hope this resolves
that issue and then I just had
one more question.
Um, how do we ensure hospitals
are not using the quality of
care as a cover for the economic
discrimination. So since the
bill allows economic factors to
be considered if they relate to
quality of care. How do we
prevent hospitals from
exploiting those, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, like I said, now hospitals
would actually have to disclose
the reason for the credential or
the denial of credentialing. So
let's say they cited quality of
care.
There can be an appeal process
with that credentialing
authority where the provider
could say, please explain to me
where that gaps in quality of
care could be, they can address
that then. And I think that that
again provides more transparency
and an opportunity for those
issues to be resolved because
you're right, we, we don't want
the hospitals to just hide
behind something else when
really it may be an economic
factor without this legislation,
we have no hope, right? They
just say you're denied and then
we don't have any.
recourse. Um, so hopefully this
legislation will get us to a
much better place where we can
have that process in place.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, that is um a
great answer, and I just wanted
to make sure that was closed and
then my very last question or
concern is um online or page 3
line 19, where it's still states
that the hospitals have to
comply with the bylaws would
A bylaw still or could a bylaw
state that they have to be an
internal provider to get once
again out of that loophole or
no?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Chavez, no, because they can't
be, there can't be that
requirement in the approval
process. It can't be something
that you have to agree to do in
order to get credentials. The
bylaws really are about things
like.
Patient safety, how many on-call
shifts you may have to pull in a
month so that you know the
nurses, you know the process of
the hospital. That's what those
bylaws are covering. Madam Chair
Representative, thank you so
much. This is such a wonderful
bill, and I, I, I hope that it
gets passed because it's a great
piece of legislation.
Representative Echas. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative. I
just have one quick question. In
your description of the bill you
mentioned Christa, um,
specifically, are there other
hospitals that are also doing
this?
Madam Chair, uh Representative
Chavez, to our knowledge,
Christus is the only one right
now, but again, since there is
no reason that has to be given
for a denial of credentialing.
It's hard for us to know if it
is happening in other places. I
think that this will help solve
that problem so we can get ahead
of the curve, as something that
we haven't mentioned is there's
17 other states that have
already done this, because they
are experiencing these problems.
So by joining
those 17 other states, we hope
that we can make sure hospitals
don't start doing this in New
Mexico before it became a really
overblown problem versus the
Christa Saint Vincent problem
that we faced last year.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, I will entertain a
motion.
The manager I'd like to make a
motion for representative Kates
with the motion, um, OK, let me,
let me back up a little bit. Um,
it, this is a do not pass on HB
370, but it do pass on health
and human Services Committee
substitute for HB 370.
Thank you for certification,
yes,
absolutely. Thank you. And a
second,
all of us.
I saw Senna Cortez first, so
we'll, we'll do that. Is there
any opposition?
I see no, you have a due pass.
10 to 0. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you committee.
OK. Next, and just a reminder
folks, we don't have a whole lot
of time left, so, um, HB 373
Representative Herndon, we need
to get moving.
Madame Tire, members of the
committee, I'm presenting to you
today House Bill 373, and this
bill revises the uniform uh
Parentage Act and uses gender
neutral language to encompass
more diverse family structures
like same-sex couples and
children born through assisted
reproduction, um, additionally,
uh, a definitions were added to
the
Uh, to the bill, or rather to
the language to bring clarity to
the statue as it relates to the
establishment of a parent-child
relationship and what
constitutes a parent. It also
adds a time frame to report
sexual assault that resulted in
pregnancy in order to preclude
the man from establishing a
parent-child relationship, but
still allow child support to be
established, Madam Chair, I have
with me two exceptional expert.
and I'm gonna let them introduce
themselves. Madam Chair, I am
Sarah Bennett. I have practiced
law in Mexico for almost 50
years, but the last half of that
was family law as a specialist
in Santa Fe. Um, I'm also a
commissioner to the uniform laws
Commission.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jack Burton. I'm a
uniform law commissioner, and I
had practiced law in New Mexico
for more than 50.
With that, Madam Chair, we stand
for questions. OK, I will go to
Zoom if you are in opposition,
please raise your hand and I'll
come back to you in the room in
opposition. Anyone?
OK, see the place on Zoom in
support if you'd like to speak,
raise your hand and in the room
in support.
I must call you representative.
Would you like to make public
comment? OK, so I see two hands,
Jamie and Meg. Go ahead, Jamie.
Good morning.
Mm
Good morning. Uh, Madam Chair
and committee members. Um, my
name is Jamie Spears, and I'm
here on behalf of the US donor
conceived council, a nonprofit
that advocates for the
well-being of donor-conceived
people. We stand in support of
HB 373.
Uh, revised, uh, uniform
parentage Act.
Um
By updating New Mexico's
parentage law, HB 373 provides
necessary protections for
intended parents, surrogates,
and children born through
assisted reproduction. These
provisions will help eliminate
legal uncertainty for families,
particularly those with LGBTQ
parents and single parents by
choice. Modern parentage laws
offer security for donor
conceived children to ensure
they remain with their families,
um, especially protecting their
relationship.
with non-genetic parents.
Another critical component of HB
373 is the 2024 version of
Article 9. Article 9 has
modernized protections for
donor-conceived individuals,
ensuring they have the right to
access information about their
genetic origins upon adulthood.
This provides valuable
information. Thank you. Um, next
we have Meg.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Meg York. I'm a family law
attorney at Family Equality, a
national organization advancing
equality for LGBTQ families for
over 40 years. The family
equality strongly supports HB
373, which would ensure that all
New Mexico children have equal
access to legal parent-child
relationships. For example, the
bill would update existing laws
by expanding voluntary
acknowledgements to include
same-sex couples and providing
important protections for
everyone involved in a surrogacy
arrangement. As strongly as
family equality supports the
parent
Which updates put forward in HB
373. We have deep concerns about
the newly revised and untested
Article 9 included in the bill
and its potential to harm all
families who rely on donor
gametes to build their families,
as well as its potential
infringement on reproductive
liberty and privacy. We urge the
committee to amend the bill to
amend or strike Article 9,
sections 88 through 93, as
indicated in our written
testimony. LGBTQ families need
protection within New Mexico and
across state lines. Recently, a
court in Oklahoma stripped a
child of their non-genetic
LGBTQ.
parent and instated parental
rights in the child's sperm
donor, an amended version of the
bill is an important step to
protect New Mexico families,
especially children. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, representative Herndon, do
you have any?
comments before we go to the
No, Madam Chair, we would just
like, so questions from the
committee, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
This is not all new language,
correct?
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez.
It's, it's this bill.
Well, in its earlier form, we in
New Mexico has a uniform
parentage Act and has had the
2002 version.
Uh quarter century. This updates
it. We have a lot of law
developed.
This updates consistent with
that developed law in the area
of uh
Uh, same-sex parentage, for
example. So most of this of the
provisions are not new, but
barely revised to be current and
clear, and that helps us avoid
litigation.
And Madam chair, um.
So it's just very intimidating
when you see 119 page bill.
It was gonna take a lot of cups
of coffee for me yesterday to
read 119 pages.
Very basically, Madam Chair.
Representative
Um, this brings um testimony
said this brings it in line
with.
Um,
the group
Uniform law commission.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez, yes, this is a uniform
law commission updated bill. Uh,
the uniform laws commission, the
committee that drafted this bill
had um
Expertise from
Every family law organization in
the United States, and of
course, the representatives of
all 50 states voted on this
legislation, uh, the goal is
that we can have uniform rules.
Which again avoids litigation.
Um, by and, and, uh, forum
shopping, for example, but yes,
all of the um many technical
terms, particularly in the
surrogacy provisions.
were drafted by the uh current
expertise in the field of uh
family law and assisted
reproduction.
metal chair representative, have
you heard from any
Traditional family
organizations.
That might be opposed to this.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I do not believe.
I have not heard from anyone who
is opposed.
Uh, to these provisions.
except the
Um, there was, there is no
opposition that I have heard of
for the bill.
Thank you, madam chair, um.
The way I read it, and I may be
totally off because first of
all, I'm not a lawyer and I.
Uh, don't even play one on TV.
But this seems like
An attack on traditional family.
And I, I, I just have, I have
some issues with some of the
language, um.
But, you know,
I've been, I've been accused of
being stuck in the past on a lot
of issues.
Um, I will listen to
The rest of the debate, this
goes to judiciary, some I'm very
interested in in how that debate
is gonna go.
Um, I just wanted to make the uh
A comment, um.
That to the way I read it.
It just seems like an attack on
traditional family values, um,
and that always, so I, I'll
leave.
I'll leave my comments to that,
thank you.
Let's see, anyone else?
OK, so I just.
As I read section 9, it says,
um, a parent-child relationship
extends equally to every child
and parent, so does that include
sperm donors.
Um, I'm sorry, page 9,
Yes, Article 9, page 85.
Yeah, page 9.
Uh, line 21, or actually 22.
I'm sorry.
Madam Chair,
Sperm donors are not.
parents.
Except where um they meet the
other criteria for a parent, um,
The um the provisions here are
Making sure that children have
parents.
Who, uh, you know, for their own
um attachment needs and also for
their support needs, and the
uniformed Parentage Act focuses
on making sure that we can
adjudicate who the parents are.
A sperm donor would not
ordinarily be a parent. OK,
thank you. Thank you for that.
So I will entertain emotion,
Who, uh, you know, for their own
um attachment needs and also for
their support needs, and the
uniformed Parentage Act focuses
on making sure that we can
adjudicate who the parents are.
A sperm donor would not
ordinarily be a parent. OK,
thank you. Thank you for that.
So I will entertain emotion,
so representative E Chavis with
the motion in the second.
I'll second it a second by
Representative Kate, um, will
you take the role, Karen?
Representative Anaya.
Yes, and explain my vote.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative An Chavez, yes.
Represented Ferrari.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Man of vice chair? Yes.
Madam Chair, yes. 72 by a vote
of 7 to 2, you have a due pass
and Representative Anaya to
explain her vote.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, I know, um, the
sponsor and I have been in
communication texting back and
forth. I mean, yes, on the
understanding that we'll do a
few things before we head into
Judiciary Committee. Um, I'm
actually really concerned that
we're erasing our trans family
members because, um, within this
language we're actually um
mixing up sex and gender, male
versus female, woman versus man,
sex and gender are two very
different things, um, and so,
Madam Chair.
representative, um,
I will go down hard, making sure
that this language is is changed
or I will very much fight
against it. Um, so thank you,
Madam Chair and Representative.
I think it's important just for
one quick explanation that
representative uh Anaya's
meeting in some places we talk
about a woman who gave birth
instead of a person who gave
birth. And so that's really
where she is making her um uh
explanation, and I also want to
make sure that this committee
knows that this is a bipartisan
piece of legislation that was a,
a, a, a senator who is up out of
my party, and we've worked on
this together, and he is not in.
The legislation, legislature
anymore, so I'm bringing it
along without him.
Just so you know, thank you,
Madam Chair. OK, thank you Madam
Vice Chair, we're gonna switch
seats.
So we will hear um HB 389 and I
scratched it out so well, 399
is, has been rolled as the money
Mad, Madam Chair, you may
proceed. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members. So, House Bill 389
is
is a simple bill, um, and in,
uh, basically what it does, it
amends and enacts sections of
the medical Record Acts to
require that the entity
designated as the health state's
health information exchange will
also function as the state's
data utility, and this has to do
with legal things and with me, I
have um Terry Stewart, who is
the CEO of Synchronous, who is
current, which is currently the
state's health.
Information exchange and I will
let her go into a little more
detail. I'm, I'm sorry to
interrupt, madam Chair, we don't
have an FIR for this one either.
Uh, Madam Chair, it was in the
stack of things that were with
your not in the notebook, but in
the stack.
Do you have it now? OK.
Go ahead, Terry.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee as
Representative Thompson stated,
my name is Terry Stewart, and
I'm the CEO and president of
Synchronous, which is the state
of New Mexico's designated
health information exchange and
to briefly tell you what a
health information exchange is,
we securely
Exchange and disclosed data
consistent with HIPAA and the
New Mexico Medical Records Act
between covered entities, which
are healthcare facilities to
take care of patients and shared
data. The average individual
sees 4 healthcare providers in a
year, and that data is retained
in that health system's
electronic medical record system
and what an HIE does is allows
that data to be
Shared between health
information systems, so if there
is an individual who lives in
Deming and has to be transported
to UNM, the emergency department
physicians are able to see that
patient's records. um, when
they're are seeing a doctor at
UNM Hospital. So that's what an
HIE currently is. And so you
would say what is a health daddy
utility. So the reason why this
bill is coming before you is
last year at the federal level,
the Senate Health, Education,
Labor and Pension Committee in
the appropriations Act has
language that it is directing
federal agencies to direct
states to recognize they're not
for profit HIEs to become the
state's health data utility, and
that is in an effort to help
create a national network to
securely share data, but to have
states have governance.
as to how the data in your state
will be secured and shared. So a
help daddy utility is really
taking silo data right now, data
is collected and stored.
In many areas, um, that
healthcare providers have to
share data with the immunization
registry with the HIE with all
payers claims database, but all
of that data stands by itself
and is not shared, and it makes
it difficult for healthcare
providers to find some of that
disparate data. So with the
health data utility, you're able
to take this clinical and
non-clinical data that supports
the patient's health care to
allow appropriate
people to see it.
There is no funding request that
we're asking with this bill.
We're asking for the current
electronic medical Records Act
to be amended so that the
state's HIE is also the health
data utility, and it will set us
up for potential funding and
grant opportunities that will
come from the federal government
that are saying that this is
what the state has to use your
health data utility to help you
with, you know, this program,
so.
That is what a health data
utility is.
And Madam Chair, we will stand
for questions.
All right, thank you very much.
We'll go to the
To the zoom. Is there anyone who
stands in opposition to this
bill.
I see no hands. Is there anyone
in the audience who stands in
opposition to this bill.
I see no opposition. I'm going
back to Zoom. Is there anyone on
Zoom who stands in support of
this legislation.
Please raise your hand.
Seeing no hands is there anyone
in the room who stands in
support of this legislation.
All right. I see no hands, so
I'll go to the committee.
Thank you. Our first person is a
representative Nicole Chavez.
Sorry. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, I just
have.
A little question or concern,
cause you said that you were
already the CEO of
Of the utility we're using now
or the owner of the company, is
that correct?
She's the CEO and president of
the Health Information Exchange.
Correct. And if we're wanting
the rest of the state to then
use this when this, would this
benefit you then because you're
wanting us to use your platform
then going forward or am I
confused Madame Chair and
representative, we are already
using their platform, so rather
than reinventing the
wheel and having it cost, it's
already been set up within
synchronous, so we're just
adding one more, we're basically
adding a title to it, they're
they're already doing the work.
So we wouldn't be adding more
contracts to something already
being done, or we would, I
believe.
Madam Chair, Representative.
At this point, there is no
funding request, um, for this
bill. It is to establish that
our state has a health data
utility, which is the direction
that's coming from the federal
government.
That and it is the purpose of
the health data utility is to
reuse existing infrastructure so
that we're not rebuilding and
creating more silos of data. And
it is not to replace everything
that's out there. It's working
with all the other disparate
health systems. So we are a not
for profit, so there's not an
owner, um, and, you know,
there's not a benefit, you know,
to the
Owner of a not for profit.
I don't know if that's answering
your question that you did, but,
but you didn't. I, I understand
the response. OK, thank you.
That's all.
Any, are there any other
questions? I just have a
clarifying question following up
on Representative Nicole
Chavis's question. Recently, the
healthcare authority entered
into a contract for purposes of
uh maintaining data, which is
very different from the contract
that was issued by 9 major
counties, including Bernao
County. So the question is
clarification. So with the
synchronous product that you're
talking about, bring these
contracts.
In for data information together
into one place, even though
we're using separate data
collection areas in healthcare,
uh, now through healthcare
agencies.
Madam Chair, um, I am not
familiar with the appropriation
that you talked about with the
nine counties. So I don't feel
that I can answer that question.
I'm not familiar with it. So
thank you, Madam Chair, members,
uh, um.
I'm sorry, um, madam, uh,
presenter, I think more
specifically is if there are,
let's just assume even if you're
not familiar with them, they're
using, we are having different
healthcare data information
that's been collected by
different agencies. In this
case, it happens to be different
counties, and it happens to be
the healthcare authority. Now,
with your, with this product
that we're talking about today,
will it bring in all of this
data into one place so that
that's really what we're looking
forward to having and
And that's the clarification
that I think that's been asked
for. So Madam Chair, thank you
for that clarification. The role
of a health data utility is to
take this disparate data and try
to have, excuse me, one source
of truth that people that you
don't have silo data in more
data is available for healthcare
providers, for policy makers to
be able to make decisions about
what is best for New Mexicans,
and Ma, this isn't a product,
right? It's
Thank you. Well, thank you,
Madam Chair. I, I think that
that has been a big issue in
discussions that have been going
on all summer, is bringing
information in one place, so no
matter where I am in the state
of New Mexico, my data can be
accessed, so I'm getting the
best health care possible. So I
think that is where you're
going, and that is exactly what
we've been looking forward to
happening for a while now.
It happens. So, uh,
I'm sorry. Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative and expert.
I really appreciate this having,
you know, been in nursing for so
long, getting access to data,
but um I'm, I'm a little bit
confused now about uh data that
would be um personal.
Versus
Because I know how important
that is to find out.
A certain patients data that
maybe they went to a different
hospital or that sort of thing.
Are we talking about that kind
of
Data, I think I got people in
the audience
Madam Chair and representative.
So it is that kind of data.
Let's say you're in Albuquerque
from Demming and you get in a
car crash, and, and you're on,
um, blood thinners, and you're
not
Alert enough to tell people the
the the treating physician or
treating professional can go in
there and see, oh my gosh, she's
on, on um warfarin or whatever,
so it's and also if you know, if
you were if you had um some sort
of cancer and all of a sudden it
it um, you know, in a car
accident, something happened.
It's just so that the the
The treating professional has
access to what's going on with
you as opposed to having to do
another CAT scan or having to
do, or having to wait until
someone gets back to them with,
you know, whatever might be
pertinent in your health
information.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and would this
be um similar as synchronous,
um, the same as Epic, for
instance.
Madame Chair, representative, I
don't know what epic is.
It's, well, it's an electronic
medical record.
I can answer that.
I'll let my expert.
Madam Chair Representative
synchronous is not an electronic
medical record system. We
actually have, we do have a
platform, but it takes
information from all of the
different EHR systems in the
state, and we combine them into
one longitudinal clinical
record. So,
It has data from Epic, Cerner,
Meitech from all the different
facilities in one place.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, no, I'm not
done yet.
I have one more question. Um,
So,
can you report statistical data
that is not, that is not
personal.
From this source, Madam Chair
Representative, we do, um,
statistical analysis that, you
know, that is data we share with
uh managed care organizations
for turquoise care. So we
support that. You're able to
look at predictive model or
statistics of what percentage of
their patients, you know, might
have diabetes. And so we do
provide that type of data on a
very specific population to a
very specific entity only for
their patients.
or their members.
Thank you very much for that
answer. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I find it.
Interesting that this is where
we're at, you know, in, in
healthcare and in in life in
general, we've talked a lot
about privacy and that sort of
thing. Um, this is just the
world we live in. I gonna
support this and vote yes for
it, but I don't like people
knowing everything about me and
But then again, it could save my
life, you know, that's where
we're at. So anyway, I
appreciate the bill. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, I'll move a do
pass.
Second.
We have a new pass by
Representative Eleanor Chavez is
their 2nd.
We have a 2 by Representative
Anaya. Will you please take the
role?
Representative Anaya.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative Ann Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Santa Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes.
7 to 2. The do pass.
Thank you by a vote of 7 in the
affirmative and 2 in the
negative, you have a due pass.
Representative Bohan, would you
please step forward.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. We're gonna be short
and sweet on this bill, um, it's
an appropriation, um, what it is
doing is making an
appropriation. Uh, this is House
Bill 393, uh, making an
appropriation to the Department
of Health for the New Mexico
Health Service Corps to support
the recruitment and retention of
healthcare providers who treat
rural or undeserved populations
or patients of federally
qualified health centers. Madam
Chair, the majority of our
As we know this, uh this
committee knows this very well.
The majority of our state is
rural and we, we have a lot of
issues recruiting, retaining
healthcare providers in roll New
Mexico, especially in American
Indian populations where we see
if we were to do and fund, we'd
have significant positive health
effects there in other parts of
our rural um New Mexico.
And understood we have a problem
right now with recruiting, um,
healthcare providers as it is,
but this is specific to these
areas, uh, we have 200 sites
across the states and 80% of
these sites are in rural, um.
Yeah, 80%, 90%, right? 90%.
Yep, rural areas, so really
focusing our dollars and making
sure that these populations are
taken care of is, is, is
critical now, the appropriation
is for $5 million out of the
general fund. Uh, this is mostly
an education piece for y'all as
we're going to move towards the
the Senate taking over this um
endeavor and with that I'm going
to turn to my expert witness.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Yvette
Ramirez Ammerman. I'm CEO of the
New Mexico Primary Care
Association. In addition to what
the representative has said, um,
we serve 32 out of 33 counties
and over 331,000 New Mexicans,
um, to add to what you said, 90%
of the folks that we serve are
um under 200% of poverty. Um, we
are the healthcare safety net.
For New Mexico. We provide, uh,
primary behavioral health and
also dental health care kind of
one stop shop. If we get a
person in the door, we want to
make sure we keep them and help
them. We also have a sliding fee
scale, and we are also um
governed by community based
boards of directors.
And I'll stop there. Thank you.
Thank you. So we will go to Zoom
if you are in opposition, raise
your hand, and I'll come back to
you in the room in opposition.
Seeing no hands on zoom in
support, if you'd like to speak,
raise your hand in the, in the
room in support.
If you'd like to speak, I will
take 5 for 1 minute.
Each.
Me and here again, Doctor Mary
Van Sickel. I'm a retired OE
Gin,
and I practiced in my tone in
Taos, Los Alamos, La Familia,
and Southwest Care, after I
retired from my private practice
in Houston, so I did that to
just keep going and contribute.
So I saw rural health for sure.
So I know there's a need,
there's no question. So I guess
that the only question for this
bill is it
an appropriation, but it's not a
mechanism to get it done. So
who, who gets it done with that
kind of money who it is um in
charge of actually getting it
done and how. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Jeremiah Die.
I am the CEO of First Choice
Community Healthcare, one of the
FQHC's uh who would benefit from
this bill. Uh, we are in the
Albuquerque, uh, Los Lunas and
Edgewood areas, so I'm familiar
with the needs of provider
recruiting in the urban, but
also in the rural environment
and one of our biggest
challenges in terms of our
ability to serve, uh, these
underserved patients is our
ability to recruit providers and
so I want to speak strongly in
support of this bill.
Because I think it could have a
big impact in our ability to
take care of people.
Who have nowhere else to go in
many other situations. Thank
you.
Excuse me.
My name is Tom Scripson. I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
Dental Association and a dentist
in Albuquerque, um, we're
strongly in favor of this bill,
uh, the Health Service Corps has
been an effective way to
recruit, um, all kinds of health
professionals to um the areas of
greatest need, um, as dental
graduates are approaching half a
million dollars in debt, the
only way we're going to be able
to attract them to some of these
locations is by having
incentives, and we appreciate um
this appropriation for that
need. Thank you.
OK, and we will go to Zoom. We
have Enrique.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Enriqueel representing the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We strongly support
House Bill 393, and we do ask
for a due pass. New Mexico's
shortage of healthcare workers,
including primary care doctors,
dentists, and nurses threaten
our economic future in such a
big way. It's not really health
care if it's hard to find a
doctor and medical appointments
take months to schedule, and not
to mention what it does to the
health of New Mexicans,
particularly those who are low
income or
live in rural New Mexico. Now
House Bill 393 makes a
relatively modest investment in
helping trained doctors in
exchange for the promise that
they will work in our state for
at least 2 years. We think
that's a win-win, and we ask for
your support of House Bill 393.
Thank you.
OK, thank you. So questions from
the committee.
Representative Martinez and then
Eleanor Chavez.
Madam Chair, representative.
Um
Can you tell me who the New
Mexico Healthcare Service Corps
is.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you,
uh, Madam Chair, please.
Madam Chair Representative, the
Mexo Health Service Corps is
part of the Public Health
Service Act, and it has a small
provision in it. Um, it's
usually for stipends, it has a
small provision to provide
funding to organizations in
rural areas, so medically
underserved areas. And so this
would be for recruitment and
retention, money is going
directly to the organizations
operating in those areas. Um, so
that was kind of answering her
question as well. We've worked
with the primary health care.
Bureau of Department of Health
and they're fully in
They are fully able to um make
sure this is enacted properly.
So Madam Chair representative is
this uh is this a nonprofit? Is
it?
Part of DOH. I've never heard of
the New Mexico Health Service.
Uh, so it's an old statute of
the Public Health Service Act,
and it provides stipends so that
um you can operate in service,
you can serve in er in medically
underserved areas and um get
stipends, um, all of our
clinics, um, all 20 of them are
nonprofit community-based health
centers. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, but the
question is
Is the New Mexico Health Service
Corps, a nonprofit, or is it?
The vision of DOH.
Yeah, so it's a, it's part of
Department of Health. So it's
where the money would go through
and where we'd have to report to
all of that.
And you, Madam Chair,
Representative. So this is a
division of
Madam Chair.
Um, and is the 5 million in
house 2.
Ichair as I I said earlier, as
of yet, no, so that we're we're
really promoting this so that we
have a a light bill running in
the Senate as well with the
Senator Bobby Gonzalez. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative,
are you expecting it to?
be added on the Senate side
Madam Chair Representative.
that, that is our hope.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Represented my final question
is,
Who's the $200,000 in
administrative fees gonna go
too.
Madam Chair, um, represented my
uh be going to DOH if I'll have
goes directly to the
administration, uh, the state
administration to oversee.
Madam Chair, what's that
$200,000 gonna get us?
I'll defer Madam Cho.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um,
The primary care bureau
administers the.
Many of our programs that are
getting healthcare providers
into rural and underserved
areas. They don't usually get
any kind of administrative
assistance. So when we are
asking for this money, we know
it's gonna be an undue burden on
them. So we've asked finally for
some administrative dollars to
accompany it.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you. And just, just, um,
on the last line of the first
page, um, no more than 200,000,
so it's not a guarantee of 200
it's up to. OK, Representative
E. Chavez. Madam Chair, move
would do pass?
I'll suck in that motion.
Will you take the role, please?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kates, yes.
Representative E Chavez.
Representative in Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones? Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Sorry my arm didn't reach that
far. Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
92.
So vote of 9 to 0, you have a
due pass on House Bill 393 and I
had texted Representative
Armstrong and haven't heard
back, um, and we need to be out
of this room in 7 minutes,
Madam, Armstrong is is
requesting to be rolled to
Winston.
Thank you. Thank you. So that
will, we will adjourn for today.
Thank you.
Um
