From the committee.
Representative Hermio.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward
madam chair rural hospitals in
New Mexico are concerned about
having to shut their doors if
they do not meet the ratio in
this bill can you talk to that
and are there any remedies for
that sure thank you
Madam chair representative yes
we've heard that same concern
and if you look at the bill
rural hospitals can ask for a
waiver but we also our position
is that with proper staffing
rural patients in rural areas
will also be afforded the kind
of care that they deserve we
don't believe that any rural
hospitals will shut down as a
matter of fact California is the
only state in this country that
has mandated ratios and none of
their rural hospitals shut down.
If I can ask another one madam
chair
the next concern is that when
meeting these ratios because
but there so it is tied on their
budgets that this may negatively
affect them on on their budgets
could you could you top toward.
Madam chair representative yes
rural hospitals the rural
hospitals that we where we have
members have been employing
travel nurses throughout the
COVID pandemic and as a matter
of fact even before the COVID
pandemic they utilized a
travelling nurses so that is
more costly than employing a
regular nurse Madam chair
representative we believe that
if rural hospitals can employ
the numbers of nurses that they
need and working conditions
improved then are and to be
attracted to go to rural
hospitals in fact on Friday one
of the nurses who is here Madam
chair representative actually
lives in Santa Fe but works in
California and she told me it's
because of staffing ratios if
the staffing ratios in New
Mexico were to change she would
love to work here.
Thank you madam chair and in
just a comment Representative it
seems like of the rural
hospitals in my area do not
understand the waiver that you
had discussed and and my only
recommendation would be to to
sit with rural hospitals there's
or some of these rural hospitals
and explain what that waiver
means and and I think they would
feel comfortable and and the
communities would be sure that
this does not mean that we are
shutting their doors but but
that is the concern for my
constituents in my community so
and till that time I will have
to vote No until we are able to
to sit down with those rural
hospitals.
Madam chair representative
absolutely will be happy to talk
with them thank you so much any
other questions.
I'm open to a motion I would
like to make a motion to for do
pass second okay Monica can you
take the role.
Yes.
Representative cat yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Yes with an explanation.
Representative down.
Representative said PED's yes.
But there.
Yeah yes.
With the six to zero we have to
pass.
What we're not supposed to
collect so do this.
Okay two sixty three
Representative Lujan is here.
Your.
I'm sorry go ahead
Representative Hermio.
So it is clear to what my
statement was is that rural
hospitals do not seem to
understand that there is a
waiver that they can apply for
and so I would like
consideration of rural health
care and those conversations
within thank you thank you we
will go on to House Bill to
sixty three Representative Lujan
whenever you're ready.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee members it is
a beautiful Monday
Today we're we're talking about
a bill that's going to save
lives as saving lives and
improving the health of all New
Mexicans are our highest
priorities.
New Mexican families have been
struggling with substance use
disorder and trauma for decades
with new doctrines widely
available we continue to see the
rate of overdoses increase as we
work with our families dealing
with substance use disorder we
have to meet our community's
needs by offering wraparound
services that not only save
money but more importantly save
lives.
It is the intent of house bill
two sixty three to prevent fatal
and nonfatal drug overdoses
provided pathway to substance
use disorder treatment for those
who desire it.
Improve access to medical and
social services prevent the
transmission of infectious
disease reduce reduce public use
of controlled substances and
reduce emergency room use in
hospital utilization related to
drug use.
Communities throughout the
United states are seeking to
establish overdose prevention
programs or have already
authorized them.
Two sites operating in New York
City city since November of two
thousand twenty one have
demonstrated that such programs
are highly effective in saving
lives.
In less than one year of
operation the site's reversed
nearly seven hundred overdoses
with no deaths.
House Bill to sixty three
commands in New Mexico harm
reduction act to create a new
program called overdose
prevention program the bill
authorizes the New Mexico
department of health health to
establish and administer the new
program in order to reduce death
disease and injury associated
with drug use.
House Bill to sixty three is not
the solution but part of the
solution a tool in the tool
chest that will allow
communities to determine the
appropriate methodology to be
used in their areas.
And with that madam chair I
stand we stand for questions but
first up before that I'd like my
expert witness to introduce
yourself.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and we come
back with the drug policy
alliance.
Okay we will go to the audience
anyone here in opposition I
tricked you.
Is there anyone on zoom in
opposition if you are like to
speak raise your hand.
Okay in support.
If you want to come up hopefully
we'll have a microphone your
time is limited to one minute so
talk fast.
madam chair my name is Dr Wendy
Johnson I am the I've been for
the last ten years have been the
medical director of.
There that's better and to lean
for the past ten years have been
the medical director of off
million Medical Center in Santa
Fe I helped start the largest
population based opioid
treatment program in the state
there ten years ago we see three
hundred to four hundred patients
a month and that helped
literally hundreds of patients
on the road to recovery and I
can tell you it's not a straight
line I the company eight hundred
two hundred people on their
journey the vast majority do
recover but usually after few
relapses I've also seen some
patients die of overdose in the
harms related to drug use but
relatively few many of my
patients have been with me for
five or ten years to ups and
downs when I asked them what was
the most important factor in the
recovery the state knowing
people in their lives had faith
in them people who wouldn't give
up on them.
That's what overdose prevention
centers are that so that's what
they represent people care
people who help and sending the
message to folks are using that
there is a way out that the path
out of this epidemic isn't
through punishment and stigma
it's through compassion and love
and that's what overdose
prevention centers are.
providing that compassion and
care and literally keeping
people alive until they're ready
for recovery thank you very
much.
Good morning my name is Kathy
Chavez was born and raised in
New Mexico I'm a nurse and I'm a
veteran but I'm here to talk to
you about my dad my dad was a
heroin addict and I remember
when I first came home on leave
from the navy he came from the
back room the what we call the
quest the total and he was high
having trouble breathing with a
four night and I can only even
the thought of something
wonderful like this anyway and
we lived way out in rural plan
an ambulance would take into one
so I threw him in my car against
better judgment but it worked
and I tell him to the closest
urging Kerr there he got I do
not count.
And I'm not I'm just here that.
The safe places they will find
people a chance to live again
and get well.
And.
I don't know who you think of
those people are that are going
to use this place but those
people are my people and your
people there might that there
might comes in the my dad to me
and my brother and my cousin of
Mondel.
And my nephew Charlie thank you
very much so please consider it.
I and I didn't member encouraged
or condoned my father stories in
fact sometimes I hated him for
but I wanted him to live with
dignity and die with dignity not
behind a dumpster.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Rikki Lee
Chavez legislative coordinator
for the New Mexico from all
defense lawyers association
thank you to the sponsor the
sponsors and the drug policy
alliance for bringing for this
important piece of legislation
we're often before you madam
chair members of the committee
asking you not to increase
penalties or create new crimes
as a solution to public safety
and addressing substance use
disorder we believe that this
bill is one of those tools that
serves that specific purpose and
for that reason we urge your
support thank you for your time
and consideration.
Thank you we will now go to.
Sorry one more.
Hold on soon thank you madam
chair Representative I'm a
family physician practice thirty
eight years and the land and I
had substance abuse patients of
all kinds all my career.
There's no question in my mind
we need to help folks better as
the previous speaker said I
think we this this act would do
a lot to get get us there for
some of the acute stage stages
of course in my office as a
practitioner I see people in
their attempted recovery whether
the relapsing or not they have
more opportunities to canyon
continue on the path.
To recover so I support this
bill thank you madam chair
representative.
Okay now we will go to zoom
which Kim Chavez Cook go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender we do stand in
strong support of this
legislation well we see a lot of
folks returning to our offices
because they have become system
involved it is very often
because they are struggling with
substance use disorder and
substance misuse disorder and
having other avenues for
addressing this process I just
ostracizing and stigmatizing
people that can often times lead
to less socially acceptable
behaviors that can lead to
system involvement we believe
that these types of supports and
safe environments where there's
also a bridge to access to
treatment services it's going to
be a vital piece of the puzzle
in resolving the public safety
issues that stem from these
types of issues and treating it
as a health issue rather than
criminalizing people who are
really struggling to try to turn
themselves around so we do
appreciate the sponsor we
appreciate that the hard work of
the drug policy alliance on this
on this policy issue and we ask
the committee to support and
vote yes for this this bill
thank you so much can't caring
candidate.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in strong support of
this legislation and we think
the Sanchez
and and we called him back for
continuing to push this forward
this is going to be very good
for the people of New Mexico
thank you thank you Karen.
Barron Jones.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is van
Jones on with the ACLU of New
Mexico the state of New Mexico
as part of the New Mexico state
coalition the coalition.
More on this on this piece of
legislation this proposal as
well and that actually gives
false statement was apolitical
fiscally sound evidence based
and we gave this effort and pain
because we set up opportunity to
save lives New Mexico especially
when the state is on the state
and the nation of the EM is
experiencing an unpleasant
unprecedented spite and over
those levels and then on on so
many more of a personal note
many of you all heard me speaker
and speaking my struggles with
substance use disorder through
the years while working at the
legislature and I think that I
find this will probably save me
a whole bunch of heart rate and
payment and and waking up to you
know law enforcement folks on
eight one days after Mexico over
those with that action on the
support this legislation thank
you thank you Sarah and Philip
I'm gonna let you pronounce your
own last name.
Good morning I thank you madam
gentility the harm reduction
program records remediation
called about the center and
contacted Public Health
contractor.
Working specifically overdose
and.
The state
strongly encouraged everybody to
are you courageous support and
this legislation I think it data
speaks for itself similar to how
people felt about strange
exchange in harm reduction
programs
you know twenty five years ago
when New Mexico took the step
towards providing harm reduction
services I would also echo what
others said
as a person related experience
that you know we're we're
dealing right now with that twin
crises of homelessness and
substance use which is
particularly dramatic in
Espanol New River counties where
I work and
I think sometimes even with data
and.
I'm sorry okay we will go back
to the sponsor do you want to
respond to anything you heard.
Imagine if we stand for
questions okay all right
questions from the committee.
Representative Lord.
Okay I'm going to get hear me
okay thank you madam chair and
representative.
Further okay so I'm going
through this
What's being changed now look at
age three to sixty three on page
six it says the overdose
prevention programs to provide
participants with the safe and
hygienic space to administer
consume previously obtained
controlled substances under the
supervision of a personal.
Personnel training overdose
reversal couple questions I have
on that chair representative so
previously obtained controlled
substance that means that they
would bring their own drugs and
is that correct madam chair
Representative that's.
I would say that's true but I'm
gonna give allows more
information for you more from
Emily Madam chair representative
of that is correct they would
bring their pre obtained drugs
you slide them out like yes
Madam two right I'm chair that
Representative yes they bring
their own drug supply into the
program there would be no giving
of of any substances to
participants by staff for the
program itself.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so
Madam chair representative who
would be.
What would qualify as personal
trained in overdose reversal
what with that who who who would
be doing that.
So madam chair and
representative there are
different models I just want to
stay there are a hundred and
eighty of these types of
programs around the world
fort in fourteen different
countries and so there are
different models but most of the
programs are staffed with
trained our ends who are there
to respond if there is an
overdose or another health
crisis they're they're also case
managers intensive case managers
of peer support workers and
others okay Madam chair
representative I thought in the
last bill and H. B. two through
six we had a massive nursing
shortage where would we get
these nurses madam chair
representative.
You madam chair.
Representative they don't
necessarily need to be RN's
there would be other trained
staff and opportunities for
other health providers to to be
in the centers in these
programs.
Okay madam chair representative
so what kind of other trained
staff to know nurses would
understand how to do vitals look
at the eyes to see if they're
overdosing who else would be
qualified and understand if
somebody's having overdose and
how to administer the correct
medication reserve reverse that
Madam chair representative thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative.
That would be part of the
training in order for for
anybody any medical provider
involved there are volunteers
that would be involved in some
of these models they would be
trained on how to administer
those those reversal type of
medications Madam chair
representative if the person who
you're saying would be and and
not in the medical field what
training would they be provided
in and how would tend to the
internet Madam chair
representative.
As we know we are in this crisis
many people those that are even
consuming or using
drugs are.
Being given information it's not
something that is a hard thing
to do but I'm gonna let them
only at add to that Madam chair
representative we currently have
a very robust robust harm
reduction program in New Mexico
we were actually lead in harm
reduction of many other states
part of that program today is to
train people on how to identify
and respond to an overdose and
so currently naloxone is
available to you could be
trained in your own home to
support your grandparent who may
have taken too much opiates for
example because of dementia
that's an example so we have an
incredible training program it's
very easy to use however these
programs go through very
rigorous training to make sure
that staff are a quick to do
this I will also state to your
point about
at our end shortages there are
ready harm reduction programs
all across the state this could
be a service they had to it so
there are ready staff in many
programs who can offer on this
type of service are ready.
Okay so Madam chair
representative explained to me
what these facilities look like
is it a facility.
How okay so couple questions we
start with one one.
Where do you determine that
those facilities I know we have
that we have them already is
that correct these type of
facilities are we're going to
implement them Madam chair
representative we do not have
the specific program in place
this would be added to that harm
reduction act and they were be
different types of models that
we are looking at setting
because of that will aspect of
our state we are we have
language that would allow for
different types of models that
would accommodate to those at
the different communities.
Okay so madam chair
representative how do you
determine what districts are
going to go in and will you be
opening up for public feedback
in case people have some
objections to that Madam chair
representative I really thank
you for that question as
mentioned in my introduction we
want we want this methodology to
to match those needs of those
communities and we know that
it's for instance in recovery
but we have one of the highest
incidence of of substance use
disorder happening and as you
heard from those commenting
today alligned also with
homelessness with these programs
with do an outreach of matching
wraparound services and
providing information and health
care and better public health
outcomes when we would we would
provide those models that would
match those communities that's
really kind of a a key aspect to
what we're doing with this this
piece of legislation Madam chair
representative would there be
any public feedback though that
somebody was concerned about
that thank you only because I
lived in Portland when I went
from a stated pick a pair meals
every single morning absolutely
absolute madam chair
representative thank you for for
honing in on that there is
already a lot of public input in
our communities and a lot of
outreach and a lot of
information that we've been
getting to the harm reduction
program from the department of
health they are
spread across our state's to
they are really informed and
working with communities are
ready and they know those and
those determinants in those
needs of those communities.
Chair representative I think
something I would add to this is
to allow public feedback because
if you have a home in that area
and it affects your house price
in anyway shape or form of they
have some objection they should
be able to voices heard by the
I'm sorry no my other question
was because I I remember this
bill off from I think last year
two years ago and one of the one
of the problems I had with it is
at and I don't see that in here
madam chair representative I
don't see where there's any
counseling services for them is
there going to be hands on
counseling for them at each one
every time they go to this area
Madam chair representative the.
The mission of our harm
reduction program is to offer
those services when they are
needed so they would have access
to
yes they would have access to
that information and when they
would need it and so I would I
would also add that to our
communities and to the reserves
of those programs that are
already seen in different parts
of the state that those
communities that have them in
those areas that have them they
have better public health public
health outcomes and and
neighborhoods that are are.
Healthier because of that madam
chair Representative Madam chair
representative is that listed in
here or is that just something.
I'm looking at page I don't
think come.
That is co locating harm
reduction overdose prevention
services but I don't see
anything specifically saying
that they will be receiving
option of counseling or to going
to rehab is that summer
specifically in this bill madam
chair representative madam chair
R. Representative.
That that is just the function
and the whole aspect of this and
then we would look on page six.
Line for the referral of
substance abuse or substance
abuse treatment services this
was the fact.
Thank you madam chairs of I
think about Morales and that
wasn't in there because that was
something I don't remember
reading that maybe I missed that
so madam chair representative on
page six reduces console
controlled substance in this all
purchase six that are if you
have somebody that is dealing
drugs right outside there are
you going to other gonna be
turned into law enforcement or
house at work Madam chair
representative of that is not
the mission of this program and
that is not the mission of the
harm reduction model at all.
And then only would you please
add to that madam chair and yeah
madam chair and representative
section five states about
limiting civil and criminal
liability and it is explicit
that
that it is only the conduct that
is allowed under program is of
those individuals are provided
this limited civil and criminal
liability selling
and trading and otherwise
providing harm reduction is not
allowed under these programs so
I'm not saying that they would
call law enforcement but the way
this bill reads it only protects
those people who are abiding by
the program rules which is just
possessing and using.
Okay Madam chair representative
I would definitely like it if
it's that better if somebody was
committing a crime and standing
outside they're selling that
they would definitely be turned
into law enforcement madam chair
representative or is there an
age limit on this can anybody
come and what what is the age
limit that somebody could come
into this program.
Madam chair representative.
It is not.
Is not stated in in this
Piece of legislation that I've
either I've seen in.
Just just to go back to the
mission of our production and
and not in meeting does it have
the substance use is our
disorder where they are and I
defer to Emily again to add to
that madam chair and
representative there is no age
limit noted in the statute
however that would be set to
rulemaking Department of Health
already has program rules for
the syringe exchange programs
and other harm reduction program
so that that would be part of
that promulgation of rules and
regulations so madam chair and
representative and do a lot of
work on CYFD what happens if
there's a CYFD run aware some
equipment human traffic down
there under age what happens
with that would there be anybody
asking them any questions are
for the ID or looking them up to
see if the runaways or to see if
they're being human trafficked
how would that be handled Madam
chair representative Madam chair
representative that.
That's not addressed in this
piece of legislation and if
there were something like that
of course it would be the
responsibility of anybody doing
that information or coming into
that knowledge to have that
reported however we would would
we look upon the rulemaking from
the department of health Madam
chair representative so that's
that's my problems because I
work with CYFD issues in there
so many runaways and there's so
many kids that human traffic to
me it seems like there would be
something in there that an extra
step would be taken if somebody
came in and they were under the
age of eighteen with a little
bit investigation to find out
either run away are they working
in prostitution are they And
CYFD are they are they in Harmar
the being human trafficked so
that that is concerning to me I
don't.
Thank I think that addressed on
my questions thank you madam
chair representative.
Representative Hermio and and.
Madam chair representative lu
Han thank you so much for
bringing this forward as many of
you know I'm home visiting
specialist and and my primary
job is to evaluate children at
birth and the majority of the
children that are you wait my
community are exposed or born
addicted I never thought that I
would be trained in giving our
can and and the ability to use
nor can in our community we lost
three children to overdose
effect and all the youngest
being two years old we were
trained the day before Christmas
on how to give nor can to save
the lives of children thank you
for bringing this is very
emotional but I'm grateful that
it's here today.
Thank you representative
Representative Jones.
Can you speak up a little bit
of.
So so I have some questions I'm
just going to take off on what
Representative Lord I was just
talking about with the age limit
that was one of my questions I
know that according to the the
details of the bill we're not
allowed to gather personal
information not allowed to ask.
Name address age is that true
Madam chair representative yes.
So madam chair representative
how would we know if these
people are under it or not at.
Thank you madam chair
Representative the core of a
harm reduction program is to
provide a safe space where
there's not judgment where there
there are services that are to
be provided for.
Any of those type of questions
that would come if they would
come.
Into place so to speak and there
was outreach it was necessary at
that time from that individual
so a harm reduction is to meet
individuals with substance use
is or disorders where they are
to to get the there the help
with the needed to service get
the services that they need when
desired and an important concept
of this is to address the crisis
that we are in right now and
that prices is growing and if we
we want to have another tool to
help this crisis our state is in
their nations and this and this
is a program that we need to
have in place and if people are
afraid.
If they they can't go to a safe
place and have those needs met
or have a place to.
To to to.
To use the substances that and
we are not we are not then
Meeting them where they are
Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative
I I guess if if this is only one
aspect of use that would work
that I see a real problem with
children who might be addicted
and and need help and yet we're
we're just helping them.
Chair I'm not really helping
them from that that aspect.
Madam chair representative.
There are many families in the
generations of families and
decades of substance use
disorder where children have
been involved.
Against their will so to speak
and have grown up in these these
households in these families as
you just heard from some of our
testimony today.
We have to find a service for
them if that is what they need
and I will defer to my experts
to add to that Madam chair
representative I you know we are
all concerned about our children
and and everyone but I will say
that if someone who uses drugs
is dead there is no chance for
peppery there is no chance for
services and what this program
does is not just open the door
to let people bring their drugs
and you when you walk into the
New York program you don't walk
into a room what seen people use
drugs you walk into a room and
there's a drop in center people
are sitting on the couch talking
and drinking coffee they're
watching a movie it creates
community and there are people
there to sit and and find out
exactly what that person needs
whether they're seventeen what
you're twenty five or sixty the
ideas that you wrap the person
around the services these
programs are up ridge to
services there are Bridge to
referral they are a bridge to
treatment in in Vancouver
there's
a model where the bottom floor
is and overdose prevention
center the second floor is a
detox center and the third is an
inpatient residential treatment
program because we know that
unless you meet that person
where they're at that recovery
that is never possible and so
these programs become that entry
point into the services and
supports that they need so I
just wanted to share that that
this is really about a
wraparound your we're wrapping
love around that person but
we're wrapping housing supports
transportation counseling
maybe if someone is experiencing
a trafficking that would be
identified and we can really
support them so this that's the
idea behind this purpose is
really to point entry thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chair and representative so.
Because we're not able to gather
personal information I know that
I read and as you just mentioned
that this program is in place in
New York City there have been no
overdoses in New York City how
do we know that.
How do we know that those people
don't leave their and if you
never see them again they didn't
die the next day Madam Madam
chair representative
We don't know that that is
information that we don't now
what we do now are the how the
health benefits of public health
benefits of the the program we
had seven hundred overdoses of
the New York program.
And not a single death of.
Of the care for that's from the
care that they receive from the
services that they receive the
that goes to show that this
program is working and it's
beneficial to this community.
Will thank you for that and and
I understand that I think it's
it is misleading for them to say
that there have been no
overdoses in New York City but I
all move on to to my next my
other questions had to do with
the nursing since being being a
nurse hi I'm trying to wrap my
mind around being in this kind
of a setting in providing this
type of service
As a nurse when I be responsible
for identifying this street
drugs that the this person
brings to use thank you madam
chair at and I want to say thank
you Representative for your
service as a nurse my mothers
and nurses well race in in that
household
And I have not personally
visited the sites family has so
often that her response to that.
So madam chair and and
Representative
So I just want to focus on the
the complement of services back
to when we were I was talking
before one of the services is
drug checking services so last
year thanks Bonser a drug
checking service probability
passed out and signed so that
there are supplied and devices
to help identify what substances
might be in the drive so someone
might bring their drug of their
pre obtained drugs into the
center and they can actually
check to see does this have
federal and it we know in New
Mexico that many you know are
rising over to us to really
contribute to fund all right now
you can check for those
adulterants so you know it it
doesn't eighty eight staff
member wouldn't be able to know
if that white substance came in
what's in that but we will have
the ability to check and tested
and that is also how lives are
saved and I do want to clarify
you madam chair and
representative
there are that there been no
deaths in overdose deaths in the
New York program that doesn't
mean that there were yes we do
know actually that some of the
participants in the near
programs have died from
overdoses but that's because
they worked in the program at
the time of use and so that's
that's the
The goal of these programs is to
save lives in the in that in
that moment thank you
Representative Vincent.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
I'm gonna make money pretty
short and I'm.
I just came to my mind wrapped
around something like this but
cannibal school I'd.
So you're saying that.
These people that come into the
drug debt drugged in is that
right.
Madam chair representative is
not a strict and this is a harm
reduction program.
So when they come in they
provide their they bring their
own illegal drugs in and nothing
can be done they can be
arrested.
I'm sure that is correct.
And the people that are there
that's going to be monitoring
the program.
What will there be security
there for them.
Madam chair
Representative there would there
would be some sort of security
in any kind of building or any
any with but not all the time as
we have harm reduction programs
servicing interstate right now.
Would anyone be turned away.
Madam chair representative as
noted earlier if there is there
is that.
Responsibility of contacted if
if that conduct was violated
then yes that they there would
be measures taken.
Madam chair representative so if
someone was wanting to shoot
heroin and they couldn't quite
get it done would would there be
assistance provided important to
help home shoot it up to the
vein thank you for that question
madam chair I'm gonna ask my
expert witness to respond to
that madam chair and
representative one of the other
services that's provided is
education on how to
At in that instance inject a
drug but they're not actually
injecting the the substance they
can train them about how to do
it safely to avoid a potential
wounds we know that a lot of
people end up in the hospital
because of sepsis so there is
that opportunity and then also
there provided a safe supplies
and clean syringes for example
if that's the the drug of choice
in it that's the way there
administering it thank you madam
chair representative this.
Is there a limit on this that
make you they come in for five
years ten years fifteen years.
Madam chair representative yes.
That's all I got.
Okay thank you for
Representative.
And as a reminder please silence
your phones if you haven't.
Thank you madam chair and and
members of the presenters today
it's really great
that you're presenting this
program to us for consideration
so that three professionals that
would be for you to respond to
and to help the audience and
everyone to understand just how
this program will work first of
all how you engage the community
and the operations of this
program and where it's going to
be house and how it would be
carried out.
I'm thank you madam chair and
Representative as there's a good
question one.
One critical of public health
strategies for preventing the
the fatal overdoses in the
sacrament of what we're talking
about today the overdose
prevention programs such
programs meant the consumption
of of of the pre obtain
substances in a and hygienic
environment as we're talking
about.
The outreach that we already do
is to the harm reduction program
at the department of health they
are engaged in our communities
they are engaged with here at
advisers appear
support groups so there's a lot
of a stab wish me that's already
in place what this bill would
allow is rules to be made to see
how we would how we would a
further that communication and
to look for those this pertinent
places and and and and how those
models would be adapted to those
communities madam chair.
So thank you madam chair of the
presenters of it's really great
that you're gonna be involved in
the community of the rulemaking
process and determining how and
and where this program will be
carried out you know one of the
other big questions that is a
rising is that how is this
program going to be paid for
what is the substance and source
of making sure that funding is
available for this program.
Madam chairman god to bring this
is
I just like to say something in
regard to the cost in July
twenty twenty one The state road
Rhode Island enacted legislation
establishing a two year pilot
program authorizing overdose
prevention programs in response
to the overdose crisis and a
study conducted to assess the
potential impact of such
programs in the state found that
it would result in a substantial
cost savings due to the
prevention of emergency overdose
care and and the lives saved.
There are there is also feel
right now it's house bill three
fifteen I believe that is
in place addressing the revenue
that's coming in from the
cannabis rental revenues and
looking to have that funding for
a program like this madam chair
Representative thank you madam
chair and thank you of Madam
presenter regarding it showing
how there is a basis and source
for funding this program in our
communities as well as getting
the community involved and so
finally I think the big question
following up on Representative
Bentsen's question we have this
program as it existed New York
and how are we making sure that
law enforcement was not going to
come in and try to invade the
the work that you're doing to
help the people who are
participating in the program
Madam chair representative that
is a great question and I'm
going to the turned over to
Emily she actually visited this
site and and others around the
state.
Madam chair and and
Representative
the beauty of the New York
program is that they are working
in partnership with and my TV
and Sam Rivera is the executive
director and he just told the
story the other day about how
the law enforcement actually
came in and with an idea to the
staff and said could you hand
out could you create some cards
for us so that we can hand them
out on the streets when we
encounter someone who's using to
refer them into this program
because one force men are seeing
the devastation of public drug
use and the littering of
syringes and so there this is a
benefit to them so they are
working very closely with NYPD
and they're ready seeing budget
where they're not having to deal
with an overdose on the street
and then figure out how to make
referrals because that's not
their job they're not trained as
social workers are case managers
and so they're actually very
happy about this the department
of justice also visited and on
point in New York and they are
taking a very hands off approach
as well and so it's it it's
critical that law enforcement
become partners in the community
that wishes to open a program
like this so thank you madam
chair representative for that
question it's really important
that they're brought into the
process early thank you madam
chair thank you madam presenters
I'm really happy to see this
collaboration between the
community and law enforcement as
we work together to make sure
that I communities are helpful
healthy thank you madam chair
that's all I have.
Thank you for the question of
what Representative Chavis on.
Okay you have a second thank you
okay would you take the role I
was for my next start.
That's the case yes.
Representative travels yes
Representative Ferrary.
Representative conmigo.
More no.
This appears.
No.
I share this yes.
Yes.
You have by five to three you
have to pass.
Madam chair thank you committed.
Okay we will move on to
The representative cappuccino
then yes I'm not sure if they're
here yet but if if they're here
ready to present at HB eighty
eight could we go ahead of the
next bill we have physicians
here have taken time away from
the practice I I understand that
and I spoke with your floor
leader and
So we are not thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
we are here to present H. B. two
sixty four.
Which would require an
independent analysis of the
Medicaid managed care program to
determine fiscal viability and
make recommendations for
improvements in New Mexico we
spent over a billion dollars on
health care we must ensure the
sustainability of Medicaid and
improve health health health
outcomes for New Mexicans who
are enrolled in this very
important program I have with me
as an expert witness Mary
Feldblum she is the executive
director of the Health Security
for New Mexicans Campaign she is
also a former academic for Ph.D
is in sociology with a strong
emphasis in economics merry has
over thirty years of health
policy research.
And experience most of which has
focused on health care costs
drivers very will identify the
areas of concern regarding
Medicaid managed care and areas
that we believe need to be
looked into from an independent
source.
Thank you
Eleanor and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee of supply sure to be
here is very can you speak up a
little bit okay it is the market
use the hand hello okay.
Can you hear me now.
No I've got it turn it on I
guess.
You got an extra.
It's not working.
Because.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
Since the the change to a
Medicaid managed care program
which occurred in nineteen
ninety eight LFC staff have
produced some excellent reports
that repeatedly describes some
of the major flaws in the way
the Medicaid managed care
program is structured I have
reviewed reports from two
thousand fifteen I didn't go
back to the present focusing on
key a few key problems they
consistently point out these
flags illustrate why HB to sixty
four is so important.
Between fiscal year nineteen in
fiscal year twenty three
Medicaid costs increased by
fifty six percent while there
are other factors at play
legislative finance committee
staff note that rising costs are
primarily due to higher
enrollment yet during those
years despite Medicaid expansion
and federal comment requirements
the total health care services
used by enrollees quote remained
flat or declined over the same
time with a few exceptions.
If costs are increasing and
utilization is flat or declining
does this mean that managed care
organizations or MCOS are being
overpaid.
M. CEOs are paid to a risk based
met payment system called
capitation.
They receive an actuarial based
fixed rate per member per month
if bit members do not use the
services there may be an
overpayment problem.
Thus how the capitated rate is
determined is absolutely
critical.
The how health and Human
Services to
Department actuary presents a
range of possible rates based on
projected future costs for
example provider payment
increases and future usage of
services according to LFC staff
the HSD with selecting the mid
point range not the wrong one
but the mid point one and told
very recently as a result
millions of extra dollars were
given to the NCOs.
Well HSD now reports it is
selecting the lower actual range
the twenty twenty to evaluation
by LFC cautions that was unable
to validate assumptions in the
MCO capitated rate setting
process.
Unfortunately the NCO financial
information so critical to
determining the capitated rate
is inconsistent.
The M. CIOS have different
business models including how
they account for costs divided
between their Medicaid program
and their commercial lines they
are also in this is my addition
to the to the comments of the
reports they're also competing
for customers so some
information may be considered
proprietary and I'll give you an
example.
What happens when there is an
overpayment.
Current contract allows and CEOs
to keep one hundred percent of
the first three percent of
overpayments anything more than
the three percent is shared
between HSD and the M. C. Harper
tracking calculating and
recouping these overpayments
adds to the ministry of costs
and burdens of the HSD staff and
I'm quoting from the reports.
What other information is
required to evaluate the
Medicaid program well provider
rate increases are a factor in
determining the capitation rate
H. S. D. reports it is difficult
to validate whether propriet
providers receive those
increases because individually
negotiated provider rates are
proprietary the gets into that
proprietary issue I mentioned
before.
In addition M. CEOs do not
provide reports on specific
behavioral health service
utilization for their outcomes
these reports also mentioned
other examples in some the LFC
reports raise serious issues
regarding how M. CEOs are paid
about accountability and lack of
transparency.
Finally I want to give you a
more positive note and the it
there is there is it was an
example given in the recent
government
it took a governor's task force
HM CEO has its own form to
formula or in its own PBM the
final report points out that
there are six states who have
actually come created one for
military for their Medicaid
managed care program and they
have to actually saved according
to the governor's report
millions and millions of dollars
but the probe report also points
out that the impact of this
change goes far beyond drug
prices quote physicians have
more time for patient care by
the reduction of prior
authorizations prescribers know
what medications are on the
preferred drug list and
pharmacies are not tasked with
stocking medications for four
different Medicaid formularies
and I would add that this also
helps a patient.
Passage of HB two sixty four
provides the legislature with an
extraordinary opportunity to
obtain the expertise and
information you need in order to
come up with solutions such as
this one solutions that will
enable Medicaid to function as
it was intended to do so thank
you.
We will go to the audience for
opposition.
Anyone on the main opposition.
Raise your hand.
K. nobody in support.
If you want to please come
forward and use that the hand
held Mike.
And on so if you want to speak
please raise your hand will get
to you.
Morning madam chair
representative thank you for
allowing me to speak in favor of
this bill as a primary care
physician for almost forty years
of dependent on Medicaid for
many of my patients in rural New
Mexico and we can do better I
think with manage Medicaid
managed care in terms of making
good use of the money so that we
get more clinicians who are
willing to practice in rural
areas as well as who will stay
and make the program more robust
so I am speaking in favor thank
you madam chair.
And.
You
madam chair members of the
committee I'm Dale tanker I
represent the New Mexico
pharmacists Association
I do stand in support of this
bill as most of you know I've
been involved with pharmacists
Association for thirty five
years and during that time we've
had a number of
concerns addressed through the
legislature trying to get to
what the real costs are how that
money is being spent on whether
it's appropriate or not Mary
mentioned some pharmaceutical
numbers
the the real problem is it's
kind of a shell game and we
don't know what the real numbers
are and we can't know what the
real numbers are until there's
some kind of transparency and
somebody who can look at it who
understands how that shell game
works
I can tell you the pharmacists
are underpaid the doctors are
underpaid
that the I say PBMs health plans
are not underpaid
so I definitely support this
bill and thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee our that felt
like it was really loud
my name is more like how log I
am currently the acting Medicaid
director for the state of New
Mexico and I wanted to just
reiterate that there are several
of the solutions that are
proposed by the sponsors of this
bill that the agency is already
pursuing and I would like to
requested that they work very
closely with the agency as we go
through this as there are
certain federal requirements
that we are obligated to uphold
as a state slash federal agency
but we do support reviewing and
evaluating our program to make
sure that we are being good
stewards of state dollars thank
you very much.
Good morning madam chair members
of the community our committee
the New Mexico osteopath
association stands as part of
this legislation.
Can you please tell us your
name.
Sorry about that my name is
Corey requests.
Okay we'll go to zoom icon up
Peck.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm a contact speaking
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico.
We strongly support H. B. two
sixty four based on our position
that health care needs to be
affordable for all New Mexicans
that health care dollars should
go to taking care of patients
and that cost and pricing data
should be transparent thank you
thank you Brady horn.
Hello my name is on the server
Department at UNM now that I
needed to testify quickly about
this bill
I'm also a senior fellow at the
UNM Center for Social Policy
a member of the New Mexico
Senate committee
One research doesn't directly
state health insurance I can
tell you that the state's socio
chair incredibly.
Medicaid covers approximate
fifty percent of New Mexicans I
don't have a stranger's for
Medicaid Mexico's about eight
point eight billion dollars even
a small change in our allocated
money for them general health
and economic benefits our state
also since government covers a
large percentage of Medicaid
costs there may be large budget
chair on New Mexico can best
leverage this program
LFC more in order to help
support but just in my review.
Earn mascara structure New
Mexico could be improved so I
just think you through this
process would be really helpful
for us in New Mexico thanks for
time thank you and Barbara
Webber.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity my name is Barbara
Webber executive director of
Health Action New Mexico where a
health advocacy organization in
New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of this bill
Medicaid is the primary health
care system for New Mexico at
this time and the information
that is required to be and
oversight of the the managed
care program
you have to remember that then
Medicaid privatization is
relatively new and I insisting
on transparency fiscal
responsibility and also the
study of the health and come
outcomes that have been produced
by automatic managed care or not
produced so that we can go
forward with a stronger Medicaid
program thank you for the
sponsors for bringing this bill.
Thank you Barbara.
Okay see no one else committee.
Any question.
anyone want to make a motion.
Okay sec okay
Monica take the role please.
Representative K..
Yes Representative Chavis yes
Representative Ferrary.
Jones yes.
Yes.
The.
This is yes.
That a vice chair Herndon yes
madam chair talks yes.
By eight to zero we have a to
pass.
And we will move on to that the
next act the Representative
Chavis show and three seventy
surprise billing protection act
sunset date.
But there's your expert you have
sourdough expert.
He's a great sourdough bread
Baker.
Whenever you're ready thank you
madam chair members of the
committee this is a very H. B.
three seventy is relatively
simple bill it just changes the
date
of for provision of the sun
surprised billing protection act
from twenty twenty three to
twenty twenty eight.
The provision is related to the
provider reimbursement benchmark
for qualifying out of network
medical bills the state's
methodology works better for all
parties in the federal approach
and gives a state time to
incorporate data from a new
database that is currently being
built.
And I will go with me is my
expert witness
Brian.
Seccombe by Colin file renaming
him over here.
and he has additional points
about this about this very
important bill.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
be brief sizing gauge with all
of the stakeholders who worked
on the original surprise medical
billing legislation that passed
unanimously in twenty nineteen I
think we're on the on the same
page here that we need a little
bit more time to make sure all
payer claims database is up and
running and it that it would not
be good for any of our
stakeholders including the OSI
to have to the revert to a
federal process that doesn't
work nearly as well as what
we've done here in New Mexico so
with that I think we can simply
question just eight anyone here
in support.
If you want to come up and
speak.
And on zoom if you're in
support.
You can raise your hand.
Madam chair representative thank
you for allowing me to speak
Rick Madden a family physician
speaking in favor this is a bill
that I think will accomplish
extending something that has
been very helpful to patients in
New Mexico and you know this
federal legislation there some
loopholes we need to fix a
particular thing ground
transportation transportation
but we do have a lot of benefits
and of course have been some
modifications and how it's
applied so I hope we can keep
working on improving this but by
speaking favor and thank you
madam chair and representative
thank.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative my name
is Denise king aged a long term
services aging network director
this affects older adults and
people with disabilities who
always who already find
navigating complex health
issues insurance issues
difficult and do not have the
resources particularly in
medical crisis is to ask it out
of out of network providers will
be utilizing the in their
treatment.
they are also often ashamed.
To request assistance and so for
this reason we are in support of
this bill.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Dr mark Epstein on
the emergency physician former
CEO of true health New Mexico
health insurance carrier as well
as Mexico Health compact
connections were of the chief
medical officer I served also as
expert in the original
promulgation of this legislation
and stand inform support as well
as representing the health
information security act by a
committee that helped establish
the APCD the all payer claims
database the concept to spending
and and from support this is a
great workings continue to be to
yield great results thank you.
Okay we'll go to zero okay go
ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows Blue Cross
blue shield of New Mexico we
stand strong support of this for
the reasons stated thank you.
Okay now we'll go to zoom and
workers.
And by thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Anna price
and I am a volunteer advocate
with A. R. P. New Mexico the R.
P. New Mexico's stance in
support of this.
Thank you Barbara Webber.
Members of the committee again
this is Barbara Webber executive
director Health Action New
Mexico our
Constituents if you wanted to
consider how consumers in New
Mexico have really gained
benefit from the existence of
our New Mexico state law and
extending it makes a lot of
sense it's kept people from
medical debt it has kept people
from adding to the trauma of
being in the hospital to the
procedures that they had not
maybe anticipated and finding
themselves with an anticipated
bills so we stand strong support
of extending this legislation
thank you.
Okay now we will go to
opposition in the room anyone in
opposition.
Okay anyone on zoom in
opposition.
Okay seeing none we will go to
the committee for questions
madam chair moved to pass.
Okay at does anyone have quit I
actually I have one question
anybody else okay so I'm
Representative and Colin we've
been reading about press Santa
Fe witching there E. R. over to
basically at different set of
providers.
Would they be considered
surprise billing I mean would
they be what would they be
considered out of network do you
happen to know madam chair I
will defer to my expert witness.
Madam chair
We have to know a little bit
more about
which insurers there currently
contracted with and we do have a
page to handle on the line who
may who's on zoom who may have a
little bit more insight into
thank you page go ahead.
I think I need it you can hear
me yes.
Okay so it it is true but if
these are emergency doctors it
what this bill does is
regardless of whether or not
they're in or out of network it
holds the consumer harmless for
any sort of out of network
charges it applies to all
emergency care overuse of what's
happening in Santa Fe is
emergency room the person seeing
emergency room doctor would get
one bill the card was of whether
or not those providers are in
network or out of network in
that one bill would be paid at
the
the consumer which is paid the
in network level.
In page one more question for
you so if if this bill is a if
this measure is allowed to
sunset what would be the case in
that situation.
So the case in that situation or
the ease of this is is that
there is one set reimbursement
rate that everybody follows if
this sunsets then we report to
the federal process where there
is some extensive negotiation
between the provider and the
insurer the there might be an
appeals to an independent review
organization and the amounts
that the independent review
organization are allowed to
consider in their review is
currently on the federal
litigation so right now
providers are not getting paid
for out of network medical bills
and I suspect that the system is
breaking down and people the
insurance are getting thrown in
the middle of this with beings
Center bills that are improper
bills or potentially even
getting set sent to collections
The New Mexico we don't have to
worry about that and hi I just
want to throw in there that we
have have zero complaints about
this and in fact we are the envy
of a lot of other states who
have not sent a similar type of
benchmark.
Thank you page okay so we have
we have any questions from the
committee okay we have a motion
to pass by Representative Lord.
And a second.
Representative Jones is there
any opposition.
Seeing that when you have a do
pass.
Okay we will next go to HB
eighty eight medical
malpractice damages cap.
Okay.
Thank you.
So I'm gonna ask our analyst did
you have a it are your analysis
based on this up.
Okay.
On the other side did you okay
all right that was the question
okay go ahead Representative
Townsend thank you madam chair.
I was just thinking I still have
the T. S. the breakout from
thinking about my first term in
the legislature when I was the
only male on the health
committee.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee house
bill eighty eight makes a
permanent fix to the
legislature.
Had to make.
To the medical malpractice
during the special redistricting
session in two thousand and
twenty one.
I'm sure you all remember in.
November of twenty one
independent physician owned and
controlled outpatient facilities
alerted the legislature that
they were unable to secure of
medical malpractice insurance at
the higher limits that were
meant for hospitals under the
revisions made to the medical
malpractice at H. B. seventy
five.
To the crisis.
The legislature granted those
independent outpatient
facilities a two year reprieve
from being treated at the
hospital under the act with the
understanding that those
independently owned outpatient
facilities.
Could not get the those
independent out patient
facilities could not secure
insurance after exhaustive
searches in twenty twenty two we
would permanently fix the
problems in the twenty twenty
three legislature.
Madam chair we have a committee
substitute which would like to
explain before my expert witness
to start and we got a public
comment if you get a motion to
discuss the substitute so move
by Representative Vincent okay
go ahead.
Thank you for.
The committee substitute simply
ensures that by defining an
outpatient facility.
That is not majority owned and
controlled by hospital.
As an independent providers at
the cap section of the medical
malpractice law follows the this
definition by permanently
practice placing those
outpatient facilities under the
independent provider cap of
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars plus the annual CPI.
Madam chair I have for.
Expert witnesses with me today
the first as Carey Robbin Ruiter
and with the New Mexico Medical
Society and with your permission
I'd like her to have a chance
statement.
A good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kerry robin for under the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society thank you
for the opportunity to explain
the history between behind house
bill eighty eight.
First I want to make it very
clear that our advocacy related
to medical malpractice since the
winter of twenty twenty one has
never been intended to cause
families that have experienced
tragedy anymore heartache my
heart breaks for these families
and I cannot imagine the depths
of their pain but our advocacy
has been necessary to ensure
that patients do not lose access
even more health care
professionals because of
unintended that grave
consequences as many members of
this committee are new to the
legislature in this issue I'd
like to take a moment to explain
how we got here in the nineteen
seventies New Mexico experienced
its first insurance crisis when
the last medical malpractice
insurer notified the state would
no longer write policies the
legislature passed the medical
malpractice act also called the
NMAA which created the patient
compensation fund a common risk
pool where physicians could
secure malpractice insurance for
reasonable price.
The NMAA struck unique balance
for the benefit of physicians
and patients as a benefit to
patients to positions as a
benefit to positions any claims
brought against the position
would have a limit on the
economic and non economic
damages that could be awarded
against the position as a
benefit to patients the NMAA
guarantee that regardless of the
limitation on damages patients
could be awarded unlimited
punitive damages and lifetime
medical costs paid to the PCS to
be clear the PCF guarantees that
all future medical expenses will
be paid for an injured patient
no matter the cost.
After the Act healthcare
providers have been able to
secure insurance in one of two
ways as your hand out explains
the first way is to the patient
compensation fund the second is
outside of the NMAA through
industry standard one million
dollar policies for each
occurrence tech at three
occurrences per year these are
often referred to as one million
three million dollar policies if
insured this way provider maybe
student open non capped
environment with no limit on
judgments as you can see on the
backside of that document recent
Syria were awards in malpractice
cases have far exceeded the one
million three million dollar
policy coverage leading
physicians under insured for
higher costs physicians are also
required to secure tail coverage
to cover all past claims and
reinsurance to cover awards over
the million dollar limit.
We shared a snapshot of the cost
of malpractice premiums for New
Mexico compared to our
surrounding states even PCF
coverage is more expensive than
policies in other states and the
range prepare for the million
three million dollar policy for
just the base policy not the
cost of reinsurance that
increases every year these
policies are simply becoming
unaffordable the environment has
been unsustainable that's
unsustainable for some time
demanding action.
In twenty twenty the
superintendent of insurance was
directed by the governor to
convene stakeholders to discuss
them in a the medical society
along with attorneys insurers
and hospitals participated in
the process we offer proactive
ideas for improvement and ward
against changes that would
directly affect recruitment and
retention of physicians the
superintendent issued a report
in December of twenty twenty in
which he recommended that no
action be taken on that now
during the twenty one session
due to its remoteness but also
made some recommendations on how
to approve the NMAA if necessary
unfortunately house bill seventy
five was pre filed anyway a bill
that followed none of the
recommendations and remove
hospitals from the and then they
using the argument they were
that corporate actors taking the
PCS as a response the house of
medicine were to draft and
introduce a bipartisan bill that
integrated the superintendents
recommendations Senate bill two
thirty nine but that building
not receive a hearing in Senate
Judiciary almost all health care
professionals propose seventy
five an introduced but after
passage on the floor the
governor called the negotiation
between the plaintiff attorneys
and the New Mexico hospital
Association the New Mexico
Medical Society was prohibited
from direct participation in
negotiations I could not
advocate on our own behalf as we
did not have a seat at the table
after these negotiations to
place it is true that the
medical society agreed to
certain provisions of house bill
seventy five most importantly
that the independent provider
cap would increase from six
hundred to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars the creation of
a PCS advisory committee in the
provision that hospitals would
exit the PCS in twenty twenty
six with the mandate that they
pay off their deficit prior to
their exit the wi fi concerns
during the negotiation process
we were simply not in a winning
position to fight against the
bill it passed the legislature
the Medical Society honestly had
no intention of revisiting the
act after the twenty one session
and have been working to
implement provisions of house.
The seventy five however in
November of twenty one we
received panicked phone calls
from physicians across the state
they told us two things first
independent physicians acting as
agents who are not employees of
hospitals to perform procedures
and see patients there were
included in the definition of a
hospital and therefore going to
have to be insured under the
hospital cap that insurance did
not exist.
Second that independent
physician owned controlled
outpatient facilities were also
under the higher cap because all
licensed outpatient facilities
not just those affiliated with a
hospital were placed under the
multi million dollar cap applied
to the hospitals but these
independent applications are not
hospitals they're not reimbursed
like hospitals and even the
federal government after hearing
that shows does not treat them
as hospital Medical Society
immediately convene stakeholders
and notify them of the impending
crisis all agents would not be
able to work at midnight on new
year's eve and all independent
outpatient facilities would be
forced to close as the
recognition that there was a
problem with house bill seventy
five we responsibly dealt with
the problem during the special
session because that's what we
do with legislation has
unintended consequences we work
to fix them as memorialized in a
memo distributed House Judiciary
during the special session the
medical society in the New
Mexico trial lawyers association
agreed to three things one
permanently fix out eight the
agents and ensure that they are
treated as independent
providers.
To delay implementation of
higher caps for independent
outpatient facilities would to
understandings first these
outpatients would work
diligently to secure insurance
throughout the twenty twenty to
interim for the higher cap
limits but second if they could
not secure affordable insurance
or insurance at all we would
work together to permanently fix
the crisis facing independent
outpatient facilities and three
that we will continue to monitor
the definition of occurrence
it's still began our work I will
let our experts explain their
own searches for insurance but
what I can tell you from an over
arching point if you is this
house bill seventy five created
the PCS advisory committee and
the precarious position of the
PCF and unavailability of
Insurance was discussed at
length in the committee the fact
that independent outpatients
were still struggling to
insecure insurance to come to no
surprise to anyone in fact the
superintendent was directed to
work with all qualified insurers
under the act to convince them
to write policies for these
independent outpatient
facilities the only proof you
should need that this insurance
is not just unaffordable but
doesn't exist at all is the
superintendents final order that
he issued in October of twenty
two which we provided to you
it's seven part unless the
legislature changes the NMAA an
upcoming session the cap for all
outpatient health care
facilities will rise to five
million dollars for calendar
year twenty twenty four if the
cap rises to that level because
of the on availability of
insurance coverage for those
entities outpatient health care
facilities that are not majority
owned and controlled by hospital
would be unable to participate
in the PCS and make a lot of
business in its entirety further
depleting the surcharge base for
the PCS he recommended that the
legislature to make permanent
lower cap limitations for
outpatient facilities that are
not majority owned and
controlled by hospital and
that's what house bill eighty
eight that it'll.
House independent outpatient
facilities to be treated as
independent providers and state
insured through the PCS there
are eleven independent
outpatient facilities and
medially impacted but there are
more independent physician owned
non corporate health care
facilities that want to come on
line to serve patients but
cannot do it without this bill
this is not a bill to go back on
a deal this is not a bill to re
live an excruciating debate
about harm to patients this is a
bill that recognizes we made a
mistake we all did sometimes we
pass laws that are in perfect
and we fix them in the past few
years there have been lots of
bills fixing legislation that
were all negotiated in good
faith I have bad outcomes G. R.
T. destination forcing pre trial
detention cannabis licensing end
of life conscientious objection
access to reproductive health in
its criminalization but this
issue for whatever reason has
become hyper politicized and it
doesn't need to be we've already
recognize that we made a mistake
with agents we permanently fixed
then in December of twenty
twenty one it is time to
recognize that we made in the
state with independent
outpatient facilities and it's
time we fix it.
Madam chair my second experience
Dr Gabriel Adams and south with
externality for.
Business.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members Mike or better
yet use the handheld.
good morning madam chair
committee members my name is Dr
Gabrielle Adams thank you for
the opportunity of allowing me
to testify in favor of house
bill eighty eight I'm the
president of southwest gas
royalty and southwest endoscopy
which was established over forty
years ago by Dr Robert land who
I think is here today I hope is
here made it here
we're an independent single
specialty practice we
specializing gastrointestinal
disorders which includes liver
and pancreatic diseases we
currently care for over two
hundred and fifty thousand New
Mexicans from all over the state
we see approximately fifty
thousand patients a year.
we find a hundred percent of
your name Hospital sound of our
regional in patient care because
your amendment does not have the
capacity to cover that hospital.
In nineteen ninety eight we just
opened the first outpatient GI
lab in New Mexico other names
for this type of facility are
ambulatory surgical centers or
outpatient care facility.
At our facility would perform
over thirteen thousand
procedures a year primarily
upper endoscopy and colonoscopy
on stable outpatients we differ
from a hospital in many ways we
are are not an acute care
facility we are certified by CMS
which is the centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services
and we voluntarily are certified
by triple H. C. which is an
accreditation association for
ambulatory health care hospitals
on the other hand are certified
by CMS and the joint commission.
The greatest difference for
patients the state the federal
government however is that the
equivalent procedure performed
at our outpatient facility is
reimbursed at markedly lower
rates than at a hospital or a
hospital owned outpatient care
facility.
This results in significant cost
savings for patients for third
party payers through for the
state in Medicare payment and
for the federal government
excuse me state for Medicaid and
from federal government
Medicare.
The difference is because both
the state New Mexico and our
federal government classify us
as different entities than a
hospital.
And this is this is mandated by
the federal government and our
state I'm gonna I'm gonna share
an anecdote about how
significant this difference can
be when my son was in middle
school which is a long time ago
because he's a first year
medical student help he
accidentally swallowed a quarter
well I just win the on a weekend
I was on call I couldn't do the
procedure myself our facility
was closed because it's a
weekend I had to call in Dr
Lynn.
Come into the hospital and doing
in dust could be impose a
quarter out of his stomach so
wouldn't get stuck somewhere
farther down.
So.
He went straight to the G. R.
Loudon had his procedure done
and the bill I got was five
thousand dollars and that was
just for the facility fee and a
hundred and fifty dollars of
that went to doctor Lynn the
rest of it was the hospital
facility fee if it'd been a week
day and he could have had it at
my facility that would have been
seven hundred and fifty probably
total everything including
doctors and.
So.
That brings me to the matter at
hand which is house bill seventy
five which Kerry you know
reviewed but that was the
revisions the medical
malpractice act was passed in
two thousand twenty one and it
misclassified outpatient care
facilities the same as a
hospital and with that resulted
in is that there is no insurer
in the country that will provide
us insurance.
So included in your packet is a
list of all our denial letters
it's also a tabular there's a
table that has all the names of
the insurers that we have
applied to we have been applying
as Kerry mentioned since the
fall of twenty one when we were
told by our current Kerrier that
they could not find the could
not continue to provide us
coverage.
So thankfully house bill eleven
was passed and that temporarily
fix the agency classification of
our facility the same as a
hospital but as you've heard
already that set to expire
January first of two thousand
twenty four at that point we
will be not insured on in under
the patient compensation fact
act and if we get a one million
three million policy we will be
woefully under insured.
So house bill eighty eight
correct this agency
classification permanently it
allows us to continue to provide
care throughout New Mexico to
all these hundreds of thousands
of patients.
We cannot practice uninsured and
that is for the safety of our
patients we cannot practice
under insured or uninsured so in
closing I want to acknowledge
that we all share the same goal
we have all share the goal of
improving the lives of those of
us around us lawyers are
motivated by justice you are
citizen legislators are do so by
crafting legislation and
repealing legislation that isn't
good.
In a position as a calling this
is a calling that I heard when I
was eleven years old living in
Mexico in the mountains and
Oaxaca.
It is a calling to promote
wellness to heal patients and
when we can't heal it is to be
with our patients and their time
of dying which we are going to
one of these days it's a calling
I'm not ready to give up yet and
I.
I thank you to pass house bill
eighty eight so that I can
continue serving New Mexico
thank you.
Madam chair my third expertise
Dr mark dapper with from X. ray
systems.
Chair woman members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak before you
my name is mark Tepper I am a
radiologist and president of X.
research it's in New Mexico.
That's resources New Mexico is a
hundred percent position on
private practice operating for
more than seventy years in New
Mexico we are a group of twenty
five radiologists three breast
surgeons to nurse practitioners
with seven offices extending
from Farmington to Alamogordo we
provide radiology services to
for hospitals as well three of
which are in rural areas.
Also primary care clinics in the
Santo Domingo pueblo we provide
care to over three hundred
thousand patients each year we
drop Haitians from all over the
state particularly for breast
cancer diagnosis and treatment
and for all other imaging
services including the first
outpatient interventional
radiology services in the state.
Presently we are constructing a
comprehensive breast health care
and imaging center in
Albuquerque with the intent to
streamline could care for breast
cancer patients and improve
access to care and reduce the
time for the diagnosis of breast
cancer.
From true diagnosis from
treatment from months to weeks
the images Center when approve
access to all types of imaging
for all other patients including
screening mammography the
building was designed to include
everywhere Tory surgery center
in a a C. completion of that
portion of the building has been
put on hold unless the proposed
changes H. B. eighty eight or
enacted we'll get unable to open
the issue due to the enormous
cost of malpractice insurance we
would be forced to operate the
A. S. C. at a loss if you were
to be operational art amatory
surgery center will provide
savings to patients and to
payers including state funded
Medicaid programs with compared
to having the same procedures
performed in a hospital.
Faster malpractice coverage for
practice under the existing cap
and participation with in the
PCF have increased twenty five
percent over the last year alone
and up a hundred percent from
just two years ago the increases
are driven primarily by the need
to fund the patient compensation
fund although this is not the
only issue affecting recruitment
and retention of physicians in
New Mexico rising costs and low
reimbursement are already making
it difficult to maintain staff
levels in our practice and this
only furthers our difficulties
in bringing in new talent into
the state.
Further complicating the
malpractice situation for us the
AC is completely enclosed within
a single building containing
patient clinics extensive
imaging capabilities including
MRI cat scan mammography
ultrasound and X. ray the
current malpractice law is
uncertain as to the application
such a combined facility is
uncertain of all the medical
assets of providers in such
building would fall under the
higher multi million dollar cap
should H. P. eighty eight not be
enacted if that were the case
the the cost of malpractice
insurance we're prevents from
operating the center entirely.
Unless the bruises in H. B.
eighty eight are passed in the
new by the New Mexico
legislature in the current
session making the current
malpractice cap for physicians
own health care treatment
facilities permanent and loan in
the state and the patient
compensation fund after twenty
twenty six we and other
physician owned treatment
centers will be unable to
function further limiting care
in the state already
experiencing a shortage
positions and with significant
limitations to access to care.
Thank you members madam
chairman.
And madam chair my last
witnesses Dr Jayant Kumar was
real medicine associates.
Madam chair and Committee
members thank you for inviting
me to speak up for house bill
eighty eight I am president of
the non medicine associates
single specialty group in New
Mexico it was established in
nineteen seventy three so this
is a fifty eight year
anniversary this year.
my group has thirteen doctors
and thirteen nurse practitioners
yes and we have a staff of
ninety two we provide services
in Albuquerque Rio Rancho
Bernalillo Los Lunas Sapporo.
Los crucis Clovis Roslyn and
Santa Domingo pueblo so I will
reach in New Mexico is
widespread and we provide
excellent renal care our group
is one of the top southwest Reno
groups in the country we provide
complete a spectrum of renal
care which includes chronic
kidney disease management we
have more than ten thousand
active patients we see
care of patients needing
dialysis through about twenty
dollars this units that we co
chair with another company.
We also have hospital services
and we provide coverage all over
Albuquerque and these locations
I mentioned to you I am the
medical director of the
transplant program at
Presbyterian so we provide
kidney transplant the only the
second transplant program in the
state the only kidney pancreas
transplant in New Mexico.
I also do clinical research
through my company during peak
of COVID we did vaccine trial of
this AstraZeneca that led to
emergency use authorization by
FTE and we had fifty five New
Mexico residents participating
in this trial.
just a little bit about kidney
disease about fourteen percent
of adults have kidney disease
and if you look at Medicare one
part of Medicare recipients have
kidney disease we have about
five thousand two hundred sixty
three New Mexicans with end
stage renal disease that means
that require dialysis or have
transplant thirty eight three
thousand eight hundred six of
those patients on dialysis and
my group provides get to one
part of these patients.
We have fourteen hundred fifty
seven plus plan to civilians a
my group provides high off the
pier to hop of these patients in
New Mexico we have nine hundred
new ESRD patients in New Mexico
starting every year.
In July twenty nineteen through
presidential act at Bhondsi
kidney health initiative it was
recommended that eighty percent
of end stage renal disease
patients by twenty twenty five
should be either going home
dialysis or have a kidney
transplant.
Because of that we started.
Promoting home dialysis in our
region I'm our penetration for
home dialysis and the reason has
gone up from nine percent to
twenty percent within a year and
a half we also started a home
dialysis clinic in Los crucis
which is the unique clinic
because it only caters to
patients who wanted to home
dialysis they want to stay home
and do dialysis we have about
thirteen patients right now in
this clinic this clinic is
covered under if a patient
compensation fund and you know I
don't plan to continue this
clinic if this law is not passed
updated the patient that they
need to go to the incenter
dialysis clinic three times a
week Dr some of these patients
Dr our our and have to go to the
dialysis clinics I'm home
dialysis is only be taken to
stay home and continue that
Alice's treatment.
My practice also has a vascular
access center like Dr deficit we
manage patients with the
vascular access is that helps
them get dialysis home as well
as in center currently this
center works as will be end
which is office based labs and
it is covered in that limited
liability coverage what we are
but we have been planning to
expand to a military surgical
center for the last two years
and this year was a break in the
a groundbreaking for AC but that
has been put on hold benefit of
AC has been already mentioned by
Dr pepper but I would just tell
you the cost factor is very
striking for simple procedure
like from back to me which is
remove of clot from eighty
Fischer law that these patients
need almost daily basis for
dialysis medic in patient up
access center will Medicare will
pay thirty four thousand seven
hundred seventeen dollars.
For hospital based outpatient
center Medicare would pay four
thousand eight hundred fifty
seven dollars while my partner
at the ambulatory surgical
center will get paid one
thousand six hundred eighty one
dollars so the made in the
hospital charges for outpatient
for a simple procedure like from
back to me is about twenty
twenty five times higher than
even get paid so it does not
make sense for us to be
classified in the same category
as hospital based surgical
center if this bill is not
passed we would be very limited
in the scope of what we do of
the lot practicing in New Mexico
I've moved here with my family
fifteen years ago this H. R.
three children here we want the
kids to go to med school and
serve movie New Mexico but you
know it this is just becoming
very challenging for us to
continue what we do if this bill
is not fixed thank you.
Chair thank you for noticing and
that I I
Where we're ready for questions
from committee okay so we only
have forty one minutes left
before we have to be on the
floor so I'm gonna limit
on each side to twenty minutes
so if if you will our online and
in support please raise your
hand and if you're in the room
and in support of what what
let's do a raise of hands who
who is here in support.
Okay obviously you can't all
speak so I will owe money
there's about a hundred hands on
those whom
let's take Act ten ten two
minutes here no that won't work.
Yeah
So we'll start in the room and
we will take seven people for
two minutes each and then we'll
go to the manager at the point
of personal privilege I think
this is such an important bill
forty one minutes with all of
these people that have taken
time out of their day and whose
lives and livelihoods are at
stake I think it deserves as
much time as we need even if we
have to be excused from the
floor temporarily up
Representative Jones we we are
way behind on our agenda not
just today we have more bills
than I believe in the committee
in the building and certain
members have drawn out thing so
we're going to stick with twenty
minutes per side we saw a show
of hands so if you want to speak
please stand up.
New Mexico.
Thanks for seventy six and six
six thirty eight eight no
motions close limit debate are
allowed and I think this is very
very important these people come
from all over this is part one
of the biggest mistakes of our
past and roundhouse
Representative or you are
wasting their time.
I know you're limiting their
time in which I I am and it's
that the prerogative of the
chair I'm sorry if we had been
able to move other bills a long
we would be further ahead we're
gonna have to just start not
hearing built very shortly
because we're here we're getting
Senate bills so go ahead I'm
sorry.
Hi my name is Suzanne being on
recent Lee I moved here from
Washington DC area
I have worked in the United
States Senate for forty years
retired came here to be with
family in Kerala's although I
live in Rio Rancho
coming here as a new resident I
found it very difficult to find
a doctor I you've heard this
story I'm not going to go into
it but it took it was a
challenge and already doctors I
could find were in the clinics I
have four clinics that I have my
primary different doctors so I
found them I was lucky my
daughter moved here she can't
get into some of these places
now the hospitals were not even
accept her with her very good
insurance not a health care
plan.
so I'm saying as a patient
that's what I'm here as a
patient that H. R. eighty eight
is extremely important I mean I
understand unintended
consequences I worked in
Congress for four years with a
lot of bills so I get it but I'm
saying I want to keep my doctor
I had colon cancer and I do not.
I want to go back to Washington
DC to have that taken care of
also not in the seventy five
just the classification this
whole classification issue needs
to be resolved and it will be
wrong result in nature eighty
eight so there's no reason that
we should not pass this and
support these doctors otherwise
they're going to leave the state
they're gonna sell their
practices because you have
forced them if you don't pass
this bill and yes two ninety six
out of the state they're gonna
retire they're gonna leave
they're gonna sell the practices
because they can not get
insurance.
No lawyer would ever work
without liability insurance and
medical doctors will not do that
as well about practice insurance
so that are those are my
comments please support H. R.
eighty eight and also just two
ninety six we'd like to see that
brought up looks like it's being
buried so we don't want that to
happen as a companion bill thank
you.
Hello Representative my name is
Dr Julie silver higher I lived
in a single wide trailer and I
went to through high school I
studied Navajo at the community
college in requests and I'm
bilingual in Spanish I'm a
family doctor ended my geriatric
fellowship at Harvard I live in
Santa Fe and I work full time
providing primary care Christus
St Vincent I am one of the few
geriatricians in Santa Fe I've
spent twenty years treating
addiction diabetes and dementia
passing house bill eighty eight
is the most important thing you
can do for health care in New
Mexico in this term.
This bill will fix the
unconstitutional lumping of
ambulatory surgical centers in
with hospitals are specialists
who are doing low risk
procedures in HSD is must be
supported we rely on them Monday
through Friday I go to work and
I scramble to provide access for
my patients who need called
Oscar peace for GI bleeding
biopsies for masses I procedures
and orthopedic procedures among
other things we are desperate
for doctors we will lose them if
you'll allow are trial attorneys
to drive them out this is not
partisan please will you help us
take care of New Mexicans or
will you make compromises with
our trial attorneys and keep our
governor happy accepting their
campaign donations I am asking
you legislators who will you
call when you get sick when your
loved one has a cancer but can't
get an appointment when I can't
get them in for the colonoscopy
or for the appointment to get
the care that they need I have
begun instructing my patients to
call their legislators when they
can't get in with the specialist
because I am stock.
This is not a partisan issue
when I called extreme associates
the radiologist answers the
phone and coordinates with the
oncologist to help me get the
care I need for my patients when
I called down to south with GI
they get my patient and so they
can start treatment if I lose
them im stock I can't do this by
myself please help us please
vote for H. B. eighty eight.
To remind you we are not going
to talk badly about anyone no
blaming no trial lawyers this
we're going to keep it very
simple and professional thank
you.
Madam chair representative is my
name is Dr teddy's within ski I
live in Las Vegas New Mexico
into San Miguel County Dr Nancy
right now I are currently
renovating a historic building
with the plan to be increasing
some residential apartments
medical offices and my plan was
to create a and ask Senator in
the lower level I'm a real
general surgeon I've been so for
thirteen years
with the current malpractice
limits as they are it looks like
I will not be able to open this
endoscopy center the corner of
the state is extremely limited
for access I currently have
multiple practitioners begging
me to get this open I get calls
when you get open I have cash
pay
people asking me when you open
they don't have insurance and
I'll be able to offer caspase
Services I have.
People begging me for help the
only hospital there is also a
Vista which is currently
has its own issues of its access
in the part of the state is
extremely limited and I I my
plan was to.
Give them something that I'm not
Mel given the if this
classification stands I'm and
I'm the only owner of the
corporation that is going to
have this endoscopy center I
will be it's only sole provider
and I will not be able to do
this if this agency
classifications stands I
certainly won't be taking in the
ninety five hundred that the
hospital in town gets for their
EDD's so I can't pay
I can't get the insurance I've
looked as well it doesn't exist
for me I will not be able to
vote and the town will suffer
the county will suffer another
counties are somehow get people
in Santa Rosa I get people from
Santa Fe who are waiting for
months and months and months and
of Santa Fe GI closes thank you
thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on government
activity I am a physician and
the CEO of New Mexico cancer
center which is one hundred
percent physician owned one of
my physicians to inject implants
devices of the neck to treat
sleep apnea recently gave me a
hospital bill on one of his
patients the device costs twenty
four thousand dollars the
surgical fee was five thousand
dollars and the hospital bill is
a hundred and thirty thousand
dollars I wanted to build a
surgical center in the practice
for my students to be able to
lower those costs that would
have lowered it to about forty
thousand dollars I'm unable to
do that because I cannot find a
commercial insurance to be able
to hit the cap of being under
the hospital range we would like
to help lower health care costs
and we would like to be able to
provide safe secure physician
owned outpatient surgical
centers so that we can do that
this bill would cost nothing in
state revenue but it would save
a lot of money for health care
costs across our state thank
you.
It will take two more in the
room and then we'll go to the.
Madam chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
privilege of this floor my name
is Dr symbology many years ago
the move to Albuquerque to
practice in my last position
here was a cardiac surgeon to
director of cardiac surgery at
the heart hospital I was one of
the founders of the heart
hospital but some years ago I
took a position as a cardiac
surgeon at the Mayo Clinic in
Minnesota and which is where I
get still my personal care some
years a few years ago it retired
in Las Vegas Nevada so truly I
do not have a vested interest
here but it is so so sad what's
happening.
And some years ago just as an
outside thing if I may mention
Bill Gates introduced me to the
Consumer Electronics Show the
chance to visit Las Vegas and
lot of CEOs I mean it and very
very aware of the health care
situation just like the
education system here in New
Mexico and I want to challenge
and inspire you to look at this
situation the private providers
to care and provide an
incredible piece in the
infrastructure of health care
and I have friends in the mmhm
to trial lawyers if you think
justice needs to be provided of
course which so should the
justice be provided in other
states with the trial lawyers
and doctors have come to a
consensus so like in Texas the
cap is two hundred and fifty
thousand in California it's two
hundred and fifty thousand in
Colorado it's three and a
thousand of course I have a list
of all of the states if you want
I'm sure you'll see in it so and
thank you and please this is the
challenge that you all have in
your privileged position thank
you so much.
One more in person and then
we're going to go to soon this
is we're taking the mask off for
madam chair and members of the
committee Dr mark Epstein again
I'm not a practicing clinician
but again I ran health insurance
companies I've seen both sides
of the issue my appeal is a very
practical one I think the fiscal
impact report fails to take into
account how many folks are going
to be getting care and hospital
based settings if this house
bill eighty eight is not
Department brought to bear in
the past many millions of
dollars tens of millions of
dollars out of for HSD in
Medicaid for General Services
Division come there state
employees and and the rest of
the I. back the budget for the
state will increase
significantly has you by failure
to pass this push people into
health care into the hospitals
where there's anywhere between
at three X. mark up to ten X.
markup so this very fundamental
financial consideration that's
not reflected in the FIR I need
to be taken into account and I
do ask you to please pass this
bill thank you.
Thank you okay we will now go to
soon and I'll just start at the
top and we have
Ten minutes left so I will take
five people so Dr bard Act.
Two minutes.
Good morning thank you for
letting me speak I'm a primary
care provider I've been working
in New Mexico for more than
twenty five years I've worked in
a variety of health care systems
including the Indian health
service.
I've worked at UNM and now I
work at the UNM student health
center I am in favor of passing
house bill eighty eight this is
a bill that is helpful to all of
us in this room.
Many of us and I assume many of
you in this room are patients
who have had unusual long wait
times that are unacceptable
especially when needing to see a
specialist.
Our major health systems in
Albuquerque have very long waits
for appointments.
As a primary care doctor my
patients and I rely on
independent specialty practices
and specialty groups such as
southwest gastro in urology.
And X. ray associates of New
Mexico to deliver quality and
timely health care to all of the
patients in New Mexico and I
strongly urge you supported
thank you.
Thank you next we will go to
Erica Somalis.
Yes.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Dr Erica silly still more I
am born and raised here in New
Mexico and from the state The
New Mexico my father is a
Mexican immigrant and we have
three doctors in the family
myself my brother who is in our
all ages and my sister in law I
am the former president of
women's specialists in New
Mexico who is the largest
private practice women's health
care in New Mexico we thought
eighty eight thousand patients
last year we see patients from
Sokoto we see patients from back
on we see patients from Las
Vegas we see patients from
Gallup requests on we also take
call it both Presbyterian and
love this but we are an
independent practice we have
seventeen OBGYN positions and
I'm sorry I was on last night
and so I deliver some babies and
and and four hours of sleep but
I am here because I am here to
support our independent
practices southwest
Gastroenterol logy in X. ray our
patients rely on them and I
cannot take care patients
without them the crisis in New
Mexico is that people are
leaving the reason I am here is
because I am born and raised in
New Mexico out of the six people
that I trained with two are here
one is from this let that in one
is myself and everybody else has
left the state and I am very
scared about the future of
health care in New Mexico thank
you thank you
Trained trans.
Can you hear me yes I'm and I'm
a primary care doctor in
Albuquerque New Mexico and just
to keep it short I support house
bill eighty eight to encourage
more providers to open their
practices independent practices
it is the independent practices
that are very
what should I said that that
more attuned to patients needs
thank you.
Thank you Kathleen mostly.
Chairman Thompson members of the
committee my name is Kathleen
mostly retired registered nurse
and public health professional
I'm in support of HB eighty
eight medical malpractice
damages caps as we have so many
policies that depend on
maintaining and increasing
providers I heard some shooting
committee lower madam medical
malpractice caps locking
equipment was effect on provider
population ratios in a two
thousand five standing by into
nose inhaling Jr that was even
more exaggerated for the rural
areas.
Providers in New Mexico are less
able to recover the cost of
higher premiums because of our
high Medicaid population.
We now have higher malpractice
caps in Texas Colorado
California Nevada this bill is a
step to stabilize the patient
compensation plan by ensuring
the present Fund doesn't shrink
by an accident so participants
the bill does this by placing
independent positions under the
lower tax and allowing them to
remain in the fund after twenty
twenty six please support HB
eighty eight thank you.
Thank you Terry Cole.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Terry called I am the
president CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
he allocation medical facilities
covered by this legislation are
not hospitals so they shouldn't
be treated as such under our
medical malpractice laws the
fact is that the costs and
accessibility of healthcare has
become an important economic
development matter communities
without an adequate number of
positions will simply not thrive
they won't attract companies or
talent this is a dire problem a
recent LFC secret shopper study
found that Medicaid enrollees
for example are only able to get
a primary care behavioral health
appointment thirteen percent of
the time we're short three
hundred and forty primary care
doctor one hundred and twenty
psychiatrist and nearly sixty
OBGYN there's a lot we need to
do to combat or healthcare
worker shortage but this
legislation is one key piece New
Mexico simply cannot become an
impossibly expensive place to
practice even the
administration's Human Services
department says this legislation
could attract more providers to
New Mexico and keep them here
right now specialists in
particular it was an error to
apply the hospital malpractice
cap to these non hospital
facilities and for the health of
our communities it's time we
simply fix it thank you madam
chair I appreciate the time.
We actually have enough time for
one more so we'll go to eva and
jelly.
I thank you for letting me speak
today my name is Dr ava actually
I am a hospitalists impatient
for this and at university of
New Mexico in Albuquerque and I
am here in support of house bill
eighty eight as an in patient
doctor I have seen the great
influx of patients to the
hospital overwhelming our
hospital capacity in New Mexico
I have over the past two years
even with the pandemic dying
down that.
The has not gone down that our
patients and have not come out
and I and.
We worried about the effect on
the hospital crowding.
that would happen if these
independent outpatient
the procedure Center surgical
center specialty centers were to
close down in addition to drive
I think comment about the
financial cost of these
procedures inpatient I worry
that we simply do not have the
capacity the all of these and
New Mexicans in the hospital
setting and that we will see
questioning the are overcrowding
and adverse outcomes so I
support house bill eighty eight
I hope you're able to.
So everyone who is that Dr hands
up on to if you were in
opposition your hand out the
report the number.
Madam chairman members of the
committee thank you for your
time this morning my name's
other Spitzer and I in twenty
fourteen I lost a child due to
medical malpractice she was she
was injured during her birth my
wife has lasting injuries from
that birth as well she died and
we called in my arms and I'm
here today to tell you.
We don't we don't want
condolences we don't want those
things right we want justice for
our families we want I want my
child's life to have mattered.
And when these things happen I
left that hospital that day I
didn't have one child I took a
twin daughter home I had an
injured wife and I took home a
two hundred fifty thousand
dollar medical bill nobody
offered to make this right
nobody offered to make this.
Go away no one offered anything
I had a fight for justice and I
don't want any family to ever go
through anything like I went
through because all I can tell
you is the harm from that is a
life long every time I look in
my daughter's eyes I am
overwhelmed with sadness and it
breaks my heart that are twin
sisters not here in any of your
parents imagine.
Having your child pass from this
life the next in your arms is is
the biggest cursor as.
Almost everything you've been
told today is untrue is based in
fear there's not a problem that
needs to be fixed.
We need a high quality care
that's what we're here about.
You know there's a cause and
effect problem of what you're
being presented.
What we're all we're all trying
for as high quality care in New
Mexico this is not the right
fixed there's no fix that needs
to happen two years ago patients
agreed to these changes we did
not like these changes right we
wanted no damage caps we did not
want to wait two years why did
we not only two years because of
this because people came to the
table and bad faith for a chance
to do it again.
But here's what I'm here to tell
you today and you heard one of
the doctors say right where does
he go for care he goes to
Minnesota which has no damage
caps so when he needs care he
goes to Minnesota more there are
no damage caps.
And every time you talk about
capture talking about patients.
And their families who have been
injured and harmed in severe and
real ways the system has to
improve thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Jeffrey
green and the dentist from
Albuquerque
I'm here not only as a provider
but as a patient.
As a young Dennis I sought out
An independent facility one of
the best in the state to perform
Lasix surgery.
Unfortunately that Lazarus was
missed program to not laser
through my right eye.
I was forced to retire.
Four years of surgery.
Over ten million dollars of
economic losses from because I
had to sell my practices.
didn't do enough in fact.
Not being able to see my son's
first pitch a baseball game on
my daughter's gymnastics meets
because I was so light sensitive
the pain was excruciating.
cause me to.
Of AUMENT after four years of
this this torture.
specials decided that the only
way to get me out of payments to
remove the I..
I seven opposition of this bill
because as a provider we have a
responsibility to care for
patients and sometimes we make
mistakes.
These mistakes need to be
resolved we need to do what we
can to fix them.
Even if it means making them
all.
Because these mistakes
drastically affects somebody's
life thank you.
Chairman committee members I'm
Cathy Levin a lawyer I was in
the room for the negotiations
and it every step of the way
through the special session of
twenty twenty one.
you've heard from only one
company southwest gastro that
has previously participated in
the fund and that qualifies
under the outpatient health care
for definition all the other
testimony that you have heard
today goes to concerns about a
nationwide health care provider
shortage I support and would
happily work on measures to
bring more providers in New
Mexico tax breaks reimbursement
rates recruitment
a second in fusion of thirty
million dollars in the patient
compensation fund to pay for the
doesn't deficit that was created
by mismanagement of the funds.
And failure to raise surcharges
on doctors at the same rate as
inflation and the cost of
living.
The fear that has been injected
into this campaign.
House because small clinics to
believe that they will close
it's just simply not true.
The house bill seventy five
outpatient health care facility
cap is intended to apply to
places where serious procedures
happened and people can be
catastrophic in catastrophically
injured or killed.
Patients who go to outpatient
health care facilities for these
kinds of procedures and are
injured should not be limited to
a seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollar cap.
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars for the life of Stacy
Lotto an Air Force captain who
was killed due to malpractice.
Seven hundred fifty thousand
thousand for the death of the
matriarch of the looser family
who was killed due to
malpractice seven hundred fifty
thousand for Michael Webb who
was rendered brain injured
during an outpatient surgery
procedure.
For two years.
I have asked for proof that
southwest gas troop cannot get
any coverage.
the emails that they have
produce showed produce recently
show that they can get coverage
remember that the whole point of
this provision of the act was to
move hospitals and these
facilities out of the act in
twenty twenty six.
The major insurer of mad Mel in
New Mexico the doctors company
whose logo is on every page of
the medical society's website
has a FAQ page that says will
the doctors company continue to
offer insurance in New Mexico
after HB seventy five in the
answer on their website is yes.
The okay thank you.
Madam chair I'm here for people
that they can't hear you on the
webcast my need to use your
thank you thank you and I
apologize and I dropped my
folder.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee John which it's
what The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO we represent
over thirty four thousand
workers in the state but we also
like to say that we represent
all workers of the state and I
can tell you very much that this
is the worker issue god for bid
we have workers making minimum
wage maybe just about minimum
wage they have a procedure that
through an accident will affect
them for a lifetime prevent them
from ever working again leave
their families in positions
where they need to figure out
what to DO that is a situation
that no worker should ever have
to worry about we understand
that there is a doctor shortage
crisis in in this country and I
think you heard some other great
suggestions by we're here to
speak for the workers and I can
tell you unequivocally that the
workers of the states are
unfortunately against this
legislation the need to be
insured that their families will
be taken care of if god forbid
in miss ever happens through a
procedure so with that we do ask
that you propose respectfully
thank you.
You.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Julie on a
coop Representative the people
who work with the brave patients
that you're hearing from
Representative The New Mexico
traveling Association hospital
eighty eight reduces
compensation for patients harmed
in the tax payer subsidized
system and its taxpayer
subsidized so far to the tune of
thirty two million however
there's another system for
providers to get madam medical
malpractice insurance the
private insurance system for all
those patients whose providers
are not in the tax payer
subsidized system in the private
insurance market the patient has
access to justice with the jury
deciding if and how much is
Sarah further harm reducing
these caps goes against the
compromise but the Medical
Society hospital association
patients lawyers and nurses
agree to in twenty twenty one
instead this bill prioritizes
profits over patients this house
bill seventy five was not a
mistake all the parties
Representative the compromise
together and talked about this
very issue independent
outpatient clinics the real
solutions that we need to be
talking about are the ones that
Kathy Rapp in a fight G. R. T.
removal increased salaries loan
forgiveness center at such a we
don't need to put this burden on
the backs of patients thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Marianna and I and I'm here with
fairness for New Mexico patients
many of these patients who
cannot afford to take the day
off.
Would have come to learn is that
the issue of caps is actually a
social justice issue.
Because limiting the amount that
multi billion dollar insurance
companies to patients is an
injustice.
It is not an issue of doctors
versus patients.
Perhaps on patients is an
insurance company agenda.
Research shows that states with
and without cap see no
difference in rising insurance
costs and actually states the
institute caps also haven't seen
the rates fall.
This is another manufactured
insurance crisis holds all of us
here hostage.
But I want to underscore is that
there's zero data that supports
doctors leaving the state due to
house bill seventy five that is
a political agenda.
Nobody wants quality health care
providers more than the patients
who were harmed by medical
malpractice.
No madam chair legislators you
are the front lines of
protection for patients and
quite honestly doctors.
We're asking you to say no to
the multi billion dollar
insurance company agenda that
hides behind the long patient
wait times that they created.
We need to put limits on the
insurance companies and their
rate hikes that are profit
driven agendas that under pay
our folks under staff are folks
and over work that we do not
need to put limits on the amount
of justice that patients are
able to receive especially when
they have lifelong injuries or
death please stand with patience
and for that matter please stand
with the actors and say no to
house bill eighty eight.
We have one more in person and
then we'll go to soon Madam
chair representative funding
Zachary Keelan a lawyer Santa Fe
and Albuquerque I wanted to
bring up an issue that's not
discussed very much in the in
and that's the impact on Indian
country in our veterans under
federal law.
The tenth circuit looks to the
state you Medicare medical
malpractice act and applies it
even though the those Indian
health facilities and VA
facilities don't pay into the
fund those limitations are then
placed on the and so this has a
very negative impact both in
Indian country and on our
veterans and it's something that
has been talked about it we
wanted to bring to your
attention.
Okay we will go to soon dominate
dupont.
Thank you for letting me share
the patient perspective my name
is Tony to call and I'm a native
New Mexican born raised and
currently living in Albuquerque
ten years ago my husband and I
decided we wanted to start a
family what a wonderful
pregnancy and I wanted to labor
on my daughter's due date and
that labor went smoothly
smoothly until abruptly it
didn't.
All of a sudden I was
experiencing unrelenting back to
back contractions which deprive
my baby's brain of oxygen for
about twenty minutes until she
was born.
Sh my daughter Josephine was
born lifeless and was
immediately taken to the newborn
intensive care unit where she
spent the first nine weeks of
her life.
It wasn't until several days
after her birth that we learned
about the grave medical error
that occurred in that because my
daughter's permanent brain
injury we learned that I was
given an extremely large and
inaccurate dose of a dangerous
medication that then because my
hyper contractions.
The medication was an unlabeled
back a complete reach of safety
protocols this air forever
changed my daughter's life and
consequently the lives of her
entire family.
Today Josephine is almost ten
years old.
Historical policy she cannot
walk by yourself for talked very
easily she is visually impaired
just sensory processing disorder
as you requires assistance for
every aspect of her daily life
conditions are lifelong they're
expensive and time consuming we
had to have home remodeling we
have special vehicles twenty
four hour care intensive out of
state therapies and the list
goes on we love her so much and
are so grateful that she
survived her horrific burst what
happened to her was not her
fault and it was not our fault
it was preventable.
She will forever live with her
significant disabilities and my
family's life will never be what
we envisioned when we decided to
have a baby we and she deserve
justice for the harm that was
cost I'd like to ask you to put
yourself in my shoes.
What if this happened to you
what do you expect to be fairly
compensated.
Thank you thank you great coats.
I don't see great coats okay
Void over.
Go ahead Boyd.
Unmute yourself.
Okay we will come back to him
Phillies re all.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Felice Y. L. I am a private
attorney in Albuquerque and I'm
also the president of the board
of the senior citizens law
office it is an organized
organization that's dedicated to
providing low cost or free legal
services for senior citizens in
central New Mexico and Felicia
and all over New Mexico and I'm
here to speak it and it's house
bill eighty eight because
seniors as significant consumers
of medical care are also at
heightened risk for malpractice
seniors get.
Procedures such as colonoscopy
is and hi I procedures and I'm
really sensitive and and and I
smelling a lot of I've I've
listened to the doctors
testifying today and it's clear
to me that they really care
about their patients we all he
are here I think because we care
about patients and I think it's
really sad that that there's
they're in the situation where
they're advocating for this bill
because because of insurance
rates and I think I have to
think that there's a better way
to support our doctors rather
than rewarding the insurance
companies and what makes me
really uncomfortable is putting
our our citizens and our seniors
at greater risk we already know
that doctors they have the
advantage and madam medical
malpractice cases are very very
difficult cases and patients
lose those cases office
and so I just when they do when
I think it's really important to
trust the jury to get it right
and not to permanently prevent
the jury from awarding fair
compensation when New Mexico a
citizen has been harmed there's
just got to be a better way to
support our doctors and our
patients at the same time thank
you so much right on the nose
okay we will go to Breanna
Baker.
Good morning can you hear me
yes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
hearing from me today my name is
Brandon Baker and I am almost I
think generational New Mexican
was born and raised in rural New
Mexico my life has completely
changed as a result of a medical
malpractice my experience began
in two thousand and six with the
heart attack that went
undiagnosed but three dates due
to misdiagnosis I lost my unborn
child and Economic concede due
to my little heart function any
departments from.
And I was harmed by malpractice
although the judge decided that
the damage cost to me would cost
millions of dollars over the
course of my lifetime I didn't
even see a fraction of that
because of the caps on damage.
Continue to be a financial
impact due to out of pocket
costs and for my medication due
to the red tape surrounding
getting my medication paid for
my my practice case became well
known in New Mexico and and use
nationally as an example for
other lawyers I never received
appropriate compensation for the
damage that was done to me for
the issues that a container deal
with that today and I live with
for the rest of my life.
Not only am I faced with
excessive medical expenses due
to my condition I have to move
item in New Mexico to the east
coast to receive proper care
that I need completely changed
my lifestyle and am on a ship
crew improved to as result of
malpractice doctors need to be
held accountable for their
negligence that they cannot harm
other people in patients may be
fairly compensated for the
lifelong medical debt.
Have some payments to patients
only cost from there are two
people who have already
experienced life altering
injuries and some cases shipped
responsibility and cost of the
harm to the public thank you for
your time.
Thank you and we have time for
one more
Right copes.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can't.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Greg
Coates I am a medical doctor and
for the last three decades have
been a litigator I propose
health bill eighty eight because
of its lack of accountability
and the safe harbor that it
attempts to provide to large
outpatient facilities that here
today you've heard involved
dozens of providers and staff at
least of up to a hundred what
that means is the size in the
volume of these facilities where
dangerous high risk procedures
take place they're tempting to
have a predetermined valuation
of a human life placed on the
value of their mistakes I would
like to point out to the members
of the committee that that there
are two examples I've come
across that stand a uniquely to
demonstrate how in a lower risk
of population of care
certain individuals for instance
there is a ER physician in Los
crucis that in seven years we
have zoom I separate occasions
all those cases that are
resolved settle and he as of
today is still a under the PCS
secondly a spine surgeon
throughout his career bringing
from California twelve prior
medical malpractice lawsuits
with him for a through my firm
as well he until his hospital
privileges were revoked by the
hospital he too was in good
standing of the PC at so who
benefits from this seven hundred
fifty thousand dollar cap on the
value of a human life obviously
outpatient health care
facilities and their doctor
Harper but the important
question to ask is who is it who
pays clearly the patient by by
the fact that they do not
receive full justice for their
injuries and the our.
Work of their life is determined
by whether whoever malpractice
them happen to be capped or not
secondly though The New Mexico
taxpayers with their annual
subsidies to the tune of thirty
million dollars plus they to our
need asked to pay for this
largess that the outpatient
health care facilities are
asking this committee for here
today and for those reasons I
oppose house bill eighty eight
thank you thank you we will go
to the committee for questions
thank you all for your public
comment I'm sorry we don't have
more time Representative is the
pants ski okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
You know we have spent a lot of
time in this committee
hearing from health providers of
all kinds about the issues that
they're facing and I am
certainly sympathetic to efforts
to do whatever we can to help
those health care providers and
some of the things they've
talked about our gross receipts
tax
certainly reimbursement rates
has been one of the top
priorities are making it easier
for incoming health care
providers to get licensed in
this state
but you know I'm looking at this
legislation and it it really
feels like this is a solution in
search of a problem in some of
the research I was doing I read
a report just from last year and
from the American college of
surgeons that said that
malpractice rates have been
increasing since twenty nineteen
across the country which is well
before this legislation was was
enacted and and later amended
and so I I I think that that
maybe some of this is due to a
lot of national forces and and I
want to make clear.
to everyone that's that's
listening that that health care
providers in the state as I
understand
madam chair and representative
they have two options is that
correct they can they can do the
private market seek insurance or
they can go into our taxpayer
supported system that offset
some of those costs is that is
that correct Representative.
Madam chair and gentle lady
thank you I'm on the left to
carry a dress that issue the
field Madam chairman members of
the committee Representative
Penske so it is correct I would
say that the patient
compensation fund has not been a
tax payer supported system with
the exception of the current
fiscal year in the current
fiscal year there was a thirty
two million dollars
appropriation that was made to
the PCS but it was made by the
legislature because there was a
believe an agreement that the
former superintendent of
insurance allowed a bunch of
batch cleans out of the act when
he was only supposed to allow
three point out of the act the
legislature has given that one
time appropriation because it
was actually a state employee
who did not act as a fiduciary
of the funds so I I would pods
with the tax payer funded system
because it's only been a one
time appropriation I would
answer that yes there are two
ways to get your insurance in
the market there is the patient
compensation fund which is a
common risk pool that is
supposed to keep the cost of
malpractice insurance for
physicians certified nurse
midwives podiatrists and others
that are qualified under the act
at a low cost we provided you
all a document that shows the
other way that you can get
insurance which is the million
three million dollar policy on
the open market there are a
couple of very very important
differences if you secure your
insurance the patient
compensation fund there is a
limit on damages that the
patient compensation fund will
pay out in terms of economic and
non economic damages no one is
arguing about that cap we're
simply trying to classify an
independent outpatient facility
as an independent provider as
the federal government does but
I would also say that the most
important thing and the reason
why the case.
Compensation fund is so
important for physicians to
secure their insurance through
is the protections that it
provides to patients patients
have lifetime medical expenses
paid out of the patient
compensation fund regardless of
costs for the rest of their
lives madam chair I'd like to go
back to my.
Previous point which is we as a
state.
Decided that this was that this
patient compensation fund that
is off has been offset it is
offset yet again this year and
house bill two to be an
important use of public funds
because we are doing a lot to
support health care providers
and that was the original
rationale for the creation of
this other option many states
madam chair and and
Representative do not have this
other option physicians simply
go out into the private
insurance market and accept it
and pay those premiums the
medical liability insurance
market is incredibly well funded
at this moment you know there
ratios are better than all of
the other property casualty
insurance programs as of last
year and so I do think we're.
We may be searching for a
solution that ultimately
penalizes patients would really
some of the solutions it should
be through some of these other
mechanisms we have to support
health care providers in the
state which include
reimbursement rate increases
which is truly support and would
represent a much larger
percentage of clinic revenue
then offset on insurance
payments so I mean I'm I'm
confused because you know in
these emails that were
We provided in this packet to to
my office and and and now to the
committee
there are multiple references
to.
Madam chair and representative
to insurance being granted you
know I'm I'm seeing med pro dot
com.
Magazine usual dot com and
forgive me because I don't know
the full names of these
accompanies Jackson insurance
solutions dot com.
That.
Madam chair and representative
is as I read these emails I
think what they these emails are
saying.
Are that they are offering
insurance.
Maybe not it at the rates that
are acceptable or with a and.
Caps that are necessarily
acceptable to the clinic that
the insurance is available and
so Madam chair representative.
Comment on that because.
If private insurance is
available and you also have.
What is now at least for the
last two years and I I don't
know the true history of the
fund but it is a taxpayer funded
for offset fund.
I don't understand what the the
problem is so can you comment on
these emails because to me they
seem pretty clear that the
insurance is available.
Dr Adams would you please Madam
chair representative use the
Mike please.
And just before you get started
I I wanna save someone for rest
till was not the superintendent
of insurance that was spoken out
he.
He's a good guy.
Yeah Madam chair representative
so those letters indicate that
there are one million three
million policies available
outside of the fund there's
nothing within the fund and
there is nothing that would
provide us coverage up to the
caps as mandated by house bill
seventy five so there are as you
heard testimony today
Physicians are not comfortable
practicing under insured so if
there's legislation present that
states that the cap on it how
patient care facility is the
same as a hospital and a six
million.
Being outside of the fund and
only insured up to one million
granted there's no cap outside
the fund is simply not
sufficient insurance.
Madam chair representative isn't
the insurance sufficient within
the fund.
Madam chair representative there
is no insurance within the fund
we received a letter from aren't
sure the doctors company.
stating that they would not
insure us it's all in there
saying it would not insure us
our out patient care facility
within the fund because they are
not insuring to six million
since the fall of two thousand
twenty one we apply to all of
those admitted carriers and we
try to get insurance within the
fund.
For the caps as mandated by
house bill seventy five and we
also plot applied to insurance
companies on the market outside
of the fund and no one would
provide us with caps up to with
coverage up to the caps which
next year is five million.
Madam chair members of the
committee let me just find a
little more context for you all
because it's it's taken me a
long time to our health this
works as well.
This is the way the patient
compensation fund works is any
provider who is receiving their
insurance through the patient
compensation fund is required to
go on the open market for the
first two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars of coverage
than they pay a surcharge to the
patient compensation fund to
cover all of their liability
from two hundred and fifty one
thousand up to seven hundred and
fifty thousand if they're
independent providers and that
is their full coverage if
they're independent provider if
you are a hospital or an
outpatient facility under house
bill seventy five you are then
required to go back out on to
the private market I get
insurance for everything from
seven hundred and fifty one
thousand to the four five six
million dollar limit so when are
independently owned outpatient
facility say there is no
insurance in the fund they're
saying there's no insurer who is
going to ensure that and from
that seven hundred and fifty one
thousand up to the five six
million dollar cap at the
hospitals and the hospital owned
outpatient facilities are
currently under and that is also
why are independent outpatient
facilities will be under insured
whether they were to stay in the
act which they cannot do because
they do not meet eligibility
requirements under the policy
say that or they go outside of
the act and just get a million
three million dollar policy
because there is that gap in
coverage from seven hundred and
fifty one thousand to six
million four million to six
million and they can not get
insurance for those limits
because they simply are not
written.
Matt madam chair and
representative
I think I read these emails at a
different way it and you know.
We have hundreds of outpatient
clinics in New Mexico and yet
we've only heard from a couple
that have come forward.
Most of these clinics are
getting full coverage in the
private market and so.
You know I I just return to.
I think to truly support health
care providers and the vast
majority of providers that we
had heard from in this clinic
and that I have heard from over
the past year the issues that
really matter to them are
bringing up those reimbursement
rates making it easier to be
licensed in an ad physicians to
their practices or to their
facilities there's a number of
things that we are working on
that I think will.
Really address some of the key
issues that are facing our
health care providers.
And you know I think that.
Yeah I just closed my and I
think that.
These outpatient facilities.
Are engaged as a very serious
medical procedures and I think
that we need to honor the
original
conversation around what the
risk to patients and those
facilities was when we crafted
this solution years ago a couple
years ago and yeah I've I have a
hard time just as as I would
not.
Provided you know be in favor of
legislation that would punish a
couple of one or two companies I
also don't want to pass
legislation that is being pushed
by just one or two entities when
we know we have hundreds of
facilities and in the state
clinics and facilities that are
obtaining insurance on the
private market that are able to
work
for their patients and for the
community and in a manner that
balances the risk they made
those decisions I looked at the
two options that I think are
available most especially in our
state because we are a health
care professional shortage state
we do need to do kind of go that
extra mile and I think what we
have with the patient
compensation fund the taxpayer
dollars of it put into that fund
it really reflects the
commitment we have to health
care providers so with that
madam chair at Representative I
can't support this bill for
those reasons and Act I would in
my comments thank you madam
chair thank you and we have an
excuse to the from the floor but
I did let them know if they
absolutely need us we will have
to break so Representative Lord
madam chair and representative I
want to make sure that I
completely understand this
because I was here and voting I
did not vote on that bill
because I saw what was going to
happen
I want to make sure that I'm
understanding correctly because
I'm reading these emails it's
very clear there is no
malpractice our side liability
insurance in the future for one
they raise that cap is that
correct Madam chair
representative and experts.
Madam chair members the
committee Representative Lord
we agree with you we think that
the thirteen qualified insurers
in the patient compensation act
have made it very very clear not
just to our outpatient
facilities who are here today
but also to the superintendent
of insurance he was directed to
try to convince these interest
rate policies at the higher
limits and he himself said there
is an on availability of
insurance through the patient
compensation fund the the very
person who the government has
charged to look for these
policies has also reached the
same conclusion and I think it
is important to talk about what
other clinics are doing in this
state there is a mishmash of
things that are happening there
about four hundred independent
outpatient facilities in this
state when you pull their
licenses many of them are
affiliated with hospitals that
are not part of this
conversation because they would
be covered by their hospitals
insurance many of them are also
actively fees federally
qualified health centers which
fall under the federal tort
claims act and receive their
insurance that way there are
some others who acquired knows
policies back in the nineteen
seventies which are very odd
evergreen policies but those
policies don't exist anymore so
when we are faced with the
reality of insurers who are
happy to it outpatient
facilities wrapping the secure
this insurance for the first
time they are not able to do it
and there are increasing costs
even the one million three
million dollar market that are
becoming untenable and we
appreciate all the help that we
can get in order to solve those
problems there's a number of
pieces of legislation that are
trying to attack this but
helping offset the cost of
insurance that you can.
Look at that whole isn't a help
we have to be able to six for
the policy first thank you madam
chair representative because yes
I do members I was learning
about this extensively that
there are certain people
accepted there somehow
affiliated with hospitals that
is not applicable to them
whatsoever so this is a smaller
tighter market that is going to
have no ability to get liability
insurance and I was reading in
here because I remember when
this bill got passed
I think was during a special
sign member with somebody
special session since I've been
here that we kick the can down
the road we're like oh no these
people can't work they have no
liability earns a we're just
gonna kick the can down the road
well venture we're gonna be at
the end of the road I was
reading in here that after
extensive negotiations of
society and the New Mexico
travelers so she agreed to delay
the implementation the tire cap
because.
You can't get insurance so I
think it's super important
understand that this is no point
ha I think some people miss
understood this point doctors
and hospitals I think this is a
very small market of people who
will not be able to get
liability insurance because
there is no such thing my
correct in that chair
representative.
Madam chair members the
committee that's correct okay so
I just want to make sure that
everybody understands madam
chair representative that there
is going to be no liability
insurance so if there's no
liability insurance what happens
to these I want to make sure
separately
non hospital facilities what
happens if they can't get the
proper
liability insurance.
Madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Lord I'm happy to allow my
physician colleagues to speak
specifically to their clinics
from an over arching point of
view southwest Gastroenterol
logy which is currently insured
for the PCS but can not get
insurance for its outpatient
clinic would be forced either
closed its doors because it's
uninsured or sell to a corporate
medicine type actors which we're
trying to avoid.
But X. ray associates would not
be able to open its breast
surgery center because they had
to stop construction due to the
unavailability of Insurance for
their ECS and Dr Kamar is going
there.
Thank you madam chair that kind
of what I'm trying to hammer is
that this is not hospitals is
not hospital affiliated clinics
this is our independent I'm
sorry our make sure simply
correctly non hospital owned
facilities in a small niche
market there is no liability
insurance out there for them if
that doesn't happen they're
going to close I'm trying to
count on one hand how many
doctors I've lost in five years
I and they just I mean we have.
For a multitude of reasons Madam
chair representative we have got
doctors leaving left and right I
have my own theories of why that
is but
I can't see why we wouldn't look
at this small niche here and say
we're going to help you stay we
want to the state we're
supporting you to stay because
you cannot get that liability
insurance and you're gonna close
your doors and leave I can't see
having to go through yet another
doctor affect go through one
more primary of one more
specialty doctors of spree
because it happens every time I
go to make another appointment
they're leaving they're leaving
the state so madam chair and
representative.
That was my main question is I
think people are missing what is
happening here I miss it one
more time.
This small niche cannot get the
insurance it is not out there
there's nobody out that that's
going to give them the email
show that I've been inundated
with phone calls and emails of
saying we're going to move item
pack up because we're this small
niche and we cannot get coverage
it's very simple everything else
is being convoluted in this and
that it's a small niche they're
going to leave and that's
basically the end of the story
still up chair representative
that's all I have thank you.
It Representative Jones thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
just a take off on what
Representative Fajardo is saying
about the and and also
Representative is to pants
the number of clinics that would
be affected I have a list here
this a lot more than just the
three of you that spoke and
more than just a couple and it
includes clinics in Albuquerque
Los crucis Bernalillo Santa Fe
Santa Rosa it includes south was
care center women's health
services and family medicine
that would likely close if we
don't do something and.
Hopefully pass this HB eighty
eight and and although these are
a small number of clinics I
think it it needs to be pointed
out that
the service thousands even
hundreds of thousands of New
Mexicans I I can't imagine how
are we going to of sore the if
you're Gastroenterol edgy clinic
closes how do we absorb fifty
thousand patients a year into
the hospitals.
I I mean is that even possible
we've just talked about how
hospitals are understaffed we're
gonna have to be closing budget.
Madam chair representative Jones
I have no idea where they're
going to go because if you you
know I've heard that if you call
Presbyterian for a employment
SCG I it's eight months out as I
mentioned UNM cannot cover Santa
regional hospital so we provide
care there
optim does not have a GI program
anymore and so we help
Presbyterian with their do I
care also as we help UNM we help
press we do all of opt ins do I
care there's only a handful of
GI doctors in Santa Fe there's a
few up in Farmington I think
there's a few done in Los crucis
that's kind of it and so we take
care of patients from all over
and our weight even though we're
the go to people I waited for
five months to see somebody and
we are of a shorter wait and
everybody else because I don't
know why but we we have the
largest number of cash for this
in a group and we work very very
hard.
Losing that service would be
trouble.
Have a stating under
devastating.
Yes I'm sorry I'm sorry I'm so
Madam chair representative.
Session for you have the
dialysis clinics are you the
only dialysis clinic that
provides
Helps for people who who have
home dialysis so our dialysis
clinic is the only dialysis
clinic that focuses on home
dialysis the other dialysis
clinics have what they call in
center dialysis three times a
week and most of the patient
majority of the patients that
are over in center dialysis and
don't do home dialysis so in our
interests for our clinic to run
we make sure that our patients
are trained well and supported
vents with that continue to do
dialysis at home even if they
live like hour and a half of a
from the unit so you know if if
if I have to close my balances
unit that would have to go to
these units eventually turned
into in center dialysis unit and
go three times a week thank you
Sir thank you and thank you
madam chair representative I I
again I just want to point out
that that eight people these
patients will end up in
facilities going to hospitals
all have to they they may have
to travel hours which not it is
not even possible for so many
rural people I know we have a
crisis right now in my district
we're we're losing physicians I
honestly believe that there are
going to be patients who may be
diagnosed if they can get in to
see a private
a family practice doctor if they
can get in to see a family
practice doctor maybe diagnosed
but unable to receive care right
now they rely on it
volunteers to transport them it
within our city to receive care
and we're losing that care they
can't go in our it's just it's
just a crisis beyond what I I
think we can even imagine here
if these if these clinics close
not I'm just curious I'd like to
see how many how many people are
in favor of this bill again at
the hands that we had a just
earlier I didn't I didn't really
get to count those and we have
hundreds did you say on the.
Zoom Adam at I I'm not sure I
didn't count them I think that's
huge and how many of you are not
associated with our associate
with different clinics than
those we've talked about here so
that's way more than two
clinics.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you madam chair.
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent can you
hold on a second we actually are
still on discussion of the
amendment so I will entertain a
motion on this the substitute
bill.
You madam chair I would move to
table the substitute I have a
second.
Okay.
it's an amendment.
No it's a it's just it's just
that no that's okay so we have a
tabling motion on the substitute
bill for house bill eighty eight
Monica can you take the role.
Representative K..
Yes.
Representative Chavis yes.
Right yes.
Have you had any of yeah.
Jones no Representative Lord
absolutely no.
Just a fancy yes.
Representative been sent no.
madam vice chairman yes and
madam chair talks yes.
Okay by seven to three the the
Committee sap is been tabled go
ahead Representative Vince and I
just didn't want to forget to do
that thank you madam chair.
So what I'm trying to get my I
know this is a lot for us to
take in.
Committee what I'm hearing madam
chair representative you cannot
get there is no option to get
insurance.
Madam chair members the
committee there's no option to
secure insurance through the
patient compensation fund there
is no option to secure a five or
six million dollar policy in the
open market the only policy that
is available is a very expensive
one million dollar policy that
would leave independent
outpatient facilities under
insured.
Madam chair representative what
what I appreciate from the dock
is you said that you work with
presbytery and and sometimes
you're able to get people onto a
list.
And when somebody has something
going on internally they want
they don't want they can't be
seen in three months they need
to be seen today or maybe next
week and what I'm having a hard
time wrapping my mouth my mind
around is.
I'm sorry the comments inside of
this if you can't get insurance.
And we you know we we don't
allow you to practice and I
don't think you're fit in here I
think you're really gonna have
to close up your doors and all
of being here and for the last
month is how we have shortages
of everything.
And now we're fixing to have a
whole lot more of the same
shortage except for state of
nurses can be physicians.
Madam chair representative and
sent the that is correct I don't
know what we will do starting
January first I started
discussions with my partners I'm
not comfortable practicing with
only a one million policy in the
state many of my associates are
not either and so I think that
you know will be forced to go
somewhere else or retire.
And they'll be hundreds of
thousands of patients who do not
get your care.
Thank Madam chair representative
the you know the only thing that
I'm trying to figure out is I
mean I've got an **** business
which is no means gonna cost
somebody their life but I run a
three million dollar policy I
don't get to work.
But it's available to me you
don't have one available to you.
So what I'm trying to figure out
in my mind madam chair
representative is I've got a
local hospital in in and read
also and.
I'm very thankful but they
struggled to find doctors every
day.
And then you know then and then
they move out and they get a man
and they move out and they were
able to offer a service and then
they move out and renal renal
stuff is big big business in
from my district.
And the because of fuel prices
in because of inflation.
My folks can't even go to the
hospital to get dialysis they
have to drive a hundred to a
hundred eighty miles just to get
it I would do anything to get
some renal services and in our
district but it's not gonna
happen so here's here's our
hospital and all these outlying
little clinics that we have from
cap of ten Toronto to cares also
if one of those shuts down.
It's devastating to our
community.
And I just saw Representative
Jones have everybody raise their
hands up that's going to this
from different facilities and
all those has the potential to
close up I can't I can
understand that.
And of course to the people that
you know have some malpractice
issues.
maybe for someone losing a child
on my heart's with you
condolences.
And the youngest condolences Sir
I I know that that that happens
it shouldn't happen but it
happens because we are people
people are going to make
mistakes and unfortunately we
heard some of them today.
And madam chair Representative.
I've had hundreds if not
thousands of emails on this and
I guess in closing I have to
support your your.
Bill I have to support your
bill.
I'm not going to be on the hook
for you leave and all these
people leave in our area thank
you madam chair.
Court Representative cakes.
Share.
ET I just had a few quick
questions because it's been long
I know
in all the.
Did you did
misrepresented.
And madam chair what we did you
percent anyone from an insurance
companies providing medical
malpractice insurance.
Your testimony today.
Madam chair members of the
committee due to the lack of
time there was not a
representative from an insurance
company able to speak in public
testimony we do have in
different information from all
of them that were happy to share
with you but that's just the
reality of how public money has
gone.
you madam chair Representative
and and and committee
So I know that you've been asked
this question several times and
this is what it is confusing you
can receive private insurance
currently for one million per
incident three million cap.
On a private insurance and then
you would have to go to the
patient compensation fund for
the remainder madam chair
members the committee.
Representative Kate snow that's
not how it works you have to
choose where you get your
insurance you either get your
insurance through the patient
compensation fund in which to
secure the first two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars in the
private market then you pay a
surcharge into the patient
compensation fund and the
patient compensation fund covers
your liability from two hundred
and fifty one thousand up to the
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollar cap if you are an
independent provider if you were
than a hospital or an outpatient
facility you then have to go
back out to the private market
and get insurance from seven
hundred and fifty one thousand
up to the five or six million
dollar cap as that cap increases
to twenty twenty six at that
point in time hospitals and
outpatient facilities will be
required to exit the patient
compensation fund I will not
have that option at all anymore
the second way that you can get
insurance is by going on to the
private market and trying to get
a one million dollar policy for
each occurrence capped at three
occurrences a year that
insurance would leave the
independent outpatient
facilities under insured because
the market has now been set for
the cap for damages for these
individual facilities to be the
five or six million dollars so
physicians have to try to get
reinsurance which is unavailable
to them because the market does
not have insurance for these
types of facilities because they
are not hospitals up to those
higher rates so that is why the
physicians feel like they would
be under insured and that option
is not available to them thank
you thank you madam chair and
members of one last question so
what are other states doing at
the.
It's time that that have caps
because the private insurance
doesn't have any caps correct
the madam chair members the
committee it's really hard to
compare different states because
it really is apples to oranges
when it comes to a multitude of
different factors the first
thing is there has been
significant tort reform and a
number of states that has
increased the bar that you have
to meet in order to file a
malpractice case at full which
actually lessens the the burden
and the liability for physicians
and independent outpatient
facilities there are a number of
states that have patient
compensation funds a similar way
to get affordable insurance we
provided you with the rates for
some of those states on the
chart in your packet they're
also states that have different
kinds of caps the state of
California for example has a has
a cap for non economic damages
at three hundred and fifty
thousand I'm so sorry I'm just
talking I just asked me about
the state sorry madam chair
representative the states that
have caps above four million for
hospitals what how are the how
are the
medical groups or clinics
getting insurance what insurance
companies are they using madam
chair and members the committee
and Representative Kate.
I would say first and foremost
hospital insurers are different
insurers than insurers to ensure
independent outpatient
facilities it is a different
line of business so you can't
compare insurance companies that
insure hospitals to insurance
companies that insure outpatient
facilities owned by independent
physicians the second thing that
I would say is I believe that
New Mexico now has the highest
cap in the country for hospitals
there are hospitals that are
struggling to secure insurance
on there were a number of them
that came forward in the fall
but we do not represent the
hospitals that would be most
appropriate for you to ask the
hospitals directly because we
know the market as it exists for
the independent physicians and
their outpatient facilities so
sorry madam chair representative
so here's a has no caps and
private most private insurance
has no caps.
so I would I would respectfully
say no caps are higher than what
you're claiming to be New Mexico
being the highest at.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Representative
Kate Arizona is one of those
states that has had significant
tort reform to increase the
standard in which you must need
to file a malpractice case at
all there let their environment
litigation environment is
drastically different The New
Mexico's and their juries are
very different The New Mexico so
it is true that they do not have
a cap but the judgments that are
made in the state of Arizona are
often lower and there are far
fewer malpractice cases that are
filed at all due to tort reform
that has happened in that state.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative so I like to
think you I know that it was a
big of a logistic got to be able
to gather all these individuals
for testimony on short notice
I'm sorry that the insurance
companies didn't feel like it
was enough notice thank you
Representative you've heard.
Thank you madam chair and and
madam and.
This is
so Madam chair and to our expert
witness one of the things that I
don't understand and I'm asking
for your clarification yes with
respect to the patient
compensation plan now there is a
cap of I I just a correctly
seven hundred fifty thousand is
that correct madam chair
representative I mean expert
witness madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Herndon for independent
providers there is currently a
cap of seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that increases
with the CPI every year so
actually starting January fund
of twenty twenty three the
independent provider cap is that
eight hundred and three thousand
dollars then there is a to hear
reprieve for independent
physician owned and controlled
outpatient facilities or for
calendar year twenty twenty two
and calendar year twenty twenty
three they're going to be under
the independent provider cap in
twenty twenty four they will
switch to the hospital cap with
hospital owned outpatient
facilities the hospital cap
currently is four point five
million in twenty twenty four it
goes to five million in twenty
twenty five it goes to five
point five million and in twenty
twenty six it goes to six
million dollars within the CPI
so thank you very much madam
chair of expert what I'm not
understanding and I'm asking for
clarification on right now based
upon the caps that are currently
in place in the patient
compensation plan not in the
private if I if I drive Madam
chair representative gets food
and the amount of the liability
is in excess of the end of the
of the insurance then the
physician themselves would be
liable for the additional amount
maybe their own personal amounts
but.
You would not do that anyway I
mean how you would want to have
more insurance if you think
there is is there is there is
that if there is a greater
liability so I what I don't know
it was not clear to me and clear
to this a group is if there is
under the current pension
compensation plan and you wanted
more insurance how many doctors
and that patient compensation
plan will be on the cap anyway
because they want the protection
madam chair members of the
committee madam chair members
the committee in Representative
Herndon if you are insured
through the patient compensation
fund the monetary limit of seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars as an independent
provider is the most that will
be paid out for monetary for
economic and non economic
damages there is then a
requirement that the patient
compensation fund to pay for
lifetime medical expenses in
addition to that seven hundred
and fifty thousand dollars but
when you secure your insurance
through the patient compensation
fund there is no risk that you
ever have to pay out more than
the seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollar cap so there is
no need for you to have
additional insurance on top of
what you have secured through
the patient compensation fund
that is the functionality of the
cap in the medical malpractice
act.
Thank you of madam chair and
Medical Center then.
Can you tell me can you tell us
how many.
X. are currently in New Mexico.
Madam chair members of the
committee we actually asked the
department of health to pull all
of the licenses for outpatient
facilities there are over four
hundred currently in the state
of New Mexico an outpatient
facility licenses abroad license
that includes ambulatory
surgical centers dialysis
centers treatment facilities so
that four hundred is the total
less outpatient facilities that
exist in the state many of them
are affiliated with a hospital
many of them are FQHCs meaning
that they are under the federal
tort claims act there are a lot
of pain of those four hundred
outpatient facilities that are
currently insured under the
patient compensation fund which
are the eleven that are
immediately impacted by house
bill eighty eight with then
additional independent physician
owned and controlled outpatient
facilities wanting to come on
line as Dr dapper and Dr Kamar
have testified to who are
currently insured for their
independent providers under the
PCS have tried to get insurance
for a future outpatient facility
under the PC act and have been
unable to and have their force
stopped expansion of care by not
opening an outpatient facility
due to the unavailability of
Insurance madam chair thank you
very much madam chair and an
expert witness for that but if I
hear what you're saying Senator
four hundred of these clinics
within the state of New Mexico
Madam chair representative of
expert there are eleven that our
current in the plan you and but
they are the thought that there
are some that are associated
with hospitals but it sounds
like there are hundreds that are
in the private insurance plans
able to get private insurance
plans outside of the station
compensation plan.
So but there are we heard to
Representative here to testify
in some of the people who
testified in support thereof
madam chair right experts don't
even practice in New Mexico so
help us understand if we have
hundreds outside we're getting
the private insurance it must be
available madam chair no I
didn't madam chair and members
of the committee and
representative of Herndon.
First all of the outpatient
facilities that are affiliated
with a hospital are in IHS
facility are a VA facility or R.
N. F. Q. H. C. that are on that
list and it is probably more
than just a handful have
insurance either through their
hospital or through the federal
government.
There are outpatient facilities
that currently exists that have
a million three million dollar
policy those policies were
secured prior to passage of
house bill seventy five.
Many of them had a nose policy
that was acquired in the
nineteen seventies which is an
evergreen policy that said so
long as you keep paying your
premium we will continue to
cover.
The reality is any outpatient
facility that is on the market
right now in the current
situation in the world after
house bill seventy five has
passed are you able to secure re
insurance on top of that million
three million dollar policy and
affordable price or at all and
they do not have news coverage
that would cover then from back
in whenever it is that they
secured that policy so it is
true that there are facilities
that half million three million
dollar policies but for any new
facility trying to go on that
market it is proven to be very.
Madam chair representative but
expert witness thank you for
your responses.
So I just I will just tell a
quick story I'm one of seven
kids we have six girls and one
boy twelve years ago my brother
had a heart attack and was
rushed to the hospital after the
surgery the surgeon came out and
said what we didn't know if we
had if he had insurance that we
put in a cheaper stamped.
And that was kind of concerning
at the point and we finally got
to see him I saw he had a mask
on the side of his head from
work he had been in a jam he
fell and hit his space on the
sink and its head on the floor
and the doctor I asked the
doctor what about is hedged I
was so worried about is hard
that I couldn't deal with this
head so all night long I sat
next to him and watched the
blood coming out.
And I kept asking the nurse what
about his head and she was
saying we're watching we're
watching it he died he died from
cardiac arrest and brain injury
so I know these things happen
and I think the patients have to
be protected with that I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair substitute motion to
table and take tabling motion
takes precedence so Monica go
ahead and call the roll.
Representative K..
Table.
But we just need we just need
that tape that the table emotion
takes precedence.
Representative tribe.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative how to me of.
Percentage out no Representative
Lord no to table with an
explanation Representative that
path yes.
Representative visits no.
Madam vice chair heard and yes
and madam chair time yes.
Seventy by seventy three it has
been table thank you my
committee chair I'm sorry to see
you guys go I tried thank you.
And just for the committee's
information I just found out
that I have been exposed to
comment so
So I think everybody has but I'm
gonna go get tested right now
I'll let you know.
