I do see Representative board.
Representative Matthews or.
Representative.
Well present thank you.
Representative.
Excuse Intel he couldn't join
us.
Adam vice chair.
Madam chair.
thank you Emily and I think
since we have our first on a
presenter we're gonna go ahead
and jump in on H. B. sixteen now
welcome representative Garcia go
ahead and print did you have a
an expert out that we need to
let in.
Yes
up in the morning Darlene and we
went to the as the the almost
all the committee if the
secretary could done ring in my
three experts and then you are
because I own a one LP hard
sock.
Terry went across.
And merry out Garcia Mary Ellen
is showing as and M. C. B. R. C.
on the attendee this.
Okay I believe they're all
committed to Penn.
Super duper.
you madam chair
house bill sixteen.
A all encompassing piece of
legislation first time ever in
the state legislature.
And madam chair house bill
sixteen.
makes an appropriation to the
crime victims reparation
commission.
To fund.
Law enforcement base.
Advocates.
For victims of gun violence.
Madam chair.
Why.
Do we want to create advocates
for victims of gun violence.
We are I'm just like division's.
Of our law enforcement agencies.
Madam chair committee simply
put.
To seek justice.
For the killing of our loved
ones.
And to directly connect the
surviving family to the ongoing
investigation.
Madam chair.
And we had a bit the map again.
When my god son Juan Carlos
Romero was killed on February
seventh twenty seventeen.
We might have captured the
culprit then.
And also avoided the collateral
damage of Juan Carlos is sister
Victoria Romero dying of cancer
in August of twenty twenty at
the age of thirty two years.
We have yet to find the killer
of Juan Carlos Romero.
Juan Carlos was working on a
masters in philosophy at UNM.
He had a bachelor's in economics
and a bachelor in arts.
The university.
And went in for a late dinner at
midnight at the front your
restaurant.
It was going to his apartment
around the corner.
One block east of the front tear
you turn on that street to go to
his apartment.
And he was shot in the stomach
as he was walking along the
sidewalk.
His iPhone was done in.
Is what was on.
Everything was on as percent.
Victoria.
This sister.
And my god daughter.
Are the only sons and daughters
were the only sons and daughters
Michael by New Mexico Monday.
Carlos and Patricia Romero.
Victoria stepped up to be the
contact person for a PED.
She started a go fund me.
Fund and work with a beating at
the very onset of the
investigation.
Essentially that was the only
contact.
That the family had with the
PED.
At the onset of the
investigation.
And
Also
There was some evidence in
regards to I suspect and the
girlfriend of a suspect that the
family was turning over to HPD.
And a lot of that.
when I noticed.
And
One of the suspects.
That the family was bringing
forth actually attacked my god
son at the front here three
months prior to his killing.
the stressful going ons with my
goddaughter Victoria with APD.
Then down to her coming down
with cancer at six months after
the killing my god son.
And eventually she succumbed
that cancer on August twenty
twenty at the age of thirty two
leaving the five year old son
mother less.
And today the culprit that
killed one Carlos essentially
took two lives.
Madam chair things are different
now in any PED no instigation
Division the homicide division
thanks America our and the new
leadership of the C. I. D..
Dennis the foil commander deputy
commander col hi soch and as of
August of twenty twenty one the
first victim advocate of gun
violence was brought on board.
With the homicide division Terry
what best sometime the W. army
former.
Madam chair.
And we had a victim advocate get
in the violence a county sheriff
department one sixteen year old
NSL or going yes what shot in
the head by what one individual
and simple tenuously ran over by
another individual in August of
twenty eighteen.
While they were enjoying with a
group of twelve students
enjoying hot summer afternoon
and the boys get their better
land.
And we had a victim advocate
then for her.
The admitted shooter in the
eminent admitted driver might be
serving long sentences today.
As of today.
No charges have been filed in
that case of that precocious
child sixteen years old if that
student.
And then this guy elementary
Jimmy Carter middle school
fiscal heritage high school she
came to the US at three years of
age and turned out to be an
incredible person.
And she would have become an
outstanding leader of the Latino
immigrant community in our
community.
Madam chair.
I would like to go on some
outstanding expert witnesses at
this point.
In this order deputy commander
Kyle Hartzog.
Carry with us and Mary Ellen
Garcia and I yield to them madam
chair.
Go to the go ahead.
I'm I committee I appreciate you
guys hearing from us today my
name is Kyle Hartzog and the
deputy commander of our criminal
investigations division that's
basically were all the well most
of the taxes of Albuquerque
police department work out of so
homicide unit crimes against
children missing persons
I come from the early County
sheriff's office and working at
the DA's office for three years
and I come from doing a type of
investigation I really
successful call pictum Center
investigations and what I found
in doing human trafficking cases
is instead of focusing on the
behavior of the bad guy focused
on what actions can we take an
investigation to make the victim
as whole as possible by the end
of this thing realizing we can
never make them for you all
again right once these crimes
happen to us there are to
rebuild completely backed when I
started conducting homicide
investigations and now as a P.
hired me to help shape our
current homicide investigations
I never gave up that tax.
In hiring of Terry right this by
the chief of police Jim R.
Keller and I work together very
closely to make sure that the
families of our homicide victims
have a voice in everything that
is going on that we can create a
transparent communication
process so that the second they
lose their loved one they
realize they have near instant
access to the homicide unit in
the investigation well we can
always share all the details of
an ongoing case we always had to
be hyper responsive to their
needs their phone calls their
requests for visits and better
than that we have to act as
their guide through this very
uncertain stage of their lives
and a criminal justice system
that is designed to keep good
guys out of jail right not
designed to put bad guys in jail
we have had tremendous success
over the past four five months
we've been going to the victim
meetings with the groups that
get together introducing
ourselves offering that will
meet with them any time and
we've probably held close to I
mean probably three dozen
meetings in the past few months
with the families of homicide
victims inside the state units
they could come in and see and
they usually have some of the
most basic questions they also
share an appreciation for what
that detectives are having to do
but at the same time they feel
conflicted they don't want to
bother the detectives they don't
want to seem like that are
hindering the investigation but
a lot of times they don't
realize all the resources they
could have whether it's TV
Garcia whether it's all mais
grief counseling services are of
many of the other up avenues
they can take.
At the same time our police
officers while they are very
skilled in many many things.
Working with the grieving family
of a gun violence murder isn't
one of them it's just not if any
of them are good at it it's
because there are there are
probably just go to that anyway
right it wasn't necessarily from
this training program that
police departments have given
them so we're asking a lot for
them to also be these really
patient hand holders for the
families who rightfully deserve
a lot of questions to be
answered and there are calls to
be returned and information
about the investigation given
what we found in the model that
we started last July with hiring
to report this is that this this
model works we've given a
different Avenue for the victims
to come forward and talk to
police even though they don't
really have information about
the case but the they deserve to
to hear from us it frees up the
detective so they can focus more
on the investigative aspects of
the case these families feel now
inclusive as inclusive as they
want to be in the investigation
and then once investigation
turns into a prosecution what
sometimes is right away
sometimes it's months later
sometimes it's thirty three
years later in the case of Papa
doctor who's nineteen eighty
eight murders were trust salt
this past year.
The DA's office and has their
own advocates who now take the
reins so they already they
already had applicants right the
system is in place that works
that if someone's charged with
the crime advocates are set up
at the DA's office the PED in
every police department around
the state homicide cases don't
get closed they never close yet
these families need just as much
help and guidance and that
investigative portion of this
whole road as they do in the
criminal court process of it I
see some hands are raised on a
Q. monologue Here I'm I'm happy
to to answer any questions you
guys have.
Thank you Carl Madam chair of
ideal now to Terry worked us.
I'm just just to let folks know
we will take all the questions
at the end after everyone has
presented so I will I will get
your hands I'm I will know I
will call on you once we hear
from all the witnesses thank
you.
Go ahead very.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Terry where
fast and my position here at the
Albuquerque police department is
yes the company's on manager and
my decision about six months ago
and even though I've spent
almost my entire career serving
crime victims
at this stage of entering the
criminal justice system.
The needs for crime victims are
quite different.
Victims are experiencing.
Immense trauma of just being in
this experience of losing a
loved one in such a tragic
manner and so we spent a long
time just for a lot of time just
like deputy commander mentioned
listening to survivors of
homicide and what needs the bill
are important as as this
occurred in their lives so
navigating through the criminal
justice system entry into the
criminal justice system they
have lots of questions about
their loved one we can direct
them to in my in answer general
questions about just the early
stages the first days after
someone they love has been
murdered.
We can also assist them
in.
Find for crime victims
reparation funding and if their
application is accepted then
there's funds available to help
them perhaps pay for funeral
expenses crime scene cleanup
ongoing
grief counseling those kinds of
services sometimes in a unique
situation there might need some
sort of emergency funding and we
can navigate through crime
victims reparations to see if
that's available I'm just things
are proceeding through the
system like if the vehicle is
towed to the Albuquerque police
department and moved to a towing
company we can contact them so
they have an understanding of
where personal possessions are
and how they can retrieve.
Personal switch is very very
important for families and then
like deputy commander said.
If the case then moves to the
district attorney's office we
can do that warm hand off to the
district attorney's office I am
always supporting the DA's
office I giving them contact
information and also helping
them understand some of the
dynamics of that particular
family I've been working with
who needs to be notified and
those types of things.
Our taking it to the next level
and working with a law
enforcement agency the police
department.
Many times I'm requested to be
with families during a crisis
for instance The Washington
school middle school shooting
that occurred
I was sent to be at the hospital
with the family.
So that they could be.
That somebody would just be with
that representing the police
department and that if they
needed information I could try
to make that happen and then
introduce them to their
detective
also.
There was another.
Road rage incident where a young
child witnessed his father being
shot so I was called out and I
stayed with that child until the
child was in the safe and placed
in the state our place but I was
actually that child at the scene
for many hours until that
occurred
and then the long term it is and
another example for that child
is making sure that she got
resources for counseling and
trauma for his experience at
such a young age.
So
Definitely the needs at this
level are so much different than
other
other times during the criminal
justice system so I believe this
is something that definitely
should be supported.
Thank you Terry madam chair
you'll not to Mary Ellen Garcia.
Good morning thank you
representative Garcia madam
chair members of the committee
thank you so much for allowing
me a few moments to speak my
name is Mary Ellen Garcia and I
am the grants bureau chief at
The New Mexico crime victims
reparation commission many of
you know our office very that
very intimately our office is
the agency if you're a victim of
a violent crime we assist with
expenses related to that
determination in addition we're
one of just a handful of
organizations around the country
that has victim compensation
house with their victims of
crime act and violence against
women act grant funding so we
administer both state and
federal funds to survivor
programs across that the state
this is an initiative that when
representative Garcia that with
our office is very near and dear
to my heart I have been doing
survivor advocacy and victim
services work for twenty two
years starting at the law
enforcement based victim
advocate and recognizing the
need for advocacy at the moment
of crisis for survivors of crime
particularly survivors of
violent crime such as gun crimes
and other violent crimes we know
that the time and space between
when you call nine one one and
your your loved one is injured
or murdered when there is gun
violence in our communities we
know that we rank fourth in the
nation our state is fourth in
the nation as the most violent
gun crimes State the City of
Albuquerque ranks between second
and fourth in the nation for per
capita gun violence our office
alone over the last four years
has paid four point six seven
million dollars in funeral
expenses alone related to gun
violence and the last five years
homicides and funeral expenses
have been the most
the the highest paid expensive
all the expenses that we support
we support six different law
enforcement agencies currently
at.
Ross the state to do this very
work in two thousand sixteen our
office under the leadership of
our director Frank Zubia and I
have known that this is an
incredibly important initiative
to see victim advocates and law
enforcement agencies be able to
work with families because the
time and space in between and
the trauma involved often by the
time they get to our office or
get to a district attorney's
office two three five months
later thirty three years later
there's an immense amount of
trauma that's not been dealt
with within families this would
allow victim advocates within
law enforcement agencies to
connect to existing resources
that we already fund survivors
of homicide groups grief
services groups the expansion of
all of my grief services across
the state to have a network of
counseling services that didn't
exist before so our office is
uniquely
Pose to be able to one solicit
these funds that we've been
establishing relationships with
law enforcement agencies across
the state in two thousand
sixteen when we help the
department of public safety
begin their victim advocacy
program we set no not not you
can't put it in the biggest your
sections we need to put in the
jurisdictions that have the
least amount of resources and
some of the highest violent
crimes in our state so Espanola
last Vegas Albuquerque those
communities have some of our
first DPS victim advocates
currently we only have three of
the all of the jurisdictions
with the department of public
safety the ability for our
office to have five million
dollars allocating about two
point five for year one and then
for year two and to demonstrate
to you as are legislature that
this is something that needs to
be part would allow us to put
about twenty to twenty five
positions across the state
that would support violent crime
gun violence based crime within
our within our communities
helping communities decrease the
impact of trauma we know that
folks who were involved in gun
crimes if they don't deal with
the trauma that's experienced by
their families
They have to get that trauma out
somewhere and if they don't have
the resources necessary often we
see increased crimes people who
take you know also began a life
of violence themselves and so
what we want to do is really the
that first response we know that
there's an immense amount of
body of research saying that if
you have somebody at the onset
to help you navigate the
criminal justice system process
you engage in a better which is
why the violence against women
act in itself was written right
to engage in communities and
have those first responders so
this is an initiative I could
talk for a very long time madam
chair and members of the
committee I think that this is
based upon the research our
office is done under my
leadership and director CBS
leadership over the last ten
years we know that this comes up
with our service providers and
survivors as the one of the
largest gaps that time its base
between engaging a law
enforcement and getting
activated in the criminal
justice system process and so
madam chair members of the
committee it's a privilege and
an honor for our office to be
selected to do this we think
that we have the infrastructure
ready to hit the ground running
we've developed relationships
with law enforcement entities
across the state to really were
already getting phone calls
saying Hey when is the
solicitation to come out and
we're like hold on we got to get
the money first so let's you
know let's support you know you
know let's let the legislature
know that this is something that
our law enforcement communities
are actively seeking and so
madam chair members the
committee Representative Garcia
thank you for your vision and
this and we're we're excited to
be part of this thank you Mary
Ellen and with that manager was
them progressions.
Okay what I'm gonna have to
remember how we do this all on
zoom again but thank you for
your presentation and I so far I
have representative Armstrong
Representative Lord
Representative Anderson and
Representative bash.
I'm I we we are gonna open it up
now for public comment so
participants
If you are in favor in favor of
I hope I'm doing this right it
seems like so long ago we did
this and I think I'm if you are
in favor of this bill please
raise your hand.
On the screen.
Okay.
Okay so we have seven if you
would like to give public
comment
Family I I'll start at the top
although money may be different
than yours so Patsy Romero.
Madam chair just to let you know
there's also people here in the
audience and I'm not sure if
they want.
Okay we will we will take those
ones first and then if there's
there there are people in the
committee room who will take we
will take the ones I don't know
who's where but we'll start with
well now it's moved to get.
Romero.
Your muted.
You can you hear me yes now we
can't thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Patsy Romero I am the co
chair for the National Alliance
on mental illness
as for the legislative committee
and we stand in support at this
legislation I think it's
critical that the advocates are
there to help victims of crime
and we appreciate
the
Representative for bringing this
to the committee thank you.
Thank you next we have Charles
good Amaker.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak to you
today on this bill I am Charles
good marker and I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of the New
Mexico Public Health Association
which is a membership
organization of five hundred New
Mexico individuals and
organizations committed to the
values of social justice equity
inclusion collaboration and
seeking the common good.
The mission of the public health
of public health generally of
course is to fulfill society's
interest ensuring conditions in
which people can be healthy.
Victims of crimes often need
help recovering sometimes
physically almost always mostly
and so this is definitely a
public health issue.
Affluent New Mexicans can for
the personal access to quality
counselors health providers and
others who can help a victim
recover lowincome New Mexicans
usually cannot afford to get the
help that they need health
equity is the term used to
describe equal access for all
people to those necessary
resources conditions by making
crime victim services more
widely available this bill helps
achieve greater public health
act health equity.
It makes services more available
to a wider spectrum of New
Mexicans both geographically and
by level of income we therefore
urge your yes vote on this bill
thank you.
Thank you Maranda fiscally.
Hi my name's Mandy was fully M.
co president of New Mexicans to
prevent gun violence we stand in
strong support of HB sixteen and
think Representative Miguel
Garcia for bringing forth this
is very important piece of
legislation I actually helped
the family of a nest or den yes
I still do for the past four
years there was absolutely no
justice for this family there
was no therapy there were she
almost lost her business because
of the grief I sat with her many
times.
In the graveyard where her
daughter is buried we finally
are hoping to get her justice
because.
Representative Garcia and I work
together to have Attorney
General Hector Balderas office
this is so important there are
so many of these cases and I
really and truly grateful that
representative Garcia has move
this forward thank you very
much.
Thank you know is there anyone
in the committee hearing room
who wants to speak in favor.
Okay I'm gonna take that silence
as no I'm is there anyone on the
line who would like to speak in
opposition if so please raise
your hand.
Okay I'm not seeing any hands
anyone in the in the committee
room want to speak in
opposition.
Okay.
Thank you Representative lord so
we'll go to the committee
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for the presentation I
have a few questions
what is the difference between
this entity and the and a
victims advocate.
And representative I can answer
that I'm sure I yield to our
W. then a hard song or the other
experts who are address.
Yes my form is improper she's so
freedom you up and then put in
my place
So I mean there there really is
that much of a difference but
it's in the way in which we use
all
victim advocates the criminal
justice system I worked three
years at the DA's office as well
so I got to really see this in
action the they don't usually
kick in by any kind of statutory
language until someone's been
charged with the list of
enumerated crimes right where it
requires usually the
prosecutor's office to provide
an advocate to the family to it
let notify them of court dates
provide in person services
during a trial or motion
hearings that kind of emotional
support and that is absolutely
it's incredibly necessary and
beneficial and has a really
strong impact on those families
during the cases what I have
found out minority to do though
in being second in command over
the homicide unit is that there
is a large gap right in twenty
twenty one our department has
only so far charged about thirty
thirty five percent of our
homicide cases that's a hundred
and fifteen cases last year
thirty five percent of the been
charge that means you know I'm
I'm doing the quick math seventy
or eighty other families have
gotten no advocacy outside of
the program that we started in
July that really only kicked
into gear in the late fall and
is now now running a little bit
more smooth although it's it's
severely under staffed because
the more families that start to
realize they have this access
the the wanted the really reach
out and they wanted so there
isn't really a big difference
but we're trying to get the same
services now in the
investigative state without any
kind of court mandates for
statutory mandates that we have
to do it we just know that we
need to do it for these
families.
Okay so thank you madam chair
and thank you Sir so there's no
difference really except that
what what you're trying to do
with this bill is have it going
to affect before the person is
charged where the other entity
are just the crime that see the
victims advocate doesn't kick in
until a person is charged is
that what I'm hearing in
layman's terms the base.
In some cases we make an arrest
right away and the advocate at
the DA's office is basically
going to fully handle all the
contact the family but that's
pretty rare that we're making
immediate arrest on homicide
cases work on violence cases in
the nature of the investigations
so this is going to cover that
gap in between.
So but that's not madam chair
Sir this it that language is not
in this bill.
The only language in this bill
is that that for those of
funding and the specific entity
it's going to but there's not
that language in the bill that
kicks in as soon as there's a
victim.
Madam chair this legislation is
exclusively to create victim
advocates with the law
enforcement agencies.
where there spectrums of gun
violence so it's spelled out in
the bill this bill is
exclusively for that purpose.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative but what I'm
saying is I understand that it's
for that purpose but it doesn't
state in the bill that it kicks
in as soon as there's a victim
not a charge and so I wonder
where that's going to be
addressed is that when you
create this entity I see miss
merry Alan Garcia raising her
hand would you like to answer
please hi yes madam chair
members the committee
representative Armstrong so the
way in which the the
solicitation when the
solicitation of that'll be very
clear that it's specific a
prolonged workforce based victim
assistance there's a terminology
madam chair members of the
committee and I can get into the
weeds about this but the way in
which you look at the time
advocate verses the victim
assistant victim advocates are
nonprofit entities that support
advocacy that's protected under
confidentiality provisions and
and works with the counseling
and all of the nonprofit
survivor services that assist
victim assistance are and so
that the terms get used
interchange eight
interchangeably we talk about
order protection or a
restraining order they get used
interchangeably but technically
any governmental entity is a
victim assistance in the state
of New Mexico we have not
established the victim
assistance piece at the law
enforcement based advocacy in
the extent that would like to
meaning that we only have six
departments across the state
that have them what this would
do is in that solicitation it
would establish those victim
assistance and assist victims of
violent crime and gun crime at
the scene of the crime and or
with the detectives so that
would be outlined within the
scope of work
then the statutory in
individuals that impact the
district attorneys that's what
the district attorney victim
assistance victim advocates
COVID when their statutorily
required to support victims of
crime
Based upon the victims of right
victims rights act so that's
where that's going to happen
what we've seen for example is
we have a law enforcement based
victim advocate in Los Alamos
that relationship between the
first additional district
attorney and that victim
advocate has streamlined the
process from the moment of law
enforcement activity until it
gets it to the courts so that
those two entities now have an
MO you develop right which is
what we would leverage to help
other agencies across the state
streamline those processes so
that survivors and their
families have that continuum of
care from the moment of nine one
one until the process is
adjudicated so this what kind of
set up those victim assistance
with law enforcement then we
have the victim assistance of
the district attorney's office
and then we have our corrections
department right we have friends
in Garcia and the department of
corrections in their hold it to
automatic you see that helps in
that continuum of the entire
criminal justice system process
I was probably a little more
than you were asking
representative Armstrong but I
hope that that clarifies that a
little bit thank you very thank
you thank you so much and thank
you Representative so my my
victim advocate is her her
actual definition is a victim
advocate witness assistant with
the seventh judicial district
attorney's office and so that's
something that's important to
through the district attorney's
office when the person is
charged and the cases brought
forward and so what you're
wanting to do is something
specifically exactly like you
said full circle coming through
from the minute the nine one one
calls all the way through
corrections okay okay I I think
thank you for that and then are
one of the other questions I
have is what are the locations
across the state you said I
heard at one time three agencies
and then I heard three six so
how many different locations are
you in across the state of New
Mexico and what locations are
they.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong we have to City of
Albuquerque police department we
have the city of Farmington
Police Department we have the
city of Las Cruces police
department city of Rio Rancho
police department Los Alamos
police department and
The department of public safety
a state police so those are the
six entities when I said three
we have three counties three
jurisdictions within the
department of public safety
supported in that one program
and project.
Thank you so much madam chair
and
So this money would be to expand
not across
because you know of course I'm
sure everyone knows I say it all
the time that I represent rural
and frontier New Mexico and what
happens in small town USA where
we we do have a violent crime
but at the same time we don't
have access to a lot of these
behavioral health it our
initiatives that are moving
forward so how is that going to
help someone in reserves New
Mexico.
Madam chair.
This funding is going to.
Kind of
Have an equal opportunity class
so to speak.
And it's up to the law
enforcement agency.
To kind of make a solicitation.
The criminal reparations
commission or funding for the at
advocate.
And seen at the merry Allen's
group you know has been a fair
kind of entity in terms of the
disbursement of prior funds for
law enforcement we feel that
that practice will continue to
apply with this program to where
the rural communities are not
left out.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Garcia I
appreciate that because you know
if we're gonna do this we we all
need to remember that this fact
when we make laws and we make
all this craziness that happens
at this Sir silly roundhouse
that we keep in mind all
entities all.
People across the state of New
Mexico and how does that affect
us in every community that we
live work and play so I
appreciate those answers so much
and what I have one last
question madam chair and how do
you qualify for some of this
funding state for our funeral
expenses and things like that is
there a process is that well
advertised will this advocate
help in that process.
Yes thank you representative
Garcia Madam chair
representative Armstrong so the
way in which we operate under
the victim compensation it's an
eligibility process so if you're
a victim of our eighteen and
numerate crimes eighteen violent
crimes
you're you'll or your family
member can apply for victim
compensation as a result of that
and it statutory madam chair
members of the committee we we
do we do a lot to get ourselves
out there to we make sure that
all the district attorney's
offices we go visit them either
virtually the last couple years
or in person every program and
project we Fund it is in their
contracts their award recipient
that they have to inform educate
and assist survivors of all
violent crimes with the
application process for victim
compensation when we expanded
our funding I know we're talking
about law enforcement this is a
great example we now funded most
of our child advocacy centers
and our casa programs are cost
of programs are almost at one
hundred percent application
process for every child that
goes to their costs at through
their costs and so we do a lot
of work to train and educate any
program or project so any law
enforcement agency that would
receive funding under this
initiative and which we
administer administered through
our strategic plan which focuses
on rural frontier communities
getting priority consideration
we would ensure that they have
to go to a victim compensation
training we would go out to
those agencies top with law
enforcement so this would be and
bility for us to even further
expand that that process of
informing educating because if
you're a victim of a violent
crime under the eligibility
determination which for the
first in the nation that expand
that to reporting not just to
law enforcement but also to
medical license medical mental
health and tribal professionals
so we have a very survivor
centered approach.
This would expand our ability to
increase access to applying for
those eligible funds and so
that's how we support that
Representative Armstrong members
of the committee on.
Thank you very much madam chair
I'm done.
I just want to remind the
committee that we have for more
bills that we have six more
people with questions on this so
if we can please keep our
questions and answers and brief
as we can because we don't want
to fall behind on the first day
so I will go to Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair and I
think I have to move because I'm
next to the computer some the
move further down on this table.
So the question that I have on
this because I'm reading the
bill it says victims of gun
violence and violent crime and I
looked up what the definition of
violent crime is and for the
FBI.
That is on and moving I'm
talking to you.
One second.
So that is murder rape robbery
aggravated assault.
All violent crimes point F. bear
those involve force or even the
threat of force is would that be
the correct definition madam
chair.
Kyle can you maybe address.
Yes that that would be the
correct definition in in real
real terms inside out after two
previous apartment homicide
cases just gun violence
incidents where someone doesn't
lose our life but they're shot
armed robberies or aggravated
assaults meaning someone pointed
a gun at someone else those
would really be the four big
categories we would use these
rules for we already have
advocates on sexual assault side
of things sensually so these
ones would be really on on gun
violence.
Okay then check can you please
define a crime we're going to be
gone would be used.
The violent crime.
Can you respond to that.
Yes so again so every minute
assaults somebody brandishing a
firearm and pointed it at
another individual kind of an
angry rude are are threatening
manner but they don't
necessarily pull the trigger are
they do pull the trigger of the
bill it doesn't strike then we
have actual injury shooting so
somebody fires a gun another
person and it's something they
don't lose their life armed
robberies which is kind of a
little bit of a mix so the
taking of something from another
by threat or use of force which
makes about a high amount of our
I'm aside cases last year and
then actual homicide case no one
just begun violence homicide
cases I can tell you Terry works
with all of the homicide
families whether to DB
strangulation case turns into a
homicide or a gun shooting she's
she's going to work with indeed
no matter how they passed away
eight she's gonna be made
available for thank you.
Thank you madam chair so my
question is so an armed robbery
if somebody used a knife and
they had a knife in the when
Adam so that this wouldn't apply
to them because it's not gun
violence.
In in practical terms know that
they would are still get some of
the same access to the advocate
that any of our other armed
robbery offenders are victims
might might need right now we
give no advocacy towards armed
robbery victims at all they get
I mean to get absolutely zero
but we would we put him in the
same category third victim of a
weapon that was used to threaten
them whether it was a knife or a
bomb doesn't matter they're
gonna have that same level of
trauma that we want to help.
I'm sure so why don't we just
call this the violent crime
activated robbery for all
victims instead of stating.
A lot of peace of.
Masters want my lungs.
Okay I'm not gonna die so what
we just call this the violent
crime armed robbery bill instead
of saying oh well if your victim
of gun violence that takes
precedence over somebody those
suicide rate with a knife as
opposed to gun why did we do
this.
Madam chair
The bill is all inclusive as
deputy commander stated.
And and gun violence naturally
is a very hot topic with online
Forsman agencies.
And we feel that the way that
the bill reads is this correctly
worded in terms of the focus the
intent and the scope of the
legislation.
I'm thank you Representative
thank you madam chair I would
kindly to disagree with that
because the problem with this is
there is no such thing as gun
violence there is violence that
is done to people being a
survivor of violence myself with
some of the knife I find this.
Extremely disturbing that we're
gonna just say gun violence
takes precedence or gun violence
there is no such thing as gun
bonds are you gonna call right
genital violence are you gonna
call somebody who is a tactic I
was.
It was minimized it was a nice
violence no violence is violence
if this just said why would
current I'd be a hundred percent
on board with you but the fact
that you're so I keep
suffocating this mask.
The fact that you're using.
Gun violence is kind of
ridiculous because I I think of
victims like Victoria martens I
mean she was murdered it was
horrific it was a gun used.
There are tons of people there
right.
There are tons of people that
have armed robbery there are a
bunch of people are salted and
no gun was use so there's no way
I'm gonna be on board with this
and that's unfortunate because
having had a Stockert here in
the state of New Mexico and
having used to advocate it was
very beneficial there was no gun
used so for this bill if you
really want this bill to be
super effective I would just
call that violent crime and
armed robbery because it doesn't
matter how you right.
It doesn't matter how you
murdered.
Is is that you are suffering
afterwards and you need help to
me this is comes off as a
political thing gun violence
again there is no such thing as
gun violence then you would have
to say right bein nice Mylan's
you say type of violence
baseball bat violence there is
no such thing violence is
violence so take the non
violence out of this wording I'm
totally on board with that the
way it is it just comes off as a
political fiasco just trying to
blame guns instead of helping
people there survivors of
violence on all levels.
So what that's basically have to
say about that thank you I yield
my time.
Representative Garcia this is
essentially an appropriations
bill budget definitions and and
all of that are are located
elsewhere in statute is that
correct.
Madam chair us correct and
you know and and it's exclusive
in terms of the contract that
the crime the crime reparations
commission signs with the local
law enforcement agencies in
terms of spelling out the
specifics of how these advocates
are utilized in for the crimes.
And I'd like to remind the
committee to keep that in mind
that this is this is centrally
is an appropriations bill to an
already existing program so if
we can kind of staying on that
part of it because we are where
we still have four bills to go
through what I have
Representative Anderson bash
boom.
Home.
I'll get it one of the
ari and then but at at so go
ahead Representative Anderson
madam chairman my questions been
answered thank you Senator
Representative bass.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative Garcia for
bringing this bill
my question I think is is rather
short I was surprised to hear
that families are responsible
for
crime scene cleanup and is that
the case no matter where the
crime takes place whether it's
on the street or in another
public setting or in the home.
How does that work.
Can you answer that please.
Representative Garcia madam
chair representative past crime
scene cleanup is one of the most
expensive things outside of that
individual cost it's quite quite
expensive and most often in a
homeowner's insurance rental
insurance does not support those
fees so I'm I can't speak to
that occurs in a public place
history and knowledge let me
know if it's in a public place
like a park for that and the
community the county wherever
that typically is responsible
for kind of cleaning that up as
as a public service but if it's
in in an individual's home
whether that's rented or owned
it's their responsibility and so
often times that is supported
through our victim compensation
claims and we do our emergency
processes for that.
Thank you and thank you madam
chair that was my question.
Thank you Representative Bunka.
Thank you madam chair good
morning everyone thank you Rep
grace yes for being this for and
for all legislative assistance
morning and may and then it's
good to see you as well a no and
we've done a lot of work
together in the past with Asian
families and I've seen first
hand what CPAC and the defined
requests that UN minister I see
the impact on communities and
how and families have really and
supported to these these
different processes at my
question was around the
the folks who would be working
as assistants under law
enforcement and how they would
network and navigate with those
on that I think it's a nonprofit
and I I know having worked with
said she done case management
with and families who have
experienced crime it's needed
and central service and
non profits the the help to
connect communities and
especially those who maybe
We need additional services such
as being different languages are
different cultures are what what
what have you and I just wonder
how they connect with the
assistance on our law
enforcement so that there is
really a comprehensive network
of support.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam was that a question
because of Terry could probably
address that.
Be happy to madam chair members
of the committee Representative
definitely we would work with
other advocates that are
supporting the family and the
family is is has a relationship
with the nonprofit and is dean
resources through our department
to prescribe that we definitely
work with that so that's already
occurred a few times it's a
great collaborative to make sure
that families are getting all
the resources that they need and
also to I can also referred that
some families for some of.
Some of the stripper to have up
your support and a lot of the
long process for those types of
of service so Mabel to identify
and based on location around the
state I can refer a family to a
local or even virtual support
through non stop profits that
are doing really good work.
Thank you Terry yes.
Thank you madam chair that's all
I have.
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Garcia for
bringing this bill forward and
it's so nice to see
Mary Ellen and also at ad agency
where yes hi Terry we worked
many years together with mad and
I'm glad to see that you're
continuing to have that done
support you know
in your.
In your work I think this is a
great program and I think it's
really important that supporting
victims of through the trauma
and the court system really
helps them to cooperate with
enforcement and achieve the
justice they deserve and the
more cases that are solved and
brought to court and justice I
think the better we can reduce
crime and I think this is
something that is
Part of the whole crime
reduction and that we need to
keep that in mind that
supporting victims and for them
to get the justice that they
deserve for their loved ones are
for themselves is really
important in this whole concern
for reducing crime in our state
so I just went thank you again.
That's all madam chair.
Thank you by chair but I just.
Thank you madam chair also thank
you representative Garcia for
bringing this bill
in the year two thousand my my
uncle was killed and there was
no there was no advocacy that I
can remember at all and I
remember you know our whole
family just kind of watching my
aunt who was married to him just
kind of our mental health just
deteriorated and she ended up
committing suicide so I'm
thinking about this and how this
could have made a difference for
my family and I think it would
make a huge difference I just
want to make sure that this is
going to be an equitable
obtainable solution for like one
of the other representative
state representative said rural
at front here in New Mexico and
also our our tribal land so
that's my only my only concern
but I but I really appreciate it
a lot and thank you for your
your expert witnesses for being
on as well thank you.
Representative Garcia did you
have a response to that are.
No I think we address that the
okay Sir okay okay thank you I
will entertain a motion.
Yes okay.
In order third or fourth or
whatever okay so Representative
bash has a do pass and
Representative but it just is a
second Emily can you please take
the role.
Representative Anderson.
What.
Yes Representative Anderson.
Yes yes yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord.
With an explanation.
Right
now.
No we will go through and then
we'll come back after you know
I'm right Representative
Matthews.
Hello so it sounds.
Representative Montoya Sanders
with the speaker.
This is just.
Representative mobile.
I said yes thank you.
Representative first.
I believe he may have gotten
economy okay.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
And so Emily what's the vote
count we have eight and paper
and one opposed so we have a two
passed eight in favor and we
will go back to Representative
Lord for an explanation for her
vote thank you madam chair
actually I would have voted yes
on this bill if you would have
removed gun violence and put in
aggravated assault armed robbery
or if you would added all the
other words that are violence
like nice violence baseball bat
violence from our islands I
would be totally on board with
the bill the way that it's
written there's no way there
about four thank you your my
time.
Thank thank you representative
Garcia we will move on to your
next bill which is H. B.
seventeen expand rural health
practitioner tax credit I'm and
you have experts that we need to
promote to panelists
representative thank you madam
chair and it's a Gail Tinker.
And the Dr Richard Larson.
And I don't I don't think Karen
Whitaker is on there but if she
came on can would occur as well
if not we'll just go with the
prior to.
Built in current Richard Larson.
They're now promoted last thank
you Emily go ahead
Representative thank you madam
chair
House Bill seventeen.
R. as certain pharmacists
registered nurses social workers
behavioral counseling therapists
and physical therapists to the
rural health care practitioner
tax credit.
And madam chair this is the
seventh straight year.
I think during this legislation.
And the and two years ago it did
pass the house fifty four zero.
Maybe it over to the Senate but
it didn't get quite asked the
Senate finance.
And the the scope of the bill
madam chair is that currently we
have a two tier structure within
the tax credit we have a five
thousand dollar credit for these
health professionals positions I
still think that osteopathic
doctors dentists psychologists
and podiatrist.
Currently we have a three
thousand dollar credit or dental
hygienist physician assistant
certified nurse midwives provide
registered nurse and this this
is refiners practitioners and
certified nurse specialist.
Our bill does manager is that
we're adding.
Some some professions the
credit.
That being pharmacists.
Registered nurses for the first
time.
Think of social workers
independent social workers
professional mental health
counselors professional clinical
mental health counselors
marriage and family therapist
professional art therapists I'll
go on drug abuse counselors and
physical therapist.
All five percent the provisions
of this act.
And madam chair
This summer I sat down with
doctor Larson who's vice
chancellor of UNM health
sciences center and he's also
chairman of the New Mexico
workforce New Mexico health care
workforce committee.
One that thought that there were
some some individuals that have
called me these past seven years
saying that they were that they
were not in the credit they were
counselors.
So we went back and and Dr
Larson research with a
regulation licensing and found
that we were leaving out certain
counselors but this bill
includes them and also madam
chair
We're not in these professions
to that three thousand dollar
credit.
The real healthcare practitioner
tax credit act was established
in two thousand and seven.
And it was to reduce work force
shortages in the rural areas and
also to retain practitioners in
the rural areas.
And
and also the kind of enhance
economic development in these
rural communities for example
practitioners moving into these
rural communities I homes they
shop locally and that's the
form of economic development.
And why
pharmacist.
Social workers behavior health
counselors and therapists
physical therapist and
registered nurses.
mainly because this is where the
greater need by.
And our Madam chair of the New
Mexico health care workforce.
Committee.
Last seven annual reports has
recommended that.
that pharmacists social workers
behavior health council
therapist.
and physical therapist
the priority in terms of moving
on to the credit and madam chair
my legislation has always been
based on these recommendations
by the New Mexico health care
workforce committee and not
recommendations I think this.
Madam chair the medical
healthcare workforce committee
is a twenty four member board
comprised of really incredible
medical professionals medical
boards medical associations and
diverse community groups such as
the New double ACP The New
Mexico Hispanic medical society
and the US Indian Health
Service.
This committee
right makes analysis and and
stuff and statistics a licensed
health care professionals on a
yearly report in terms of
reducing work shortages
throughout our state.
And
Madam chair of the New Mexico.
Health care workforce committee
as you science to determine
where to best address of
practices shortages and
repayment in rural New Mexico in
a sense the them and us to
believe that the biggest bang
for our tax credit dollar lies
in expanding the role health
care practitioner tax credit act
to include pharmacists social
workers behavioral cancer
service this will therapist and
madam chair registered nurses
which I've added in which I'm
working with Dr Larson to
include in his next report
because registered nurses as we
know madam chair the nursing
industry is in crisis and
and there's this conflict in
terms of travelling nurses and
so it's appropriate that we
bring registered nurses on board
in terms of the credit and madam
chair The New Mexico health care
workforce has put together some
data in and we have the twenty
twenty report to reflect on that
but the the committee reports
that there's fifteen thousand
five hundred eighty eight
practicing our ends and C. N. C.
M. S. as that's certified nurse
specialist ninety percent of the
fifteen thousand are registered
nurses and twenty three percent
of those are in rural areas.
So this credit will apply to
three thousand two hundred
thirty nine our ends that would
be eligible for the credit also
in terms of the era how
providers
the the committee
report shows that there's ninety
four hundred of behavioral
health providers in our state
practicing twenty percent of
these practice in rural areas so
for behavioral health providers
we're looking at one thousand
six hundred seventy four that
will a qualified be eligible for
the credit also the report shows
that there seventeen hundred
pharmacist of these is a
practicing pharmacist twenty six
are in rural areas or present
four hundred forty pharmacist
also there's fifteen hundred.
Eighty seven as well therapist
statewide twenty five percent of
these are real communities that
building three hundred eighty
seven
a physical therapist so we have
former forty pharmacist
internecine and served as that
would be eligible for the credit
in total madam chair this bill
house bill seventeen
I would would allow five
thousand seven hundred forty
health care practitioners to
become eligible for the credit.
And madam chair I would like the
on how to
dealtaker
to kind of reflect on the
significance of the legislation.
Representative.
That thank you madam chair.
I hope everybody can hear me I'm
Dale G. Kerr executive director
of the New Mexico pharmacists
Association and
I want to state that it's.
This is been a long road with
this bill thank you
representative Garcia for your
determination and continued
efforts on behalf of this tax
credit in New Mexico
I don't remember when I first
advocated for including
pharmacists in the tax credit
shortly after I believe two
thousand seven we're our first.
Initiated.
I'm not successful at that time
and obviously still not
successful I'm still want to
pursue getting pharmacists
included in the tax credit.
pharmacist probably is one of
the few professions that doesn't
have a tremendous
Negative presence in the state
of New Mexico we're not.
At we have a health care
shortage of almost every
profession in New Mexico and
whether there isn't some water
shortage of pharmacists there
particularly in rural areas it
as Representative said about
twenty six percent of
pharmacists work in rural New
Mexico when that number should
be more.
I'm probably closer to half in
any case I'm.
The three thousand dollar tax
credit is not going to make or
break the pharmacist but it
might be just incentives to make
them move to a rural place in
New Mexico and so we do want to
support this legislative effort
and it just want to say that I
am a member of the health care
workforce along with Dr Larson
that group is a phenomenal.
It is a very mixed group very
broad based on very much
providing input into health care
workforce information and I do
want to expressed support for
that work group as well do a
great job and Dr Larson thank
you for your efforts and it out
when the other after the other
speak of the happy to stand for
questions thank you thank you
brother and madam chair I we I
want you all now to our Dr
Richard Larson questions for a
UNM health sciences center
richer go for it thank you very
much Representative and madam
chair all of my remarks will be
brief I have had the opportunity
to chair the New Mexico
workforce analysis committee
since its inception in two
thousand fourteen.
This was a committee that was at
that was formed by the
legislature and really has
allowed us to lead the nation in
our ability to track the work
force both in terms of its
supply and its demand throughout
the state of New Mexico we're
one of the few states that can
do that and so we should feel
very proud that we actually get
that data thank you make
decisions from it as a Dale
tanker mentioned we are short in
almost every health care
profession as a representative
mentioned there's a tax credit
that's been in place since two
tears there's a five thousand
dollar and a three thousand
dollar tax credit in our
analysis of that tax credit it
was obvious that there was a
number of health care providers
that were omitted we could never
figure out why I hope that this
will be the fifth year that the
workforce committee which is
tasked with bringing
recommendations such as to the
legislature for funding.
Has recommended that the tax
credit be expanded to these
groups that have not previously
been included the representative
summary of those groups was spot
on and is a desire to also add
RN's so I am here on behalf of
the committee and the
committee's recommendation and
we would be at as a whole very
supportive of trying to get the
tax credit expanded for the
health care professionals that
have not been included and it is
very worthwhile keeping people
in rural and sending them to
practice in rural New Mexico
where the shortages are the
worst.
Thank you doctor and I I you'll
lastly of madam chair to account
with lock Karen go for.
Your cell.
You would need.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee Karen my lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter thank
you representative Garcia for
continuing to bring take the
good fight of this bill and
in many rural counties in New
Mexico we have we have no social
workers social workers provide
access to a variety of a variety
of desperately needed rural
services from behavioral health
services disability services and
schools including access to the
services and many other
services.
This bill would provide one
piece of the package of needed
services to these committed to
these communities are I believe
that
Representative Garcia is
analysis was spot on and would
be glad to answer any other
questions you may have thank
you.
Thank you Karen madam chair I
with that we stand for
questions.
And not Representative Ferrary
thank you for reminding me about
the poll and family is so
talented you gotta pull together
for this so Emily if you could
put up a poll and that this is
for
non non representative so if you
are in the public please vote in
favor or against this bill.
We'll give you I'm.
A couple more seconds.
Okay it looks like eighteen out
of eighteen are in favor of this
whole so I now I will go to the
audience if you are here in
support and would like to speak
please raise your hands.
Okay then we will start with
the.
Linda.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Linda Spiegel
representing our various nursing
groups and as you all know there
is a huge shortage of nurses we
have about sixty six hundred
RN's that we're short in New
Mexico according to what the
workforce reporting and courting
to the workforce solutions
analysis and we have already
included advanced practice
nurses in this legislation so
we're really grateful to the
sponsor for expanding it to
include registered nurses we
need to do everything we can to
get registered nurses to
practice in our state one of the
initiatives we have is to expand
the schools of nursing so they
can educate more people but we
know that where people are
educated they usually stay
especially nurses so it's it's
very important that we find the
credits that we find all kinds
of support.
In rural areas many hospital
beds are closed and they are
closed because there are no
nurses at the hospital so we
strongly support this bill thank
you.
Thank you Linda next we have
Dorothy's feet.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Dorothy Seton on our member of
the veterans and military
families caucus I'm a retired
army officer I chair for about
twenty one years and I've been a
retired veteran for longer than
that.
the caucus supports this
legislation because mental
health substance abuse our
veterans issues especially in
rural communities veterans do
not live around the base or in
metro areas we scatter out all
over the state and the
professions that are being added
to this bill are necessary to
health care team veterans of
should not have to travel to a
metro area to receive the
services.
These.
Types of professionals being
added in this bill especially
the mental health and substance
abuse professionals are critical
to the staffing of the veterans
courts around the state and also
to the veterans home in truth or
consequences we strongly support
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Dorothy next we have
money on the and I have.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Mike
and I and I and I and and I'm
here on behalf of the American
physical therapy association of
New Mexico I want to start by
thanking the sponsor for taking
our phone calls and also for his
consideration of the statewide
workforce study when adding
physical therapist the list of
health care providers receiving
the roll tax credit I also want
to think members of this
committee that we spoke to you
for your commitment to moving
this bill forward I specially
with physical therapists
included as of course we face
health our health care shortages
across the board in our state
thank you so much.
Thank you money Ana Serra Baca.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Sara Bach and I'm the client
advocate for compliments ABA
where we serve children with
autism and their families in New
Mexico we are also a member
organization of the New Mexico
behavioral health providers
association and we stand in
strong support of this
legislation I would like to
thank the relentless effort of
the bill sponsor to get this
passed we are confident that
this is the year as we are all
aware the need for providers to
provide needed services
throughout the state is
tremendous and we believe this
legislation will be the
foundation for which we can
recruit the specific health
professionals to New Mexico and
more importantly to recruit them
to underserved areas of the
state thank you again for your
consideration in support of this
important piece of legislation.
Thank you Sir and next we have
Kerry robin brindar.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Terry
robin Broder registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
Medical Society we strongly
support this legislation we feel
that our health care system
right now is in dire need to
understand that when we look at
the system as a whole the more
health care providers that we
had in our state ensuring that
there is quality access to care
the easier it's going to be for
our urban centers and for New
Mexican residents as a whole and
we believe that it is long
overdue that all of these
individual clinicians that are
outlined in this piece of
legislation he added to the
rural health care tax credit in
addition to having those health
care tax credits rates to create
that kind of parity I thank you
very much of Madam chair and we
urge you to vote yes.
Thank you Romero.
Thank you thank you madam chair
my name is Patsy Romero I am the
co chair of the legislative
committee for the National
Alliance on mental illness I
really I would like madam chair
to thank the sponsor
of representative Garcia for
bringing this legislation
forward again as many of my
colleagues are in front of me
have spoken we have a huge
capacity issue particularly in
the rural communities and I
applaud the sponsor for
including behavioral health
professionals in this
legislation madam chair and
members of the committee so I
strongly support this
legislation and I think we need
to do anything and everything we
can in New Mexico to increase
capacity to provide these
critical health care services to
New Mexicans thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Patsy next we have
Mike McMillan.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Mike
Vick non I'm operations officer
an athletic trainer at southwest
bone and joint and so we're city
we stand in support of this bill
would also like to mention that
every couple legislative
sessions similar bills adding
health care professionals are
proposed to be added to the
credits and the much like the
bill that will will be heard
next in committee H. B. thirty
eight.
Anything we can do to
increase.
Recruitment and retain health
care professionals to our rural
areas is appreciated and so is
stand in support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you next we have Charles
good marker.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I'm Charles good
marker again speaking for the
New Mexico Public Health
Association which of course just
five hundred members across the
state and with our focus on
equity we applaud the efforts
any effort by the state to
support more of both private and
public health care workers to be
able to practice in rural areas
of our state serving the people
there.
We support that effort because
work to rural urban disparities
in health care are of social
determinants of health outcomes
but since the idea is
Rooted in the in the hope rather
than actual hard data present on
whether that this is the best
approach to resolve the
disparity
we we do have concerns and
suggest that there be a strong
annual evaluation component in a
sunset date
actually we feel that way about.
All tax credit bills not just
the specific one but also
including ones that support
public health why we ask for
that because we've course want
to make sure that the money
spent on public health programs
are effective and so it's a tax
credit rather than expenditure
it has the same impact could
have the same impact on other
public health programs so it's
certainly important to make sure
that it is being effective we
hope that this bill does move
forward we thank you for your
time and your vote in favor of
it.
Thank you Charles next we'll go
to Evelyn Evelyn I'm gonna let
you what pronounce your last
name.
Evelyn are you there.
And I and muted yes you are more
thank you very much madam chair
and committee
my name is Evelyn then a grotto
I represent today the DP and M.
rural caucus statewide and we
speak in strong support of this
bill for all of the
aforementioned reasons which I
will not repeat so thank you for
your affirmative vote on this
legislation.
Thank you I'm and so far I have
Representative Lord
Representative Anderson and and
Representative Montoya in that
order Representative Lord go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I just had a
quick question on this
I don't see chiropractors listed
in this is our reason line.
Madam chair
Representative Lord.
vectors are not part of the
recommendation of.
Of health professionals that
have been.
For the New Mexico health care
workforce committee.
And that is what my bills based
on its based on those
recommendations are outstanding
the committee.
Thank you Madam chair
representative so I the only
other question I have on this is
what is there any way there been
a larger amount for tax break is
three thousand seems really low
was there an opportunity here is
an opportunity to increase that
amount of tax break.
madam chair was lowered
You know the past years I've
been doing this for seven years
in past years.
We've done legislation to
include everybody on the five
thousand.
But what happens is that that
dollar figure it kind of keeps
going up.
And it gets harder for us to get
out of the tax committee so the
higher the tax burden the the
less likely this bill will pass
the tax committee.
Right.
That's the risk of keeping all
these questions under house bill
seventeen with the three
thousand dollar
credit many because we've added.
Some professions that were not
on the bill on last year's bill
and that those were the physical
therapist and the our aunts.
So if we were to put everybody
at the five thousand range.
Of the professions that we have
in house bill seventeen we'd be
looking at pretty close to a
twenty million dollar hit.
And right now LFC shows a ten
million dollar hit but I can
guarantee LFC at that amount
will be more like five million
you know once this program has
unfolded with the new
professions mainly because not
all of those well health care
professionals in the rural areas
are gonna take credit of take
advantage of this credit once
it's implemented it'll take some
doing so I hope that answers
your question Representative
more yes Representative thank
you madam chair I I it I just
look at and I would like to see
the larger amount just because
my pharmacy just closed in
Moriarty they're gone I know we
have a huge issue with.
acting and keeping nurses and
doctors and medical
professionals is a huge issue
for the state so anything that
we can do to help them I think
would be greatly appreciated by
everybody all of our
constituents in the state so
thank you Representative I do
appreciate this bill yield my
time address.
Representative Anderson.
Yes madam chair I just wanted
to.
Up my question really was
answered I just wanted to say
that I thought that
Representative Garcia's
description of the when I called
to tear tax credit
Language three thousand five
thousand was sufficient to
answer my question and I wish
you the best with this bill
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Anderson Representative Montoya.
Madam chair thank you so much
and Representative Garcia I
commend you for your insurance
on this bill.
I had a similar question on the
two tier tax issue of five
thousand three thousand it was
sufficiently answered.
I just want to state that I'm
support of this obviously I'm a
rural Representative and
anything we can do to bring
equity in the health care
industry across this wide and
growing list I appreciate it I
applauded and I will be voting
in favor.
When the time comes.
Thank you representative
Representative Barreras.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Garcia once
again my my question is since we
have.
Do bills bills in front of us
that are that are similar this
morning this one here seventeen
and then also house bill thirty
eight of my my question is I.
Representative Garcia if we if
we possible bills what is their
plan to maybe merge them or are
the it if if that's if that's
been discussed at all if you can
if you can let us know.
I haven't read through the other
bill that you're.
That you're speaking of
You know that's up to the
committee to decide if you wish
to pass one bill to bills
whatever they wind up in tax and
we'll go through the process
there in tax in terms of of that
action you know consolidating or
not
that you know in in in in just a
brief summary of the
you know are built exclusively.
Based on recommendations from
the New Mexico health care
workforce committee and
and that's what we're basing our
bill on.
Thank you thank you a
representative Garcia I would I
would
you know I would love to see you
know just that that that that
doesn't happen before the the
tax committee or just because we
thought we saw this happen with
similar bills are not similar to
this bill but without having
last year I just want to make
sure this gets worked out before
so that you know it because
because I know that I'm not the
only one that's confused right
now and in the committee as to
what what the you know what the
recommendation was but I
appreciate you Representative
Garcia and I think it's an
amazing bills thank you.
Thank you vice chair and
representative Garcia I will
jump in here and say it may be
worth your while to have a
conversation with representative
Allison and see if you can
figure out how to merge your to
build I know we're going to hear
his next and I know in a lot in
some ways it's broader and so it
may not be able you may not be
able to come to terms but I
think you may have a better shot
if you if you go in with one
bill but with that said I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair almost would you
pass okay and again okay so that
was Representative Barreras and
Representative Ferrary and Emily
if you can take the role.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Representative strong yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Matthews is not
present Representative Montoya
yes.
Representative is not present
madam vice chair.
Yes.
And madam chair yes.
I think by and nineteen zero you
have a do pass representative
Garcia thank you madam chair and
thank you committee and god
bless you all today and thank
you expert witnesses.
Okay I'm we will move on to our
house bill thirty eight which is
world health care practitioner
tax credit Representative
outlets that.
Representative Allison on.
Yep I see just promoted him to
pay okay.
Okay whenever you're ready
representative Allison.
Representative did you have did
you have experts you want us to
promote to panelists.
You madam chair and members of
the committee.
All of my expert witnesses our
help they're busy saving lives
okay hi I do not have any expert
witnesses but I believe there's
gonna be some of people call in
and to support my bill okay go
ahead.
Okay my bill house bill thirty
eight.
Can you hear me alright with my
muscle yes we can hear you okay.
I feel like I've been someone so
they put a muzzle on me but
anyway by house bill thirty
eight is expanding the rural
health care practitioner to all
registered nurses licensed
midwives and chiropractic
physicians and emergency
services first responders and
essential health care workers
who provided assistance during
the Corona virus twenty nineteen
pandemic.
This is my third try at running
with this bill I read with this
bill my first year my freshman
year and at that time it was
just registered nurses and when
people found out that we have
the bill I had a lot of calls
from all over the state asking
me to amend it and add licensed
midwives so we went with that
first year and we made it
through to committees and we
just ran out of time.
The following year we had.
The emergency.
Medical service first responders
and people that are associated
with.
COVID nineteen pandemic.
And then this year we had the
current practice positions.
my bill is in a way similar to
the one that we just heard from
Representative Garcia.
And the only thing is that
money includes the
chiropractic's and the people
that are directly associated
with the pandemic.
We hear a lot of talk about how
much we care about the people
that are out there on the front
lines working against the
pandemic.
But so far we have done nothing
to help them other than just
give lip service saying that we
appreciate them.
My bill hopefully will be able
to compensate them for putting
their lives on the line because
practically that is exactly what
they're doing putting their
lives on the line.
So with that brief introduction
I am I know it's getting close
to our time on the floor so at
this time.
I hope there's some people call
in and with calls of support
thank you madam chair thank you
committee members okay thank you
Representative I'm Emily can you
put up a poll and so the
audience members can vote in
favor or against and we'll give
you a few seconds to do that.
No.
Allison you're not you are muted
thank you I just didn't want you
to have let something slip that
you didn't want us to hear so
I'm.
Okay so it looks like we have
seventeen in favor and zero in
opposition so now we will go to
the public
Excuse me so if you were here in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand and I will call
on you.
This is in opposition if you if
you're in favor please remote
lower your hand and I'll come
back to you I'm just making sure
you're awake.
Okay I the names I thought I
figured they were not in
opposition okay so we don't see
anyone in opposition in support
please raise your hand.
Okay we will start with Capt.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is Cat
Sanchez I'm a policy manager for
both futures a statewide
reproductive justice
organizations led by and for
black indigenous women and
people of color we have done
significant work over the years
with licensed midwives and
expanding access to midwifery
services in rural and frontier
New Mexico we appreciate and
support the bill the sponsor
Allison that's sponsor Allison
has brought and continues to
bring forward as a committee
considers a variety of tax
credibility we also support we
ask you to consider HB thirty
eight as Representative else and
has been open to amending his
original bill and added language
to include all midwives licensed
in the state currently the state
tax credit as Representative
Garcia mentioned is already
offered to certified nurse
midwives but does not include
licensed midwives who often have
lower income and are more likely
to work in rural and frontier
areas we would love to see
emerging of bills or additional
language to either bill to be
completely inclusive of licensed
midwives and we appreciate the
Sanchez inclusive language and
urged the committee to pass HB
thirty eight thank you.
Thank you Pat next we have Linda
Linda.
Thank you madam chair Linda
Siegel for the nurses
association
we strongly support this so I
won't go into the same reasons
that you've already heard on the
last bill I haven't had a chance
to talk with Representative
Allison but I am concerned that
we've taken out certified nurse
midwives certified registered
anaesthetists certified more
print nurse practitioners and
clinical nurse specialist simply
because registered nurse does
not capture that those
categories of advanced practice
nurse so I will speak with you
Representative Allison about
that I know you were thinking
that they would be included in
the registered nurse definition
thank you so much for bringing
this it's very important for all
of us to to have these people
included thank you.
And just to follow up a little
bit on what Linda said
Representative Representative
Allison if you and our
representative Garcia could get
together and see if maybe
there's a way I feel like you
might have a better chance of
getting their tax but who knows
that always that always a
crapshoot so we will go to
Madonna and I have.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee in Montana and I
at again here on behalf of the
American physical therapy
association of New Mexico thank
you representative Allison for
speaking with us and also for
your commitment of adding a
friendly amendments to add
physical therapist your bill
next committee although we won
now see what that looks like
when you and representative
Garcia get together we know from
the presentation by
Representative Garcia is still
that physical therapists are
included on the health care
workforce report as a need in
rural areas and we stand in
support of moving this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you next we have done
Blackburn.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is don black
funds physical therapist so
twenty nine years experience
working in home health hospice
Public schools and early
intervention most of that are on
Rural areas I personally see the
need for
John.
The need for physical therapists
it.
Don we lost you.
Okay I'm back on yes.
The little bit tech checked a
challenged and I think
Representative Allison for
adding up to teach true house
bill forty eight
and I do believe that.
A tax credit is one piece of the
puzzle.
Thank you don next we have Karen
Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen with lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico's
chapter and we are we stand in
strong support of this bill as
well but we would also like to
ask Representative Allison if he
would make sure that whatever
bill he and representative
Garcia put together that all
licensed social workers be
included in this they too are
essential workers on the front
lines every day and need to be
included as part of this thank
you very much.
Thank you Karen next we have
Mike McMillan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Mike bell and
operations officer after trainer
with southwest bone and joint in
Silver City I stand in support
of of this bill and
what I was trying to convey and
my and my message previously was
here each year the legislature
looks at adding health care
professionals I think this bill
encompasses.
more licensed health care
professionals and and I would
like to see all of licensed
health care professionals be
included on the tax credit with
this this bill also takes a step
further and and mentions
essential health care workers
which
during the pandemic our office
was was open we've got eight
licensed health care
professionals from medical
medical doctors to physical
therapists occupational
therapists.
And to support those.
Licensed health care
professionals we have twenty
other individuals from front
office staff to back office
staff to billing staff and the
way I I read this this
legislation they would be
included in that credit to the
and I think it's critical to
recognize those folks as well
especially during this pandemic
when
we.
Then open every single day and.
as navigated through this
pandemic and
continue to operate and serve
the health care needs of of our
region so I stand in support of
it and and I think if possible
we could.
Have one singular built it to
encompasses not only all our
licensed health care
professionals in the rural areas
but maybe even the support staff
if not just for a year to
because of the pandemic that
would be greatly appreciated.
Thank you.
Thank you next I have Charles
good marker.
You madam chair members of the
committee Charles good markers
being good for New Mexico Public
Health Association our house
with that H. B. seventeen the
prior bill by Representative
Garcia we stand in support of
this bill
the inequities rural urban
inequities in health care must
be addressed this bill mixes
very sincere and worthwhile
effort to do so.
Just want to remind the same
concerns about this bill and any
other tax credit bill that.
Probably should be a
thorough
evaluation process included in
and perhaps even as sunset to
force that a valuation re
evaluation by the legislature so
we want to make sure that any
expenditures on health care
whether they be through talked
the tax system or direct
expenditures be used
efficiently and effectively for
the purposes intended so we hope
that's considered as the bill
moves forward thank you.
Thank you Isaac to Kotak.
I'm because autos you got it
thank you so much madam chair
I'm Eisaku Sato said the chair
of the native American
democratic caucus representative
close to seventy two thousand
voters in the state of New
Mexico we stand in support of
representative Allison is built
and we believe that this helps
really bring equity to our role
and tribal communities that are
lacking the critical care
infrastructure that is is is
destitute many of these
communities so we stand in full
support of what the
Representative is trying to do
and and commend him for his
vision of bringing equity to be
small in rural communities thank
you so much.
Thank you Isaac next we have
doctor Michael pritom.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Michael
program chair practice physician
in Albuquerque in private
practice and I represent the
American chiropractic
association also treat patients
at UNM hospital and First
Nations community health service
which is a federally qualified
health center I have several
patients patients who drive in
from other parts of the state to
see me in a common speaking
speaking in favor of this bill
because it will help.
Recruit new providers and other
part of this parts of the
state's state and it will
Provide more access to pain
management and other services
around the state thank you for
supporting this bill and for
allowing me to speak.
Thank you and next last we have
by Dale Tinker.
Thank you madam chair they'll
Tinker with New Mexico
pharmacists Association as I
mentioned earlier on the other
bill
we have a shortage of all
providers in rural New Mexico we
have a shortage of all providers
everywhere in New Mexico but
especially in rural New Mexico
so anything that would encourage
providers to locate to rural
areas of this state should be
encouraged and supported
definitely support Linda getting
included the all of the advanced
practice nurses they're critical
to the state and and so we
should we support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Dale and we will go to
the committee I have
Representative Lord
Representative Anderson and
Representative Montoya in that
order so Representative Lord go
ahead thank you madam chair I'm
Representative thank you for
bringing for this bill thank you
for including chiropractors and
the reason I say that is because
during this pandemic they stayed
open a whole bunch of them
stayed open and they were
treating a whole lot of back.
People get back to work so I do
appreciate that you included
them because so many times to
get excluded I think with this
bill that maybe you and
representative Garcia can work
together an expanded even
further because I'm all about
all of our health care workers
and I do appreciate support EMTs
in our social workers get some
sort of tax breaks and credits
and whatever we can do to help
them but if you do work together
doctor says a secretary to the
doctor C. I. representative
Garcia please up to stay
steadfast on the chiropractic
portion and make sure that they
are included and that's all I
have to say I support this bill
thank you thank you
Representative Lara
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair I was prepared to
make a motion but I see we still
have discussion and so that
that's all I have thank you.
Actually Representative Anderson
Representative Montoya okay is
handed back up I his hand came
down I wasn't sure if he was go
ahead Representative Montoya
madam chair thank you and
representative Allison thank you
for your for your work.
Given the testimony that we've
heard and the dire need in rural
areas I believe that these two
bills are distant cousins at a
family reunion will bring the
product we need for rural New
Mexico.
So with that if I can make a
motion.
Going.
Yeah we're no actually you are
you can't be the last one to
speak and make a motion so we
will go to Representative
Anderson for the motion and I
will take you for the second.
The past.
Second okay and we will you take
the role please.
Anderson.
Yes what Representative
Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Matthews is not
present Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative turned off of is
not present madam vice chair.
We.
Yes.
And finally madam chair yes.
In nineteen zero Emily yes okay
so Representative Allison you do
have a nine to zero past and
again we will allow I think you
probably heard loud and clear
from the from the committee that
we we we would appreciate it if
you would not work with
Representative Garcia if we can
get this one bill that we can
actually get past so thank you
for that Representative Allison
and
If you will give me one second I
was supposed to text
Representative Trujillo so let
me do that so I take a drink of
your coffee or something
actually Representative Allison
Did you how did you want to
speak yes.
Give me time thank you thank you
very much and thank you to the
committee of there's one section
of the bills that no one
mentioned that's all page six
it's a definition of a central
health care worker.
On our State it means an
individual who perform services
that are essential to continue
critical operation of a hospital
or a clinic including custodial
and security staff because those
people get exposed to it we
think that we owe it to them to
get some kind of credit I thank
you for the.
For passing this legislation and
I will be speaking with my
brother.
Representative Garcia thank you
very much.
Madam chair thank you to the
committee members thank you
Representative Allison and next
we will go to HB twenty three
and now Representative Trujillo
and Representative Trujillo I
know you just told me go your
expert yes and I just forgot so
when you get on Representative
Trujillo if you can now let us
know your expert is that we need
to promote to panelists.
New okay actually I think the
panelists so I will put her on
and then Representative Trujillo
whenever you're ready go ahead
okay thank you can you hear me
yes you're fine okay Dr Cosette
Wheeler is my expert witness.
Okay on so you can go ahead
thank you madam chair and.
Would be my pleasure to be here
today I'm assuming back and
forth with how's Education
Committee.
But right now what I'd like to
do is introduce this is really
important bill it's house bill
twenty three the human
papillomavirus pap registry and
I'd like to say obviously that
this is something I've been
moving forward for a while and
I've talked to HSC about trying
to get some support for it so it
won't exist if we don't support.
So then what the registry is
doing is it asking for funds and
and it doesn't Reese and if it
doesn't receive them the budget
for New Mexico for cancer
prevention risk of total lost.
What it does is it the.
It helps record and find
information regarding sexually
transmitted
infections and what I would like
to do because I eight AM.
Able person really coherently
address the concerns and the
explanation as to where to my
experts would miss madam chair
that okay with you that is
Representative.
Dr Stewart go ahead.
Hi can you hear me yes we can
thank you madam chair and
committee members and
Representative Trujillo.
So I'm The New Mexico HPV pap
registry is something that has
been in place since two thousand
six as a partnership with the
department of health and.
I want you to be understanding
what it does which is best
probably conveyed by imagining
that health care all around us
occurs but we don't really have
a way of understanding what is
being delivered we can see in
the big picture sometimes if
there are disasters
why there is outbreaks of
certain diseases but generally
speaking you can take anything
from cervical cancer to prostate
cancer etcetera and you do not
nor do hi unless you have a
system to monitor
the health care delivery know
what actually is happening on
the ground in other words what
care are people receiving what.
What procedures and practices
are being delivered to the
population verses let's say the
national guidelines and so the
New Mexico HPV Pat bridges
street was created to enable the
prevention of cancers.
Namely human papillomavirus
based cancers which affect both
men and women
the cancers that affect men and
women are of the middle throat
and there are many cancers
mostly you all would be familiar
if you're a woman or even if
you're a man from your family
members who have been being
screened for the last fifty
years by pap smears.
So pap tests we all get it is
actually B. for most recently
the main reason that women come
in to the health care system
it's sometimes was initiated
when women had their first child
maybe they had never had a pap
smear before but it was for
fifty years recommended that
women get pap smears every year
that's changed recently two men
no women should need a pap smear
more than every three years and
people somewhat I have been
worried about that and the pap
smear now is being changed to
you don't need a pap smear
instead we know that cervical
cancer and other cancers are
requires human papillomavirus to
cause the cancer so HPV cancers
can be monitored with HPV
testing the US national.
The US preventive services task
force recommends that women get
either pap smear alone every
three years pap smear plus an
HPV test every five years and
now the option to get an HPV
test alone has been adopted so
this system monitors all of the
delivery of healthcare across
the entire state it's unique in
the United States as the only
statewide registry which is
brought a lot of prominence to
New Mexico because the data that
we see here in terms of delivery
to rural rural women in terms of
why do women get cancer right it
can be detailed by this resource
something that we observe and
we've reported on because we
published in the major
scientific peer reviewed
literature is that women in New
Mexico who get cervical cancer
are more likely to live in rural
areas but are more likely to
never have had a pap smear or to
not have had one in the past
three years so when I introduced
the conversation here we
wouldn't know that without these
data systems we would know that
we have cancers we wouldn't know
why we don't know without a
system like this if physicians
are.
Or any provider because nurse
practitioners provide a lot of
this care throughout the state
and they're very important in
that regard but we wouldn't know
what are women actually
receiving so.
In the data that comes from this
registry we observe that women
are continuing even seven years
after national recommendations
to receive pap smears and HPV
test every two or one or two
years.
The the sort of bringing
ourselves to the national
standard is not happening and
what that actually means is that
New Mexico is spending a lot of
money right millions of dollars
screening people more than they
should now at the same time
there are women who are falling
through the cracks so you can
imagine that we wouldn't know
this we wouldn't know oh well we
are screaming too often but what
happens when you tell a
population and you tell the
whole state providers women only
need pap smears every three or
five years depending on the test
you give them.
When you start seeing women
increase that are not getting
screened.
At five to seven years that is a
risk that is not safe so all of
these things are compiled by the
registry to inform what should
be changed and how we can do
better through interventions
similarly you all probably are
very aware of human
papillomavirus vaccines right
these are great vaccines
and they have been very
effective but screening and
vaccination are actually
redundant in the sense that they
target prevention of the same
cancers so as women begin and
then begin to age there has to
be an adjustment in the resource
allocations from health care
dollars let's say well these
people are vaccinated even if
it's not a hundred percent of
our population the overall risk
of the population is highly
reduced so we have to have in
the C. protection so this
registry is is unique and the
funds requested in this bill are
to support two and a half FTEs
computer
hardware that is aging and the
individuals who travel around
the state to health care
facilities and to manage the
data I think that it's a very
important resource that I of
championed and given my blood
for for fifteen years
what's happened is that federal
government is no longer able to
support infrastructure so we can
bring in and do millions of
dollars in reserves but not
support the actual nuts and
bolts and that's what this
request is for.
If you have any questions I
think that I I would be happy to
take some but refer back to you
madam chair and.
Okay Representative Trujillo
okay thank you.
Representative Trujillo I think
to say thank you thank you for
my reading my speaker speaker
Mexico.
Okay so family if you could put
up the pole so for the public
you can vote in favor or in
opposition to this bill so I'm
I'll give you a few more seconds
to do that.
We have had done unanimously
popular bill this morning that's
pretty nice so I'm gonna go
ahead and and it and it looks
like ten out of ten people are
in favor
and we will go to the audience
I'm.
There no one voted against this
bill but is there anyone in the
public who wants to speak out
against in opposition of this
bill if you do please raise your
hand.
Okay I see someone with house
number three fifteen I don't
know who that is if they want to
speak in support or opposition.
Madam chair we do have somebody
here that is about to speak okay
go ahead.
Madam chair hello members of the
committee madam chair my name is
Megan much I'm interim chief
government relations officer at
the university of New Mexico
just wanted to share that as an
organization we stand in strong
support of this bill the reason
the doctor Wheeler explained
this this seems to be a
situation where better
utilization of resources will
help us address preventable
cancers thank you very much for
listening to us today.
Thank thank you and that now I
know what house three fifteen is
that's the room number.
Learn something new every day
thank you so much and then I see
I Charles good marker.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you again I'm
speaking again on behalf of the
New Mexico Public Health
Association and.
Charles I'm so sorry I I needed
you accidentally okay.
Thank you madam chair I was
simply stating our our support
from the New Mexico Public
Health Association for this bill
for the reasons previously
stated thank you very much thank
you for all through the move
may.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on
services in the bay with the New
Mexico women's agenda we have
supported this measure in the
past and we continue to support
it it's important that we use
all the resources available in
the state to manage cancer and
especially when it is Spence so
successful thank you thank you
Susan okay that looks like all
the public comment and I have so
far I have representative
Armstrong go ahead.
Thank you madam chair sorry I
was double consuming.
One of my questions is thank you
for your presentation and and I
was wondering if it sounds like
the the that you lost your
federal funding for this and I
was wondering why if that is
true and if so why did you lose
the federal funding.
Madam chair Dr Peter speak.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Gail Armstrong
so we have other research
support.
In the order of millions of
dollars each year but the actual
nuts and bolts are no longer
supported through the mechanisms
available through the federal
government so it means that
For a lot of years I was putting
resources to the infrastructure
to the point that there was no
way to continue to get those
those funds allocated to the
actual people doing the
programming the actual people
doing the data management but
the resource brings in far more
than the infrastructure it's
just that those resources for
infrastructure are no longer
fund double through the federal
government it's not that the the
program has no resources.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you for that answer the
other question I have is
Do women know when they get
these tests that it's shared and
that it goes into a registry.
So.
Madam chair and I am
Representative Armstrong the
like all public health data.
Other than immunization
registries.
All public health data that is
in the notifiable diseases and
conditions which includes.
A number of things a long long
list I'm there is not an opt out
because public health operates
for the good of the total public
health not on an individual
basis an individual women R. D.
identified in these systems
meaning they are a number not at
percent per se so that women are
at risk for their information to
be exposed okay thank you so
much for that answer thank you
madam chair and then
But I'm I'm curious to know.
I'm reading my notes.
why is this appropriation wasn't
included in the general budget
or is this just an ad that
you're trying to get in and and
is it through the department of
health and why wasn't included
in that request madam chair.
As you know Gail I'm sorry
Representative Armstrong LHS
this summer and that was one of
our committee recommendations I
have to this you run a bill for
it but I spoke with the fiscal
entities who have assured me
that they will help with this.
That it was not in the D. O. H.
budget that I was aware of I
have to run a bill.
Okay thank you madam chair that
was that's all my questions
thank you Representative.
And I don't see more hands rates
but I do have a question for Dr
Wheeler I'm I see it on the
board of that it's synchrony
synchronous now The New Mexico
health insurance and information
exchange it is the information
on the exchange is that use and
is it helpful or could it be.
So I'm.
Madam chair thank you for asking
that important question
What you're talking about in the
H. I. E. that's statewide okay
the statewide HIV was.
Considered when this was
implemented and their
their focus primarily as far as
serving the department of health
notifiable has been in what I
would say to you is this is
positive in this is negative so
the complexity of the reporting
is is simpler than what is
needed to understand this
activity so things like both
what we do and what the in New
Mexico tumor registry who
monitors all cancers throughout
the state we have to manage a
local system for that reason to
keep the quality high and to
have a more complex set of data.
Thank you for that and I see
Representative vice chair but it
just has her hand right so go
ahead Representative Barreras
I'm sorry madam chair I wasn't
sure if I was allowed to to
speak after the the the the
chair speaks but I I was
expecting for there to be more
more questions I don't I don't I
don't have any questions on the
bill I just wanted to say but I
definitely is supported this as
it was mentioned you know this
is the most common cause of
cervical cancer and we we have
the ability to you know possibly
eliminate cancer so it's it's
the it's very very important
that we're getting the the
reporting out there and that
more more people are aware of
this is going to you bring up a
much needed balance to low
income areas which we've seen
other data are are are affected
severely by this so I do want to
thank you so much Representative
Trujillo because this this means
a lot to me and the I I
appreciate and I supported thank
you.
So madam chair yeah.
I'd I'd like to move that H. B.
twenty three do now pass.
Representative second a second
okay Representative Montoya
Emily can you call the roll.
Representative Anderson or.
Representative Anderson are you
there.
We just come back to him
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes yes.
Representative Martin.
Representative Lord.
We
are returning to her
Representative Matthews is not
present Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative asset additional
excuse I believe.
I think I saw him on the stand
oh okay and.
All overturned and.
And Representative Anderson.
Representative Lord.
And Representative processes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
And Emily what's that count.
Paper Gerald opposed impact.
Representative.
That are chairman
Representative Anderson yes I'd
like to be a test okay then that
makes it eight two zero.
Thank you so much Dr Wheeler and
Representative Trujillo and we
will now move on to H. B. thirty
two.
Thank you and thank you doctor
we are I think madam chair my
next bill is house bill thirty
two it is the feminine hygiene
products gross receipts.
I'm actually wanting to do madam
chair is to create an exemption
from charging gross receipts
taxes or feminine hygiene
products I know that the
majority of the people on this
committee in this committee.
Purchase.
These hygiene products for
themselves or for their children
or for their mothers or for
their wives so they know the
cost
of having to buy these non
luxury items this is not
something that we we as women
believe
is a luxury you know and and
I've spoken to many people over
the course of several years
madam chair members of the
committee where at where a lot
of in the United States not just
in other countries but in the
United States what they've had
to resort to to using rags and
toilet paper and whatever means
necessary to deal with the
feminine issues that men and
hygiene issues and then I as a
educ as an educator I've spoken
to lots of young girls in middle
school and high school and
sometimes late elementary school
which they started their period
and they have not had access to
these products what I'm doing
today madam chair is not us to
eliminate the cost of purchasing
these items but to eliminate the
tax in the state of New Mexico
on these items because that
again they are not sure the
items we don't tax groceries so
we should not tax.
Hygiene products and asking for
this committee.
If you read your analyses you'll
see that the state.
New York and Connecticut
Illinois and district of
Columbia Maryland Massachusetts
Minnesota New Jersey New York
and Pennsylvania all of these
states have some kind of an exam
for these products and I just
want to make sure that you all
know that the bill.
The bill specifies and limits
the exam drugs to tampons
menstrual pads sanitary napkins
panty liners menstrual sponges
and minstrel caps so I'm hoping.
That we were able to push this
forward this summer I asked.
House appropriations and finance
committee to do it a fiscal
analysis.
And they said that it was less
than a million dollars a year
which is a drop in the bucket to
try to ensure that.
Children that young girls and
women who have have no access
will receive this opportunity
this opportunity to be able to
access these feminine hygiene
products madam chair I know that
the department of health did not
have an issue with this as many
other agencies so I know it'll
go to taxed right after this but
I encourage all of you to
support me in this thank you
madam chair I stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo.
We'll go to the poll
so and.
So a lot if you are in favor
please vote that way if you're
not position a vote that way.
Okay it looks like once again
Eleven out of eleven twelve R.
twelve if I keep talking to
might just go up a twelve out of
twelve people are in support so
we will go to the public for
comment so if you are on zoom
please
Please raise your hand if you.
Well let me do it this way if
you let's do in favor first so
if you are I'm on.
Either in the room or online we
and we will start with I come
Martinez.
and committee members my name is
Mike American I appreciate.
And the vice president of the
Planned Parenthood generation
action Ross Mr generation action
packed.
For students on practices could
not afford them.
In a lower income states having
an affordable access for help
with how.
This is a community and help
those who struggle to acquire
such and such a necessity
yes House Bill Page.
Thank you next we have Sebastian
hearing.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sebastian hearing I'm UNM's
in a nursing part of Planned
Parenthood generation action
chapter on my campus.
Access to menstrual products
means that my patient population
may partly up of houses women
and my peers most of whom work
low income jobs would have
better access to supplies that
should be easily available to
those who need them I urge you
to support house bill thirty two
thank you.
Thank you Sebastian next we have
the coda Water send.
Madam chair and members of the
community my name is Dakota
water St I'm the community
engagement specialist of the at
the ACLU of New Mexico I'm here
today to ask the committee to
vote yes on H. B. thirty two
well every menstrual cycle is
different the average person
spends twenty to fifty dollars
each month on menstrual hygiene
products central hygiene
products can be very expensive
and out of reach for New
Mexicans historically the US has
exempted food and other items
into Mississippi's of life such
as medicine and prescription
drug from sale sales tax get
twenty eight states including
New Mexico have a tax on hygiene
anyone who has ever mainstreet
and knows the hygiene products
are necessity it is time New
Mexico remains this tax the
ability to afford clean hygiene
products needs to be accessible
for all New Mexicans for the
reasons listed above I asked the
committee to pass H. B. thirty
two the feminine hygiene product
gross receipts tax thank you.
Thank you to cope Dakota next we
have have heather Smith.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is heather
Smith I'm a policy fallible
teachers New Mexico an
organization run by and for
black indigenous women and
people of color we support this
piece of legislation Mr Mr drugs
are necessary essential items
for anyone who administrative
and access to these items should
be considered basic health care
still many low income New
Mexicans struggle to afford
menstrual products but people
indigenous people and people of
color face the most barriers to
menstrual hygiene and often go
without these drugs when
administrative resort to
hygienic alternatives they're
vulnerable to harmful physical
and mental health comes.
Please by reducing these because
of these problems these items
New Mexicans will have a greater
access to crucial the health
care that they need and it would
be a great step in the right
direction please vote yes on HB
thirty two.
Thank you have their next we
have Jessica Serrano.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jessica Serrano and I'm speaking
to you on behalf of southwest
women's Law Center we stand in
favor of a feminine hygiene tax
deduction necessities like
groceries are not tax New Mexico
to lessen the regressive nature
of state taxes and that logic is
easy to follow low income
households spent a larger
portion of their income on those
goods and therefore there is an
inherent in equity in taxing the
subsidies.
Economic research based on
consumer data after new Jersey's
tampon tax was repealed a two
thousand five show that by
eliminating the tax it may the
products cheaper and more
accessible to low income
menstruating people instead of
thinking of this tax deduction
is losing revenue for the state
we should instead look at the
benefits of the tax section and
think about it as number one
social program for mentioning
people number two reinvestment
program allowing mentoring
people to invest the money the
money saved from the tax
deduction in other parts of the
state's economy for those
reasons and the reason stated
before we ask the committee to
vote yes on house bill thirty
two thank you.
Thank you Jessica next we have
dropped Charles good marker.
Madam chair members the
committee Charles good marker
speaking again for New Mexico
Public Health Association
we I rise in support of this
bill taxing feminine hygiene
products there are which are
necessity of life for just over
half of our people.
Basically amounts to a tax on
women being women there's no
parallel taxed and being then so
it's a matter of equity.
Some low income people as Senate
prior to Starfire's noted simply
can't afford appropriate hygiene
unfortunately that has that in
can have some serious health
consequences to reducing the
costs in this way is a matter of
equity thank you very much.
Thank you Charles next we have
Susan Loubet.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Susan
Loubet a with the New Mexico
women's agenda and we support
this legislation for the reasons
stated by the sponsor thank you.
Thank you so the next we have
Jen Billig.
Thank you madam chairwoman I am
Jennifer Billig with girls Inc
of Santa Fe and we are strongly
in support of this bill to get
rid of taxes on feminine hygiene
products we know from our
experiences working with teenage
girls that low income girls in
particular do miss school
because they do not have access
to feminine hygiene products and
anything that can be done to
lower the cost helps keep girls
in school which affects the
whole of their life their
ability to be in school and to
be supported and do well thank
you.
Thank you to the public for all
those comments okay I have
Representative Lord and then
Representative Barreras but I
want to say because some of you
aren't on
the interim Legislative Health
and Human Services Committee
that in women who are
incarcerated and jail prison
whatever have to pay for their
our feminine hygiene products
out of that money that they may
have used for snacks are for
phone calls or for whatever so
that's just a side of something
that we we need to think about
and figure out how to solve but
I will go to Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I do have a
question on this I thought I
heard somebody say that the
average price spent per month is
fifty dollars a month for
hygiene products.
Or do we have which brings
Representative Lord I think that
was one of the public comments
so
is is is out do we have an
average amount what I'm trying
to figure out is how much women
obtaining tax each month for
Fuhrman hygiene products.
Madam chair.
Representative Trujillo.
If you look at LFC analysis we
would be saving on eight hundred
and forty two thousand dollars
in taxes I don't know the cost
of each of them and then hygiene
product per se but this will
give you the general
amount of money that we would be
we would be losing and revenue
which isn't a drop in the
bucket.
Thank you.
I don't remember your here being
blind sorry kind of threw me off
there Madam chair representative
when you're out is on average
how much does a woman spend on.
M. and hygiene products each
month.
Representative Lord I believe
that that whoever and public
comment said between twenty and
fifty dollars.
And I don't have that
information madam chair.
Thank you that was trying to get
it so what I'm trying to figure
out is.
If we're trying to who makes
this is a weird word feminine
hygiene products we're trying to
make the products available to
everybody and we're just take
off the tax.
So people would save like what a
couple dollars each month.
Maybe so but it would be madam
chair I apologize for not going
through you madam chair it may
be so that would save a couple
of dollars but it's significant
for people who don't have any
dollars.
And I understand that point I'm
just trying to figure out if
we're trying to this.
The more affordable I'm just
thinking things in my hand madam
chair and representative
madam chair mandate we also
sure Representative Lord when I
first started doing this I was
thinking of just trying to write
a bill that would allow women to
just have free access to
feminine hygiene hygiene
products and then I think the
industry that productive
produces a make talked a couple
of people that would have had a
connection so madam chair with
the next best step was to the
east.
Make them more accessible by
The tax.
Thank you madam chair.
I will jump in here that as
government we have that's one of
the few ways we have to make
things more affordable with
taxes we can't we can't set
prices that we can't Sam mandate
that reason reason ability so I
think this is one of the few
ways that we have to I'm as
government to affect the what
what women are paying out of
pocket.
Thank you madam chair
representative so at for equity
quality I guess is it right word
is there anything on the men's
side do they not pay taxes on
razor blades or anything that
they need every month okay they
do not pay taxes on **** or
that male enhancement products
they do pay
taxes on razor blades but those
are not the luxury items as I
mean they don't have to shape
women have to have the period.
Thank you madam chair presented
it so you don't pay taxes on
bear do women pay taxes on birth
control pills.
It's my understanding that the
prescribed
medicine that no they don't.
Thank you birth control pills
are not considered luxury items.
Thank you mentors as trying to
do the comparison to birth
control **** I'm okay I think
that's all the questions I have
for now thank you.
Thank you Representative vice
chair but it just.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative R. Trujillo for
bringing this bill and also just
to pay you back off of oil
Representative Lord was saying
that are they I think you're
definitely on to something there
are the prices of these products
is outrageous hi I mean
completely outrageous and.
So eliminating the tax this is
just a start the with the way
that I'm saying is it's just a
start and this is starting a
conversation around to this you
know that the mention of razors
that's not male specific that's
not that's not something that
only that Munoz and that they
absolutely have to for to have
acceptable hygiene.
You know just as I'm speaking
from personal experience I grew
up in a in a home address for
sisters there was five girls and
one women under under one roof
and I I remember.
Having to lie to my mom and tell
her that I was sick so they
don't have to go to school
because I was mortified
it affected my confidence for a
really long time
I see how I see how this is the
start you're you're you're
you're right it's just a couple
blocks on
but when you don't have any
money I it makes a difference it
really does it makes it possible
for you to to be able to to
afford these products
and then going so madam chair
you you mentioned incarcerated
women I also wanted to mention
that that they also make their
own tampons which is very
unhealthy
thank you eight two two things
down the road there's also a
time when you're incarcerated
before you have access to your
commissary money and so it
during that time if let's say
that you're rested and you
happen to be menstruating then
there is still going to be a
time before you have access to
that money and you know again
you're using whatever whatever's
of the supplies you can find
around you for that so thank you
so much Representative Trujillo
for this bill eight it really
does mean a lot and eighty eight
this is the start to making a
huge difference but I'm really
glad that you're doing this
thank you.
Thank you.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
Madam chairman would you pass.
Also three Representative but I
don't know why this role is but
if you're the last one who spoke
you can't make the motion so.
That I'm sorry.
I forget about all the time so
we will have the motion from
Representative Ferrary and the
second from Representative
Barreras and Emily if you can
call the roll.
Representative Armstrong.
Anders Representative Anderson
yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Is yes.
Representative programmer yes.
Representative Lord.
Thank you senator movie computer
I'm voting yes with an
explanation please.
Okay.
Representative Matt.
Representative one point.
Yes thank you.
Representative is not.
And madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
It.
Thank
Zero to pass okay Representative
Trujillo you have a due pass up
and
what explain my boat real quick
thank thank you for reminding me
go ahead Representative Lord in
in.
The reason I voted yes.
Reasons but the main reason I
don't think we should have state
income tax anyways we have other
ways we can get income tax I
think which is abolish the state
income tax anything that's about
unpacking things I'm on board
with.
Thank you for that and it looks
like we have completed our
agenda just a reminder we will
be.
I thank you Representative
Trujillo we will be back eight
thirty on Wednesday with another
college and that so thank you
committee members and thank you
public for your attention and
your participation and we will
see you all next time are we are
in respect thank you.
