Thank you very much Gabriel.
Good morning everyone.
Representative Anderson.
Representative but.
I'm here.
You Representative.
Representative Stephanie lord.
If.
Representative.
Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya.
President.
We've.
He.
Representative lives Tom.
Sure.
Representative.
Ferrary isn't.
madam chair I'm gonna go back to
the
Representative.
Stephanie lord.
She already said she was here
okay.
Representative.
Marian Matthews it should say
excuse I think you missed
Representative Gail Armstrong
right I'm Representative Gail
Armstrong president.
Thank you.
Thank you very much and madam
chair they were on yes I'm.
And do we have seven I think we
have seven five counting right
okay we have a quorum so we can
get started
and is
Representative Hochman Vigil has
the first bill and she's in the
attendees if we could bring her
over.
Part of.
And Representative
Who do you have as experts that
you would like us to bring over
thank you madam chair of
director and Linda Trujillo for
more of the should be in the
attendees
little Trujillo.
Got it okay.
And that that madam chair okay
and before we get started if you
would let me Representative I
just wanted to announce to our
attendees and those watching
that we are not going to hear
this morning house bill one
fifty one The New Mexico
behavioral health consortium at
the request of the sponsor there
working on amendment so we are
not hearing house bill one fifty
one.
and with that we are in I
apologize Representative Hochman
Vigil we had to roll you over
from the other day we ran out of
time but you're here this
morning so thank you and will
your house bill one twenty five
behavioral health practitioner
changes and the floor is yours
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee it's
great to be with you this
morning I'm so when I actually
got elected to the legislature
two years ago now in twenty
eighteen I actually set out to
I'm doing it could to study the
mental behavioral health system
in the state of New Mexico it's
an issue that I hold near and
dear to my heart I'm especially
in the wake of of what happened
in the state in twenty thirteen
in which a lot of practitioners
we're shut down for
circumstances they will go into
but it really had a an effect on
people in New Mexico who rely on
mental behavioral health
resources and so what I did is I
actually just talked everybody I
possibly could I talk to on
members of the governor staff
the governor's office various
entities are providers on the
ground actually contacted the
director producer director of a
movie called the purge which
detailed what happened in twenty
thirteen with our mental
behavior health resources in the
state and I'm I.
K. many issues and I'm sorry I
also work with the pew
charitable trust to is been
doing a deep dive us study of
mental behavior health resources
New Mexico as well my family was
deeply affected by what happened
in twenty thirteen I know others
families and other families were
affected as well and the issue
that kept on popping up was the
issue that you have in front of
you today and house bill one
twenty five I'm looking for ways
to really make a difference and
making sure that we have enough
mental and mental behavior
health practitioners in the
state of New Mexico is looking
at the licensing requirements
that we have in the state so
that people can get license and
accredited to provide those
resources and I had the good
fortune of working with several
people that I have to think
today who helped Canada
culmination of this bill first
and foremost my experts are
director Linda Trujillo former
representative Linda Trujillo
she has been just a joy to work
with and together we have I
think put together really good
bill that helps address some of
the problems that we're that
have been in existence for quite
some time but this particular
issue I also want to thank our
members of the psychologist
Association of New Mexico the
behavioral health practitioners
association everybody that came
together to talk about this
issue give feedback on the bill
and coalesce into what we have
to be a good product so what
house bill one twenty five does
is it changes are certain
licensing requirements for
psychologists social workers and
counselors it also allows for
the utilization of electronic
resources for supervision
requirements and also make
changes to the counseling and
therapy practice boards so as to
make them more efficient and
fluid to address the needs that
we have in our state that those
boards have to address so with
that I think that I will
introduce director former
representative ledger trick
Linda Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
thank you so very much
Representative Hochman Vigil
this really is an important
bill particularly for reducing
those barriers for licensure
from other states so I just
wanted to say that there's a
couple of things that we also
did to this because the the acts
were open and this does cover
three different mental health
profession act it also
recognizes the challenges that
have happened through
provisional and temporary
licensor during the pandemic
because of delay testing because
of delayed access to getting
hours completed and so we
extended that language to extend
beyond the a public health
emergency and then in some cases
six months in other cases I
think a year
and.
Really that's really the the
gist of what we did we are
trying to reduce the counseling
board from nine down to seven
and only by removing two public
members which will keep two
public members on the board and
nine is a much more difficult
board to try to get attendance
four and seven is a much more
manageable size of the board
thank you thank you
representative madam chair.
Thank you and welcome
director former Representative
Trujillo.
Superintendent superintendent
thank you.
I apologies superintendent.
Thank you thank you for for
being here and and helping on
this so we will go to the
audience and we're going to do
something new this morning spend
tried in a couple of other
committees were ready to do it
in in this committee and that is
for the attendees we're going to
put up a poll of whether you are
in support or opposition to
house bill one twenty five and
so you can respond to that
please in support or opposition
that gives us a sense of who's
in the audience and how
as if we were in person raising
our hands which is what we've
done in the past so support or
opposition will give that a few
seconds.
All right I think we can close
to Paul eighteen in favor one in
opposition in the audience this
morning we'll go first to the
opposition if you wish to speak
what if you would raise your
hand.
After it there we go okay
lily Irvin Vitela.
There you go go ahead Lee.
You have to you yourself.
I thought I did but you did for
a split second thank you.
A great mix of madam chair
committee members my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico First and
throughout twenty twenty we
spent time in over twenty
Communities having community
conversations about health and
it would be no surprise that in
those conversations behavioral
and mental health came up as
critical needs in one community
in particular when we were in
Sierra County we ended up doing
a healing circle because they
are in the midst of planning
there had been a community
conversation there have been
three youth suicide rates and so
no that was maybe one of the
most dramatic and haunting
experiences that occurred during
the community conversations
But it certainly wasn't singular
in terms of the importance of
behavioral and mental health and
and what we heard again and
again we're the challenges to on
the community side on on on the
people in need of healing side's
ability to access qualified
behavioral health professionals
in a timely way with
unfortunately deadly
consequences in some instances.
But we also heard the story
because of course providers were
also drawn to our community
conversations and then again to
our town hall about the rigors
of trying to to deliver care
this is even pre pandemic with
you know a lot of stress the
amount of compassion fatigue but
Karius trauma secondary trauma
and burn out we heard about that
from both providers and we also
heard about that from others so
the importance of supervision
it's critical you know in in the
most recent national study about
By care is stress and trauma and
and mental health providers
social workers for example
seventy percent of them had at
least one symptom of secondary
trauma.
And so as folks are delivering
care in remote environments and
don't have the full of
resilience provided by being
together face to face with the
team to help process really
challenging cases and situations
the ability to expand and the
use of technology to provide
supervision becomes even more
critically important and so I
just want to thank
Representative Hochman kill for
her.
Efforts and her wisdom in terms
of talking to so many people and
I would just say that what she
learned is very similar to what
we learned in our community
conversations in our town hall
and over eighty five percent of
the people who participated in
their over five hundred fifty
folks all together we're
strongly in favour of strategies
like this in order to really
make sure that not only are we
providing high quality care but
that we're not I'm devastating
the lives of people who are
delivering that care the process
by not providing them the
appropriate supports thank you
thank you lily you had me
confused for a minute because I
thought I'd called on opposition
and you're obviously in support
so hope that that's all right
but I do have we're doing
opposition opposition.
Okay.
More C. may.
Thank can you hear me yes go
ahead my I I just want to say
I'm trying to navigate here
online computer that's all right
are you speaking in opposition
to house bill one twenty five AM
because I I don't have a clue I
just have a couple of issues I
mean everybody I I agree that we
need to have.
As many qualified
People on trying to get this so
I can pull up and see my see the
actual thing but make make your
comments quickly comment that I
have in there is that throughout
your bill you struck out the
words moral character as as a
requirement and and in many
places you you put the age of
majority and I think if we take
a look at I mean there's a lot
of examples of people it may be
advanced in age but the the
character is is not there I
think it's a great mistake I
know you replace a lot of with
ethics but ethics has on the
connotations using the the.
The.
Term axiom of use were it can be
moved Mike a goal post and
having gone through counseling
and having had family that's
going through counseling I I
think that's a dangerous
precedent to take that part out
people need to know that the
people that they're going to be
interesting some very very
important parts of their
emotional and psychological
being that they should be able
to try us and and I think more
character is very important for
for patients and it's important
for insurance companies to know
that this is something that's
important to this and to the
state there's that moral
character actually is saying
that the accountability there so
thank you thank you Marci I'm
sure the sponsor will address
your issues so when we get to
that and I hope you'll stay on
and and listen to that response
so now we were are going to it
Susan Wilger are you speaking.
Are you speaking in opposition.
Sorry madam chair I jumped the
gun I can't that that's alright
we're going to I just want to
make sure I didn't miss an
opposition we're going now to
those who are in support so if
you wish to speak in support
please keep your comments as
brief and concise and non
repetitive as you can I would
appreciate that my go ahead
Susan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Susan Wilger
executive director of the center
for health innovation we are in
support of this bill for the
past couple years we have worked
extensively in communities
throughout southern New Mexico
and I have to basically did what
Lilly said earlier our
communities really see the
importance of having opening up
opportunities to expand and
diversify our workforce and this
bill supports that we're
particularly in favor of the
allowance for tell the
supervision for clinical
supervision so thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and we appreciate your support.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Ashley Wagner the
director of public policy at the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
we support house bill one twenty
five because it is in line with
our recent economic strategic
action plan where we suggest
finding ways to improve New
Mexico's regulatory business
climate to make it among the
most friendly in the US we
especially like the bill
modernizes and simplifies the
process to become and remain
licensed and makes it easier to
build a workforce by removing
unnecessary barriers for
practitioners to move into the
state this will only positively
impact our economy thank you so
much.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm trying to manage
management using to drive going
go ahead.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee this
drive alone I'm the director of
the April services division and
the HSD and HSD we're standing
and strong support this
legislation I'd like to point
out that it it certainly
sharpens the tools for
successfully recruiting and and
bringing in practitioners of
various types from outside the
state that's something that I
had direct experience of when I
was at the medical services are
having difficulty with so we're
very pleased with that I also
want to point out the utility of
the avoiding it for and impact
of the public health emergency
on on making it difficult to
keep providers in the field I
think that's very strong and
finally we want to point out
that the importance of the the
provision of supervision via
telehealth which has the
opportunity of of greatly
strengthening the quality and
access to care across the state
so we are in strong support
thank you so much thank you
doctor bone next we have
Linda Siegel.
Go ahead Linda thank you madam
chair members of the committee
Linda Siegel representing the
New Mexico psychological
association and we stand in
strong support of this bill and
really appreciate that
Representative Hochman Vigil
came to us in the beginning to
make sure that all of the needs
of academic rigor still be
included in in the act and we
really appreciate the ability to
expedite licenses and have
telehealth supervision so thank
you very much.
Thank you when the next we have
hi Karen Witt lock go ahead
Karen.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Karen what lock
with the national association of
social workers to map New Mexico
tractor we want to thank
Representative Hochman Vigil for
bringing this bill and our
strong support for behavioral
health we also excited to see
Representative and whips former
representative Lente Trujillo
for her new leadership at our
energy and for meeting with us
we stand in strong support of HB
one twenty five this will cut
down on the bottlenecks and
particularly improve improve the
licensing of social workers
moving to New Mexico these
reciprocity issues are huge for
us telehealth supervision also
is a big deal for us with the
shortages social workers in New
Mexico this bill will definitely
help I go on about the issues
that this was all but this will
help in many ways and reform is
long overdue thank you.
Thank you Karen.
Jason Weaks go ahead Jason.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks a
contract this from Bernalillo
county speaking today on behalf
of Bernalillo county behavioral
health department earlier Candie
runs basically the state's
largest behavior health facility
at the metropolitan detention
center and all the ancillary
services are really important
behavioral health department
strongly supports this
legislation you know we've been
evaluating this issue and trying
to figure out how to move
forward intelligent reform for
quite some time I really want to
think Representative Hochman
Vigil and superintendent trio
for addressing this during the
interments much needed change it
will help us attract quality
providers to the state well and
also social workers we have a
huge lacking and that in New
Mexico even in the urbanized
areas like Albuquerque there's
just not enough providers so we
hope that this change it really
helps track those provides the
state and we really stand in
strong support of this
legislation is much needed and
overdue thank you.
Thank you J. son our next we
have
Jennifer.
Lockwood.
Yes my name is Jennifer Lockwood
and the quality improvement
director at mental health
resources it's a community
mental health agency in rural
New Mexico and we are also a
member of the New Mexico
behavior health providers
association and on behalf of
both of these organizations we
strongly support this bill.
Thank you Jennifer.
And I think the last we have our
Rikki Lee Chavez go ahead Rikki
Lee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we often come before
the legislative body and ask
that you do treat criminal
justice issues with more of an
eye toward public and mental
health especially with the eight
ways behavioral health as we
have advocated that many
criminal justice issues are
actually public health and
behavioral health issues and so
we stand in support of this
measure and and hope that we can
encourage more people to be part
of our behavioral health
community and assist in our
public safety advocacy.
Thank you regulate.
I think that's it for the for
the audience
Representative did you want to
say any closing words or address
and comments made before we go
to questions from the committee.
Thank you very much madam chair
yes I would it with the the
question brought forth with
regards to the removal of the
good moral character provision
so it's that that's a great
and it's that is definitely a an
issue that we expected to be
brought up before the committee
and before I turn it over to
superintendent Trujillo to
address the the language change
I want to as a cabbie ought to
bring the committee's attention
to one of the reasons why we
needed to put forth that this
bill we had been seeing a bottle
necking affect with our
licensing through RLD because
some of the a particular
language and causes and the act
as it as written has created a
situation and a lot of the
analysts evaluating these
applications for licensure hi
language that was I'll allow
them a great amount of
discretion and in some cases
down right confusing and that
what it was that they were
particularly looking for and one
of those provisions that was
causing that confusion was the
good moral character provision
what is good moral character how
are we supposed to evaluate that
if that provision is Matt then
you know then there are other
elements of the licensing
application that comes still had
that had that same problem with
discretion and are one of the
issues we tried to address by
cleaning up language in the act
was to remove that that
discretionary component and make
the language are more of a
directive so that the sorry my
life for now.
So that the analyst evaluating
the the applications for
licensure would know exactly
what it was they were looking
for and be able to grant
applications in a timely manner
once those requirements have
been met and so I'll turn it
over to superintendents are here
to talk about the particular
language change.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair and yes we know
that that question was going to
come up and there's been
substantive confusion about
removing that language from
statutes it really is very
ambiguous and can be very
subjective to the according to
the person who's doing the
analysis I do want to point out
that each one of those acts the
psychology Act The counseling
and therapy practice act and the
social workers act all have
language in their act that point
to the criminal offenders
employment act so they have to
analyze any criminal history
under the criminal offenders
employment act and if you if I
could just pointed to that
section twenty eight dash to
dash for there is in fact
language for a board lawyer or a
board to deny suspend or revoke
a license for actions that fall
within that criminal offenders
employment but it has the
process for analyzing what the
crime is and ensuring that it is
in fact related to the the
business operations of the
license so there's nothing
that's been removed here it's
just simply been clarified.
Thank you are you ready stand
for questions now representative
madam chair were ready to stand
for crushed questions thank you
thank you Representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
and a good to see you
superintendent Trujillo
I am I think I brought this to
your attention early in the
summer when I had a couple of or
maybe it was before you were
there I'm not sure but anyway I
had a couple of.
Ladies that have moved here from
another state that couldn't get
a license because of the
language of the the having a
license I in for five years in
another state and they are
behavioral health specialists
and anyway I appreciate this
bill so much and Representative
Hochman Vigil I went signed on I
like it that much I was like wow
we need to do this and I was
trying to do it but they kind of
thought they could possibly do
it through rural but you did a
lot more extensive work and I
really really appreciate that
one of the things madam chair
and representative is the.
the on page on page three line
twenty four they're still
language the five years.
Is in there and on some of I
don't know if it was on its on
this bill or others but they
they changed it to two and a
half.
So why are we leaving I.
It looks like we're leaving I in
the licensure of psychologists
from other areas for reciprocity
I'm assuming.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative Armstrong I
saw that you signed on to the
bill and I got so excited.
Thank you for your support I'm I
will defer to superintendent
Trujillo on that question thank
you madam chair and thank you
representative to for signing on
to the bill we appreciate your
support you're absolutely right
that happened when I was just
starting at the regulation
licensing department and we did
explore options for doing it by
rules but it's not possible to
do it I rules we did meet with
each of the industrious the
counseling the social work in
the psychology and the feedback
that we got from psychology
because we would prefer that it
be two years the feedback we got
was that they could accept five
years and so we took out anymore
and I'm I'm honestly I'm not
sure that that this is the right
way to do it so I'm still a
little like trying to figure
this out but what the board has
actually done in this is been in
place for years for psychology
is that the the language in the
statute says minimum five years
they extended it to ten years by
role and so I learned of an
individual who had been license
for nine years and ten months
here recently and was denied
licensure by reciprocity because
they they haven't met the ten
years and so what we're trying
to do is stop the board you know
stop those rules from extending
beyond that I it would be our
preference to go back to to that
was what the original draft had.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you superintendent for
those answers I
You know I I it's kind of I'm
just gonna say it sometimes this
industry not this psychiatrist
in particular but industry in
general
sometimes about competition and
so I don't I just really would.
Appreciate last year said that
even though they the the
psychiatrist don't want that but
other than that madam chair I
and I totally understand about
the good moral standards I'm
gonna hold this up so I'm sat on
madam chair and representatives
I sat on the sunset commission
out committee I I co chaired
that and we have to evaluate
every sunset that was coming up
in this and so on part of the
grading the LFC looks at is.
One of them is good moral
character requirement and I ask
that same question is that how
do you judge that how do you you
know where is that coming from
so almost every single entity.
Was marked red.
Every single one of them because
how do you judge that and so we
have talked about you know that
language needs to be updated and
so I appreciate that because it
makes our job easier when we are
evaluating sunsets and so with
that madam chair I just want to
let you know Representative I
support your bill thank you
superintendent Trujillo for
always being very responsive and
listening to concerns and this
is going to bring a lot more
reciprocity in a time of need in
the state of New Mexico and we
should go through the whole book
and this language thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative next
have Representative Lord.
I thank you madam chair and I
apologize I'm cursed with bad
lighting it doesn't matter where
Matt if I'm at the office and
home amendment to see that I
just and what it is but I
apologize for that so I think
you I also do actually support
this bill but I do have some
questions for clarification and
for some people who have asked
me some questions so I'm back to
Marci maze and hope that she
understands that was a good
question and I knew that was
also going to come up also want
to make sure that and of course
disciplinary action is also
something they will look at when
you look at ethics is that
correct.
Madam chair representative lord
I believe that's correct I need
confirmation from the
superintendent shaking her head
yes okay thank you that's why I
just want to make sure because I
know that defining what ethics
is good moral character
sometimes can be difficult of
what is that and I would assume
that if you do a criminal
background check and you check
references and your checking
their disciplinary actions that
will actually cover the
foundations of actually what is
good moral character I did have
a question on this so what the
reciprocity are there any states
that are restricted from across
to be in this or is it all
states.
Madam chair representative Laura
there are there's no state
that's restricted from these
requirements as long as
requirements can be made can be
met they will meet the
requirements for a license to
grant a license okay and so I
stopped there I know it's a
accredited school so so my
question is in your when this
person is applying I I assume
you're gonna go back and say
okay let's see how to put this
examiner grants a quality so I'm
gonna try to explain it so
everyone understands it's
listening to.
I know that there's some schools
you can go to and get a degree
but it's not really a degree so
to speak online schools so I'm
going to assume that when you
look through these you're going
to make sure that they are
accredited schools for New
Mexico is that correct.
Madam chair representative lord
that is correct okay that's what
I have and I do support this
bill thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Ferrary there you
go I'm sorry I was gonna lower
my knee and instead of just
opening my
At and then I touched the video
okay here we are.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dayan Hochman
Vigil for bringing this forward
and it's so wonderful to see you
a superintendent to PO we just
really miss you but my question
I have a bill that is going to
expand
board certification and getting
the extra compensation and that
teachers get for being board
certified and we're expanding
that to include counselors and
other staff.
But eliminating the
administration like principles
do you see that what your bill
is doing to expand the people
who would qualify to then also
in the schools where we have a
lot of our
You know deaths of you know
young people I suicide
or some of referred to it you
know as
Deaths of despair for the two it
to really work together.
I thank you madam chair thank
you vice chair Ferrari for the
question from my layman's
perspective just having worked
on this bill so several months I
don't hear any particular reason
why the bills can't
B. work in concert with one
another I know that we had at
one point considered changes in
the school code that applied to
school counselors but again I I
don't see anywhere where the the
two might conflict but I will
defer to our superintendents
radiology has for their thoughts
on that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative so the
interesting thing about the
licensure in public schools for
these professions is that they
first have to be licensed by the
board and then there they
receive another license from PED
to ensure that they actually
have the education and the
experience to work with
students and so there should not
be any conflict in that.
I'm thank you madam chair and
Representative and
superintendent I'm thinking that
your this bill will make it so
that there's a larger pool of
people who will then be
encouraged to get their board
certification and in our schools
for young people yes Madam chair
representative very precisely
yes okay great I I appreciate
this bill so much thank you.
Thank you representative next I
have Representative of trousers.
Good morning madam chair
representative.
superintendent Lucille hi I have
a question the stricter that
gets to I don't Representative
so the the individuals that make
up work there generally thank
you service of public for the
professional and so forth it
makes it up and so what to
positions did you remove and
what positions remained for
seven positions what are what is
the make up of it.
Madam chair thank you very much
Representative todos OS I will I
would have to go to the bill I'm
I'm caring too much right now to
remember precisely but I I'm
sure superintendents are here
members.
Thank you representative madam
chair representative I just on a
personal note I want to let you
know we're delivering PPE is to
funeral establishments around
the state right.
You're welcome as role well that
superintendent.
And I appreciated our
conversation of on a month or so
ago and and hopefully we can
just make progress and and keep
our communities safe with sure
up the decisions thank you madam
chair representative the of five
members on the board will remain
the different types of licensure
under the counseling and therapy
practice act so there's one from
each license tight that will
remain on the board but this one
this board actually help for
additional public members and so
we're reducing that down to to
adjust to public members it
without hurting any of the
professionals that will serve on
that board.
in again.
Because I know what it is in our
rural state are you in when
tried to obtain and retain
licenses
its top so this is good it in in
a way because I mean I'll be
honest with you
We have to we have to trade in
my business I can just hired
they don't want to come
Silvercity argument for and and
the only place you can shop for
clothes are things at Walmart so
we have to
you know these these to track
the the individuals that are
graduating on this this makes a
lot of sense to me because of
the the people are graduating
when I try to attracting year
even if you try to pay them more
they just they're like the come
to town they're all excited in
the sea and the like like I.
I need my last night life in my
you also want to enjoy different
things so I understand that
there was one more question I
have so you know
Madam chair representative will
be following up with the on the
temporary licenses just see and
maybe address this but I didn't
hear that they don't just
continue practicing after the
six month time frame after the
emergency help or yes.
Madam chair representative I
would assume that would be
within the party duties of our
L. D.
I'm and superintendent Trujillo
was shaking her head yes.
That would be RLD.
Also I appreciate your hard work
and and and thank you so much
for bringing this legislation
forward and and and our pleasure
is to actually get to see our.
Our superintendent.
then the repeal because I we
just talked on the phone and and
and so it's just one of those
things when you see someone at
this the next your you never
know what but that is not I
don't know if you caught us
earlier.
Speaking but I was I was time
the chair we're also speaking
wanted to listen that I'm just
looking forward to.
This is meet everybody in person
and and the chairwoman I'm gonna
I'm gonna hold you to that okay
we're gonna all go to dinner
yeah and we can talk all about
family friend that's.
That's right thank you wanted to
thank you representative next to
have Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil and members of
this committee I stand in full
support of this incredible
legislation.
Having lived on the ground the
results of the last decade shut
down of that behavior health has
been devastating.
To the notion of recruiting out
of state with that room rest
reciprocity it's it's a
beautiful thing I would like to
point to institutions and
individuals in state
particularly in New Mexico
highlands which has great school
of social work that we look to.
Home grown as well
it's something that has been
very effective is the C. P. S.
W. model that I've been working
very closely with with our eight
programs in Rio Arriba certified
peer support workers as an entry
point for those that want to go
on and continue to have perhaps
you know provide a pathway to
that.
Service the lived experience of
those individuals who have
rehabilitated coming out of this
really challenge life in service
is so effective so on that I
will close and just thank you I
I commend this legislation and
thank you very much I yield back
to madam chair and
representative up in the hill
thank you thank you
representative thank you
Representative chair by just at
one add one comment you know I
might I too was deeply affected
by what happened in twenty
thirteen the loss of our mental
behavior health practitioners
people lost their lives as a
result of that and it was deeply
affecting too many of us and
it's actually one of the reasons
why I ran for office was to help
fix this problem so I hear you
and I recognize the trauma of
the this Thomas that you
experience as well and so you
know thank you for supporting
the legislation appreciate it.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Thompson.
Madam chair and I apologize I
did get a unanimous half in
education or bill that actually
puts counselors and social
workers on the three tier system
with everybody else so that when
the races come along they don't
get left behind so so that was a
good thing but I just I just
want to talk a little bit madam
chair about so I was in the
legislature I'm in twenty
thirteen when the destruction
occurred and now I was.
Maybe had they behavioral health
subcommittee of the health and
Human Services committee and the
LESC Matt and the chairs that
okay behavioral health
subcommittee fix our behavioral
health system you have for one
day meeting I want you to come
up with a plan to fix the
behavioral health system and I.
The LCS staff worked our tails
off and came up with about seven
bills that would have done a
variety of.
I lost my reelection.
That never.
And now not that we were going
to fix that with seven bills but
it was a start so thank you I
started off working with
Representative Hochman Vigil on
the on the behavior health staff
and I have been torn in ten
thousand ways so I really want
to thank you for for continuing
on and of course I support this
bill thank you for the work that
you're doing on this end and
please know that you can call on
me and hopefully I'll be
available to help you so thank
thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair
I I to say in support of this
bill for several reasons and one
this morning we touch briefly on
the paying full of people and
the decision of of a previous
governor to shut down rural
behavioral health care
throughout New Mexico.
It's it saddens me that were
eight years later still trying
to repair the damage of that
action
I think of of this bill to me is
rural friendly.
to provide better health care
behavioral health care services
to of New Mexico residents I
think of the tele health hello
then whenever no phrase we use
to describe it is also very
rural friendly I have a
constituent who served on the
board of that is being reduced
in size and I believe is clearly
supportive that that size
reduction is is basically
positive because in New Mexico
during the summer months if we
have board members who have to
come greater distances than
simply Albuquerque or Santa Fe
that it is a very disruptive to
ride and find out that we're
short of quorum something as
simple as that and clearly the
technology advances that we're
all working with this year the
legislature may make of those.
I'm happy outcomes less so madam
chair I simply want to say that
I to fully support this
H. B. one eight one twenty five
and believe that we're going to
improve health care in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you representative and
Representative Hochman Vigil I
don't usually like to have
prolong the hearing any longer
than necessary when you
obviously have the vote but
you've heard from everyone and I
have to I have to say my own
patients first want to apologize
to the superintendent I totally
missed your elevation to
superintendent and I have been a
champion of yours for that
position for a long time I
celebrate your
your elevation to superintendent
that couldn't have a better
person
In that position so thank you
and the superintendent I go back
even further then the twenty
thirteen to buckle it probably
around the two thousand and five
she was at our regulation
licensing down and I was
secretary of aging and we were
then trying to figure out ways
to streamline reciprocity and
licensing for behavioral health
and there was a fair amount of
and I think someone mentioned
it's
competition and turf there was a
fair amount of pushback about
about doing some of these
efforts today and I think twenty
thirteen shows us the damage
that that
could because in that we we lost
so much in our providers and are
behavioral health system and
is this someone in the audience
said it's been there's been a
long time coming it's been a
long time coming and I just want
to thank you Representative
Hochman Vigil for your
dedication to
this I know you have several
bills hopefully we'll hear more
of them on improving the
behavioral health system in New
Mexico and I I I just want to
thank you and thank you for for
bringing the bill and
I will what's the pleasure of
the committee not that I can't
yes but then I shall pass okay
it in a second is there any
objection to a do pass.
and seeing none hearing none
Representative you have a
unanimous do pass out of house
and health health and Human
Services Committee on house bill
one twenty five thank you thank
you thank you for coming sitting
through to committee hearings to
get this done reset it thank you
very much.
The committee yes Delores I
think we have some folks we do
we have someone missing we do
don't I Mr excused
representative bash and then
Matthew yes there we have
several people putting on bills
and other committees this
morning so anyone missing is
excused thank thank you but you
have a nine to zero so thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay and next we're going to do
house bill one twenty nine with
Representative Fajardo and I
know she is in the attendees
list I saw her.
Say if we can.
Yes her over here there she is
and Representative Fajardo do
you have some experts that you
would like to
join us.
Yes madam chair can you please
bring and Rolf Schmidt glacier
and Monique Whitney please.
Time.
I apologize I'm out of breath
had to run to the other room to
grab my glass.
Okay we have we have Monique.
And.
Madam chair and Representative
Fajardo I don't see Mr McLish is
it possible she's under as one
of these
institutions.
Paddock medical association
perhaps let me find out one
second yes I've yes I think that
is Sam yeah thank you madam
chair.
We'll get him over okay I think.
yes.
I and just to
Say he was there.
And then disappeared.
There we have back again just to
make sure
Mr McLish the you're showing up
as the New Mexico New Mexico
osteopathic medical association.
Yes thank you okay just wanted
to double check that we have the
right person and Representative
Fajardo you are you have the
floor go ahead and present your
bill thank you madam chair thank
you members of the committee I
actually it messes Committee I
was on this committee for him
for several years I don't
remember why he took me off but
it was one of my favorite
committees and so I don't carry
a lot of health bills so it's
always an honor to be back over
here and so I think it's only
one member here that haven't met
yet that Representative Barreras
so nice to meet you.
I'm so eighty one twenty nine
I'm not gonna lie this is a
complicated bill with a lot of
opinions and stakeholders so I'm
really excited to hear what
people have to say.
The result of some of the
language in a resolution that
was passed by the National
Senate caucus of state
legislators their own Senator
Ivy Soto is the current chairman
president unfortunately in the
time of COVID he probably hasn't
had a chance to really flexes
muscles on that National
Committee as much as you'd like
we always constituents quite a
bit about their ability or lack
of ability to afford medicine.
Some people say this is all the
manufacturer's fault some people
say this is the fault of
pharmacies and some blame the
insurers what this bill seeks to
do is reduce how patients have
to pay have to pay out of pocket
Medicine.
I did send some information to
the Act thanks committee
secretary with some videos and
some graphs and I hope you had a
chance to you know if your
emails are like mine there's
hundreds of them I'm in a normal
session I'd be able to have this
information out to you.
But it really doesn't kind of
detail graph form on how these
copays are working I think
there's even some YouTube videos
if you had the chance to look at
it
this bill does three things it
requires pharmacy benefit
managers to report how much they
receive in aggregate from
pharmaceutical manufacturers and
how much of that is passed on to
health insurance.
I was percent rebate to be
passed through to patients to
help them at the pharmacy
counter with the amount they pay
for out of pocket I am sure that
any payments
patient makes is and that was
made on their behalf by an
employer or patient assistance
foundation or manufacture copay
assistance counts towards their
out of pocket maximum and with
that madam chair I would like to
introduce my two expert
witnesses one eight going a
little bit deeper detail they're
much smarter than I am when it
comes to these things and I hope
that they can explain a lot
better than I can and so can I
handed over to Mr McMahon
question and.
I yes Mr McLish.
your I also want to just sorry I
was looking at my text message
just a reminder to the committee
hopefully everyone is in their
share file at this point able to
access your file all your
handouts or their representative
in a file folder on this bill
for this day in this committee
so everyone should have access
to them and and hopefully has
seen them but go ahead Mr
McLish.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Ralph McLish on the executive
director of the New Mexico
osteopathic medical association
or statewide physician
organization supports house bill
one twenty nine because we
believe it removes another
obstacle from chronically ill
patients by prohibiting copay
accumulator programs in the
state of New Mexico.
Copay accumulators make it
harder for patients to meet
their deductible or maximum
resulting in higher out of
pocket costs copay accumulator
programs prevent patients
who receive copay assistance
from counting those funds toward
their annual deductible or other
out of pocket expenses.
Health care health care
professionals working with
chronically ill patients must
design evidence based treatment
plans with their patients.
Physicians try to involve the
patient and the the development
of a treatment plan to lower non
compliant behaviors it's
difficult enough for patients
living with chronic illness to
stay compliant with their
treatment plan.
But often these patients are put
in the middle of an ongoing
battles to lower health care
costs.
Okay accumulator programs create
a financial non compliance which
is difficult for health care
professionals to navigate when
patients cannot afford their co
pays they make hard financial
decisions for their family they
often discontinue treatment and
may experience unnecessary
disease progression
hospitalization or life
threatening all training
ramifications says such as
habitation and needed
transplantation.
New Mexico's legislature has
helped many New Mexicans by
passing legislation that
standardized pre authorization
and limited the use of step
therapy I hope our state
continues this trend by
prohibiting the use of co pay
accumulator programs thank you
madam chair.
Thank you I'm.
And Representative did you want
to us to hear from Monique now.
I'm it let me ask if money if
she wants to speak.
Yeah I'm on thank you thank you
madam madam chair and members of
the committee thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak on
this very important bill my name
is Mike Whitney I am the
executive director of the
pharmacist United for truth and
transparency we are a nonprofit
advocacy organization we have a
community pharmacies in New
Mexico who are members and I'm
speaking on their behalf I am
actually persona but I feel
compelled to eat out I make
third generation New Mexico and
I will be back families in New
Mexico sh
I wanted to follow up on that
previous testimony speaking from
the the pharmacist point of view
about the importance of copay
accumulators they.
Is absolutely without dispute
that prescription costs are
getting more and more expensive
there are many reasons for that
on all sides of the supply chain
pharmacists are caught in the
middle pharmacists and patients
have a trusted relationship on
this is well documented what
happens is yeah patients who
come to the counter and they
cannot afford their medications
so as was previously stated they
end up having to make difficult
decisions I will tell you that
the opposition will tell you
that it's not fair to included
co pay accumulators accounting
for patients to doctor pull up
it's hard to result to reconcile
that argument because all plans.
All plan participants pay their
premiums equally and that's it's
not you know necessarily
locations all that they have a
chronic illness that with the
requires more expensive
medication but I will point out
that numerous studies have shown
that there is an extreme costs
associated with nonadherence to
medication so estimated that the
US spend somewhere in the
vicinity of two hundred eighty
nine billion a year with medical
costs associated with patients
not being able to afford their
medications and not a hearing to
us so in the end it becomes
actually not fair the patient
can't pay their medication the
the planned then that's
absorbing much greater costs
down the line so strange
argument say it's not fair
it's it's proactive and
preventative to allow patients
to help these copays
particularly because the
insurance company gets its
payments from the the copay
assistance card everybody in the
equation is beating their and
the guardian it's just that one
side has decided that it's going
to define what constitutes fair
not fair we in Arizona passed a
bill last year it went into
effect in twenty twenty.
That build their other states
that are now.
Implementing similar bills to
this we believe it will in the
and create a greater health
outcomes and I think without I
will us stopping testimony of
their questions I can answer to
do so.
Thank you and Representative I
think you have an amendment is
that correct yes thank you for I
thank you madam chair thank you
very much give me and we'll move
that for discussion when we go
to the committee but I'm
wondering if there's anything
you want to say about that
before we go to the audience I'm
madam chair do you mind
discussed amendment first or use
one way to after that that I
think we'll wait till after
public comment unless there's
something critical you think the
public needs to know before they
make their comment no I think
that's fine I'm actually looking
for the public comment I know
this is a controversial bill
it's very complicated and so
hearing some of that I think
would be beneficial to everybody
so if you're okay we'll wait to
public comment to talk about.
Thank you just don't just let's
not forget you see in this
virtual thing without paper in
front of us to forget
so again we're going to do like
we did if you're here for the
last bill we're going to take a
poll of the audience to see if
how many are in favor of a house
bill one twenty nine and how
many are here in opposition so
of those among the attendees
this morning if you would our
response to the poll in support
or opposition.
We'll leave that open for
fifteen twenty seconds give
people a chance to respond.
Okay looks like we haven't we've
got nineteen or seventy three
percent and support
or twenty seventy four percent
and seven or twenty six percent
in opposition.
Okay so first we are going to go
to the audience in opposition.
Opposition and I'm going to ask
that you try and keep your
comments as brief as possible
and non repetitive you we saw
your hands right so don't you
don't have to speak but those
who wish to speak please raise
your hand in opposition.
Okay we have rent more.
Go ahead Brandt.
Thank you madam chair it was a
little slow to get to the and
you.
Create the opportunity to speak
to the committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Brent for
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
it is a trade association health
plans it has members in the
state of New Mexico
I have spoken with the sponsor
of this bill and
I will say this our opposition.
There's a lot of things going on
in the bill we would very much
appreciate the opportunity to
sit down and speak with the
sponsor to try to address some
of the issues that are there I
will say in the the first
instance one of the the things
that is in the bill is seeking
transparency transparency can be
good in certain circumstances
but the the underlying question
for a hip in its members is the
transparency that is sought in
this bill is for a bit of an
undefined purpose and so we
really want to try to better
understand exactly where the
transparency measures will make
things meaningfully better for.
People who are seeking care it's
understandable that different
parts of this supply chain would
want to know what's in the
various agreements but that may
not necessarily benefit people
at the end because as I've told
this committee many times the
cost of.
Description drugs is set by the
manufacturers and everyone in
the in the chain from there
tries to respond to that and
tries to provide good value to
patients at the best price
possible so the problem really
does start with the
manufacturers of the other part
that I would a note for the
committee is there's lots of
people involved in this supply
chain focusing just on the PBMs
and what they're doing is an
incomplete solution to a very
difficult problem I would say S.
secondly and I will end with
this focusing on a copays
doesn't acknowledge the fact
that the the cost to patients
are insured also includes the
premiums and so when there's an
over emphasis certain over
focusing on co pay a copay
amounts in the blacks the fact
that there's also the premiums
that that are necessary part and
the fact that where you have a
restricting of copays you're
necessarily going to see
premiums rise and so I would say
once again we need to look at
this this issue from a holistic
perspective and see what this
proposal does to premiums not
just copays and we look forward
to continue our discussions with
the sponsor thank you very much
madam chair.
Thank you Brandt next we have
and I'm I apologize if I don't
get this right
of Latino Mendez Harper.
Hi there this is the Dr Lujan
and as Harper can you hear me
yes thank you thank you thank
you so much madam chair members
of the committee my name is Dr
Lee GM and that's Harper I'm a
pharmacist in a lobbyist with
prime therapeutics which is a
PBM owned in part by Blue Cross
blue shield of New Mexico and
I'm appearing today before you
to respectfully oppose house
bill one twenty nine
some of the concerns that we
have is that this legislation
it is it is complex as
Representative Fajardo
mentioned but our concern is
that add some administrative
obligations that don't either
result in drug cost savings or
improve quality of care and
we're concerned that there are
some things in this legislation
that will increase prescription
drug and health care costs for
all New Mexicans on if I could
just briefly touch on three
parts of the legislation
I will try to do so as quickly
as possible first I want to
start by clearly stating that we
absolutely support meaningful
transparency in drug cost
information
ensure websites allow allow
members to log in and get
patient specific information
about what their benefits are
such as like what drugs are
covered what the out of pocket
costs are in so this this
legislation requires insurers to
provide that to aside to have it
centrally published is our
concern with that is that it's
it's duplicative and not really
beneficial because it doesn't it
may not have the level of detail
that is already available.
the second item in this
legislation is that PBMs have to
report information to OSI and
this really accomplishes nothing
except providing information
that PBMs already provide to the
insurers that hire us and it has
no meaningful value to anyone
there also are some concerns
about some of proprietary
information that we're reporting
that may not be completely
unprotected.
but I wanted to focus on the
final section of this
legislation that focuses on
patient cost sharing amounts
and wanted to clarify some
things if the first is that PBMs
don't determine patient cost
sharing amounts insurers make
all the decisions about how
their benefits are designed and
that includes patient cost
sharing so what is your copay or
do you pay a percentage of the
drug cost
and PBMs are simply
administering those benefits
after all those decisions are
made.
the two elements in section four
that we see is could be could be
Kastro Evers is the under
present point of sale rebates
sharing
this is a proven cost driver for
collectively insured members
I want to share briefly that the
Congressional Budget Office
study this for Medicare part D.
patients and found that it would
increase federal spending by a
hundred and seventy seven
billion over ten years and while
I recognize that Medicare D. is
at different scales The New
Mexico I wanted to share this
because it's the exact same
policy concept and actually and
FIR GST noted that they have
eighteen million dollars in
rebates that they used to offset
program costs so that gives you
a little bit idea of the scale
that you might be looking at New
Mexico.
the second element that can
increase costs are is having to
include those manufacturer
coupons in member and member
cost sharing information
and the the rationale there is
that these coupons encouraged
the use of high cost drugs
despite having generics
biosimilars or lower cost
options available and so what
this does is it increases
overall spending on drugs so
that's that's the issue with
manufacturer coupons.
the final point I wanted to make
is that we were a little
confused about section four
because it seems to undermine
previous sections of the of the
legislation
the concept of having a hundred
percent rebate shared at point
of sale is is counterproductive
to the PBM reporting that's
required to OSI that reporting
focuses on how much money in
rebates either health plans or
insurers are retaining or PBMs
retaining but then you have
section for that says all those
rebates have to be passed on to
consumers so our concern is that
if this bill is enacted with
both of those provisions in
place the state would spend tax
dollars to set up this reporting
infrastructure only to have
nothing the reported so
certainly echo France sentiment
that you know this is a complex
bill we look forward to speaking
with the sponsor and and
proponents but for the reasons
that I noted respectfully ask
you not to pass house bill one
twenty nine.
Thank you.
Thank you our next I have Marlys
jokes.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes.
It's thank you want to show its
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
and we appreciate the Sanchez
attempt to reduce prescription
drug costs and house bill one
twenty nine.
And for all the other.
Reasons previously stated we do
stand in opposition and are
concerned that this bill in the
end tended consequences will
actually drive up drug costs
were members into New Mexicans
in general I would like to
emphasize that we believe drug
price transparency needs to be
required a call across the
entire supply chain
pharmaceutical manufacturers to
PSA owes to PBMs to health plans
and until that transparency is
enforced throughout that entire
supply.
Chained we are not going to see
a reduction in drug costs so we
look forward to working with the
sponsor we have been in touch
with her and that is everybody
has mentioned this is
complicated but.
Just want to emphasize in maybe
just inquire as to we had done
some changes to PBM reporting
which.
The Gina had mentioned and in
less we are starting to do that
transparency to out that supply
train to the PSA owes to the
manufacturers we're never really
going to get to to tax
transparency so we encourage
that we look through that entire
supply chain as we go through
this process thank you.
I'm a I'm sorry thank you.
That that'll be the number one
question at your mute our
response your muted and can you
hear me now
to it so to the that was the
last speaker in opposition so
those who wish to speak and
support if you could raise your
hands.
And we will start with our Linda
Siegel.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I'm here on this bill on behalf
of the American cancer society
cancer action network and we do
support it because it would
remove barriers in New Mexico to
co pay assistance by requiring
all the payments made by
patients either directly or on
there have on their behalf be
counted towards the overall out
of pocket maximum payment or
deductible and requiring health
insurance carriers to do so will
protect cancer patients from
surprise billing and treatment
delays as well as allowing
individuals to utilize the phone
Bennett benefits of the copay
assistance program so ACS can
talks ask for your support on
this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have page two
Hamel.
Go ahead page if the on mute.
Rate you are still muted.
You're on mute on your end.
Okay Page we're gonna come back
to you next we have of Felix
Garcia.
Go ahead Felix on mute there.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
my name's Felix Garcia I am a
person living with hemophilia B.
E. who is also HIV and hepatitis
C. positive as the consequences
of my genetic disorder.
I a support issue one twenty
nine because with the genetic
disorder and its complications I
have to maintain a very very
good health insurance at all
times on this usually means
higher monthly premiums higher
deductibles and you know paying
five to nine thousand dollars
over the year to to reach my
deductible is not the issue the
issue that that myself and
others have those of us in front
of you in this is that I need my
life saving medication in
January in February in every
month after that my medical
needs cannot wait for me to meet
my deductible in seven to eight
months any given perspective the
portion of my January order of
anti human CD factor was eight
thousand five hundred forty
dollars that's only ten dollar
sign my entire deductible for
the year.
To my family like many families
in New Mexico we don't have
enough money to to last a whole
other month in our savings
you know let alone pay an extra
eighty five hundred dollars all
I'm asking is for that the
assistance that I already
qualified for be used to help me
access my medication and not
just to add to to a profit line
for insurance company this is an
access issue it is I I hear you
know people saying that it's
complicated it's not complicated
at all in my life is very simple
is that an over emphasis will
pages because the emphasis
happens January one we're
already a month in five days
behind schedule for me it just
like me knowing we have the
security of having access to our
treatment so thank you very much
madam chair committee members
thank you Felix.
Next I have T. J. Trujillo and
then we have page back we'll get
to page after teacher.
Good morning madam chair it's a
pleasure to see you the my name
is TJ trio to register lobbyist
for the biotechnology innovation
organization of.
We as a as an organization stand
in strong support of this bill
and really like to think the
sponsor for bringing four.
Based on your comments are there
will be any details as I'm sure
there's gonna be a lot of
questions and rather have
legislators that be able to ask
those questions at this time
with that thank you for allowing
us to speak.
Thank you TJ
next we have our page to Hamel.
I can we can go ahead thanks
that's great thank you so we're
actually in a little bit more
about let me introduce myself my
name is Paige to him all I'm
with the office of the
superintendent of insurance on
the health care policy manager
there.
Nice to meet you madam chair
I've met but new folks on the
committee I spend a.
You know the the face that you
might see talking about some of
these bills related to the
insurance code
in the past and so
I
that we we we are in a position
of neutrality on this piece of
legislation
we wrote a fiscal impact report
highlighting some of the issues
that were actually.
Right up by the opposition
namely that we're on shore you
know there there's a lot of work
here for to collect a lot of
data that might not
grant this is enough
transparency to really be
meaningful to consumers and us
as insurance regulators
the other concern that we had
was some of the language in this
bill seems to mistake the
relationship that PBMs have
with insurance companies and
states that PBMs are responsible
for designing the plan benefits
related to pharmacy and that's
not true that's the
responsibility of the insurance
companies PBMs are basically
contractors for insurance
companies and the insurance
companies tell the PBMs how to
structure the plan design and an
issue that we did not ray is or
that we we didn't put a price
tag on of in the PBM is well we
share the goal of
you know curbing some of the
cost sharing for drugs.
It this would require some
evaluation maybe actuarial
evaluation of the impact of
those costs on premiums and
that may require us to contract
for or higher for additional
actuarial services
generally I think you know we
like the idea of
transparency we think and inner
we were interest I wasn't
surprised to hear the industry
shared our perspective on this
we actually don't think it goes
far enough
we'd like to see more
transparency across the board to
have a really meaningful impact
in our dialogue of where we can
control prescription drug costs
and with that I thank you.
Thank you thank you page and
that was the last
public testimony so we will go
to members of the committee but
of first Representative do you
wanna
present your
amendment yes madam chair thank
you so much I'd like to move
amendment number two one nine
three four one point two four
discussion.
And and I'll second go ahead
thank you madam chair so
basically we were drafting the
bill this is just include some
cleanup clarification language
kind of what as we were going
through we did talk to other
other organizations other
companies you know farm as in
support of this bill and this
was just to make sure that we
captured everything and then it
let my experts expert witness
it's it is up to you we can
either give it to the committee
to ask questions or I can have
my experts explained line by
line it's up to you madam chair
how you want to handle the
amendment.
can you give us an overview of
what it does and and
Actually I am I let my expert do
that okay.
For the amendment since our
focus is to of.
Limit the outcome cost out of
pocket costs for patients.
the amendment just ensures that
payments made by or on behalf of
patients counts towards our
deductible.
And their maximum the date that
the responsible for paying as
part of the contract between the
health plan and patient.
And it includes health insurers
in section four so.
It's the base of the amendment.
Okay thank you and they are
questions or discussions from
the committee on the amendment.
Seeing none is there any
objection to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none you have
we will adopt the amendment and
now Representative you're back
on the whole bill as amended.
Thank you madam chair I just
want you know I just want to
thank everybody for you know I
did like I said this is a
complicated built one of the
reasons I kind of signed on to
it is important to me
you know these co pay cards that
are issued to the Department big
companies are not being counted
toward the patient's adoptable
and I I use the dirt term double
dipping and so in my mind that's
what's happening is like if I
have to if I have to meet a
deductible before my insurance
kicks and when you have big
pharma coming in and so we're
gonna help you with that but the
insurance companies are going no
that doesn't count I guess my my
my argument is it what does it
matter who pays for it.
It's meant to help me and
consumer is meant to help the
people that that need that
medication.
As I look forward to as this
bill goes through talking to
work more people talking to more
insurance companies you know and
and I love how people think it
goes too far people you don't
think it goes far nap but with
that madam chair I stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you so first I have
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Fajardo for
bringing this forward I just
wanted to.
I know a little bit more about
and the transparency that
Age was talking about how there
should be more is it because
the PBMs don't have to exactly
report
what they receive and how they
discount can you explain a
little bit more about the
transparency part of this.
Or.
Thank you madam chair I will let
my expert go into further detail
on that one because yeah I'm you
I'm the pharmaceutical companies
are arguing that
proprietary information they
don't want to share their rates
because that you can't have
competition
you know they they they don't
want other other competitors
seeing what they're doing
because it is a very complicated
situation on reimbursements who
gets what and along along the
chain we're asking that B. B.
disclosed because it does help
that and consumer and I let my
experts go to more detail on
what that looks like.
I'm okay.
Experts say more about it.
And.
is that Mr McLish or miss
Whitney.
This would make.
This would be on this one okay.
I apologize I can you restate
the question again for me so I
can make sure I'm answering it
on points.
Yes madam chair and
representative and miss Whitney
my question is it was raised by
miss do mail that there should
be a little bit more
transparency and I know this is
trying to do that
but what
What's what's missing on the
transparency part.
Or or should be
Meet they be made I guess by the
PBMs.
On the reporting.
Madam chair members of the
committee up with regard to the
question of transparency and and
what is missing in the bill I
can certainly you know provide
hi my opinion on that I can tell
you the opposition not like my
opinion I I I feel like I'm not
prepared to speak specifically
to the aspects of this bill but
with work are transparency I
will say that it is it is
critically important for all of
us to understand if we're going
to understand the issue of drug
pricing and what drives up the
cost of drugs whether it's on
and actually saw it or it's
elsewhere it's increasing
critically important rest you
understand the role that the
insurer and the pharmacy benefit
manager play because they are in
fact in the middle and they have
relationships with nearly I
think actually literally every
other member up the supply chain
so.
I am not prepared to answer with
the specifics of this bill but I
I do believe that there is no
such thing as too much
transparency with regard to drug
prices and with regard to that
so called proprietary nature of
the information I do not believe
that that is.
An accurate description for up
for this type of transparency is
needed there is no proprietary
in this budget I'm it.
It's all I can provided again I
apologize thank thank you on
that point and I think
Representative
Mr Hamel from OSI is having
trouble she's still here for its
if she's still there I was
looking for you and attendees
and had left to there to answer
questions it was her comment and
she has texted me it if you want
to respond if that's to the
specific question about what you
specifically meant about not
going far enough in transparency
sure we actually aggregated data
not revealing the name of any of
the plans or any of the drugs is
going to make us really hard to
figure out where the problems
are it will give us just a
general piece of information
about you know where rebates you
know which companies use which
are actually wanting to give us
information about which
companies use more right it
it'll just give us information
about the volumes of rebates
and the volume of drug prices in
the markets but it won't let us
drill down into where some of
these you know drug costs or
PBMs are potentially doing
things that we should be
regulating
and so that language that
requires aggregation of that
data it was something that we
had an issue with we also we're
concerns that we the student
give us of any authority to also
sort of ask for data from drug
companies I mean that would be
something else to see sort of
the the boil down drug costs and
what that would look like.
before it gets passed through
the PBM system I think some of
the opposition said you know we
need to take a look at the whole
supply chain process and this
doesn't quite get get about this
just gets in a narrow window so
we are kind of honestly pushing
for this to go further and be
more transparent.
Thank you Mr Hamel does that
answer your question
Representative Ferrary.
Your muted.
Hi muted so I wouldn't cost
again yes thank you madam chair
it sounds like we need to go
further with this idea in the
transparency so that people can
see if they really are.
Getting the advantage of rebates
through their PBMs thank you
thank you next I have
Representative Thomson.
You madam chair a kind of along
the same lines as Representative
Ferrary I see in our
this that
The bill prohibits insurers or
PBM from divulging actual amount
of rebates and are pharmacy
benefit manager received on a
product it also requires a
website to publish a
transparency report that would
not include the identity of the
health plan PBM for the prices
charged amount of rebates issued
for specific drugs or drug
classes so I'm just wondering
why specifically prohibiting
Health were they I mean aims.
Your medications are games are
health plans or any of those
things why with that purpose was
it purposeful and why.
I mean Madam chair
representation in the analysis
where you're finding that just
so I can read it.
It's actually the majority
analysis okay in a can you can
you say that again please
basically it says that it
prohibits insurance or PBM from
divulging the actual amount of
rebates and ensure our PBM
received it also requires a
website to publish a
transparency report that doesn't
include the identity of the
health plan PBM or the prices
charged so it it looks like it's
purposefully keeping things I'm
transparent and I'm wondering if
that was intentional if it was
why and if it wasn't intentional
that maybe to point it out to
you.
Madam chair and representative I
might have to disagree with that
analysis slightly and I would
love to you can send it to me we
can have that conversation in
this that bill the bills intent
is is for transparency so that
so that they can do it in the
end consumer knows what what
they're getting you know like I
said one of the big issues is
these rebates are coming in and
consumer is is not getting them
and I'm so the bills intended to
bring that transferred language
we need to look into I would
really be interested in New in.
Finding out.
Exactly where that opinion came
from and maybe talk to the to
the into the analyst on that and
to see where they got that from.
Okay the analyst I believe it is
Karen well.
So so yeah I I like the idea of
the bill but I I it worries me
that we allow
Okay opacity is that the right
word that we're not taking them
I mean it it is far as I'm
concerned the more information
the better and I I to get tired
of that its proprietary well you
know my insurance dollars are
paying for it might tax dollars
are paying for it and that so I
I just have an issue with that
well I won't get started because
I have an issue with a lot of
things I'm but thank you for
bringing this bill and if you
could touch base with care and
and and and if that is the case
that's not what you intended
please that do it amendment
before if you need to before you
get to your next committee thank
you madam chair.
If you wouldn't mind it just
that particular languages so I
can look at it as well I would
really appreciate it madam chair
representative so that we can
move further on that and
Representative Karen is the
committee analyst and develop
the I'm not the major analyst so
that it that analysis is
available to all the committee
it's it's the house democratic
leadership bill analysis that
was my mistake of okay I I guess
I am am not up to date on who
are analysts are or what.
I know they do a good job so I
don't really care what you just
read their staff.
Thank you for your thank you
next we have Representative
Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair
In our I appreciate
Representative Fajardo bring
this for trying to chew up.
Help those that up if not then
not copays and.
Insurance
We need reform it's evident that
we could probably all agree on
that
I'm just going to share my with
my a little bit of what I've
gone through so that you can
nope.
I base my decisions on my
questions on on on my past and
what's happened to me and and
Our I I also have insurance at
the I don't want to get paid two
thousand dollars a year for my
family insurance it's tremendous
and it might my deductibles over
six thousand dollars a year
and so I understand a little bit
I understand sure as to the live
agent and sole you the pay.
On.
When you're we're doing when
they're calculating premiums the
pip front or some part of it
doesn't matter when you look at
all your your your plans
available one way or another you
gonna pay you the more fronts
and and get less than not
doubles so for we pay a little
less up front you pay warranted
Dr bulls more copays of you just
really study it
that's that's what it does and
and so it's a gamble I mean you
if you think you're not gonna
get sick you're young take the
lower one is if you're over and
it's easier for you financially
manage that then you take the
other and and so with that being
said I mean I I I'll tell you we
you know I'm gonna just go back
to what happened to me I I had a
plan to.
Some years back and we twenty
fourteen and and my daughter
rolled over in a in a in a side
by side and
I have just received a letter
from.
the insurance company that they
would no longer cover us
literally on October and they
did not have a plan that plan
would not be available next year
and that plan I have had it for
like eight or nine years before
that is a good plan and so and
I'm telling you this because
it's important because happened
to back to back years to me.
The madam chair Representative
there change that because the
obamacare this spring that
didn't meet the criteria and so
the the I was under the
impression that we we all
understood what our agent so as
we make any any adjustments from
the able to keep it and and so I
get this letter in early October
my daughter roll over on their
forget it October twenty fourth
to roll over not in this deal
almost.
Thanks for what are and I have
to provide help as we wind up we
can provide the care that we
need here New Mexico ended up in
the Phoenix and the and they had
to do eleven surgeries on my
daughter.
In a month and a half a little
well about two months actually
so that I so that I would be
covered under my insurance you
got down to seventy eight pounds
and it was terrible was hard and
and part of that was there with
Russia because I could even buy
an insurance at that time to
replace it they didn't they were
scrambling to come up with
something of that caliber.
the following year in the final
group came up with the in a.
Or or.
Finally came up with the with
another planet purchased at
little bit more money and it
didn't quite wasn't as good as
the other one but it was it was
it was something sort of
comparable.
Next year
How we through the year I had a
massive problem with my eyes it
was at issue of my eyes and I
ended up it was so bad I I was I
was going to doctors and I have
to thank you backed.
We were heard of this contacts
hard contact in the subcontinent
in order for me to be able to
see and my my my vision just was
gone I I have twenty two hundred
one I point one or the other and
I to be driven to work been read
in my papers or anything I will
go to a long deal but here's
what happens same exact thing
happens to me again the my the I
get a letter I'm going to might
researchers I ended up meeting I
get another letter your we will
no longer be offered in this
plan and so they rushed all the
surgeries on and then three or
four major goals for months and
so that being said I mean we do
have to reform
I'm stuck now with the plan and
I paying way more than I what
this and yes I'm older and stuff
and there's there's some issues
you know obviously those are
factors do not issues but my
point is is it's it's expensive
I mean I think what I'm able to
afford there's a lot of people
are struggling and I know this
is an issue because I have a I
would never you are that.
Representative can you please
Locus on on the bill yes ma'am
thank you so my point is just I
just worry about the about the
madam chair and representative
just my only concern with this
is I I I I I by the trapping
this and trying to do the right
thing on this
my point is the I just hope that
the
the double the excuse me the
copay doesn't affect the premium
madam chair as well as going
with us and because I know that
it's it's affected my stuff in
the past and so that's really my
only fear sometimes are
unintended unintended
consequence of we save this on
the left but then they come back
and get us in the I'm on on the
other pocket but outside of that
I mean I really appreciate
Representative Fajardo bringing
this and and thank you madam
chair I I I I have a couple
questions what is the really
minor and you guys addressed
dressed the majority of it it is
complicated but but
that is really my major concern
is hopefully if there's not up
our our and it no unintended
consequence it raises premiums
thank you I thank you.
Madam chair just I'm just and
representative you make a very
valid point and so this this
legislation is actually then
acted in eight other states and
so and I've talked to
at the Representative museum and
it has passed the test and he's
a champion and so I've had a
great you know our conversations
and insurance companies do keep
moving the goal post that is
absolutely true whether we do
this or not the goal post is
going to get is going to be
moved and so other states have
kind of taken lead on this I
want to be one of those states
that take lead on this but I am
listening to what other states
are doing as the Gold Coast you
know and a lot of the staff we
have in in this bill is is
brought to ideas from other
states
we capture more than what their
initial bill stand in but we may
we'll probably gonna have to go
back later and and do some more
and that's the joy of the
legislature but you're actually
right Representative you're on
point thank you madam chair let
me speak.
Thank you thank you
Representative
I wanna say of a couple of
things as well and I really
commend you representative for
bringing us hi
I really support the the issue
that you're trying to prevent
about the co pays and not
recognizing all assistance it's
my biggest complaint about
Medicare part D. prescriptions
with the donut hole and you
can't get any help if you have
no insurance the many of the
manufacturers would help you
with the purchase of those drugs
they would provide them free or
low cost and yet if you're on
Medicare or one of these or a
commercial plan for that matter
with a really high deductible
that you have to meet on your
that includes your drug copays
if you get any help they don't
count it as so you can never get
help to get through that high
deductible or that doughnut hole
in in regards to Medicare so I
really commend that part I also
have to agree that it doesn't
quite go far enough you know
when it Ag gates all the data
you can't really get at this
specific plan
in another thing that I have
said privately to some members
of the whole continuum of
industry and and I've said it
publicly.
When it comes to pricing of
drugs the industry as a whole
for manufacturers to PBMs and
the in that insurance carriers
are their own worst enemies
because they make it so
complicated and so complex you
cannot trace the real cost of
the drugs and others to there's
rebates there's discounts
there's
re basing their I mean there's
all kinds of issues that go into
in the charts that you've
provided as hand outs and that
are and if FIR are simplified
but I've seen presentations from
from the industry trying to
explain it that are and I've
said that's why we don't like
you that's why we don't like
pricing of drugs you make it so
impossible it's going every
which way and all the arrows and
and stuff so it it has to be
simplified which means you have
to be transparent in this and so
and I support whatever relief we
can get down to the individual
patient.
as a matter of of fairness and
and just
it and the the other issue I
have and when you when when the
insurance companies do their
projections for premiums they
look out here because that's all
they have that that individual
enrolled for for sure we do the
same when we do FIR is is how
much it's gonna cost in this
next budget year not what the
long term ten twenty years from
now is going to do on the long
term health and of the
individual who may have missed
their medication stop their
medication took turns with
family members on on who gets
their medication this month half
their does it cetera and then
they end up with their condition
worsening and are costing
whoever's the carrier at the
time more because they are ill
they're in the hospital they you
know have have much greater need
and all we do is look at the
short term cost and not the long
term so
Representative if your bill does
not make it all the way through
and to the governor's desk and I
hope that you'll talk more to
OSI along the way about
potentially
doing a little bit more
transparency and not
Just aggregate data but if it
doesn't make it all the way
through I intend during the
interim to put this on the
agenda that we can have more
extended conversation about this
and try and unravel a little bit
it's really hard to understand I
I the complexities of pharmacy
pricing
in a in a session and virtually
but we should that we should
spend an extended period of time
talking about this and if it
does make it through I agree
with you we're gonna have to
come back and continue to tweak
to get to the goals that we want
of having
Access reasonable access to
pharmaceuticals as they are
we'll save in health care costs
down the road yes if you have a
a pharmaceutical that's going to
help prevent further chronic
disease so I commend you for for
taking a stab at it and.
Thank you what's the pleasure of
the committee.
Representative Armstrong did you
have a question.
Yes thank you madam chair just a
real quick comment and needs to
be transparency not only in the
pharmaceutical but in the in the
whole as a whole we need more
transparency to know what and
the replacement costs what I
mean there's just needs to be
transparency as a whole I just
want to make that comment thank
you madam chair thank you
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair and move it to pass
I don't want to pass and the
second are you want to call the
roll Torrez.
Representative Anderson.
Yes.
Rep Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative made by.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash.
Yes.
I'm sorry.
Yes thank you Representative
step of the lord yes.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Your muted Representative.
Sorry I'm gonna pass because I'm
I was presenting a bill and I
missed all this discussion it
sounds like I needed to hear
that discussion okay thank you
Representative well June Montoya
yes.
Representative Louise.
Yes.
Representative Thomson yeah.
Representative the.
Joy and Ferrari.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
boat.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
You want to go back to
Representative Anderson and
Matthews.
Representative Anderson said yes
thank he's passed okay sorry
Representative Anderson.
I'm sorry.
Renewable thank you
and Representative Marian
Matthews.
And since I missed the debate on
just not voting can I do that
yes thank no no you're here you
actually have to vote.
really.
I have no idea how to vote on
this because I missed the.
I'm I'm sorry I have no idea
what I'm supposed to do here I I
would have probably not join
come in if I'd realize that.
yeah and Representative
I don't want to tell you how to
vote if it passes out of the
committee it will go to another
committee it's got a long way to
go.
But if you're not comfortable
then about now.
Representative you're muted.
Okay I think it's passing anyway
so I just vote no and then.
I'm thank thank you sorry about
that and realize that I didn't
have that choice.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
There are two knows the line up.
Thank you so Representative you
have a do pass on your could I
explain my vote oh yes I just
want to just a second that was
you have a do pass of one twenty
nine as amended and
Representative Ferrary to
explain your vote I'm sorry
madam chair I didn't mean to
interrupt you that's our I just
still have that reservation I
know this is a really good start
but my reservation still are you
know the PBMs not really passing
having to be accountable or the
transparency for what they keep
their what they passed on and
how that all works but anyway I
I do hope this there's more
discussion on it thank you.
Thank you and thank you
representative thank you madam
chair and I just real quick beat
me I respond thank you guys and
we will continue to have these
conversations I love this
conversation I just wanted to
take a personal known personal
quite a privilege I did say
Representative Thomson with her
granddaughter in the committee
room a little while ago and my
granddaughter joins me in my
last committee and for ever and
archives you'll see my
granddaughter picking her nose
and one of our committee
hearings so I will remind her
that she goes out.
Madam chair I'm in you'll
frequently see my granddaughter
trying to pick my nose.
You know it's why we do what we
do right right yeah thank you
they were family friendly
committees that thank you thank
you representative madam.
next we will go to house bill
one forty two Representative
Thomson school task force on
sexual misconduct.
And if you'll let us know if
there you have experts you wish
us to bring over they do they
are Andrew Ecole.
Alexandria Taylor and Elena
Rubin felt.
Can I just give us a moment.
And your Eckels.
Okay got Andor Ackles give me
the other names again
Alexandria Taylor.
There she is.
Thank you have Alexandria and
Elena Rubin felt.
Within each E. L. E. N. A.
Qatar.
All right I figured out how to
move I didn't think I could do
that I figured out how I can how
I can move folks to panelists so
thank you go ahead with your and
present your bill and we are
learning something new on do
every day our everyday.
Well I shouldn't have done that
just just for those of you
there's a place to where you can
have your eyebrows and lips
automatically colored in by zoom
but I was told recently that
doesn't travel well with your
head turn sometimes your lips
stay where they were so so just
just I was trying to be lazy it
it was not the greatest so thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee house bill one
forty two it is essentially the
same as a bill that I ran twenty
nineteen that made it all the
way to the Senate floor and
it got hung up on some
misunderstanding I'll just be
polite that way so essentially
what this bill is attempting to
do is to decrease the incidence
of sexual assault sexual
harassment those kinds of things
there are a variety of ways but
one of one of the most important
ones for me is to teach our our
students affirmative consent and
what that means is only yes
means yes in terms of sexual
activity not saying no does that
mean yes being quiet doesn't
mean yes
having had sex with that person
in the past does that mean yes.
That what we're looking at in
that part of the bill and I will
let my experts going to have
more on the higher it is that we
teach kids in their in their
health classes their sex ed
classes that affirmative consent
is the standard it takes away it
makes it very clear if you don't
have a test that you have that
you don't do anything
essentially there's no more well
I thought that you wanted it
because we had done it before or
you know I bought her dinner and
she didn't say no so we're
trying to get rid of all of that
kind of
I'm clear on clear standards and
with that I will I will let my
my experts still in a little
more thank you madam chair.
Expert would you like to go to
first so let's go to Alexandria
welcome Alexandria go ahead.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name's Alexandria Taylor and
I'm the deputy director of the
New Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs in in the sap
leads the state's efforts to
reduce sexual abuse and sexual
violence by providing training
and technical assistance to
service providers law
enforcement officers prosecutors
medical practitioners and mental
health professionals NMC sap is
committed to the provision of
comprehensive sexual violence
services which includes primary
prevention of sexual violence
NMC's that also collects and
analyzes sexual assault and
domestic violence data and
produces the annual reports of
our findings according to the
New Mexico interpersonal
violence data central repository
in two thousand nineteen there
were three thousand eight
hundred and seventy five sex
crimes reported by participating
law enforcement agencies are
thirteen rape crisis centers and
mental health services serves
two thousand one hundred and for
victims of sexual violence and
our sexual assault nurse
examiners served one thousand
four hundred and fifty victims
of sexual violence house bill
one forty two creates a task
force on sexual misconduct
requires public schools and all
postsecondary educational
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent and
prevention of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence harassment and stalking
and requires these institutions
to conduct a biennial sexual
misconduct climate survey.
Is the public school code to
include a requirement to set
affirmative consent as the
standard for sexual activity
according to the state's youth
and resiliency survey from high
school age young people grades
nine through twelve thirty eight
point six percent report having
had sexual intercourse and nine
point nine percent report having
been sexually assaulted in the
last twelve months all students
no matter what their gender
identity benefit from a clear
understanding of affirmative
consent in sexual activity we
understand sexual health
education provided in a way that
is age appropriate and medically
accurate prevent sexual violence
affirmative consent trainings
teaches that only yes means yes
when students understand
affirmative consent they have
more clarity about setting
states boundaries and this bill
requires that every student be
educated and their one unit of
health education about
affirmative consent before
sexual contact affirmative
consent is about promoting
healthy relationships and
preventing sexual assault
through respect and create and
communication creating a culture
of consent is about healthy
relationships and we can do that
in age appropriate ways teaching
occur affirmative consent in
middle school and high school is
a small step toward giving
everyone a common understanding
of consent we have thirteen
sexual assault service providers
in the state many of who provide
primary prevention education to
school age children and young
people tell us what they want
most is clarity and honesty in
the sexual health education they
received and to learn how to
communicate effectively in order
to have healthy relationships.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Representative did you want any
of your other experts to speak
now or just stand for questions
yeah well the Andrew go ahead
okay and thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Andrew Ackles I'm a junior at
NMSU New Mexico state director
of the every voice coalition a
student survivor led and
operated nonprofit as well as a
community order organizer for a
quality New Mexico an LGBTQ
civil rights organization.
In the fall of twenty eighteen a
few days before my eighteenth
birthday the NMAA you police
department was doing routine
door to door checks after a
party had been reported I was in
my bed ready to sleep before an
exam when I heard the knock on
my door the officer mentioned
the smell of marijuana in which
is not uncommon and a first year
residence hall and I mentioned
that it could be small through
the vents when a neighbor has a
party.
The officer asked for my ID
walked into my dorm without us
and made a comment about the
name ID at that time my name
have been legally changed but
not updated on any of my legal
documents he proceeded to make
several transphobic comments and
began casually misgendering me I
was extremely compliant and I
received two possession charges
although I was aware of the
rules and I consciously broke
them I did not deserve to be
subject to his transphobic
remarks I decided to do
something about it I spoke with
the director of LGBT programs
and I miss you and she offered
me to speak with the office of
institutional equity I open the
case we match review of how
camera footage we talked about
next steps this was in the
spring of two thousand and
nineteen I have not heard from
anybody since.
The feeling of isolation after
my case had been dropped without
my knowledge was devastating I
know that without a doubt I'm
not the only person to face the
re traumatize Asian of the case
being mishandled students
survivors and most importantly
survivors with intersecting
identities need more support
from the institutions that they
give everything to.
We need accurate comprehensive
data about what is happening on
our campuses we know that almost
ninety percent of survivors
choose not to report and this
creates a massive gap and
numbers of reports every year
compared to the actual number of
assaults we know what is
happening deserve to know what
is happening on our campus and
for many students are home.
We need access to medical legal
and mental health services after
an assault most college students
struggle with money the cost of
tuition rent utilities insurance
gas school supplies and food
make services like these
something we can only dream
about.
We need amnesty for school
policy violations at the time of
the assault it is inappropriate
to ever blame the survivor for
substance use or any other
school policy violation when
drugs and alcohol are so often
mechanisms of their perpetrator.
All of this starts at teaching
consent to middle and high
schoolers we need to know
exactly how to give consent as a
conscious voluntary agreement
that is reversible at any time
how can we expect young people
to be able to properly give and
ask for consent if we never
learn how to.
The bottom line is that we
students survivors queer and
trans young people are counting
on H. B. one forty two we refuse
to let the generations of
students after us to ever feel
the same isolation that we felt
we seek to address this at the
start by teaching young people
how to consent thank you for
allowing me to speak today.
Thank you Andrew for being here.
Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Elena ribbon felt I am the
legal director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs Alexander and Andrew
did a phenomenal job explaining
this bill and I know we are
conscious of time so I will just
say that I'm here to help answer
any questions that that might
come up thank you so much.
Thank you Representative are you
ready for us to go to a public
comment are doing then I am I
just want to and I and I wish I
had the list in front of me we
have a giant coalition that has
been working on this for well
over two years including girls
eating and every voice counts
and the sexual assault providers
and brother the our brothers to
get money my words are all
mixing up but we have a very big
coalition including the office
out of New Mexico state and
university of New Mexico who
would be involved in this so I
with that we with them for
questions madam chair thank you
representative okay next for the
audience we're going to do a
poll where you're be able to
select whether you are here in
support or opposition of house
bill one forty two Gabrielle if
you can put that up so we'll
give this fifteen twenty seconds
for those in attendance to
register support or opposition.
Okay looks like work done we
have of one person in opposition
and forty four in support.
We will go first on the audience
for for the person in opposition
if you wish to speak you raise
your hand but if you wish to
speak if you would there we go
Marci may.
Going have mercy on yourself
right can you hear me yes go
ahead.
So my name is Marcy me I was
actually on the shack the
student health advisory
committee from twenty ten to
twenty thirteen.
in APS and we discussed many
issues like this that were the
precursors to what you guys are
pushing right now I have several
problems with this bill our
number one being that you were
saying that private private
schools are going to be required
to do this because they receive
government funding
private means private it means
that the government doesn't have
a right to do this and if you're
gonna say you're gonna take the
government had on monies
remember that those monies
actually come from these private
citizens so that means we
started now we have a thirty of
thirty three page bill and we
have twenty three pages dealing
with this conglomerate of the
sexual trauma
and we know if you know if
you've dealt with children when
you say don't do this that's
where they gravitate to and the
person the reason why I'm
bringing this out is my friend's
son was twenty you and them to
one of these the other
orientations
on sexual abuse and he said well
I learned how not to rape a
woman he didn't say I learned
how to respect my fellow
students so all this is bent and
focused on the negative again I
have been a victim of sexual
violence
but this is not the way to do
this there and when you're
talking about you know the
National committees that are
putting the sand LGBTQ and the
focus is all on leftist LGBTQ
there's nothing that is focused
on the positive interaction
between people
That's a problem because.
Nobody is you basically the
reason why this is to the
various because people want to
throw away I'm not I'm not
ashamed of a Christian of they
want to throw away the ten
commandments well we throw away
the ten commandments you're
gonna end up with the you know
this okay you have to say this
and you else this person is this
okay and everybody knows that
when you're in the middle of the
heat of passion those
conversations are are ridiculous
because hormones take over
that the term affirmative
consent is isn't does not belong
in the middle schools it in
really it belongs in a
conversation at home how do you
handle this
thank you thank you
thank you Marci for at for being
here.
Next we will go to those in
support.
And.
get some hands up and are we had
your full support so those who
feel are they want to make a
statement I'm gonna ask you to
try and keep your we don't have
the clock but please try and
keep your statement briefs two
about a minute and trying not to
be repetitious so we can get
through this and hear from
everyone who wants to speak so
first we have Adelie brown.
All right yes.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is alley brown and I'm a student
at New Mexico State University
and I'm here today to show my
support for H. B. one forty two
I'm I'm a member of and your
generation action and a lot of
what we do is consent education
interact with a lot of students
and it's really concerning that
most of them come into college
without a basic understanding of
consent.
Can prevent sexual violence by
addressing reduce it to if
you're with just teaching
affirmative consent consent
thank you again for having me
speak.
Thank you Evelyn next we have
Marshall Martinez go ahead
Marshall.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you so
much my name is Marshall
Martinez I am the executive
director of equality New Mexico
teaching consent is LGBTQ
justice well clear entrance New
Mexicans are fighting for
abilities to make decisions
about our bodies and our lives
seeking the opportunity to live
whole authentic lives with
opportunities to thrive having
the skills to set our own
boundaries living in a society
that respects those boundaries
is critical to ensuring our
liberation eighty two percent of
LGBTQ use have experienced
harassment because of their
sexual orientation thirty eight
percent of clear use report
physical sexual abuse aimed at
them because of their sexual
orientation.
One in five trans people attempt
suicide in their lags teaching
consent the principles and
values of listening
understanding and knowing the
boundaries of others is one of
many very important things we
can do to protect LGBTQ use from
this abuse in quality New Mexico
is proud to support house bill
one forty two because we know
that healthy safe authentic
lives for LGBTQ people begin in
education and nothing can be
more critical for basic survival
than the ability for us to
decide for ourselves how when
and if to have any physical act
in our action with anyone the
long journey toward queer and
trans liberation is on going we
humbly ask you to take this next
step with us thank you.
Thank you Marshall next we have
a Cat Sanchez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Cat Sanchez
with both futures as an advocacy
organization for women and
people of color in New Mexico
one aspect of our work is access
to resources for used to be able
to have the information they
need to grow and become healthy
and strong adults I'm also a mom
H. B. one forty two is at the
intersection of my personal life
and my advocacy my partner and I
have had incredible productive
conversations with all of our
kids about life skills and
relationships including consent
but based on feedback from our
kids to either previously
attended and graduated or are
currently attending public
schools a lens on consent and
consent inclusive of LGBTQ
relationships is severely
lacking as an advocate and on
them and Amman this is alarming
our kids have friends who live
within a queer spectrum and know
their identities are not valued
or validated sexual health
education is disheartening we
urge your support on the bill
that we have been working in
coalition with other
organizations across New Mexico
to get past for several years
thank you for your time.
Thank you cat our next we have
Patsy Romero.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Patsy Romero I am the co chair
for the National Alliance on
mental illness but today I want
to speak as a former sexual
assault advocate serving as an
advocate for over eight years in
Los crucis New Mexico and I
stand in full support of house
bill one forty two madam chair
and express my appreciation to
representative Thompson for
bringing this to us today I will
I will speak getting longer of
because of time thank thank you
for bringing this bill over and
I ask the committee our past
this legislation thank you thank
you Patsy.
Next we have an hello Wilkes.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me yes all right
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for giving
me the opportunity to speak my
name is Emily whelks I'm a
recent UNM grad and I want to
express my full support for this
bill there are a lot of pressing
pieces of legislation to be
passed this session and this is
one of them we cannot wait to
educate and support the state
the students within our state
and to not act now would put our
young adults at risk I urge you
to join me in prioritizing the
well being of our next
generation of leaders and
continuing a discussion on a
topic that is too often brushed
under the rug as a regional I
want to reinforce there is an
absolute change there's an
absolute need for these changes
and this legislation can quite
literally change lives thank
you.
Thank you Emelie next we have
Sarinana Cabrera.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am a
staff attorney with the ACLU of
New Mexico and we support H. B.
one forty two because as we've
heard sexual misconduct
including harassment and assault
are under reported and under
addressed under H. B. one forty
two schools will still have
latitude to decide how to deal
with sexual misconduct on their
campuses but it ensures a basic
level of uniformity in the
approach across the state using
best practices like the
requirement for trauma informed
responses thank you.
Thank you Sarinana on next we
have Christopher Ramirez.
Good morning I thank you madam
chair my name is Christopher
Rabb maintenance and the
executive director of together
for brothers we build capacity
for young men of color ages
twelve to twenty four years old
in Albuquerque to be leaders at
all levels in their communities.
February is teen dating violence
awareness month and one of the
things that we learn as young
men of color in older men of
color is that young women of
color experience the highest
rate of harassment and and
assault on of of girls and women
and one of the ways that we can
be allies is to continue to
teach affirmative consent and
healthy relationships with young
men of color and their families
one of the interesting facts of
that almost ninety percent of
the young men of color that we
work with again ages twelve to
twenty four years old in
Albuquerque report never having
learned about consent in their
schools prior to discussing
consent and other healthy
relationship tools with together
for brothers the few that do
have learned as previous because
of that in their families by
building tools for middle school
and high schoolers to have these
opportunities what we've also
learned from young men of color
is it helps them to value their
own bodies and feed themselves
and their boundaries as assets
in terms of building healthy
relationships not only with
partners but with them with
their peers and with their
families we also applaud the the
folks who put the legislation
together we hope that this will
be even more
Tools and communication around
consent and healthy
relationships for students of
all ages in New Mexico thank you
thank you our next we have just
Clark.
Good morning madam chair and
committee my name's just Clark
and I'm the prevention manager
at solace crisis treatment
center which is the sexual
assault service center here in
Santa Fe I've been teaching
affirmative consent to middle
and high school students as part
of comprehensive sexual health
education for the last nine
years in those years students
have responded with excitement
over the idea that they are
entitled the agency over their
bodies I determination to move
that conversation into their
peer communities and anger that
the dominant narratives about
sexual violence haven't given
them access to the information
they need to have healthy
relationships.
Affirmative consent education
help students understand that
sexual violence is not only the
stranger assaults of pre often
presented in the media and which
rarely resembles how people are
assaulted in real life.
Beyond that it gives them tools
to build the relationships that
they want on their terms and for
the students who are already
survivors of sexual violence and
many of them are.
Without the guilt that so often
comes with being told that
because they didn't physically
fight back they're to blame for
being assaulted.
Looking down the road the number
one comment I get from teachers
who present during our sessions
is that they wish they would
have had this education when
they were growing up that would
it would save them years of
confusion and sometimes even
pain your support of H. B. one
forty two today will help us
ensure that ten years from now
the students will have to say
the same thank you.
Thank you just and next we have
Meghan Kashmir I hope I
pronounced that correctly go
ahead and leave your.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is nineteen
passionate I'm seventeen and
representing growth think of
Santa Fe when I was younger I
didn't appreciate the power of
affirmative consent because I
learned it such a young age at
age five I started attending
groping and learning about
consent through body bubble a
phrase that symbolizes personal
space and asking for hunger high
I.
As I age my consent education
grew to include relationships
that have the potential to make
contact.
This part of my upbringing with
the continuous process one that
began when I was young angry
with me my screen did not have
the same experience starting in
fifth grade could would confide
in me sharing stories of
uncomfortable situations each
time I wish I could have helped
them before that something
exciting happened been able to
communicate their boundaries
they simply didn't learn the
communication skills because I
did learn new skills I could
convince my peers that their
voice matters.
Affirmative consent education
will show young people they have
a voice when it mattered it is
imperative to provide this
education the seventh and
eleventh grade student at
minimum with this final
statement I urge you to vote yes
on house bill one forty two
thank you.
Thank you Meghan and I think
that's our last speaker.
Representative is there any
additional remarks you want to
make before we go to questions
from the committee.
Thank you madam chair I think
the statements that were pretty
powerful and can stand on their
own thank you.
Okay our first on my list is
Representative Anderson go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair of madam
chair I'll try to be what
address the the representative
Thompson on on house bill one
forty two
I noticed representative of I
didn't hear any comments I don't
believe from any of the the
school boards.
Who will be charged with this.
Mandate for training
did you see or hear any response
from of individual or the
association of the school board.
Thank you Representative
understand madam chair I'm we
have had some folks from
different school districts to be
involved in our in our process
along the way but I have not
heard specifically from any of
them and at the end there.
So I'll leave it at that.
Thank you thank you for that
Representative Representative as
I listen to some of the.
Actually comments from those who
support your of your bill I
thought to myself it is you know
I'm not an attorney but I I did
cross my mind.
Or are we trying to fix
something that we should we not
be to looking at our criminal
statutes to address
of.
Permitted consent somewhere in
criminal law there must be a
section that deals with this
subject did you have any chance
representative to review that.
Madam chair representative belt
that's not really what we're
looking more at the prevention
ankle we we are not looking at
the criminal penalties or any of
that what we are trying to do is
to prevent sexual harassment
sexual violence that sexual
assault before it ever begins so
that everybody on every every
child in New Mexico learns about
it learns that you know in the
appraise that I learned in
working on this bill is body
sovereignty and I really do wish
that I had been taught that as a
youngster because I what I was
taught was be nice so if you
were out somewhere and dancing
with someone in his hand when a
place it shouldn't have rather
than kneeing him in the growing
are slapping him you were very
nice and and I wish I would have
learned a long time ago that I
didn't have to be nice about
someone else's access to my body
so that's what this is about is
teaching you that our bodies
belong to us and we we don't owe
anyone anything in terms of
whether they can have access to
any parts of our body I think is
that the girl from the young
lady as that girl from girls Inc
talked about and.
Out learning about that.
Thank you very much
representative madam chair I
only have one more question
Let's see my question is goes
like this if house bill one
forty two becomes law use it P.
E. T. that them communicates to
the districts as to what these
training requirements will be or
do we leave that to each
district to interpret and
initiate that under this
mandate.
So thank thank you madam chair
and Representative Anderson so
PED will
will get the message out to the
school districts and it is in
the bill that that the school
districts.
There are curriculum that are
out there they don't have to buy
a curriculum they don't have to
invent a curriculum and and
having a as you have seen a lot
of the sexual assault providers
have spoken up in favor of this
bill and now that we all know
how to do so even if you're the
tiniest school district in the
most rural area you can you know
work out a memorandum of
understanding or agreement or
whatever with with the sexual
assault provider let's say in
Santa Fe for them to do the
trainings for your kids or cage
or to train you the staff and
what they need to do.
Thank you representative of
although the unfunded mandates
on to our school districts are
always a concern I did not know
that none the less of support
what you're trying to do with
affirmative consent thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Anderson and I I
don't see it as an unfunded
mandate I mean they have they'll
have to have somebody figure out
the curriculum I mean it's just
it's it shouldn't be that big of
a deal M. there there should not
be costs you know maybe a little
bit of staff time to get things
up and running but I think it's
it's well within the purview of
what schools schools and I say
that with the broad umbrella K.
twelve plus the and
postsecondary that this is
something that they they should
already be doing and it's
something that it is not going
to really bring any extra cost
as I said the curriculum are
free and the the sexual assault
providers that are you know
different kinds of of local
agencies will be glad to help
with the training.
Thank you for that
Representative because I've I've
agree with your comment and
believe that this training
addition could be added to this
important area of training in
our schools madam chair thank
you I've done thank you
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I
think you representative for
your presentation and thank you
for bringing this hi I agree
that this is something that
needs to be dealt with it's it's
the same thing in all schools we
that's one of my concerns is.
So every school I I want the
schools to be able to decide but
I wish I would hope that PED
would recommend two or three or
four or five different ones that
are all focused on the same
aspect of of
Affirmative consent because if
we if we implement this then
madam chair you know I know our
some of our schools already do
this but they do it differently
than other schools and then I
noticed madam chair and and
Representative that.
You're changing it to a
graduation requirements is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong yes and it's it's it
will just be folded into part of
the the curriculum for health
education essentially and we we
do have we do know that it has
been brought to our attention I
will say that you know if
somebody took their help with
let me put it this way we are
making the timing so that if you
are still in school but you've
already taken your health class
you will not be prohibited from
graduating because you don't
have this we're gonna make it
we're not going to go back
essentially so beginning with
seventh graders when it comes
into effect from that class on
it will be a graduation require
a requirement simply as a as a
piece of your health education
credits.
Okay and I noticed that this
bill goes to education next so
I'm gonna let them deal with all
of that because I'm I'm not the
expert in that area
one of the things that I wanted
to talk a little bit about this
time line and how a lot of the
schools are required to to do
this
you know make it make things
equitable out so I appreciate
that I am I want.
Affirmative consent for all
people.
All people.
So thank you madam chair.
Representative Armstrong and
madam chair I don't disagree
with you at all I mean and and
somebody talked about about your
personal bubble and I think
there's some of that teaching
going on that nobody has a right
to hug you if they don't ask
your permission so I'm I'm this
this is the first step and I'm
hoping that it's already going
on and that it will roll back
that kids are taught what
affirmative consent means and
that they have that bodies
sovereignty that I talked about
beginning in the at the age
appropriate level beginning
right away.
Well I thank you madam chair
thank you for those comments I
just
you know I taught my own
children this but not everyone
has the ability not every child
has that.
So I don't really like that
you're making it changing it to
be a graduation requirement
because some parents may feel
that they have the ability to
teach their children.
That anyway and it gets in the
age group that you're talking
about it gets weird everyone get
calls and you know I I'm not
sure that it's that making it a
graduation requirement is the
best way to do that I know we've
we had some.
Of things in our school that I
opted my children out of and so
I would like to still be able
for parents to have that choice
to opt their children out.
And making it a graduation
requirements even though it's to
the health.
Category I I still would like to
have the option for parents to
be able to opt out thank you
madam chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and dead
Division the committee and and
thank you Representative Thomson
for sponsoring this legislation
And
Yeah I certainly support the
goals but I do have a couple
questions about the means and my
first question is has PED has
PED been approached and asked
whether or not they are
supportive of this.
Madam chair and representative
yes we met we
we met with the PED secretary
that that like I said this is
been going on for three years so
I'm not sure when but we met
with the P. with the current P.
secretary they had no objections
they actually did we had
originally I think that this in
being taught in eighth grade and
PED and gave us the information
that actually help with pot in
second grade so they have helped
to to.
Organize this bill help to make
sure that it it does what we
wanted to do so we have had
conversations with PED and they
have helped us to make sure that
our bill is doing what what it
is that we wanted to do.
And madam chair Representative
Thomson art it.
Are they in support of the bill.
I can't speak for them and we
have not heard any opposition
the meeting was positive but I I
can't say that they are in
support of the bill because I I
can't speak for them.
Then Madam chair representative
Thompson thank you for the
answer
I noticed that in some of the
definitions and so forth there
is reference to various criminal
statutes.
And I just wondered if you
could.
Talk a little bit about.
what the interrelationship might
be between the the the the the
training and which may get into
people talking about the.
Their experiences and the things
that's happened to them and the
criminal statutes to.
Do you see any potential tension
there that's sort of my question
I'm gonna let Alexandria
discussed that madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Thompson mate may actually pass
that to our legal director Elena
Ruben fills please go ahead.
Madam chair representative it's
my understanding that the crew
of criminal sections that are
referenced in the definitions
are just too align our language
of what sexual salts means with
language that is in the criminal
code I'm not sure if that
answers.
Your question.
Chair at Representative.
At times and I I guess my
question is if if you're if.
I I just have this place out
agency from us so you're in this
class students in this class and
shares and a an experience that
would involve the violation of
asexual one of the statute.
With the teacher then be
required to make a police report
I mean I'm I'm I'm just trying
to get a feel for how that would
work right so if so if the
teachers a mandatory reporter
they they would be required to
to report the matter it's sort
of of course depends on on the
circumstances if such
information is reported to a
confidential reporting agency
there some of those on college
campuses that would be a
different story so it sort of
depends on the role of the
person that they need they
report to but one thing I would
would stresses that you know the
universe if if there's an
investigation occurring that
would be an administrative
process through a school what
through the schools I'm which is
separate from the criminal
process.
Thank you and thank you for that
answer and madam chair
representative Thompson
Very reason I raise my hand was
I realize that as I was looking
at this statute.
or this
This bill that I actually didn't
know what New Mexico law is on
teaching.
Health sex education in the
public schools is not a
requirement.
Representative there is a
requirement
again I think I will let Elena
talk about one.
What.
Madam chair representative yes I
I believe there is over a health
requirement and Health
educational requirement for
graduation and that includes
and I believe that include
sexual education as well within
that health education.
So madam chair as Representative
Thompson
so this would be a unit within
the already required education
program that is available in the
public schools is that my
understanding how this would
work.
Madam chair representative so I
I would say it's part of that
the sex ed unit but but it's
hopefully it's not limited to
that because as many people have
stated we want to teach
affirmative consent throughout a
student's world not just in the
area of sex sex that.
Madam chair representative thank
you for your answers and for the
and the expertise from your
expert witnesses.
And I yield thank you next I
have Representative Ferrary
thank you madam chair and thank
you representative Thompson for
bringing this forward this is
really important as we've heard
from your witnesses and experts
I was just wondering and you are
probably.
The least person I would need to
ask this but
is there a representative on the
task force that we
Representative disabled or the
neuro diverse community.
Madam chair representative that
that's actually an interesting
question and thinking back I I
do not know that there has been
but as you said that that's kind
of my my world so so that that
that will is that clear I mean
we will it we want everyone to
be taught these cuts these
concepts at age appropriate and
developmental level the
developmental level appropriate
weight.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Thomson I
think you know it's really
important because a lot of times
at.
There is a need to be a better
understanding of you know this
for our young people and also I
just like to follow up with
Mr Ackles about you know what's
happened it and miss you I that
is close to my district and I'm
very much in touch with them and
would like to follow up with you
if that's okay.
Okay thank you that's all madam
chair thank you next I have
Representative Barreras.
Thank you madam chair I'll make
this quick I I I want to think
of the representative for
bringing this forward I think
this is incredibly important I
want to lift up a Andrew for
sharing your experience I know
that that was probably really
tough to do I and I I really
appreciate that affirmative
consent is for everybody but I
happen to come from a family
full of women so on behalf of my
four sisters my mom my partner
and my daughter I'm really
really happy and proud to
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
I'm Representative trust us.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
legislation up I always believe
education is our is a key to
helper society server as soon as
we can
as well as its it's appropriate
and and so forth but
for our wager I might mention I
talk to our children no means no
matter what sexual affiliation
have is no means on that's it
and but and and so I'm glad that
Representative Gail Armstrong
brought up the fact that some
parents to follow through and
and and teacher your your
children and their on young
adults
teams what you should and
shouldn't be doing and how you
should act and so I I I
appreciate her bringing that up
The question often now I believe
that parents should still have
that opportunity at least but it
should be brought up to that.
And and maybe they should be
more aware
I'm really mad and I are very
good friends with the same nurse
and I work you know what a
singer says sexual sexual
assault nurse examiner and we
are very very good friends with
her and she.
Senator in rural this this the
exam that you would have to on.
Sometimes handle work five hours
and so I asked for a minute when
I read this I asked the city now
tell me about what is going on
in in in southern New Mexico
the.
Are are my district is morning
madam and so course I'm
interested in New Mexico State
University in our western falls
on the other side what are you
know she said that there was a
lot of problems with with sexual
assault to she has expressed
that over the years and so it is
a definitely a issue
that that needs to be addressed
I just had some questions and
and I'm glad that Representative
Matthews madam chair brought up
the question of.
How some of those I just
investigations work work take
place hi Mr Kraft question right
we're not going to solve half of
the she started asked that
question and and how it was how
would be handled and so the
reason I'm asking that is is on
I'm sorry I can't remember who
said that I think it was with
this is Ruben help I believe
answered back and she said that
it would be different on college
campuses so madam chair
representative I don't know who
would answer that and and I just
wanted that clarification.
Madam chair since that's that
was that Elena who I think made
the statement I will let her
answer answer.
Madam chair representative I
think what I was referring to is
that there are different process
these for investigating a matter
right there is that a criminal
investigation that would happen
with the police
universities as well as you know
primary secondary educational
institutions have also have
internal investigations they can
do that our ministry of process
these.
With that
Yes my my my question to that is
We're that creating the only
reason I'm just asking this
these internal investigations
Madam chair representative on
Mrs I guess we'll consult
Is investigations would have put
the the.
The school in on liability
situation because their pop are
we not trained properly they
have the proper protocols on how
to handle that in and I I really
feel that we're parents I I'm a
parent of of our five children
and all three of my kids well.
We went to college and went to
the airforce but I would like to
know a little bit of what's
going on in our schools support
you know and I and I'm glad that
you bring it up so that it's a
public but
Is is do are they gonna have the
proper training to handle an
investigation who's gonna given
that training so that they don't
interfere or cause a hick up in
a real investigation.
If I if I can just jump in for a
second Elena just to let
Representative know we have
passed previous laws on that
about higher education in
particular about what's required
for internal investigations and
processes so that's not part of
this bill this is about
education not about the
investigations but just want to
Alaina can can elaborate but
there are pre existing laws
about investigations.
Madam chair I think you answered
the question unless
Representative to access this
has further you'd like to ask.
Well madam chair representative
thank you Mr Rubin well I just I
don't know what that is what you
would explain it and it did it
did.
to some of that so I I would
like to know that.
And and by that you mean the
Madam chair representative
apologized and by that you mean
the the process the use that
they use or I'm sorry I don't
know if I fully is generally
just wanted to know if they have
you know all Madam chair
representative this is a rebel I
just want to know I mean what is
is there is there protocols in
place so that it doesn't
interfere with that my second
question is are going to be a
problem reliability on one of
these
It and again Representative
that's not the bill that's in
front of us so if the land can
answer very briefly that's not
what we're discussing well I I I
understand I just that's where I
was understand what I was
reading and so I was just
further wants more clarification
on that thank you.
the other question I have is on
page twenty three and I just
wanted to understand what on
line I.
Where was defined what was
defined as age appropriate.
it says image that we're how do
you define that HM
proprioceptive.
And representative that's kind
of a term of art for lack of I
mean it's understood in the
educational community and we
don't that we don't only see
what.
We talk about age appropriate as
well as developmental level
appropriate so that you know
think we can start teaching
affirmative consent in pre K.
but we're not going to teach it
around sexual activity we may
teach it around a hug so it's
not it's kind of with one of
those terms that if you're in
the education field part I mean
we all essentially no what what
age appropriate is that we're
not we're not going to put we're
not going to talk about how to
prosecute great to a first
grader with we're not gonna talk
about that to a seventh grader
we were going to talk about what
it what it is how it fits what's
in their developmental level
cognitively emotionally all of
those kind of things that is not
defined because it's one of
those those kind of ethereal
concepts that we all know what
it is it just doesn't have.
Are invested commission because
individualized essentially.
And if I can add on that point
that's where you're referring to
is an preexisting lost so it the
only the section of pre existing
law that there's being an
amendment to its in front of you
and I would assume that there
may be a more full definition in
the in the full
statute around that thank you
madam chair and representative
thank you for bringing this
legislation is something that's
very important to to all
All people together in this I'm
not this impairments that we're
living in thank you so much
thank you representative thank
you Representative Lord.
Thank you funded some light in
here okay thank you thank you
Madam chair representative.
So I want to make a brief
comment before hi yes my
questions and I'm just gonna.
It's actually words of advice
more than anything.
I'm this is the fourth time that
I've heard of bill where the
rap so the experts.
Make disparaging remarks about
law enforcement.
I'm having a really hard time
with that since it was a law
enforcement officer killed last
night and he his wife is
pregnant these behind for kids
of it makes no all emotional and
I I get a little frustrated when
people make blanket statements
all leos all gun owners are
Republicans all Democrats
because we're not all the same
you know that.
So when you start off with that
it kind of takes me out of the
game and I'm not minimizing at
all because there are bad police
officers is also bad legislators
we're human beings and.
What I'm hearing from so many
people repeatedly if there seems
to be an issue with that police
harassment then I think there
should be addressed in.
Bill that's all I'm gonna CENIC
you guys take me out of the game
when you do that skintight
honestly.
Okay so my question is this
So this will be a mandate I'm
just school have any say so I
know you're gonna get this task
force this is school have a say
so like is some of things that
that we would like you to cover
these of things we don't want
you to cover do they or do they
not have a say so.
When president that what they
have to help is affirmative
consent and as I stated before
there are developed curriculum
that are free and available
online and we're not saying you
have to teach A. B. or C. I mean
that you don't have to teach how
to do this you have to teach the
concept of informed consent work
we are not for sport proscribing
a curriculum we are not
proscribing a you must cover you
know I can't even think off the
top of my head and but it will
be to a certain extent left up
to the individual districts with
the understanding that they will
teach affirmative consent using
and at a curriculum that that
makes sense for their district.
So do they have the option with
this correct was made today then
have the option to change it or
do whatever they want that fits
their district or whatever they
feel is more appropriate for
their particular school Madam
chair representative lord as
long as they are meeting the
requirements of the law again.
You chair representative.
If I because I can see the
future of this I I I can see
this becoming controversial for
parents
With the parents have an option
to opt out of of this I know
it's gonna be age appropriate
but when they have an option to
say I don't want my child to be
taught this.
Madam chair representative it is
currently in law that parents
have the option to opt out of
six eight and this is part of a
well the Strickler friend that
representative madam chair
When this.
Gonna be training
that will include in depth
training for the teachers just
so they can overall from start
to finish is going to teach
children remind them constantly
Aid that you know they have the
right to say no.
Madam chair representative this
this is really targeted we hope
that that that that is happening
and that it will carry over but
if PED will be responsible for
making sure that the health
educators are prepared to teach
that.
Thank you Representative madam
chair I'd like to ask can you
tell me because I I did see some
common terminals looking through
here can you tell me why H. B.
one thirty three which was the
same bill wide that died on the
Senator Senate floor two
thousand nineteen.
I'm at I really can't but my
best guess is that well I know
that one member who voted
against it had a problem that we
had included regents what among
our group of higher ed folks who
were essentially responsible for
following these rules I don't
agree that rejet should not have
to follow rules around sexual
harassment so so someone got
hung up on that I can't I can't
speak to why people voted the
way they did I know that that
was an issue for one person but
as I said I don't think because
your region you don't have to
follow the same rules as
everybody else.
And I think this is my last
question chair and
representative
Which is to part when it says
that on line members will be
appointed by the governor it's
temporary how long is temporary.
Okay thank you Representative
Lord can you tell can you tell
me where in the bill you are
reading that I saw that and I
apologize if I'm wrong I in the
task force they're going to a
appoint nine members and I wrote
notes all over the place.
I'm trying to find out hold on.
Chair representative I I can try
to answer that if that be
helpful please you thank you
okay Madam chair representative
I believe that the bill talk
specifically about the task
force delivering their the
climate survey and its
recommendations on at the end of
September of twenty twenty two
and that the
task force will remain in effect
until the end of fiscal year
twenty twenty three.
And that's on page thirty three
Representative.
lines fourteen through twenty
two paragraph K. on page thirty
three ET and thank you for that
there so much in here trying to
and notes all over okay I'm so
last question on this so they'll
be a task force on do we know
what their salaries will be each
one of these nine individuals.
Representative thank what do
this is not going to be a job
for them this is going to be
part of their job as perhaps at
the university level this is not
this is not a rate it is like
out there they're doing it
because the right thing to do
and it's probably and in the in
some cases it's part of their
job you know the io offices than
at university levels or things
like that.
Yeah that was my concern because
I didn't see anything about what
they will be paid but I now have
along with doing this I'm.
Okay that's all the questions I
have thank you madam thank you
thank you are representative of
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
thank you so much I I will be as
brief as possible I stand in
support of this legislation.
Affirmative consent is.
So important particularly at at
the high school level I
appreciate very much the.
L. G. B. T. Q. voice as the
first openly gay Representative
ever to be elected to the house
of representatives I appreciate
that however I agree with
Representative Gail Armstrong
that this is about all young
people.
That you know accurate
information is so critical my
mother Dottie Montoya ran the
first ever health care center
school based wellness center
that was truly.
Rested in the state for thirty
years at the Espanola valley
high school and she I saw the
evidence of we have some
positive people the opportunity
to.
To really understand body
sovereignty respect so I am
absolutely in support of this I
applaud the sponsor for bringing
this forward and I do hope that
becomes law thank you.
Thank you
I to wanna stand and support and
while many of us have have an
and appreciate the the
affirmative consent that yes
means yes no means no is not
enough because there are many
times where their silence and
assumption of yes because you
don't say specifically now and
so this is you have to say
specifically yes and that's what
we should teach our our our kids
is that just silence is not
enough to assume that that
there's no protest on to
inappropriate
intimacy or touching or whatever
yes means yes so thank you
Representative for bringing this
again before us New Mexico's to
the Education Committee and if
there's any tweaks that need to
be made and and I don't know
about the processes for boards
of education and districts and
curriculum development and so
forth those that's where that
expertise says and can be
answered so
so at this point I am happy to
take a motion from the from the
committee.
I move for do passed.
I have a motion for a do pass a
second and a second Torrez would
you call the roll.
Yes thank you.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes and I'd like to explain.
Yes.
Representative I'm back.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative want your money
toys.
Yes.
Louise.
Yes in the locker room I will.
Yes and I don't need to explain
my vote.
Yes thank you.
Madam chair Armstrong yes.
Unanimous.
So a vote of I think we're all
here eleven to zero you have a
do pass on house bill one forty
two and representative Armstrong
to explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair I'm not
really explaining my vote I just
wanted to make a quick statement
about when you move this forward
that you would take rural New
Mexico into consideration and
mandates some of the wording in
their working together with your
local right crisis centers and
things like that we don't always
have those access to the things
like that so just be aware of
from the rural urban divide and
and let's help implement this in
the in a way that is good for
all thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative and
representative tries as it were
you the one the one explained I
just what she took the words out
of my mouth okay in our rural
communities and I just want to
make sure that it's it's sh to
basically explain this on the to
do it twice I thank you madam
chair I think I think you darted
to I think I with zoom now you
don't have to be in the same
town with that sexual assault
provided you can you can have a
memorandum of agreement with you
know when you're Senator say you
can
talk with the people in Santa Fe
and they can do we are help you
with your training virtual so I
think this pandemic has got has
made us a little bit thank a
little bit more outside the box
even though we're all in the box
right now so I'm so thank you
thank you members of the
committee for for your support
on this important bill.
Thank you representative.
next we have Representative
house bill one fifty two
Representative for our us and
for those in the audience if you
missed it at the very beginning
of our committee we are rolling
over house bill one fifty one
the behavioral health consortium
at the request of the Sanchez
working on some amendments so if
you've been hanging out all
morning glad you were here but
we're not talking about one
fifty one this morning work on
to one fifty two
Representative yes
Representative Harris do you
have some experts.
Madam chair.
Doing house bill one forty
seven.
No that was already removed from
the agenda at the request of the
chair will be heard on Monday
I'm sorry think yes so right we
have it on there and then right
removed in time for the printing
of the agenda one fifty one it
didn't make it off of the formal
agenda when we heard that so one
fifty two Representative Burris
and you have some experts you
wish to join us.
Yes madam chair thank you I have
one expert Dr rod justice and
he's already in the room okay
great.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this bill has been
introduced to update some
elevated provisions of the New
Mexico chiropractic physician
act and to provide greater
flexibility for doctors of
chiropractic to trouble between
states and care for patients
this is accomplished by allowing
temporary licensure of doctors
of chiropractic who for reasons
beyond their control are
temporarily unable to practice
in their home state and wish to
temporarily provide services in
New Mexico and vice versa it
also allows of those out of
state doctors of chiropractic to
come to New Mexico and
temporarily care for the
patients of a native
chiropractic physician physician
who is ill or injured or unable
to care for his or her existing
patients the bill also
modernizes some statutory
statutory provisions relating to
the New Mexico board of
chiropractic examiners.
With that madam chair I would
like to allow my ex.
Whose name sounds like it comes
directly out of a comic book Dr
right justice to add a few more
comments thank you thank you go
ahead drive madam chair
Representative burst thank you I
buy always sought judge justice
would have been a great name to
have
but I'm not a right justice on
the executive director of the
alliance of New Mexico
chiropractors one of two
chiropractic association's in
New Mexico I appreciate the
opportunity to speak before you
today and answer any questions
you might have we put house bill
one fifty two up for
consideration in order to
correct some longstanding issues
in our statute that needed that
it needed correction for some
time are provided chair was a
member New Mexico chiropractic
licensing board from two
thousand twelve to two thousand
nineteen the last three years of
which she served as board chair
much what we're addressing in
this bill or issue she can she
became aware of while on the
board I am by stand for any
questions you may.
Thank you.
Representative are you ready for
us to go to the audience.
Thank you madam chair I believe
already for the audience thank
you okay thank you so we're
going to do a poll once again
and allow those in the audience
to register their support or
opposition for house bill one
fifty two.
We'll give this fifteen twenty
seconds.
Support our mission to the one
fifty two.
Okay thank I think we have
given enough time for everyone
we have
for in support and one in
opposition
with that and so we will go to
the audience now and if you'll
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in opposition.
Opposition to one fifty two if
you wish to speak raise your
hand.
Hi I'm not seeing anyone raise
their hand so someone voted in
opposition but I don't see a
hand raised to speak okay so
those in support the raise your
hand if you wish to speak in
support.
And we will start with JD
Bollington go ahead JD I'm
moving on you yourself there you
go thank you madam chair this is
JD Bullington the registered
lobbyists for for the alliance
of New Mexico chiropractors and
we do strongly support this bill
when working on it all summer
and receive feedback from the
New Mexico chiropractors
Association and this bill does
some things that are similar to
what was performed for the
physical therapist and I be I
believe Representative lives
Thompson
sponsor that legislation I was
curious did I miss whether
amendments center this committee
did I miss that part.
I don't believe there were Karen
did we get.
In the last shaking her head we
were not given any amendments
okay so if you have amendments I
guess it'll have to come in the
next in the next committee I may
have talked to Representative
Ferrary said I apologize that
that may have been
receive to late but
take care of the next committee
madam okay and we are very okay
and if we need to talk about the
in this you when it comes in the
up in the discussion
Representative can can let us
know what amendments to make in
the next committee.
Okay anyone else was to speak.
Okay we will go to
Members of just madam chair I'm
so sorry to interrupt I just
checked my folder and we do have
an amendment.
Okay that was given to us timely
I don't know if we.
Properly distributed it I'm not
certain.
look on our.
Share drive and I apologize
Representative because I am a
juggling all these I can't for
sure which.
Ones sitting.
Madam chair I I completely
understand.
I apologize if we missed it.
I apologize I did not receive a
copy of an amendment to put in
the Here file but if it has been
distributed to the
Committee in another way then
that's.
Awesome.
I'm maybe if we can
Let's see if if any of our out
the big question is whether our
analysts have had an opportunity
to review and
it will waive all of if we can
circle back to that maybe if our
analyst can double check whether
they have it and reviewed
will send we can that we can
consider it.
Madam chair we're doing this can
ask a brief question I saw your
computer I could hear the expert
witness a disservice is it Rod
justice is that who it is and
and who is he with I miss that
part.
Please.
Mr I just as your muted doctor
justice.
That's it love technology and
chair representative I'm Dr
Rajesh to sign the executive
director of the alliance of New
Mexico chiropractors or one of
two paramedic Association the
New Mexico.
Okay see you with a chiropractic
association is that correct yes
we're the ones are sponsoring
the of the bill okay and I just
want to make sure your address
you correctly are you a
chiropractor yes ma'am okay
thank you doctor.
Okay so Representative Lord your
first up.
I just a need by Senator came
back thank you for.
Thank you madam chair.
I do have some questions so just
to let you know I'm a little
biased I've run chiropractic
clinics before my ex husband was
my best friend is a chiropractor
so have quite a lot of
experience with chiropractic so
this bill if I understand
correct this is an extension for
a sunset that expires at with
this is.
Okay.
Okay.
So I have some questions them
So one of the questions that
such a more like a lot of
suggestions on this we just but
you probably didn't hear Dr we
chair representative and Dr
credit here earlier we had a
bill that it's it was HB one
twenty five.
And I really appreciate in that
one it was instead of doing a
year they did six months and I
would suggest as this bill moves
forward to me
so here's the issue I have so I
did call the board I call the
chiropractic board and wow they
must be really overwhelmed
because there's only one person
working there.
And he only works one day a week
and I really wanted to talk to
the board because.
Can someone tell me first
question is there an analysis
from the chiropractic board on
this on how they feel about
this.
Madam chair representative we
took the the bill before the
board and read it to them and
explain to them and about to all
but there was no official vote
but there were no all the
decision.
But I would I would really Matt
it and on that point
Representative the FIR has input
from them Medical Board and the
regulation and licensing
department.
Thank you for that I and madam
chair I want to do what I wanted
was an official from the
chiropractic board from their
specific boards saying how they
felt about this and and I didn't
see that in there I'm okay so I
would really like to have seen
an an analysis from the board
since they're the ones that have
to do this and and that would be
greatly appreciated madam chair.
I'm.
I also like to know so one of
the but the problems I do have
as I would like to see an
analysis from the board.
I would like to see when this
moving forward for the six
months instead of a year I think
having a cut I think having
anybody out there who's dealing
with the public like that a
given treatment.
I think it's a years too long
and I balance of this person's
overwhelmed so I mean I would
rather see it be six months so
that we don't have somebody.
Out there that maybe should be
doing chiropractic as you know
as we all know chiropractors
often get a bad rap and.
Want to see that happen a lot
chiropractor so and that was to
suggestion on that
I would like to see analysis
from other organizations on the
board so that everyone can get a
bigger picture on what is
happening here and see if
everyone's on the same page so
the one year what was an issue
for me the other thing I want to
suggest in this one to you what
they did in the other bill which
was awesome they took out that
moral character and first of
wanted to get more character
actually makes more sense to use
the wording of the Houston H. B.
one twenty five and that was a
code of ethics following the
code of ethics which is to
include criminal background
checks and make sure that you're
checking for disciplinary
actions I do like that working
better on that and I would
recommend that for moving
forward.
Representative just
for clarification on your
previous questions I got a
message from the superintendent
that does sunset extension is
actually included in Senate bill
one forty five what all they
that's common they put all the
sunsets together in one bill and
then and she also commented that
the board can't do an analysis
because of the open meetings act
thank you ma'am I thank you for
that clarification
okay then I would just say at
collaboration
analysis from other characters I
just like that so that it can
get of the people get a better
feel the moral character and the
one year I would move to six
that way it doesn't put the
chiropractors about light
display ram ballet like all my
gosh this why did you let this
person have this for one year
recommend six months that's all
I really have on that thank you
for bringing forward anything
for chiropractic I appreciate it
thank you.
Thank you Representative lord
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you costs is this your first
bill Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative no this is
actually what school you might
believe it or not.
Your eyes.
What you did you did a great job
so I appreciate that so well
done well done I appreciate that
thank you I can't wait to meet
you in person by the way either
anyway one of the things that I
just wanted to bring up is once
again I did set out Sen on the
Sunset Committee and one of the
key issues
So that the with only six
members that they can have a
tied they can have a time and so
we still have six people in here
on the on the board is that
correct.
Madam chair representative yes
as far as I know yes two four
four professional members and
to.
Public.
Okay so thank you madam chair
and and drive but I I just think
we that and that may be part of
your amendment that you're going
to bring but I just it is a
concern with the LFC that was
one of the hard things and then
they also mentioned.
That
the.
Board does not have significant
resources to conduct
investigations and so I just
wanted to to bring that to
everyone's attention that's part
of the analysis that I got on
the when I was touring the
sunset committee.
so mainly the biggest one for me
as I which would add one more
board member and that was also
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
I think that's all the questions
hi I have one more question
please go ahead Representative
Lord
I'm sorry hold on to give me
chamar there we go I'm I don't
I'm not it still you know
working my way through the rules
I don't know how to recommend
this but you know I always in
procar practice but I do have an
issue that we haven't read the
amendments is there any way that
we could roll this to another
time so that we could go and
read the amendment.
Madam chair representative that
was also a concern of mine I I
wouldn't have a problem with
that at all if that if that's
what on.
What what everybody would like
to do I wouldn't have a problem
with that at all.
Thank you I think that the great
so we could see with the man
that is justice we don't get I
want to be on board with this
thank you madam chair with that
would that be okay with you.
Yet do you want to briefly
explain the amendment that might
satisfy Representative words we
don't slow you down and that you
could done officially put it on
in the next committee thank you
thank you thank you
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative lord
and I'm gonna I'm gonna turn to
a doctor justice not only
because I love saying his name
but I'm so you can explain that
that amendment thank you.
Okay Madam chair representative
thank you the amendment.
Again and didn't get everybody
will basically just cleaning up
language making things more
clarifying more more to the
point
Lots of straightforward last
start the word insert practice
in the state that I think.
We came up with with the
amendments after we sat with the
NMCA
and the other state association
and
We throw back and forth and came
up with some changes in the very
very minor changes and.
What the bill that's before you
is if I could take a moment and
explain our thinking behind the
one year.
concern that came up
We had a chiropractor in the
eastern part of the state that
was in a hang gliding accident
and broke her neck and she was
out of practice for almost a
year and other daughter docks
from from the from the New
Mexico would go over one or two
days a week and cover for cover
practice for.
She could show rocking it Texas
from where she lived in she had
friends over there that we're
willing to come over and help
but weren't able to for that
year and it certainly would have
been much less strain on
everybody else much less travel
had she been able to
at the then to test the Texas
contractors been able to come
over
we also had concerns for example
we had chiropractors who
became pregnant and were
confined to bed for the last six
months and then bed bed rest
after that we just didn't feel
six months was fair enough for
every situation
is that that that was our
thinking behind the one year.
So.
Thank you and and if I can just
make sure that I'm clear on the
amendment so that we satisfy
Representative Lord the
amendment are or not substantive
in change but some clarifying
technical language changes and
and all of that was done in
consultation with the other
chiropractic association yes yes
strike strike or less
after the period insert board
members that type of thing just
very minor that there's I often
madam chair and there.
They get all agreed on and and
nobody was throwing rocks at
each other so we're we're good.
Representative Lord does that
satisfy you enough to move it
forward and let the next
committee do the amendment
formally it doesn't and just one
more thing as far as I
understand copper to be on it
work for year I still for me I
think I feel more comfortable in
this is my opinion six months
because I know you get in state
felon doctors you know they can
fill in for you and then maybe
do an exception you know if you
can show medical reasons for the
year I feel more comfortable
with that but thank you for a
U. consideration your time.
Thank thank you Representative
Anderson.
Thank thank you madam chair I'll
be short to the point of I just
would make a comment about
amendments I think we're gonna
face many more in this difficult
format we're serving under in
this session and I hope that.
We must in my mind perhaps look
at each bill and the amendments
that were sending on perhaps to
be adopted by another committee
of.
We just much of be careful in
that policy going forward thank
you madam chair thank you
representative and I appreciate
that and we have on occasion
even in person done that and in
this format we've done that but
I agree which is why I asked her
to explain and she did I think
submitted on time it wasn't
distributed
and that's our fault I take
responsibility for that but if
if we're comfortable with the
explanation
I don't want to mess
unnecessarily hold up by on our
air this the sponsor was
Did what she needed to do it was
we fell down on our side
thank you madam chair and I to
amend Cremins thank you thank
you.
Okay what's the pleasure of the
committee.
I would do pants.
Well second okay we got a motion
and a second four do pass a
divorce would you call the roll.
And.
I vote yes thank you.
Gail Armstrong yes.
Representative may.
Yes.
That.
Yes.
The lord.
Yes.
Million Mackey.
Yes.
Roger Montoya.
Representative Louise.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes and madam madam chair
Representative Montoya had sent
you text asked to be excused for
another meeting he has.
Thank you they'll be excused.
Yes.
Madam.
Armstrong yes.
Are you have a total up to have.
In the affirmative and one
excuse thank you Representative
I attended zero you have a
unanimous do pass on house bill
one fifty two I think that's
your second through this
committee is that right.
I yes madam chair thank you that
that's my second but my first
the unanimous so.
As Ben how happy I am and and if
we.
Good get ready to be
On the floor to be
appropriately tease for when you
do your first bill on the floor
and thank you committee members
and with that are we that's all
of the business before us on
this morning and Monday's agenda
I'll just highlight for you has
already been posted I'm gonna
try and do better to get
to get these are posted out a
little bit further ahead and
we will see you on eight thirty
on Monday morning thank you
everyone and thank you for the
audience who participated in our
last seven attendees who have a
hung out to the to the bitter
end so madam chair all yeah
madam chair is so in our chair
meeting yesterday I didn't know
if you wanted to discuss that we
will not be meeting on Friday.
And we need to be Saturday I
don't know
yes so thank you Representative
it's unclear whether we will
meet Friday or not depends on
whether we're on the floor
I think they there is a distinct
possibility that we will be on
the floor on Friday and then not
able to meet next Friday so just
to alert folks and yes we will
be meeting Saturday the
thirteenth we will hear the two
cannabis bills house bill twelve
and house bill seventeen I I
think we're trying to juggle
between different committees
meeting and we will start at ten
thirty.
Saturday the thirteenth so block
your schedule will have the to
cannabis of bills house bill
twelve and seventeen I believe
the numbers of next Saturday the
thirteenth thank you
Representative for reminding me
and madam chair just a thank you
for the the poster we can see
the the difference in the for
and and opposition that that's
really helpful to be able to see
that so thank you for adding
that in yes thank you I think
that's helpful to we tried doing
it raising hands which is a
little bit
less
a little harder to do a couple
of the other committees tried
out the poll on and we worked
out the Kinks and it was working
and so it worked well this
morning so thank you thank you
have a good evening alright
everyone thank you see you next
week.
