Representative Senator Cortez.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, you.
So with that, we will start with
um
Senate Bill 3, so senators
welcome and we're ready to
listen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We are
happy to be here and appreciate
you scheduling this. Um,
Senate Bill 3 and I'll kind of
give an overview and then
Senator Sheer will kind of walk
through some of the specifics.
It's part of a
rebuild package, Senate bills
12, and 3, that's designed to
expand and enhance behavioral
health services, uh, in New
Mexico by establishing a
sustainable funding stream, both
recurring and non-recurring, uh,
the recurring is what's
sustainable. The regional
planning, and that's a key to
this bill, uh, crisis response
systems and improved service
coordination. We have called
this the guardrails bill, and
it's critical to the package,
uh, because again, it's
sets up a regional approach to
behavioral health, and it has a
string of accountability
measures. Uh, one of the
challenges that our system has
faced, has not been a lack of
funding, it's been a lack of
coordination and oversight, and
this bill establishes that
coordination and oversight, uh,
during the Senate Finance
Committee hearing, there was
some public testimony that
really rang true to me, um.
The head of Miami, New Mexico,
basically called this bill life
changing because it silos
behavioral health.
And creates a centralized
accounting uh for behavioral
health, and that's really the,
the overarching purpose behind
Senate Bill 3. I will say that
the model for this came out of
funding that we provided during
the special session.
Uh, we all took a lot of
criticism, uh, during the
special session for not doing
certain things, but we did
something that was
extraordinarily important. We
appropriated $3 million to the
courts to establish pilot
programs for assisted outpatient
treatments and criminal
competency, uh, in different
districts in the state.
And during the time between the
special session and the start of
our session, uh, the courts were
very actively involved in
building some new programs in
the state, one of which was here
in the first judicial district,
Santa Fe, Rio Reba, and Los
Alamos, a new assisted
outpatient treatment program,
which actually rolled out the
2nd week of the session. So by
having this funding and putting
in place a pilot to see how this
Coordination would work. I think
that really was the genesis for
what we came up with here, which
is a pretty unique uh proposal
that involves the three branches
of government.
And our courts have stepped up.
And as evidenced in the pilot
program, they worked to
coordinate with local
governments and providers in the
first judicial district, uh, to
put together a memorandum of
understanding of how that
program will work. I think
that's kind of a model for
what's in.
In, in this bill here, uh, and
so with that, let me yield to
Senator Scherer who can walk
through the specifics and uh and
how we've done this in the
regional approach.
So thank you, Madam Chair. So,
There was a question about what
is the mission statement here.
And so, I want to lay out 4
things that I think are mission
statement. First is to improve
access to care, because right
now,
The siloing, we've got care in
various places all over the
place and uh it's not
coordinated and people don't
know how to move from one to the
other if they need to. In fact,
our prison system is the number
one.
behavioral healthcare provider
in the state.
Wow
probably ought not be that way.
Then it's to enhance the
coordination so that we have,
you know, somebody from the that
shows up in the system from the
courts or they show up in the
system from the hospital, or
they just walk in the door. Now
they can, all of the efforts can
be coordinated, so you don't
have to.
Uh
Go in front of a judge first
there's other ways to do this
and of course that increases um
Uh, efficiency.
So now things are working
together, so it's not as
fragmented, and finally, it, it
reduces the disparities, so that
we can know what's going on and
we can actually help people, uh,
the right way.
So, just going through a little
bit of it here, if you go to
page 6 of the bill, you can see
it, um, of the
of the
Committee substitute.
Um
But it says, as we're, as we're
building this house is actually
gonna work. Well, LFC, it says
legislative finance, uh, shall
provide AOC the initial set of
his evaluation guidelines. So
we're starting by saying, OK,
well, here's a set.
But then it's gonna be broken up
into regions around the state.
I'm sorry to interrupt, um,
could you tell us what lines
you're on on page 6. I have the
one that's in context, so.
OK.
Um
If you're using the 230522.5.
Which
We are a substitute, yes.
Um, let me see if I can find it
on here.
It is
Section 4B.
Each.
each left.
OK.
No, that's section 5. We're
looking for section 4B.
He added
Really
We've obviously changed this
thing several times 0.5, and
that's because it's growing,
it's doing the right thing. So
yes, page 11 line 5, OK.
Uh, LFC, uh, shall provide AOC a
set of evaluation guidelines for
the services, and that's just to
get things started.
Because we're going to have
regions around the state. Right
now they're loosely based on
judicial districts, but it
doesn't have to stay, so the
idea here is what happens in San
Juan County is different than
what happens in Lee County,
which is different than what
happens in Union County and
everything that happens is
different than happens in
Bernalillo County.
So,
So the idea is each region then
can look at what are their
needs.
So what are the specific needs,
but also what are their
resources? What can they have?
What can they use so that they
can start building.
Uh, a program that's
appropriate.
Or that region.
And I think this is a key part
of that, because what we've been
doing for about a decade,
we've been a rudderless ship
going all over the place with
different parts of the ship
going different parts, different
ways, and other parts of the
ship, which of course means that
it's not a very good show.
So by putting these together in
regions and with this initial
set, we're at least giving
guidance now.
But then the regions will
actually pick the guidance
that's right for them.
And I think that's, that's
Critical in all of this. So the
regions are gonna figure out
what they can do with initial.
guidance from
From us
Uh, and then the last thing I
really want to touch on before I
send it back is all three
branches of government are
involved in this.
So
The AOC
there's been a criticism of
AOC's running this. No, AOC is
the chair of the committee to
get it started.
That's all.
They actually pick, or they will
pick when we put an amendment
on.
Who's gonna actually run it in
each region, so it could be
different in every region.
So AOC is involved because
Behavioral health
shows up in courtrooms.
The, uh, administ uh the
administration.
The executive branch is involved
because we're going to have the
Uh, secretaries of, uh,
healthcare authority and some
others involved in this, and
then, of course, we're involved
in it because they're going to
report to LFC.
quarterly on what's going on.
So we can be very focused on
what we're looking at and say,
no, this isn't working.
Change it.
Because we can see that, you
know, our numbers going up or
down, are things getting better.
So as the appropriating
authority, which we are,
Uh, then we have real say in
what's going on, orderly,
unlike, I don't know how many of
you are on LFC, but
Uh, you know, once a year
Department X comes in and they
give this gigantic
Dog and pony show and talk about
how great they are and they need
more money.
That's what we get from every,
every department, but in this
case, it will be very focused
and specific, we'll say region
one, region 12, whatever. And so
we can really drill down as the
appropriating body.
Just one more thing, madam
Chair, on, on the final page,
page 16, section 11 is a repeal
of the existing behavioral
healthcare collaborative.
Uh, that's kind of been around
on the books, it hasn't been
meeting, uh, obviously this new
program and the new proposal
should it pass, will replace
that. And Madam Chair, we do
have an amendment, and I leave
it up to you as to how you'd
like to handle that.
So I need a motion to um discuss
the amendment. I'll make that
motion.
So go ahead and just briefly go
over it. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. It's 0.231030.1 and there
are two parts to this, uh, the
first, uh, number one is a new
section on page 7, between lines
19 and 20. This is the list of
things that are included in a
behavioral, in a regional plan.
And this comes from the
healthcare authority, they asked
that we add a section that says
identify a capable and
accountable entity to execute
regional plans provided a
different entities may be
accountable for each identified
regional funding priority.
And so within each region, we
want to make sure someone, it's
again part of the accountability
and the reporting back, um, just
as an example, when we did the
pilot program in the first, uh
Santa Fe County was the entity
that would have fit that role.
The 2nd Amendments, um, is
number 5. This was at the
suggestion of Senator Block. It
was going to be a floor
amendment which was friendly,
uh, but we ran into issues
getting the floor amendment
drafted, and so we, I agreed
that we would put it on here and
just.
On page 9,
There is a list page line, page
9 between lines 2 and 3.
See if this
Just working here? OK, yes. OK.
But it's just looks like I'm
seeing that this looks like it's
in the, OK, no, it's, it's
correct. I'm sorry. It's
correct. So it's, it's on the
reporting requirements. Uh,
there's a list of different
reporting requirements that are,
that come back to um
The governmental entity within
each region, we're adding a new
one at the top of page 9 that
basically says recommendations
on successes gaps and needs to
better provide behavior health
care services, just so that each
region is reporting on what's
working and what, what is needed
in the future. And so this was
something that made sense and
was considered a friendly
amendment from Senator Block,
and that's what the amendment
amendments do. Is there any
discussion on the amendment?
I see none.
I'll accept a motion.
Some
The second. So is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment. OK, seeing none, you
have an adopted substitute.
adopted
amended all those a words so
early in the morning, so go
ahead with your presentation. So
I'm sure that's all we have with
us today is Adrian Avila from
our Senate Finance staff who's
here as a technical expert and
we're happy to take questions
after you hear from some folks
on the bill. OK. OK, so if you
are on Zoom in opposition,
please raise your hand and I
will take the 1st 5.
Um, in, and I'll come back to
you in the room, is there anyone
in opposition?
Seeing none and seeing no hands.
OK, same thing for support if
you are on Zoom in support,
please raise your hand.
And I will take the, OK, that
there's you can go ahead and
raise your hand if you're in
support and I will only take the
1st 5.
So in the room in support.
OK, if you would like to speak,
please come to the center to the
mic and limit it to one minute,
please, and try not to repeat
what others have said.
No,
uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
I'm Carrier Mijo, I'm the
cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority. Um, we're
really appreciative of the
collaboration that's occurred
between the leaders, uh,
sponsors of this bill, Mr.
Avila, Chairmanos, uh, to try
and really incorporate the
agency's feedback, uh, and we
think the bill is much stronger,
uh, there are two things that
I'm really excited about, uh,
with this bill. The first one is
a more authentic local
collaboration, uh, framework.
I feel like that has been
missing something that has been
bothering me for a couple of
years as I've been in this role,
um, it's really excited to see
that framework, um, and also the
more collaboration with the
courts and the judicial branch.
I think um that's really going
to be essential in moving things
forward and improving outcomes
for New Mexicans, so the
healthcare authority stands in
support of the bill. Thank you.
Good morning, madam. Excuse me.
Good morning, madam I'm sure
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino, and I
represent the publics of Tao and
Achea, and we support this bill.
And we also appreciate the
inclusion of tribes, bubbles and
nations in the amendment that
was offered in Senate Finance
and included in in the
substitute before you.
Uh, as you know, Madam Chair,
the tribal members do travel
quite frequently between
traditional homelands and urban
centers and oftentimes do get in
trouble with or come in contact
with the criminal justice system
and there are oftentimes are.
Alcohol related, so we're hoping
that as this bill moves forward
and the objectives are laid out
that tribes, especially
behavioral health programs are
included as part of the reform
package that might be offered
up. So with that, man I'm sure
we, we urge the committee's
support.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Dorothy
Seaton. I represent more than
560 members of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. I'm a
retired army officer and a
former clinical supervisor and
licensed chemical dependency
counselor, so I have some
familiarity with the delivery of
service. Um, I'm also the child
of an alcoholic who died at age
55, younger than some of you in
this room.
Um,
there's a better option than
death, jails, and hospital
emergency rooms and this bill
provides that.
The structure and organization
will help to ensure access to
services and provide a steady
source of funding.
There are about 122,000,500
veterans in New Mexico, that
along with the numbers of
members of their families, um,
not all those get VA healthcare
and their families do not
either. So these people look to
services in their community.
Usually when there's a
behavioral health crisis, you
look for help close to home and
quickly.
So this provides that as well.
So, uh, the caucuses in strong
support of this, and I hope you
will vote yes. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, my name's Edward Webster.
I'm the government relations
director with NEA New Mexico.
Uh, we stand in strong support
of SB 3, positive, positive
behavioral, um, healthcare for
students and kids as a definite
impact on positive academic
outcomes and therefore we would
strongly encourage you to
support Senate Bill 3. Thank
you.
Thank you. Now, we will go to
Zoom, so I will take JD
Bullington, I believe that's
Richard Mason, um, Doctor
Richards and Carlsbad Lifehouse,
and thank you for Betty and
Ellen for showing your support.
So go ahead, JD.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, JD
Bullington here speaking on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
that supports this bill because
it will ensure that the best
data is made available and that
the key stakeholders have a seat
at the table as the plans are
developed and rolled out to
implement a comprehensive
behavioral health care package,
just build maps out, very smart
approach by identifying the gaps
and providing behavioral health
services, and then identifying
the top actions that need to be
taken to close to close those
gaps.
Rebuilding our behavioral health
system is essential to improving
public safety and offering the
appropriate care to those in
need, and it takes a
collaboration of all the
branches in government and the
chamber strongly supports the
bill.
Thank you. Next we'll go to N.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh members of the
House and the Senate. My name is
Nat Dean. I'm a disability
advocate and I'm a person with
multiple disabilities,
diversities
excuse me.
Diversity of communities is an
essential component to
incorporate, but there's also
extremely important to have a
continuum of reporting to
objectively track and compare
outcomes which incorporate the
measurements that can uh allow
tracking of a successful
program, the diverse needs and
diverse populations are very
important, but also being able
to contrast and compare if the
communities are being successful
on a model that supports the
change.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Madam Vice Chair, members
of the House Senate, and the
community.
Thank you, Nat. Next we have
Dick Mason.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The league stands in
strong support for SB 3.
The League of Women voters of
Mexico supports the healthcare
system that provides a
comprehensive level of health
care for New Mexico residents
and recognizes the need for
efficient cost um efficient
management of the health care,
health care cost. SB 3
addresses.
Both of those.
Uh, behavioral health care
system is not fully recovered
from the dismantling that
occurred 13 years ago.
It just, it's time to start
rebuilding that system, um, SB3
creates a framework for
rebuilding and improving our
behavioral health system. Um,
the league wants to thank the
senators and others for
introducing SB 3, and we urge
the committee to give it a due
pass. Thank you.
In that like we're gonna skip
and Richards because I'm gonna
give him a little more time, um,
causesba Lifehouse, go ahead.
Yeah, Madam Chairman, this is
Phil Houston, the executive
director at Carlsbad Lifehouse.
I'm also a member of the
executive committee and the
board of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association, uh, just wanna
express our support for this
effort, the whole package, we
appreciate the efforts of your
committee and the, the Senate
committee and improving our
behavioral health system. We
think that this regional
targeted supplemental funding
will be really helpful in
filling in the gaps in our
system and helping us make
progress.
going forward and so we
encourage you, uh, to support
this and the rest of the Senate
package, so thank you.
Thank you. And finally, we will
go to Doctor Richards.
And Doctor Richards, you can
have more than a minute.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Michael Richards, the executive
vice president of the University
of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, and we stand in full
support of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health, uh framework
and in particularly Senate Bill
3 as it stands before you today.
I, what we believe is that this
is a comprehensive approach, and
it does prioritize the right
investments in prevention,
treatment, and diversion
programs, in particular, one of
the things I'd like to highlight
is that it does use the
sequential intercept model, and
that's really designed to reduce
the justice involvement of
individuals with serious mental
illness and substance use
disorder, but it, the benefits
of this are not just limited to
that specific patient
population. We believe the
benefits of this framework are
far reaching and that by
building this system of care and
providing the right technical
resources using the same model
as a way to start that. We're
not only going to improve.
the outcomes for those
individuals involved in the
justice system, but we're going
to be able to strengthen new New
Mexico's behavioral health
system for everyone. I think
you've kind of heard that the
regional planning really does
give us an opportunity to, you
know, improve access to care,
improve the coordination of the
care that we're delivering. I
believe that we will get to more
efficient and more sustainable
systems, and that ultimately
this will help us address some
disparities. I think that just
like Medicaid
Investments help sustain
hospitals and clinics and
provider networks for the
community, this behavioral
health framework and the SIM
model will actually improve the
overall health care for all New
Mexicans. So the University of
New Mexico is very committed to
this and supporting the
successful implementation of
this. And in fact, we've got a
track record of doing this both
at the local level with the city
and county with our integration
into the, the Metropolitan
Detention Center or through
building out things like crisis.
triage and reentry and
participation in Gateway. We
believe that those are models
that can be replicated across
the state. So thank you very
much. We strongly support this
package of bills and are very
grateful that the state is
making this investment, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Doctor Richards, and
just a reminder, please silence
your phones, including the
committee. Um, so with that, uh,
so far on for questions, I have
representative Ferrari, E.
Chavez, and Jones and um, OK.
Let me write them down. OK, so
in Chavez.
Anaya. OK, so we'll start with
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, um,
senators for bringing this
forward, um, I'm so glad to see
the.
Changes in our state's attitude
towards behavioral health and
the
Needs that we have so
desperately in our state, um, I
was wondering with the
behavioral health executive
Committee. How are we going to
ensure that it will be more um
successful and um working with
all of the different parts that
we are going to be seeing, um,
rather than how the behavioral
health collaborative.
Um, you know, with different
administrations, there was
different emphasis and I'm
wondering how do we have that
continue from one administration
to the next.
So Mount Chair and
Representative, let me first
kind of lay out how we got to
this committee, and I think your
point about stability is huge,
and then I'm going to yield to
Mr. Avila to address some very
specifics about how it'll work.
Uh, so this executive committee
was not where we started. Uh, we
started actually with having the
courts in this role of being
basically the entity to decide
what direction things go, and I
think there was concern about
that being
To elevated a role for the
courts. And so this was an
amendment proposed in the Senate
Finance Committee, which I think
added in the other key players
here who need to be part of the
discussion, Secretary of
Healthcare Authority, director
of Behavioral Health Services of
the Healthcare Authority
Director of Medical Assistance
division of the Healthcare
Authority head of the AOC and
then 3 other experts that are
appointed. And so I think by
doing that, first of all, it, it
does.
create a broader group with a
more, with more representation.
Having the courts involved,
provides
And a very important stability,
so we don't see this roller
coaster as we switch between
administrations and all of a
sudden have a different
administration, wanting to do a
180. I think that's been part of
the problem and we see that in
other areas. And so I think by
having the courts really is the
lead on this and with
appointees, you'll have that
stability, but also
You can't not have the key
players who are working the head
of the uh healthcare authority
and the Behavioral Health
division, you can't have them
not be part of the part of the
at the table to make this work.
And so it's kind of the hybrid
that we came up with. And let me
have Mr. Avila just address some
additional specifics about how
that
How that decision making will
happen.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative. So the key to
the success of this executive
committee is you won't have
designees, you have the actual
decision makers in the room,
approving the plans and
reviewing the plans. At the end
of the day, the local regions
will develop their plans,
identify their gaps, identify
their assets and really set the
direction of where they want to
go.
But the reality of it is
Medicaid is a primary payer for
pretty much all behavioral
health services in the state.
So you need the Medicaid
director at the table reviewing
these plans to make sure it
complies with Medicaid
standards.
If we're dealing with behavioral
health, you need the director of
the behavioral health services
division, because they're the
ones who are going to be out
there checking to make sure
there's no fraud, right? Making
sure that the there's quality
service that the outcomes are
actually being obtained. And of
course, the healthcare authority
secretary directs that agency.
So you have the executive branch
very much involved the decision
makers are at the table.
The director of the
administrative Office of the
courts oversees every single
court in the state, right? So
they have a good sense of that
side of the arena with
behavioral health. And then the
3 appointees that are experts in
behavioral health would be
appointed by the courts to
provide that stability, and
these can be, for example,
Doctor Richards at UNMH, the
director of that system. It
could be an actual service
provider from one of the
associations. So there's
flexibility on who those are
based on the needs at the time.
So it's able to adapt and move
accordingly, but the key to this
is for the first time, and
unlike the behavioral health
collaboratives, you have the
decision makers.
Making decisions instead of a
designee that's never been
empowered to actually execute.
Right, and that I think is the
key difference in relation to
how this is set up.
And um how the failed
collaboratives were set up.
Thank you, madam chair. Thank
you, senators.
Representative E. Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
Um, me chair senator. I have a
couple of questions and my
questions are, I see on page 2
you define who the behavioral
health stakeholders are.
Um, as I was reading through the
bill, I saw, uh, mention made of
adult behavioral health but not
necessarily children's
behavioral health.
And so my question is, when you
look at the executive committee.
Um, I don't see um
Representatives of, for example,
CYFD.
Um, so my question is how will
we ensure that
Children's behavioral health,
especially those who are in
juvenile detention centers is
also addressed. I, I know that
there's been a huge focus on
adult behavioral health and
that's super important. Um, but
how are we addressing it as
People are moving through, for
example, the juvenile justice
system to keep them out of the
adult justice system.
To ma'am Chair and
Representative, I'll take a
first shot and we'll jump around
here in, in, uh, on page two,
the behavioral stakeholders.
Provision, it was expanded as
the bill went through committees
in, in the Senate on line 10,
you'll see that CYFD is part of
this. Also on line 15 school
districts are part of this, and
I think for exactly the reasons
you stay, you weren't trying to
make this exclusive to adults. I
think the issues with with our
youth are incredibly important
and
That's the reason that we did
broaden this. Now I want to say
one thing that's important, and
this, this was actually an
interesting this language on the
stakeholders came together with
Senator Block and Senator Sadia
Lopez.
And, and what we were trying to
do is thread the needle where we
didn't list every single or try
to list every single group that
would be part of this, but
include language that's broad
enough to be able to pull other
folks in. The problem when you
try and list everyone, and then
if you forget someone,
You run into a situation where
they're excluded, and I think we
tried to have this language
broad enough to get the key
constituencies, but also have it
broad enough, so other entities
would be able to participate
when that time comes to have the
discussion with the
stakeholders.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
So then I'm assuming that at
some point in time, in some way,
shape or form, they will also be
able to give their input and
recommendations to the executive
committee.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, that is
certainly the intent. I think
each different, and again,
what's what's unique about the
regional components and this,
and Senator Sheer mentioned
this, um.
So what you have in, in Bernalo
County may be very different
than what representative Cortez
has in Lee County, and what you
want to make sure is that each,
each one of these is gonna,
gonna kind of form on its own as
to what, what the primary
drivers are in that particular
region. And then Senator Cedillo
Lopez also did add a provision
and Mr. Avila can help me find
it that includes a requirement
that there's a listing, uh,
there's actually an uh an an
ix that lists all the different
folks in the district. It's on
page 77 line 20.
Uh
All behavioral service providers
in the behavioral health region
and that's specifically designed
to make sure that that
information is out there, so
that as this thing gets built.
that list of providers is there.
And again, the idea is to try
and make this inclusive.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator. And so my next question
has to do with corrections. I
think one of the presenters um
made a comment about.
Mental health takes place in
jails, something to that effect,
um, I'm not sure that it does,
but I think it would be great if
it did, and so my question has
to do with how do you envision
creating
Mental health services within
corrections. Has there been that
conversations with corrections,
I think sometimes they're very
resistant to change also.
So, um, Madam Chair, let me
start. So it was the prison
system, not jails, uh, that are
the number one providers of the
number one provider of mental
health.
Services. And that's because
that particular group of people
had been arrested, OK, charged
with a crime, convicted, off
they go.
Uh, this is not the total
comprehens, certainly isn't the
crime package, OK? Um,
So some of that's gonna come
from other, other.
Parts of this, so there's a
crime package out there, this
behavioral health package, but
there's also the uh what we
would refer to as the 14th.
Uh, judicial district, which is
the competency court.
And so that's how you, you guide
them right there. OK, well, we
don't need to send you to
prison. We need to send you to
treatment.
And so that's how that would
work. This bill by itself
doesn't do that.
Although it it certainly opens
the door so that all of those
things can happen.
But there are other parts of the
world that need that need to
happen as well.
Yeah, um, thank you, um.
Madam Chair, Senator, I guess I,
my question was really
More, um, in terms of how we're
going to get corrections to
cooperate.
Are we gonna get them to buy
into um to this and that, I
mean, if you have the answer,
that's fine if you don't.
I just wanted to raise the ques
raise the issue. Uh, Madam
Chair, uh, representative. So
within Senate Bill 2, we
appropriate money to the
corrections department to be
able to stand up, um, you know,
behavioral health services that
can't access Medicaid, cause
right now the healthcare
authority and we have the
secretary here and she can go
into more details. They are
implementing, you know, Medicaid
assistant treatment. They're
trying to transition people
right before they're released
from, you know, a local jail
onto Medicaid and.
try to provide them services in
that way and really get them um.
Reintegrated into society, but
there's gonna be a gap, right,
in what can be done with
Medicaid dollars and that money
is incentive bill too.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair. So
the, my last question has to do
with and, and you may not have
the answer to this, but one of
the things that
That I've been um made aware of.
Recently, is the question of
those folks who cannot be
restored to competency.
Um, and I guess what I wanted to
do is just make a comment in
terms of that's an area that we
really need to also pay
attention to, um, because we get
into this vicious cycle of
somebody gets arrested, they're
determined not to be competent.
They get arrested again, and
there are no services really for
them.
Um, so I'm hoping that um this
executive committee, the
agencies that are present here
today that are part of that
committee will also consider
that piece and, and that's
really an area that we also need
to address. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators and Adrian,
appreciate the huge amount of
work that's gone in to this and
the widespread support.
It seems like across the board,
um,
I have a concern about the
regions and who will make
decisions on the boundaries of
those regions.
I represent. Let me start, and
then I'll yield to Adrian. So
initially the idea was to model
it to some extent to the
judicial districts.
I mentioned the pilot program uh
for assisted outpatient
treatment. This, of course, is a
bill that was passed in 2016,
uh, Senator Pain, the former
president pro tem, um, created
this civil diversion program for
assisted outpatient treatment.
It hadn't really been fully
implemented around the state,
but down in the in Las Cruces
area in her district, she was
able to start that and make it
make it happen and.
ended up back in 2016, then the
pilot programs were funding to
the courts, and so it was based
on the jurisdiction of the
different court districts, the
first judicial district, which I
talked about up front, uh, is
Santa Fe Rio Reba and Los
Alamos, certainly 3 different
Types of
Populationss, demographics,
issues in each of those three
counties, but they were able to
work with the three counties in
that district to stand up and
assisted outpatient treatment
plan. I think as Mr. Avila said,
uh, that's kind of a starting
point, but I also think there
needs to be flexibility, and one
of the things in different parts
of the state, um, some, some of
the districts, there's actually
discussion about redoing some of
the judicial districts, and we
want to make sure that, you
know,
cities of interest are brought
together in those districts to
make it work so the flexibility
it does exist for them to be
different than what's there for
the courts, uh, but really that
was the, the genesis was to use
the, the judicial districts as a
starting point with that flex
uh,
Madam Chair, representative, the
only thing I would add is right
now the behavioral health
executive committee will make
that determination. So, um, you
know, it's working off of not
only the judicial districts, but
also the work that the
behavioral health services.
of the healthcare authority has
been doing. So it can be as
small as a county, so Bernalillo
County is a perfect example.
But it can be as large as
multiple judicial districts. So
if you look at the northeast
side of the state, you might
want to merge a few judicial
districts or a few counties to
really
Get your um
You know, the most out of the
investment.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you both for that answer.
I find that's really important
in my district because we have
such a rural population. I don't
want us to be lumped into Las
Cruces. It wouldn't serve the
people of my district. We, we,
we have, we don't have enough
resources to um divide us up by
county, but we can work
together. I'm very familiar with
the sequential intercept model.
It is an excellent model, and
when I looked at that, when I
took my trip to Miami, where
they developed that model and
their diversion facility, I
realized that in my district, we
have, we have so many of those
pieces, but the collaboration is
what's missing, and that's what
this bill does really, really
appreciate that, um, the
collaboration and and the local
control because um
That's just really important,
um, so,
Let me see what else I've got.
Uh, treating the nonviolent
offenders, um.
So how, how do you see this?
Um, working with the competency
law that we've already looked
at.
So Mount Charon representative,
um, great question. I think this
piece is part of an overall
discussion we're having about
public safety. Uh, as I've said,
without this piece, we could
pass all the laws we want to,
but if we're not getting folks
to a place where they can get
the help they need when it comes
to competency.
What's happening right now and
before this new bill that we
just are working on goes into
effect. These cases are being
dismissed. So you're seeing the
same folks over and over and
over again and uh current uh
Supreme Court Justice Breanna
Zamora, um, I think really
spearheaded the effort to start
this discussion, going back to
her days at the district court
and the lower courts, just
seeing the same folks over and
over and over again under the
new uh criminal competency which
has come which is now in our
on our side. I think it's
creating the options to have a
diversion, this package is
building the infrastructure so
that that
So the resources exist for those
folks to get the treatment that
they need. So hopefully, you
begin to get out of that, that
wicked cycle, and so that's why
they really do go hand in hand
and for, I want to be really
clear for those that are, are
dangerous.
There needs to be a whole
different stream, and I think
that that exists. This is for
those that that don't meet that
threshold, but need the services
and so we've got to figure out
how to get them into treatment.
This plays a crucial part in
making. Thank you, thank you
Madam Chair, Senator Wirth,
would you say that that is also
a fiscally sound approach.
So,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative, I will, and then
I'm gonna yield to Senator's
share because this, I think is a
really important uh discussion
as well, how this all works
together. There's no question
that the cost
To
Our constituents, and we're
dealing with this everywhere.
Here in Santa Fe, we're dealing
with folks that need help. And
quite frankly, when they're,
they're back out on the street
and not getting the help that
they need, the impact on
businesses, etc. and all of our
constituents and folks that just
aren't getting where they need
to go. There's a huge cost to
that. And so I really do think
that there's a
Personal element for sure to
help people get where they need
to go and to get the resources
they need to get better, but we
also need to have this umbrella
in place so that we stop seeing
the same cycle over and over and
over again if folks coming in
and then immediately being uh
dismissed out, I think a funding
piece of this makes sense from
that perspective. And then I
would like Senator Sheer to just
talk about
Kind of how this integrates with
the other two bills because
there's been some criticism that
oh we're spending all this money
to do this and it's, it's a
trust fund model that we've been
using, I think very effectively,
uh, that's part of the other two
bills which I think would be
helpful. So I'm sure if I could
just yield to send her share.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, so Senate Bill 12, and 3.
Have to go together. So this is
the guardrails part of it, but
if you don't understand the
other two, then what are
regarding?
So, uh, Senate Bill 1 actually
develops this trust fund.
I'm now calling it a growth
fund, cause we're going to take
a billion dollars, put it in
this fund. It will be invested.
It's not just sitting there.
Um
So it's invested.
The investments that we have
range from about 5.5% to 7.5%,
although I heard that we've got
one investment that's 12, so I
need to figure out who that is.
But
Uh, so it will grow, and then we
will draw a 5% of that off every
year. So if it's a billion
dollars, that's $50 million that
comes off.
Matched with federal money at a
3 to 1 match. So that 50 million
turns into 200 million
perpetually or more as the as
the fund grows. So $200 million.
So
A, we've saved a billion
dollars.
And and allow it to grow. We
didn't spend it.
Be in perpetuity we have money
coming out that's not taxpayer
money. This is investment money,
so it's not coming out of our
pockets individually in
perpetuity.
So I think that's uh uh an
important second part of this.
Um
What we've been doing for a long
time is we've been putting close
to a billion dollars into
behavioral health.
And getting nothing.
Or getting worse, even.
So this billion is going to go
into a growth fund, we still are
going to have to put general
fund money into it cause, you
know, we can't.
Stop, right, at least not right
now.
Uh, so there will be, uh,
general fund money going into
the program just as it has been,
uh, but the difference is with
this package of bills we're now
putting ourselves in a fiscally,
uh, fiscal trajectory, so that
the, the general fund dollars
will go down as the trust fund
money goes up.
So I do believe it's very
fiscally sound.
Thank you, Senator Sheer, and
thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, just one more thing to add
to that because that that
funding is really important,
like you just described, but the
savings that we will see based
on not using the resources for
this small group of people who
need to be diverted and treated
and and made whole, uh, to the
best of their to the best of
their ability and our ability to
help them. The savings in
hospitals, the courts, the, the
correction.
uh, the economy that doesn't
grow because you have those,
those people, um, affecting
that, uh, is going to be huge, I
think, so.
I'm gonna stop there cause I
could go on all day, and I know
that's not OK here. We have a
lot of work to do, but I just
really, really appreciate all
the work that we're doing and,
and I hope that we can move this
forward quickly. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Rick.
Next, we have Representative N
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators for bringing this
forward. I'm glad that
Everybody's finally aligning and
joining forces to really address
behavioral health. Um, I just
had a quick question and if you
don't know the answer, cause I
mean, this is really fresh and
in the works, um, I understand
that, but on page 4, how it says
monitor and track deliverables
and expenditures. Um, do you
know what metrics or benchmarks
will be used to assess the
effectiveness and then how that
ties to the funding.
So, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, within the
bill, the healthcare authority
and the LFC will provide initial
set of standards or guidelines,
right, that to the courts. So
when the plans are starting to
go, everyone knows every region
like this is what you kind of
need to hit. However, every plan
will be custom.
Right, so depending on what
their prioritizing in that
region, they'll use those set of
standards that apply to those
type of services and not just
have to report on all of them.
Does that make sense?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Avila. That makes
sense, so we're sending, we're
setting up different standards
and then applying separate funds
to each region.
Is that what we're doing then.
Um, Madam Chair. So the local
region will identify, so for
example, if you're a more rural
area, having a huge facility
like Gateway doesn't really make
sense, right? What would work in
an urban area.
So that region might want to
focus on mobile units to be able
to mobile and reach the
individuals where they're at.
So in that case, when they're
preparing their plan, they're
gonna basically say, all right,
we need the equipment.
We need the money for the teams.
So those can be 2 out of the 5
priorities they identify within
their plans. And then Senate
Bill 2 basically has identified
about 18 different buckets of
money.
That based on whatever the
plants say, they can then tap
into those buckets, so there's a
bucket for equipment. There's a
bucket for, you know, regional
teams and other things like
that. So it's very much
customized to that region and
the standards of service would
apply to the service that's
actually gonna be implemented.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and expert. That
answers my question, so the
Senate Bill 2 ties into each
region. OK, thank you so much.
That's all I have. Thank you,
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, senators. Um, as was
alluded to a little bit earlier,
um, as you all know, is a
co-sponsor of the competency
bill on this side, and, uh, my
final plea on the floor was, we
can't just pass this bill. We
must pass um the entire
infrastructure that comes along
with it. So, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, senators
for bringing this over. Um, I
did have a question just about
the structure of it. I know
we've been talking about um the
funding and
the structure of it as it
relates to the intersection
between behavioral health and
the justice system, but I'm also
wondering, as I read the bill
the first time as a whole, it
seems like it, it reads as if it
is more than just that
intersection, and I wanted to be
sure that that is true, Madam
Cha and senators.
So ma'am Chair and
Representative, you are correct,
it's designed to deal with both.
It's not just, not just the
criminal system and the court
system. Again, what we're trying
to do is have a, an overall
framework that's available to
those who need it, who haven't
yet been pulled into the system.
Uh, one of the most powerful
voices on behavior health is
someone we we know very well,
Senator Ortiz Pino, uh, who
served many years and what he
sat on the floor.
during this special session
really resonated with me. Um,
You know, we didn't have enough.
Spaces for those that wanted to
be in the behavioral health
system to begin discussing more
laws to divert folks into a
system that wasn't ready.
This, I believe, creates that
system. I'm glad to see Senator
Pain here and Senator Pain, we
were talking about assisted
outpatient treatment.
And just that system is kind of
a step. This, I think, really
does.
Create that platform for both
those that are navigating
through the court system and
others that haven't been pulled
in, but, but, but for getting
the services are going to end up
there eventually.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators, um,
Thank you for including
universal credentialing in this.
I have a couple of um my
constituents who have reached
out, who are just stuck in that
process as well. And I would
also like to encourage our
committee and senators on your
side to extend that to some of
our other um healthcare
providers as well. Um,
I, as I was looking through the
stakeholders and executive
committee, um, Madam Chair and
senators, I, I know this bill is
growing, um, as we go along, um,
because the, the other two
branches of government are
represented in both those
stakeholders. I was just hoping
there would be an addition for
the legislative branch as well,
um, which I don't see in the
stakeholders or the executive
committee. So Madam Chair and
senators, if that would be
something you would consider,
you know, I'm coming into this
session.
Um, you know, a lot of folks are
bringing things last minute.
They're like, oh, we forgot
these things. And so for me,
Madam Chair, and senators, if we
had the availability for our
legislators to also be able to
be to think forward about the
pieces of legislation. I just
think that might be helpful in
terms of um ensuring that
there's a bit more continuity,
Madam Chair and senators.
So, Madam Chair.
It starts off with legislative
Finance Committee, so clearly
the legislative branch is right
there at the beginning and LFC
is going to actually give the
initial guidelines, and then, of
course, each region gets to move
from there, but no, we're, we're
involved right from the very
beginning.
And just one additional thing,
Madam Chair and representative,
I think it's going to be
incumbent upon.
All of us is as these regional
plans are put together.
You know, Representative Jones
needs to be at the table when
those discussions are happening.
Certainly you need to be at the
table. I think we all need to be
proactive here, uh, as these get
built up and then I just think
that the big role of the
legislature, we obviously
control the purse, and so the
reason the accountability is so
important is that there are
going to be reports coming back
and when something isn't
working, we need to stop the
funding, figure out why it's not
working and get that money
diverted to one that is working
in the region.
regions. So I think there's
gonna be a significant oversight
component to that.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair and
Sutters, I was also looking at
the um,
Continuity of care plans. I know
that was something that Cur
Chandler and I were discussing,
do we put this in the competency
bill? What does it look like? We
want to be sure it's funded. We
want to be sure it's um able to
be implemented, um, but one of
the bigger pieces of the
continuity of care plan and I
see you're looking for a page 2,
line 19, it's section D, um, I'm
looking at the definition of it,
which is
Um,
Identifying the
interrelationship of available
and perspective behavioral
health services for recipients.
Um, I went back to see if we
defined um behavioral health
services we did. I'm just
wondering, Madam Chair and
senators, if there's an
opportunity to allude to housing
in this as well, because, um,
I'm a little concerned that just
behavioral health services as
defined right now might limit it
to um
I don't know, mental health
support, um, support with.
Um, addiction issues, but may
not be expansive enough to talk
about housing and that and from
what we've learned, of course,
housing is just a key component
of making sure that we do have
continuity of care to make sure
that if you have a plan with
your providers that they can
actually find you at a place in
order to get you the meds that
you need. Um, so I'm thinking
forward about the.
Um
Community-based outpatient
treatment language that we put
in the competency bill and I
just want to be sure that
housing is a part of the
definition, and it is spelled
out a little bit more.
chair and senators.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that's actually captured in
Centerville 2. So Cener Bill 2
is allocating $48 million for
transitional housing to be able
to wrap this up nicely. The, the
reason it's not explicitly in
this film is because then it
would tie up that money until
the plans are ready, and the
housing crisis, the money just
needs to start flowing. So
continuity of care is meant to
address that, and
This definition is broad enough
that it captures it, but it's
just a matter of the local
stakeholders when they're
discussing all this.
You know, addressing it and
tying in those assets of what
they're doing in terms of
housing. Thank you, Madam Chair
and senators, those, I believe,
are all the questions that I
had.
I have a few statements and
questions of my own. So, uh,
while I appreciate that LFC is
gonna be LFC is the money
people. This committee and
legislative Health and Human
Services Committee or the
healthcare people, and we really
would like to be involved, um,
and consulted and not not have
things brought to us and say
this is what it is because as
you can hear from the questions,
we have a different um knowledge
base than LFC. So I'm just
throwing that out there.
and, and I don't think it's a
bad idea to have um someone from
the health care part of the
legislature involved in the
committee, um, and I will say
that in 2013 when our health
care system was um destroyed. I
was, I had to pleasure, maybe,
of being appointed the chair of
the um
Be behavioral health
subcommittee of the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee, so I've been working
on this since then, and I'm glad
to see that something has
finally come forward that that
feels like it will make a
change, but again, just to go
back to there are people in this
building and then I know Senator
um Ortizi Pino was a horrible
loss and I, you know, he can't
be replaced, but I still think
we need a voice at the table.
Um,
And then I know you didn't want
to list out all of the people
that would need um behavioral
health.
For fear of leaving someone out,
but I want to be sure that our
developmental disabilities
community and our early
childhood communities are
involved in that. Um, infant
mental health is a big deal, and
people, people, most people I
think don't realize that, that
even though they can't speak yet
in there, their, their mental
health is a big deal, so I don't
want those, those groups to be
forgotten, um, in terms of
corrections, we have provided um
Money for medication assisted
treatment, and as of the last
interim, what the report was,
there was 11 person in our
correction system that was
getting medication assisted
treatment. So that's been a
sticking point. It's been at
least 4 years since we've funded
that, but it just hasn't
happened, so just, just uh red
flag that we really need to get
on top of that. Um,
And then, and then I have a
question for you, Senator Sheer.
So you said 5% of the earnings
or 5% will be taken. Is that 5%
of the gain or 5% of the
original billion.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, it's, it's
5% of what's in ever in there
right now. So you start with a
billion, and it grows to $1.
Well, it's 5% of the billion and
a dollar. OK, OK,
thank you it's a lot more and
then just, just another piece of
information uh LHHS had a
presentation from the social
work, social work group did a
study, and at that point, I
think that was July maybe. They,
they reported that 26.1%.
A behavioral health of people
who wanted behavioral health,
we're getting it. So that's
26.1, and those were the people
who requested it. That doesn't
account for all the people who
need it, but don't either don't
know they need it or don't know
it's available, so we have to
build up our, our workforce
drastically, um, and quickly,
hopefully, um, and so that's all
I have, so I'm gonna go to
Representative Kate's for a
motion. I thank you.
uh.
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
motion for a due pass on
committee sub, Senate Bill 3.
from
And a Cortez.
So Karen, will you take the
vote, please.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Santa Cortez?
Yes.
Repres Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
Yes.
By a vote of 8 to 0, you have a
due pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 3 as amended.
Thank you.
Sure.
Um, so if any of you are here
for House Bill 344 that has been
rolled at, at the request of the
sponsor that's healthcare
equipment, gross receipts.
And next we will go to House
Bill 303.
And as usual, we have a lot of,
of moving parts, um.
So folks are in other committees
and in and out, so we'll get
started and
470 I'm I'm sorry, 417.
And it's not Monday, but it's
early.
Ladies, if you could, let's get
started.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, I have to
go and present.
A bill in tax real quick, but I
just wanted to um introduce our
bill that um the um.
It has been a great venture that
we have worked together on this
past session, interim session,
um, to bring together, um, our
two great ideas for how we um
reduce alcohol harms in our
state and um send a house Bill
417 will make it so that we can.
Increase a sales tax and put
that funding to good use in our
state, um, to reduce alcohol,
um, harms, and it's really good
that we were able to follow um
the previous um Senate um
behavioral health package.
Because this bill will make it
so that we can at the local
level support the funding that's
needed.
And um I will leave it to my
colleagues to explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair
committee. We're gonna see that
Ferrari run over there and do an
awesome job in tax as we shuffle
ourselves around this morning.
Um, I'm representative Lara
Cavena. I'm here with my
co-sponsor Representative
Barrajon, um, as chair Ferrari
has alluded to. We've spent
years figuring out how to um
modernize New Mexico's way of
taxing alcohol but this bill
presents in front of you is that
we have frozen the current
excise tax that's been.
place from the night since the
90s, it's been in place for
decades. Um, we have not
increased that. We have not put
inflationary measures on that
instead we are frozen, freezing
that we've we've called it
almost a relic in time, so it's
an alcohol tax that was
established across the country
in a different era, but in New
Mexico, it consistently brings
in about $50 million in revenue,
even through COVID, that is one
of the most consistent revenue
streams in New Mexico's um
taxing mechanisms, so we are
keeping that and free.
using it in place. We are
changing how that those dollars
are distributed previously about
half of that, about 25 million,
was going to the general fund.
We are keeping that, um, and
then the other half was going to
what was called the local DWI
grant programs and funds. Um, we
are renaming those with the
coordination and collaboration
of the local leaders that have
been running those programs in
each of our counties, all 33
counties for decades, um, those
programs and funds will now be
called.
The local alcohol harms
alleviation program and fund,
um, now, the money will still go
to DFA where it moves through a
formula to just to figure out
the distribution each county is
eligible for. There's a
statewide council made up of
leaders from our counties that
then reviews the county request
for
Sending that fund and gets it
back out to the county, so, uh,
we're basically keeping that tax
in place, changing the
distribution so that we can get
those dollars at about double
the amount to our local
communities where they can have
greater impact.
Secondly, we are proposing that
we impose a new alcohol.
Excise er tax, so as we were
more commonly understand it, a
retail tax, a tax on alcohol.
This tax would be paid by the
consumers at the point of sale.
So if someone was purchasing
alcohol at a gas station, at a
restaurant, at a bar, at a
brewery, um, they would be
paying 6% of the price of the
alcohol they're purchasing. So,
the other tax frozen at the
wholesale level. This would be a
new tax paid on the value of
that drink, which is in our
perspective, what makes it a
stronger tax policy. So
Someone is spending $100 on
alcohol, they're paying $6 on
alcohol tax, if somebody's
spending $10 they're paying 60
cents. Um, the really profound,
uh, proposal that we've brought
before you, understanding and
appreciating the champions that
come out of committee, this
committee like Chair Ferrari,
her colleague Senator Pinto,
Senator Siia Lopez, they've
taught and helped us all learn a
lot about the disparate impacts
of alcohol harm, um, and we've
named out loud that in our
State, um, much of that harm is
held by native people,
indigenous people and instead of
in a patronizing way saying that
we, the state are gonna save
anybody or care for anybody, but
this proposal does is actually
say that the that the net
receipts attributed to the new
tax, go to the Indian Affairs
department. We've directed them
to create a council that
represents the 24 nations,
tribes and pueblos, um, within
the, the state boundaries of New
Mexico today and to also have on
that council representation from
organizations serving urban
Indian populations as well as
the tribally established
behavioral health regions. So
the idea in this proposal here
is that that money, the bulk of
that money goes to ID so that
they can effectively and with
great impact, get it out to
tribes, tribal nation and, and
entities or local governments
serving tribal nations, tribal
communities, indigenous people,
and urban Indians so that um we
can
start to and continue the
process of sending the money
where it's needed most and
trusting people to make their
own decisions about what they're
healing, recovery, um,
programming your intervention
could look like with that, Madam
Chair, I'll go to Representative
Farahn for any other remarks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Chair, for
having us today, uh.
I got into this work because I
know that this is a really,
really important issue in our
communities, um, especially for
young people, this specific
surtax that we've designed the
6%, um, in addition to the
frozen tax is going to have huge
effects on especially drinking
and driving the way that we've
seen in Maryland, uh, so I'm
here in support of this bill
having worked a little bit on
the distribution part, um,
having helped in the design and
um having worked with um.
Cha Ferrari and and Cha Kadena.
Thank you.
OK, thank you. We will go to, if
you are on Zoom in opposition,
please raise your hand, and I
will come back to you, um, in
the room in opposition.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward. I will take
10 comments, uh, one minute
each, and please stick to one
minute or I'll have to cut you
off.
Um, Madam Chairwoman, my name is
in committee. My name is Ron
Brown. I'm from, I own a
business.
Call latitudes in Rio Rancho.
Uh, I mean, um, Representative
Kate's district.
Um
I wanted to say that this
program, this bill was, was from
the representatives here was
really a brilliant vision, and
we could have supported that
vision at 3% as it was this
summer, uh, it would have helped
out uh retailers with cash flow,
but unfortunately at 6%,
This creates a giant
Uh, bureaucracy with $3 million
just for administration fees,
and it's gonna put us in an
uncompetitive point. Uh, alcohol
consumption is already down.
DWIs are already down.
I would just encourage the the
these these two representatives
have a brilliant vision for this
bill.
But at 6%, we just can't, we
just can't support it. That's
time.
Yep.
Mad, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Henry
Sandoval. Uh, I am the executive
director of Mexico Grocers
Association. Uh, we oppose, uh,
HB 417.
Simply because New Mexico
already is the highest taxed
alcohol within our region.
And currently there are 8 to 10
bills along with this bill that
will directly affect all of our
Grocers and in turn is gonna be.
Passed on to consumers.
And
With that in our rural
communities and cities has got
potential of chasing business
across state lines to Colorado,
Texas, and Arizona.
With that being said, uh, that
results in revenue losses in
those areas and potential job
losses. We urge you to vote no.
HB 17.
Thank you.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, um, my name is
Kristen Thompson. I represent
the New Mexico Restaurant
Association. Um, we do
appreciate the creativity of the
sponsors and exploring these new
approaches to liquor taxation.
Um, however, this proposal
ultimately at another financial
burden on our businesses and
consumers without providing a
clear benefit as indicated in
the FIR.
We support the previously
discussed legislation 3, that
would create a comprehensive
system of care for mental health
and addiction recovery services
without relying on tax
increases. It is important to
note that only 8% of alcoholic
beverages in New Mexico are sold
by the glass in restaurants or
bars, 8%.
Um, yeah, it's restaurants that
operate that on a slim 4% margin
that are not only responsible
for regulating alcohol intake,
but would also now serve as a
pass-through for this price
increase on consumers. Uh, for
these reasons, we oppose this
tax and um we oppose this tax
increase on our customers at
this time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, good morning.
John Thompson. I'm a registered
lobbyist for Admiral Beveridge,
Southern Glazers Wine and
Spirits in Republic National
Distributing Company. Uh, I
certainly want to
Uh, that the sponsors put into
this, this bill, and it's noble
intentions. Uh, Madam Chair,
according to the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism. New Mexicans consume
less alcohol than than the
average American, the average
American consumes 2.5 1 gallons,
and New Mexicans consume 2.33.
So I think it's important to
note that statistic, Madam
Chair, um, and I, I also want to
point out on January 17th in New
Mexico Department of Health
released some information that
uh New Mexico had seen a 7.
17 % reduction in alcohol
related deaths, but importantly,
a remarkable 38% reduction in in
McKinley County, um, all of that
done without a tax increase,
Madam Chair, and that was due to
targeted funding and policies
initiated by this legislature in
action by the local communities.
So with that said, we would ask
that you oppose the bill and
appreciate the time and again
appreciate the sponsors. Thank
you.
Morning, Madam Chair, member the
committee Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Brewers and Distillers
Guilds, um, well, we definitely
appreciate the sponsor's intent
and agree that responsible
alcohol consumption is something
we should all work to promote,
um, we also, we, we, we do that
by imposing 3 drink max maxes
per customer at most of our
retail locations, um, but given
that our, our sponsors do, I
mean, our members have
significant concerns with the
bill. Um, it proposes a new 6%
point.
sale tax that would create an
additional tax burden on top of
the existing excise tax and GRT
tax that we already pay. Uh,
this would make locally produced
beverages more expensive and
potentially less competitive
against out of state brands that
produce and sell in bulk. After
years of growth growth, the
small businesses that make up
this homegrown
manufacturing-based industry
have struggled due to increased
operational and manufacturing
costs, like the aluminum
tariffs. As industry seeks to
weather these increased costs
and uncer economic circus.
s t ance s we feel that this
bill could potentially make that
recovery more difficult. Thank
you. Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for Anheuser-Busch and we stand
in opposition to this bill. And
I would note, I just on the very
broad level we are talking about
a tax increase in a period of
time when the state has uh lots
and lots of money and has for a
very long time, so we're talking
about a tax increase, not to
raise.
avenue but to try to control
behavior. This is a tax to try
to prevent uh folks from uh
consuming more alcohol and in
doing so, uh, you.
Punish other folks who are
engaged in responsible
consumption. And that being
said, this proposal represents a
180% increase on beer when you
look at the average price,
because we're looking at retail
prices, that's a significant
increase, and I would put that
all in context of New Mexico has
high tax rates for liquor
as we, as it stands now. I
looked at the National Institute
of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
and when you look to those rates
and
Move control states, spirits are
6th highest, beer is 12th
highest, and wine is 4th
highest. We already have high
taxes wrap it up. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico retail Association. Uh,
we do have concerns with the
legislation specifically about
levying a new tax at the point
of sale at the retailers during
checkout. Um, that is new, that
is a new, uh, is really unusual
across the country to implement
that. So, so we do have concerns
about that. Additionally, we do
think that the addition of that
does not really get to, I think
the concerns and the intent that
the sponsors have expressed, uh,
really customers look.
at the sticker price on on
there, and that's what they're
looking at, so we do believe the
attack should be on the
wholesale side, that'll increase
uh the sticker price there and
it's not really gonna alleviate
when it's done at the point of
sale. We do, so we do have
concerns about adding the new
tax at the level. Thank you.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair
Scott Scanlon, registered
lobbyist for premier
distributing soon to be Hensley
distributing, uh, and without
repeating, uh, with the
surpluses that the state is
seeing, we don't think a tax
increase at this time is, is
appropriate. Uh, we're seeing
Senate Bill 1 and 2, passed the
Senate already in the House
appropriation, uh, to take care
of behavioral health issues, and
then you just heard Senate Bill
3, so we respectfully oppose
this legislation. Thank you,
ma'am.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom,
so I have Al Park, Leland Gould,
Sam Dewitt, Ali Hasham
and Larry Sante. So go ahead
out.
Good morning, madam Chair,
members of the committee, Al
Park registered lobbyist on
behalf of the distilled Spirits
Council of the United States.
Um, I just want to echo the
comments that you heard from
our, um, your previous opponents
and um colleagues and note that
we stand in opposition to the
bill. We respect and really
appreciate the work that the
sponsors and the committee has
done for the last couple of
years on this issue, but we do
have a concern that this will
adversely impact um small
businesses. It will increase
burden on small businesses.
And will make us uncompetitive
in our region, uh, with our
neighboring states. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, Leland.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
morning, members of the
committee. My name is Leland
Gould and I represent the New
Mexico Petroleum marketers. Our
association has hundreds of
small business owners in every
city in New Mexico. And in many
cases we're family owned in
rural areas, and most of the
time we're the only grocery
store, gas station, or
convenience store within 100
miles. We've been dealing with
some business struggles like
inflation, some of them of us
are still recovering from the
pandemic, and now it looks like
potentially minimum wage and
then Lee will also be strapped
on the back.
these small businesses. House
Bill 417 will completely
Change how we collect taxes on
alcohol. Our members will have
to acquire either new software
or hardware or both, and on top
of this, we have the cost of
training. All of this is a
greater cost to the consumer. If
we continue to strap these small
businesses in New Mexico. Many
potentially will go out of
business and shut the doors. For
this reason, we oppose House
Bill 417. Thank you.
Thank you, Sam Dewitt.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sam Dewitt, State
government affairs director with
the Brewers Association, the
national 501c6 Trade
Organization dedicated to
promoting and protecting
America's small and independent
craft brewers. Prices of inputs
are skyrocketing from aluminum
to barley to shipping. New
Mexico's independent brewers are
already struggling to keep their
doors open while keeping their
products affordable, keep their
community hubs operational and
keep producing world-class beer.
I respectfully ask for a no vote
on House Bill 47.
Excise taxes increases fail to
influence problem drinking is
often claimed by proponents.
Problem drinkers, those who are
truly addicted, are not
sufficiently price sensitive for
taxes to change behavior. They
just likely move to a lower
priced higher alcohol
alternative. But responsible
drinkers like craft beer
customers are price sensitive.
Over the years, studies have
found that our customer base
will not pay even more for an
already premium and relatively
high priced product, opting
instead to go out.
without entirely. This will put
small businesses out of
business. We joined the previous
testifiers and asked for a no
vote. Thank you for your time.
Ali Hashem. Good morning. Good
morning, Chair. Good morning
team. I strongly oppose this
bill. This is a tax first plan
later introduce yourself?
Yes, sorry. Good morning, Chair.
My name is Ali Hashem from
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and I
own a retail store at Coors and
Irving. I strongly oppose Has
417. This is a tax first plan
later scheme that will cripple
business, destroy jobs, and
punish consumers. We are here to
serve New Mexicans. How does it
make sense raising over 200
million in new taxes on New
Mexicans in this particular
economy, even recognizing that
we currently have 150 million in
excise taxes.
And none of that is going to
prevention and enforcement. It
goes into general fund. We don't
even have a system in place on
how this will be used. We would
have to apply, wait and hope for
approval without any basis to
know how these funds will
actually serve the intended
purpose. Lastly, Washington did
raise taxes in 2012, and there
was no impact on any reduction
in alcohol. Please vote no, and
let's save New Mexicans, not tax
them more. Thank you.
Larry Sontag.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Larry
Sontag here on behalf of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. The
reasons to oppose this bill have
been well articulated, so I
won't repeat those other than to
emphasize that when the state
has had multibillion dollar tax
surpluses for several years,
there is no good reason to be
raising any tax in the state.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, now on Zoom, if
you are, if you are in
opposition, please lower your
hands. If you are in support,
please raise your hand.
And I will take the 1st 5 and
come back to you. So, um, in the
audience, anyone in support.
OK, if I will take 10 people for
1 minute each, so please do the
math yourselves cause I can't
necessarily see all of you.
OK. Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Dorothy Seaton representing 560
members of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus.
Um, we support this bill for a
number of reasons. Not all
veterans get their care at the
VA. Neither do their family
members, so we look for it in
the communities. This bill would
help.
Provide an unmet need for those
families. We also recognize the
need for culturally appropriate
services in the tribal alcohol
harms alleviation program, um,
because we have a slightly
higher percentage of veterans in
the native communities.
Also, this uh remedies of tax
inequity. The taxes haven't been
raised in decades, and they
currently go to the general
fund, which doesn't help
alleviate alcohol harms in the
least. So we urge you yes vote
and thank you.
Thank you. And, and just uh to
kind of housekeeping, um, Katie,
Doctor Katie, uh,
W, um uh is from U and MASA and
they are named in the bill, so I
will give her, I will take her
as the 6th person, so go ahead
and act.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, sponsors, members of
the House and the Senate, um, I,
I'm sorry for the delay that um
The uh unmute button did not
come on quickly. I am in support
of anything that can alleviate
the harms caused by
unintentional, uh,
Ingestion of substances which
cause harm, even though we
understand that someone may be
self-medicating.
The self-medicating can often
result in unintended
consequences. Yes, the state
does have a lot of funding at
this moment in time, but that
funding is not a permanent
guarantee, the same way that our
lives are not a permanent
guarantee.
We arrive, we're here, and then
we leave. No one gets out alive.
What we do in space in between
when we arrive and when we leave
is what makes all the
difference. Thank you for
working hard to make the
difference when someone is
simply self-medicating to
alleviate the sensation that
they have, that they do not have
the support to improve on their
own without assistance. This tax
may provide assistance to
programming and services. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Madam Vice
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you, and I
confused myself.
We are gonna go to the people in
the room and then we'll come
back to Zoom. So on Zoom I have
Kelly, Enrique, Healthy climate,
Dick Mason, and then Doctor W.
So go ahead in the room, I'm
sorry. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Conroy Chino and I
represent the publics of Taos
and Ama, we stand in full
support of the bill.
Uh, man, I'm sure there probably
isn't a single family household
in tribal communities that
hasn't been affected by alcohol
or had a family member who's
addicted to alcohol or
challenged by substance abuse,
um, that's really a sad,
undeniable fact.
For those addicted to alcohol,
the drink of choice usually is
sweet, um.
cheap
Uh, fortified wine with alcohol
content between 15 and 22%.
Family members can't choose to
seek treatment, but oftentimes
there aren't enough beds in
facilities in rural communities.
And trouble behavior health
programs oftentimes don't have
the professional staff or the
resources to provide treatment
and services. So we need the
funding that's contained in this
bill and the fund that will be
created when this bill becomes
law.
To address the harms caused by
alcohol, and lastly, Madam
Chair, uh, we noticed in the
bill that IAD will be overseeing
this fund.
And the distribution will be the
discretion of the secretary,
we'd like to recommend that uh
that a board similar to the one
that's created or uh in, in
place to oversee travel
infrastructure fund be used as,
as a framework, thank you, thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brian
Serna. I am the president of the
New Mexico Association of
Addiction Professionals, a board
member of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association.
And a small business owner of a
company called Cerna Solutions
where a behavioral health
provider with locations and
Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Rio
Rancho, San Alfonso Pueblo, and
Espanola.
The science is clear, raising
the price of alcohol will lower
consumption associated harms
from DWI, domestic violence,
assault and battery, unintended
pregnancy, STI transmission, and
the list goes on.
We heard from the opposition,
none of whom are healthcare
professionals, but business
owners. Well, I too am a
business owner, a native New
Mexican, and um, a job creator.
My margins and behavioral health
are only a fraction of what
those in the alcohol industry,
um.
Enjoy.
With this funding, we can put
this money to good use,
benefiting all New Mexicans and
reducing alcohol harms through
the prevention and treatment of
alcohol harms for um um people
and their family, please vote
yes in hospital for 17. Thank
you.
Good morning, madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Bernadette Hardy. He is Pavel
and Dena. I am one of many urban
natives who live in District 19.
I'm here as a lobbyist with
enemy to vote, and we are in
full support of HB 417. The
compounded issues with alcohol
abuse among our native people
and youth needs to be dealt
with. Alcohol abuse has caused
physical and emotional tolls,
not to mention the unfortunate
stereotype that has further
burdened our native communities.
I personally
have lost many family members.
Recently, my brother in August,
and I have seen alcohol ruin
many lives.
And I would like to thank the
sponsors for this bill, and
please urge it to pass. Thank
you.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Marlena Lera. I'm a substance
use researcher, president-elect
of the New Mexico Society of
Addiction Medicine and the
director of research at Work at
Health. I'm here today to
support HB 417. New Mexico has
the highest rate of
alcohol-related death of all
states and it's been this way
for nearly 30 years, and
although we know that alcohol
use is associated with numerous
health conditions. It's also
critically interwoven with.
Violence and crime and the
ongoing conversation in our
state regarding public safety.
Alcohol is present among nearly
1/3 of suicide victims and
nearly half of homicide victims
in the state also intimate
partner violence and child abuse
and neglect. The good news is
that alcohol policies work at
this critical time when our
federal public health
infrastructure is being
systematically dismantled by the
new administration, it is all
the more important.
important that we bolster our
own state initiatives. Please
wrap it up. We appreciate this
multi-year effort from
legislators and public health
advocates and hope that it
passes this year, where a leader
in public in alcohol related
deaths, but it is time to flip
the script and become a leader
in alcohol-related policies.
Thank you.
In order to be fair, um, I'm
gonna cut you off at one minute.
I'll say wrap it up. That
doesn't mean wrap up your whole
speech. It means end.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Cindy Soerman,
I'm an evaluator, director of
the Triple Care Health Providers
Association core team member of
the Alcohol harms Alleviation
Coalition, working on this
initiative for 3 years. New
Mexico continues to lead the
nation in alcohol related deaths
and since the last legislative
session, approximately 2220
lives have been lost. We are
losing 30, 20 and 30 year olds
who liver cirrhosis. The opioid
epidemic is highlighted in our
state, but alcohol is twice the
rate of that of of that death.
Increasing alcohol taxes is a
public health strategy that will
decrease consumption by only
0.66 to 1.2 per the FIR. It will
increase prevention, harm
reductions and treatment across
the state and provide tribes,
nations, and pueblo stable
funding to address health
disparities and alcohol harms.
It will create employment
opportunities in these much
needed fields. I ask that you
support HB 417. Thank you.
Yeah, a day of Bene. Good
morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Oa
Chavez, ED for NMA to vote and a
small business owner. I'm a
proud Jene woman and Gua Pablo
citizen. New Mexico native vote
is in deep support of HB 417,
with the creation of the tribal
alcohol harms alleviation
counsel with representatives
from Indian nation tribes and
pueblos located in New Mexico,
urban and behavioral health
region representatives, we will
see a paradigm shift in all of
our communities.
The grants provided to tribes,
nations and pueblos and our
local governments and entities
that serve tribes, tribal
communities, indigenous people,
and urban Indian populations for
the express prevention or
reduction of harms and risks
associated with substance misuse
is powerful policy. I will
gladly play a little more to
help those in need.
We have the ability to address
one of the major issues that
affect all of our communities
for this and other reasons
stated, we urge do pass on HB
417, yeah, thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
speaking on behalf of the
American Association of
University Women and the
National Organization for Women
Local branch, um, and I'm also
speaking as an educator, uh, and
one who ran a lot of prevention
programs. It is very predictable
to hear the opponents, as we've
heard this morning saying that
we've reduced alcohol harms and
so on, um, you know, they don't
want.
to raise the taxes, but we are
the number one, we have, I, I
can't tell you how many sad
stories, um, I could tell you
about suicides and other um like
domestic violence, lots of
things. So we really need to
pass some legislation that will
dedicate the funds so it doesn't
go into the general fund. This,
um, I want to thank the sponsors
for working on this, uh, you
know, the fact that we haven't
raised the taxes for 40 years.
Says it all, please raise the
taxes. Thank you very much for
your support.
I chair members of the
committee, I'm Alyssa Kenny
Guyer, uh, I worked a lot on
behavioral health when I served
as an Oregon legislator on the
Health and Human Services
Committees. Thank you for your
service. Um, when I moved here
3.5 years ago and saw that New
Mexico was the number one state
in in terms of alcohol-related
deaths, and not only that, but 3
times the national average. I
joined the alcohol, um, alcohol
alleviation, alcohol harms
alleviation, uh, coalition,
which is
now made up of dozens of groups
across the state. I'm sorry that
some of them won't be able to
have a chance like Jenny way
from Gallup, New Mexico to talk,
there's so many people on that
coalition that are in support,
mostly I just want to thank the
sponsors, all 5 sponsors that
came together had different
ideas, brought those ideas
together, compromised, and with
the help of the speaker's
office, came up with some really
fabulous new ideas as well, so,
uh, the tribal alcohol harms,
uh, uh, alleviation, uh, in
particular, so thank you so much
to the
sponsors, especially for working
so hard on this bill. Hope you
pass it.
Thank you. So we will go back to
Zoom and I wrote down, so it
will be Kelly Enrique Healthy
climate, Dick Mason, and then
we'll let Doctor W um have some
time. So go ahead, Kelly.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Kelly Livingston and I'm the
assistant county manager for
Justice and Human Services in
Lee County, and also the chair
of the LDWI Grant Council, which
oversees the current funding
provided to the counties for
their DWI programs. I stand in
support of the changes to the
local DWI program fund, I feel
the changes will benefit all
counties by expanding our scope
of wellness services and
enhancing current services which
will unequivocally prove to have
a greater impact on gaps and
needs and the overall
overall well-being of our
communities. Thank you.
Thank you next, we have healthy
climate, New Mexico.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the community.
Healthy climate in New Mexico is
focused on the environment, and
my name is Shelley Manle, and I
think you all know I have been
dedicated to addressing
preventable public health
problems in New Mexico for more
than a few decades. I was the
founder and director of Santa Fe
Prevention Alliance, and in that
role we worked tirelessly to
find solutions to this
overwhelming problem with
alcohol in our state. Um, I want
to commend the
Sponsors and all who have worked
to create this compromise so
that in fact New Mexico can put
forward an evidence-based
approach to reducing the harms
from alcohol that have impacted
every, everyone here, every
family. This is an equity issue,
as you know, and thank you so
much for your efforts. I urge
you to vote yes on HB 417 for
our children, families, and all
New Mexicans.
OK, next we go to Dick Mason.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico.
The lake stands in strong
support of HP 417.
The League of women voters
usually opposes regressive
taxes, except when it was, it is
clear that that tax delivers the
social good. The proposed
alcohol to attacks meets that
criteria. Data shows that
increase cost discourages
excessive alcohol consumption
and reduces the resultant social
harm.
The legal one, Leom voters wants
to thank the representatives
who've introduced this bill and
others, and um we urged the
committee to give it a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Enrique.
Morning, Madam Charington.
All members of the committee. My
name is Enrique Cardel. I'm the
executive director of the Health
Equity Council in Bernalillo
County.
I'm here in strong support.
One of the things that has not
been mentioned is that
increasing tax on alcohol slows
down uh the use by young people
uh slows down.
Addiction
Uh
For young folks, and we think
that that's very important, as
well as all of the other things
that have been said.
Uh, and trying not to just
repeat those.
Uh, we're here in strong
support. We appreciate the great
work done by the uh sponsors,
and we hope that this passes.
Thank you.
Thank you. And finally, we'll go
to um
Doctor
I'll let you pronounce your
name, doctor.
And you can have more than one
minute since your program was
named in the bill.
Absolutely, thank you, Madam
Chairman. Uh, my name and uh
thank you to the chairman and
the committee members for
allowing me to speak. My name is
Katie Wickowitz, and I am the
director of the university of
New Mexico Center on Alcohol,
Substance Use and Addictions or
casa, uh, the first priority of
our center is to reduce
suffering and social costs
caused by substance use and to
improve quality of life. As
outlined in the UNM fiscal
impact report funding from this
bill would help our center by
allowing us to
resources to studying,
preventing and treating alcohol
problems in the state.
I want to note that funding
research, prevention and
treatment for alcohol use has a
very large return on investment,
and this funding will ultimately
reduce the human and state costs
related to the burdens of
chronic disease, particularly in
our native and rural communities
in the state. New Mexicans die
at 6 times the national average
due to alcohol-related causes,
and we know that promoting
reductions in drinking reduces
death due to alcohol-related
causes, improves quality of life
and ultimately saves consumers
money.
These appropriations would allow
us to have a much larger, larger
impact in the state. It will
provide us resources to create
more programs to help New
Mexicans, to create jobs, and to
address societal issues and
harms related to alcohol use.
With these resources, we will
improve the quality of life in
New Mexico and save lives of New
Mexicans across the state,
including in our rural and
frontier communities. I'm also
happy to serve as a resource to
this committee as you consider
this bill. Thank you for your
time today.
Thank you. So I will go to the
committee. So far I have um
representative.
Cakes, I'm, I, I just wrote
initials and there's cases and
two Chavises and I'm like, ah,
so, um, Nicole Chavez,
representative Senator Cortez
and Representative Jones. Anyone
else?
OK, so go ahead, Representative
Kates.
Thank, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you very much for
presenters for bringing this uh
bill and um.
As I've been a part of this
group for several years. I know
the amount of work and hours
that every member has put into
this, so thank you very much,
representatives.
Um, I just want to clarify
because we've had some
misinformation in public comment
and so I, I just need to
clarify. Um, we are not the tax
committee
and so I would like to even
explain to us what are the
categories of taxes within
alcohol currently.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Keats, and I
appreciate that this bill in
front of us is really the
product of some merging minds,
so myself and Representative
Parajun with the support of
Chaente from the tax committee
and Speaker Martinez also in the
tax committee. We're really
grateful for the champions in
this body, including, um, many
of the members here,
Representative Kates,
Representative Chavez, chair
Thompson, uh chair Ferrari and
others who brought this in a
clear and compelling way forward
to the legislatures.
So what you all made sure we all
heard and understood was that we
hadn't raised these taxes in
decades and importantly for us,
as we considered proposals in
front of the legislative
committees was that the tax as
it stands is a regressive tax.
The tax that's currently imposed
at the wholesale level is
regressive. We tax alcohol type,
um, by the, by, by volume, so
currently today we have um tax
of $1.60 for spirits. We have 45
cents for a gallon of wine, and
we have 43 cents, um, uh, excuse
me, 45 cents for a liter of wine
and 41 cents for a gallon of
beer, so what that meant is
whether someone historically was
a top shelf buyer or just buying
a bottle to get through the
night navigating their
addiction. The taxes imposed
through that supply chain were
the same, so there was not a tax
on the value of the product,
instead just the alcohol type.
Um, and volume. So what we are
doing with the new tax, so we're
first keeping that 50 million in
revenue, but by bringing a new
tax forward. It's actually a
progressive tax because it's
tied to the cost or the value
of, of the alcohol someone's
buying. So if you're paying more
for alcohol, you're paying a
higher tax. If you're paying
less for alcohol, the tax burden
is smaller. Um, another thing
that was really important that
many of you all brought forward
is that without some measure to
keep up with inflation.
the rates we put on the 90s were
outdated. They, they had shrunk
compared to the price of alcohol
overall. So part of um the, the
important thing on this, the
attacks that we're proposing
moving forward, the new tax is
that it naturally goes up over
time because it's the price of
alcohol increases, so does the
revenue we collect on the
backside, so we don't have to
put some kind of cola in there
or cost of inflation because
naturally it follows the price
of alcohol, so in fact we are.
Keeping an archaic wholesale tax
that's already built into the
the price structure of alcohol
today, and the attacks were
moving forward and and bringing
into the place, so the second
tax is progressive and it keeps
up with the price of alcohol.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that in depth, uh,
answer, um, so I, I, I very much
appreciate that. So it sounds to
me like, um, uh, currently, uh,
the way this uh bill has been
thoughtfully put together is
that the tax is not uh it is
more equitable upon what kind of
alcohol you drink as well as it
is thoughtful that it's not
something we have to go and.
visit every 5 or 10 years
because it will move as, as it.
So thank you very much. Can you
also, uh, let me know where is
this tax? I see we, we see here
and and I know that uh not
everyone in the audience has
this wonderful one shooter that
you gave us and and we did
mention that um we do have
programs like um the IAD and uh
U and him uh research and
evaluation.
The uh the interlocked devices,
drug courts, but um how much of
this tax is going into the
general fund now and how much uh
is going in if this becomes law.
Madam Chair and Representative
Kates, thank you so much for
your question. So currently, uh,
as representative of Vice
Chairwoman Kaena mentioned, um,
the tax is pretty stable. Every
year we get about 50 million and
so about half of that currently
goes to the general fund, about
25 million, and then the other
25 million goes, um, to the DWI
um grant fund, but there are
other smaller distributions, um,
that it is currently still
going.
to, so, um, there's a monthly
distribution, for instance, to
the city of Farmington, um,
that's currently, um, happening
as well as a a separate
distribution for those 6
counties, and so what we've done
in the distribution is really
ensure that the counties that
suffer the most are going to be
getting the, getting their fair
share of the dollars, um, and I
can go into the, the equation of
what that is, um, that we worked
on, but that is the general
answer to that representative.
Thank you, madam.
So what you just described is
what this bill will do. So where
is that tax going right now? Oh,
sorry, uh, represented, uh,
Madam Chairwoman and
Representative Kates, uh, that's
where the tax is going right
now, um, as it currently stands.
And then I can talk about, do
you wanna hear about the the
where it will then go now with
the the current way the bill is
written, madam, so we heard it.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much. So,
uh, we heard several comments
from public comment.
One being this tax is all going
to general fund, and it's not
going to help in the programs,
and then we heard a positive
that none of this is going into
the general fund. So I just want
to clarify what is happening now
and what will happen if this
bill becomes law. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, currently, as
rep Parajon is shared.
About half of the money we
collect on the excise tax that's
been in place for decades goes
to the general fund, about 25
million. The other half
generally goes to what was
established and incredible
programming on the ground, the
local DWI grant program and the
associated Fund. So that's in
place today. We get about 50
million generally speaking about
half goes to the general fund,
half goes to the county. The
other pieces that are still in
there, uh, smaller amounts, is
that since the 90s, the
City of Farmington as the only
local government in the state
has been um receiving about
$250,000 a year in the outdated
language that was said to be
pointed towards their programs
to to house street inebriates.
Um, we do not continue the the
sweep to Farmington first in the
proposal as it's written today,
so we eliminate the Farmington
distribution. Um, there were
also historically 6 counties
that were also getting a sweep
of that money.
before the distribution went out
with lots of research and shout
out to the Association of
Counties for helping us look
back 30 years, um, the way it
was written is that those
counties were getting money for
detox services that in fact was
not accurate. Um, there's
incredible detox happening at
Matt's in Bernalillo, but other
counties would have that have
high impact weren't on that
list. So with the support of the
Association of counties were
also sweeping that automatic
distribution. What we are
keeping and as um uh Kelly
Livingston shared.
Expanding and enhancing is the
the statewide county program,
historically, it's been called
local DWI fund. Um, that's
because in the 90s, the
legislature was reacting to a
pretty horrific DWI and in turn
this fund was created. They have
been under severe limitations
for decades because part of the
direction they were given in the
90s was to spend money on
post-conviction treatment and
services. So we reacted to a
horrific and and.
fatal crash, but we put a lot of
parameters and so for years,
counties have been saying, we
want to work on prevention, we
want to work on wellness, we
want to provide programming in
our local communities so that
the DWI doesn't happen. Um, so
as such, what we are saying with
the with the excise tax that's
in place today, um, we would
hold the drug courts hold, they
were one other recipient of that
money, but on top of that, all
the money would go to the county
fund with a rename to
capture um their expansion as
the local alcohol harm
alleviation fund. So thankfully,
the infrastructure, um, is in
place. They are so well
organized, they are active in
every single one of the 33
counties they meet regularly,
they learn from each other, they
bring to life best practices and
evidence-based models, um, so we
would be almost doubling their
money, uh, with an updated
formula that that rep Barahon
can speak to if you're
interested to make sure we
equitably get that.
to the counties where it's
needed most, where they are
ready and on the ground to build
out those services working with
treatment providers with law
enforcement, with the courts,
um, making sure that they meet
the needs that their communities
are living through.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you very much. I do
appreciate that in depth, so we
can clarify. I mean, what a
wonderful uh bill here to show
healthcare and tax, um, two
things we don't actually
understand how well they can
work together and in direct
correlation, um, we do know that
like uh we have gasoline tax
that helps with our roads, and
we know all the health uh issues
uh
alcohol or or trying to to be
able to directly fund from that
to be able to directly to the
healthcare needs. I very much
appreciate this efforts, and I
will stand in support of this
bill. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Next, we will go to
Representative N Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Um, I just
have some questions first on on
the program itself. So what
criteria will you be using to
distribute the funds from the
local alcohol harms alleviation
program to the
And the tribal alcohol harms
alleviation program, um,
From the local harms of
alleviation program, I guess.
It's confusing. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Travis. Um, the FIR represented
that a little, a little bit
differently. There is just two
funds. It's the local alcohol
harms alleviation fund and the
tribal, um, harms alleviation
fund. So they don't go in
together and get split out.
They, they go distinctly from
different taxes. So how we've
written it in the bill is the
excise tax, the one that's
already on the books will go to
the.
fund. I'm grateful that
infrastructure for this fund and
getting that fund out to
counties has been in place since
the 90s, so this money um
procedurally or formally is is
sent to the Department of
Finance Authority, there they
have a a staff person. It
happens that um she's been there
almost 20 years, Julie, who, uh,
received that, that fund. They
have established and named a
statute of uh council that's
made up of secretaries or.
Designees from state agencies,
including Department of
Transportation because of their
role and responsibility in
traffic safety, um, in this bill
we're also adding a
representative from the public
ed department and Indian Affairs
department so we can have cross
conversations about the
different funds, but also
because many of these folks on
the ground are doing really
important work in schools and
want to make sure they have
clear communication with public
ed about doing their programming
in schools, but basically, um,
that council convenes throughout
the year, um, DSA.
Has a checklist to make sure
these local governments being
counties are eligible for these
funds, they know, uh, from toxin
Rev how much dollars were
collected that year, and then
they run all the counties
through a formula. Today that
formula says that it's an
average of the GRT for the
county and alcohol related
injury. So what counties have
said for years, for instance, a
place like Santa Fe would have
an inflated share of that money
because of the
GRT that's created in a tourist
economy, um, so what we've, so
as it happens today, they, they
put the the full amount of the
funds through that formula and
then every county is notified
about how much they're eligible
for. The county, um, local DWI
folks put together a proposal,
that proposal has to be approved
by their board of county
commissioners, so it has local
buy-in, and it's clear that that
county, whether it's your mind,
they can't take that money and
use it to another purpose. They
can't.
Go work on their parks or
anything else, it's clear and
documented that this money will
be used for the purpose of
reducing alcohol harm. It goes
back to DFA, the council votes
on it, um, historically they've
only denied counties when they
have a red flag from DFA or
there's some kind of audit
reason they can't receive the
money, but because all those
circles of accountability are
built in and they have a really
shared commitment to reducing
alcohol harm. That counsel is
the last ch check to make sure
that the proposed spend is in
line with that purpose.
And the counties currently
receive that money 4 times a
year. As it stands today, that
money reverts, so counties have
told us very clearly they're
they're very limited on what
they can spend in, and they have
to spend in a hurry, so they
will say sometimes when they get
that last disbursement, they're
buying whatever they can to make
sure they're not sending money
back to the state, but they
can't be proactive in planning
in purposing that money towards
operations or capital. So part
of what we've done that we
haven't spoken.
To get out loud and say that
that money doesn't revert. So if
they instead would like to staff
up towards a detox facility or
open a few more beds in some
kind of um recovery program,
they would be able to use this
money with much more expansive
purpose and not have to hurry
about spending it before June
30th, but instead keeping it
towards their needs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So I mean,
I think that's important for the
non-reverting funds for those
programs. So are there already
measures put in place to monitor
the effectiveness of the
programs funded.
As we're reallocating or is that
something that's just in the
works that we're writing out on
that we haven't truly set up
yet. Thank you, Madam Chair. DFA
already runs this program and
has those kind of measures and
evaluations in place.
OK. And then on that I did have
a question because I was looking
at the FIR um from DOH, and if
you look on page 7, I was a
little confused to see if
they're going to try to um
Amend or change cause it says
section 19 of the bill
establishes the tribal alcohol
harms alleviation Council, the
Indian Affairs Department
recommends that in quotes,
rather than statutory creating a
council, the bill will be
amended to allow IAD to
determine a mechanism to
distribute funds. So are they
trying to then take that out and
just leave it up to Indian
affairs or what's happening in
this paragraph, Madam.
Representative you and I have
read it exactly the same way,
um, after we read this analysis,
I've, of course, checked in with
Cha Linte and others.
We think accountability is
important, and we think
representation matters. Um, so
as much as we know the executive
would have good intentions in
spending this money. We think
establishing a council so that
it has representation from all
the 24 tribes, nations and
pueblos as well as organizations
serving urban Indians, um, needs
to be in statute so that again
that accountability will be in
place just like it already
exists for the local harms
alleviation fund, we would
mirror that for IED as well.
OK, thank you so much. Um, and
then my next question is, when
you were creating this bill, um,
it sounds like that you did work
with tribal leaders, but did we
work with local businesses and
restaurants on their feedback,
and if we did, what was that
feedback? Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, over this session
and, and the 30 days that we
came out of, we were grateful to
have lots of conversations with
New Mexicans that were business
owners that were restaurants
that were breweries. Um, one
piece of
back from a proposal that we
brought forward previously is
that we had first copied, um.
Uh, like old public health
measures that tax different
alcohol types at a at a
different level. So I think last
year we had spirits were 5%,
wine was 4, beer was 3, and
because we heard from
restaurants and grocers and
others like that is too much
tax. It's confusing. It will be
difficult to implement at the
point of sale. One of the pieces
we did was instead say there's
an alcohol tax regardless of
what alcohol type it is. So
that's probably the most
significant, um, change we've
made, um, and we look forward to
more conversations about about
amendments that might be
amenable or help us make sure
this is a tax we can implement
fairly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and going into
that question, I don't remember
who gave the feedback in
opposition, but they said
something about, um, you know,
we would have been OK with the
3%. Why did it change to 6%. So
can you explain where that
comment came from. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, that's compromise. It's
real that representative Parajon
and I presented a bill at 3% and
we had hours and hours and hours
of meetings of the interim with
advocates, but as well, um,
members in our body and uh chair
for
and her incredible team. We
wanted to make sure that the tax
was fair and equitable, but it
could be justified, uh, for us,
that was the upper limit that we
stood on and and for for these
advocates, that was as low as
they could go, but we had a lot
of thoughtful justifications to
make sure we could explain, um,
and justify what this tax was
and where the distribution would
go.
And Madam Chair and
representative just like to add
that um we did not have the
increase in the excise taxes we
had planned, so this was the
compromise.
OK, thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representatives. OK, along that,
I think that was those
questions. Um, I guess my next
question cause we keep talking
about um.
Uh, tribal communities, so will
they continue to not tax alcohol
sales at casinos or is this
going to um be something that is
carried on through the tribes,
um, because right now I know
they're exempt to tobacco. Are
they exempt to these charges on
on reservations.
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez, yes, a sovereign nations
and sovereign political
entities. We don't have a say on
how they tax what we do
implement, um, when in
government to government
contracts or understandings is
that tribes have many of them
have elected to lean into the
tax and rev department and the
systems that the state of New
Mexico uses to collect taxes and
then we distribute the share
back out that we've collected on
behalf of tribes, but no, our
bill does
not impose a tax on sovereign
nations or require them to do
the same. We don't have the
authority to do so.
OK, thank you so much. Um, I, I
guess I understand the purpose
of this bill, um, I, I mean,
especially in, in my family as
we've had issues with, with
alcohol and tobacco. It just
feels like, you know, raising
taxes won't deter the heavy
drinkers or alcoholics, um, but
really overburdened low income
constituents, um, because as we
see with cigarettes, they still
continue to smoke and find
funding to get.
Um, you know, their addiction,
and I think that's gonna be the
same, same with alcohol,
unfortunately, and then just
punish the responsible ones with
higher prices, um, but I, I
appreciate the legislation and,
and those were all the questions
I had. Thank you. Thank you,
next, we will go to
Representative Senator Cortez.
Wonderful. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and representatives,
um, just to highlight some of
the details that Representative
Chavez highlighted, I have some
questions to go a little bit
more in depth. Um, Madam Chair
Representatives, do you know how
the tribes are addressing the
alcohol sales and funding. I
know we're doing this in the
state of New Mexico, but what
are they doing on on their end.
Madam Chair Representative, I
can't speak to that.
OK. And OK, I'll move on to my
next question. Madam Chair
Representatives, um, do you know
if the tribe's already received
federal funding to support
behavioral health services,
specifically, um,
alcohol-related harms.
Madam Chair Representative, we
certainly can't speak on behalf
of the tribes, nations and
pueblos in New Mexico, um, but
what we can share at high level
is healthcare delivery often
happens for enrolled members of
federally recognized tribes,
which is a complexity in and of
itself through the Indian Health
Services, so there are IHS
facilities in different parts of
New Mexico, and they are
strapped in under resourced like
most healthcare in New Mexico
and across the country. Um.
In the ways that New Mexico
seeks to be appropriate with our
government to government
relations. There are different
funding streams that our state
uses New Mexico dollars towards
infrastructure of tribes,
including in the tribal
infrastructure fund, this would
be something similar, um, and
we've heard from tribal leaders
about previous histories and
efforts to use or seek dollars
like this to meet the needs that
the federal government has not
delivered, um, including in New
Mexico.
there's not a tribal run
recovery or detox program. So
there are tribal members going
to Oklahoma, Texas, Colorado to
seek services and support in a
way that they might find more
meaning in and connection and
relevancy and, and that's one of
the things we've heard clearly
is that there are tribes ready
to come up with an inner tribal
proposal and actually somewhere
in New Mexico offer those
services close to home.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you for that response,
Madam Chair representatives. Um,
I do have another concern when
people can't afford alcohol. I
know that a lot of them refer to
over the counter chemicals and
medicines with this get
addressed in the program.
representative, um, while we've
kept alcohol in the title, we've
also made sure that on both
sides of these funds, the local
fund and the tribal fund that
they will have provisions and
expansions to care for polys
substance use disorders to care
for substance misuse, however,
and whenever that's happening.
Um, so we understand that for
New Mexicans are traumas are
complex and so are the ways
people are moving through those
traumas, so we, nothing in this
bill makes it that it is alcohol
only, but more that those
Providers, those treatment
programs, those, those people
trying to stand up
interventions, have room to meet
New Mexicans at the extent of
their needs.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um,
And I know uh a lot in the
public comment and even in
representative Chavez's
questions she brought up smaller
businesses, um, how can we
prevent them from being
negatively impacted by the
higher alcohol tax. Madam Chair
representative, I think that's a
conversation we should have
every day in the legislature is
like, how are we learning from
being responsive to smaller
businesses. Um, we
Appreciate the work we get to do
to consider those questions on
the tax committee every day. Um,
here, the most, um, the, the
biggest
Move through this compromise is
to make it one alcohol tax, and
the reality is these taxes at
retail are passed on to
consumers, so that in many ways
is the hope, especially like we
see the most price elasticity
with young people. They're not
even allowed to buy alcohol,
they shouldn't be buying
alcohol, but young people is a
place where price makes a
difference, um, but otherwise
what we've said and debated um
in this committee previously is
that alcohol is pretty distinct
if you don't, if your, if your
body is navigating.
dependency if you're in
struggling with alcoholism at
that point and you don't get
what you need, you might die
that night. So we also wanted to
make sure that when we were
imposing this new tax, it's not
regressive. It doesn't mean the
people at the least are holding
a bigger burden, but frankly,
the people buying cheap alcohol
aren't gonna pay those same
taxes as someone buying higher
shelf. So in making it
progressive, we're also trying
to care for what that means to
navigate dependency while we're
building out the programming and
services and hopefully giving
New Mexicans.
chance of something different,
but the biggest way we address
concerns of small businesses was
just making it a simple
straightforward 6% tax that will
be passed on to the consumer.
Madam Chair and Representative
Cortez, there also are going to
be more business.
Provide behavioral health care
and other um types of services
that are needed in our
communities, so we will be
growing uh jobs along that way
too.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representatives. I too am
concerned about alcohol abuse,
so, um, just so you know my lens
and asking some of these
questions were for unintended
consequences to the businesses
and also to the low income
earners, um, along echoing the
sentiments of Representative
Chavez, but I'm concerned too,
um, I do have some more
questions, Madam Chair
Representatives, um, what data
do you have that supports the
liquor taxes reducing the
alcohol-related.
harms.
Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Cortez, thank you so much for
asking that question. Um, we
have been working in
collaboration with many, many
researchers, um, New
Mexican-based researchers and
also consulting with researchers
at Stanford and um Boston
University who have shown that
there are, um, I know, uh, Madam
Chair and.
Uh, Representative Cortez, we
were talking about the other day
correlation and causation,
right, and for these studies,
there are actual R coefficients.
There are strong P values to
demonstrate that increasing the
price does decrease, um, for
some individuals, their ability
to purchase, um, that is what
elasticities are generally, um,
showing us in, in economics that
they can do that.
I think for me the most um
impactful research around this
has been shown um in the state
of Maryland where they increase
their uh sales tax by 3% and saw
a lot of changes in their
alcohol consumption rates, um,
even in their STIs, um, there
are instances of that, so we
know that the we think we will
see some strong impacts with a
6% um sales tax. And um I try to
keep things as.
as brief as possible, Madam
Chair.
Uh, 11 member mentioned that uh
McKinley County is one of the
counties in our state that has
seen the biggest drop off in um
in decreasing consumption of
38%, um, McKinley imposes a 5%
retail sales tax already on
their um alcohol, so we expect
to see some good things from
this tax manager and Madam Chair
and um representative, um, we've
also incorporated evaluation and
research.
um at both the um Indian Affairs
division, as well as um for the
um alcohol harms alleviation,
uh.
Programs. So we, we will be able
to show um.
With reporting each year, how
that is being effective.
And just um specifically about
that data, Madam Chair
representatives, and I would
love to see that.
To see the correlation and to
provide statistical significance
and a direct link, that's tough
and, and we all know and in
working with data, that's what I
study for a living or data and
trends and define a exact link
and correlation, that's tough.
So in terms right now, are you
hoping for a trickling effect.
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
answer that cause I think it's
fair to say I myself have been
skeptical about that data over
the last few years, and that's
how we ended up here in this
bill together is because I
continued to raise concerns that
we didn't have enough New
Mexican data and that I didn't
quite follow the assumption in
some of this national data was
projecting on how we would
change New Mexican behavior. Um,
what we've said is that there
was enough out there for us to
pursue this in a responsible way
in a thoughtful way, um, one of
the provisions
There's still a temporary
provision says that we will come
back to review the rates of this
tax and distribution every 5
years, but from the beginning,
we are making significant
investments in New Mexican data
because we deserve it because
our families need it and I don't
want to say that in some states
somewhere else, they proved some
kind of programming could work,
cause that could fall flat here
in New Mexico and our families
deserve better, so that's why
there's such significant dollars
pointed towards research and
evaluation, so we can begin to
answer and ask.
those questions ourselves, and
then have more information in
front of us to make responsible,
reasonable tax policy out of
this, but I, I'm with you and,
and, but there's enough there
that we said we haven't updated
these since the 90s, they're
regressive. We are pointing
dollars to the general fund, we
at least need to get a fresh
start and then moving forward
make sure we are very
thoughtfully collecting New
Mexico data that we can all
review and analyze together
before we look again at this in
5 years as policymakers. I
potentially won't be.
but you all you freshman, I, I
expect I hope Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I, I, I would love to
see the statistical significance
in the direct correlation again
because I study data for a
living. Um, I'll go ahead and
move to my next question, but
thank you so much for your
thoughtful responses, um, Madam
Chair representatives, what
safeguards would exist to ensure
that the tax redistribution
would be done equitably to
benefit all New Maxicans and not
just specific communities.
communities.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, we have a very um complex
formula that takes into account
um the um I'm gonna let
representative Potter won't
explain it because she worked
with our great um other expert,
um, um, Marlena Lera, who I
think made public comment, but
they worked together to make
sure that this was going to be
equitable, let her explain.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Cortez, uh, we
have decided to update that
formula to ensure that the, the,
the counties that have the
highest rates of death from
alcohol are gonna be getting a
larger share of the portion of
the dollars. And I want to shout
out also DFA, um, Julie, uh,
who's here today, um, and you
know that uh there's been a lot
of work if you are able to look
on page, um.
Uh, page 24 of the bill, you'll
see how the the the the
distribution of those funds were
before, um, including that it
used to use an alcohol related
injury crashes number from 2000
to 2002. And that was set and
baked, and so every year, um,
that number is never updated, so
our new um
Formula takes into account
alcohol-related deaths, uh, and
it also takes into account the
population of the county in
proportion to the population of
the state. I'm the same with
alcohol-related injury, uh,
alcohol related death. And for
each of those we have also
placed a weight and uh Madam
Chair and Representative Cortez,
so happy to be talking to a data
person, um, these are weighted
averages and so, uh, 90% of the
weight is placed on alcohol
related deaths and 10% on the
population.
And that balances things out um
per our calculations, Madam
Chair and uh Representative
Cortez. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representatives, um, how
would this bill impact liquor
sales in border areas where
consumers can easily purchase
alcohol in a lower tax state
because I'm one of those border
towns.
Madam Chair representative, uh,
Chair Ferrari and I also come
from Las Cruces, so we live on a
Texas border as well, and I
think an example we see is that
these consumer decisions go both
ways. In southern New Mexico
right now are if you go to any
cannabis dispensary, the parking
lots are full of Texas plates.
So certainly, there's some
consumer choice that might be at
play there, but I think as we
have that data and including
economists looking at that, so
we have public health folks
looking at it, but also
economists will better
understand.
If there's a shift in buying
patterns, um, but you know, we
know it's like to live in the
shadow of Texas.
Saying Madam Chair
representative, and I'd also be
interested in seeing that data
as it comes about if this is
passed, um, Madam Chair
representatives, what
alternative solutions such as
tougher enforcement of existing
alcohol laws were considered
instead of just increasing the
tax.
Madam Chair Representative in a
previous life I was on the House
Judiciary Committee for 2 terms
and certainly became familiar
with the criminal code and how
it intersects with DWIs and
specifically, there is a a
mandatory sentencing scheme that
comes into place with DWIs and
other measures that haven't
continued to level criminal
penalties for the harm that can
cause from someone that's
driving and um intoxicated
whatever substance that may be,
so, um, those conversations
continue to happen, but we are
Hoping to do and, and the
counties have been on board with
for a long time, um, is this
including establishing this new
fund is we're trying to get to
the root cause of what's
happening in the lives of people
we love, the people we hold
close, so we're trying to get to
people much earlier, whether um
that be youth programming or
prevention in schools that Chair
Ferrari is very familiar with.
Like we're trying to have
conversations when they need to
begin, instead of just being
responded when we've lost
someone and and they're driving
in dangerous ways.
Right.
Madam Cha real quick and
representative, there are other
things that go along, but this
is one of the most effective
ways to um reduce alcohol use
and put in the funding being
targeted in the programs, but
there are other um.
Uh, things that can be done like
um raising the BAC. I'm sorry,
lowering the BAC level to um
0.05 possibly like they've done
in other states. There are
several other things that can be
done, but this is the one of the
top and most effective to start
with and then we'll follow
through on some of the other
things that our community groups
are advocating for.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, um, I know,
uh, Representative Chavez
mentioned if small businesses
and um the tourism industry if
they were consulted and you
responded with yes, which I
think it's so important to, you
know, get community buy-in and,
and all of the stakeholders,
which small businesses and um
tourism industry specifically
were consulted on this bill.
Madam Chair representative, I
haven't consulted with anyone
that's directly representing
tourism industry, but, um,
certainly I represented tourist
hotspot, so I represent a
district in Donana County, but
I'm from and still live in um
Mesa, so I don't know if you all
have been down to southern New
Mexico, but Mesa, we have a
plaza like Santa Fe or or Old
Town Albuquerque, um, and my
little town relies on our GRT.
So I've been able to meet with
um breweries, bars, restaurants,
um, that are in.
and then some in Las Cruces as
well to have conversations about
what the implications of this
tax would be, um, certainly, one
of the things that continues to
come up for us and we'll, we'll,
we'll be honest about that and
it'll be a conversation we
continue to have intact, is that
right now, local breweries and
brew houses have a different tax
in tax breaks basically in the
existing excise tax. Restaurants
have come to us very clearly and
said, Well, should we all close
shop and open a brewery.
Because they have a different
tax framework that could be seen
as putting the breweries at at
an advantage over restaurants
that is real, that's in current
tax law. So certainly those are
conversations that restaurant
owners in particular are
bringing forward like, should we
shut down and and jump ship over
there because they have some tax
advantages that are not being
pointed in our direction. So
those are conversations that
would, that are happening and I
I'd love to follow up with you
if there's other things you
should, you, we should be
listening to. We've also met
with lobbyists more.
So the actual, um, the, the
lobbyists from the grocers, the
lobbyists from the gas stations,
um, we continue to hear from
them and for us, the biggest
change we made was making sure
it was a a single alcohol retail
tax and not a tiered tax that
would have been much more
difficult to implement.
Madam Chair and Representative
Santa Cortez, um, we have this
year and in past years met with
the local um, uh, breweries, uh,
the representatives and um they
were.
Glad that we aren't going to
raise or change the excise tax
in their um.
Uh, I should say they're
exception.
So thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative everyone to keep
their comments and questions
brief because we have a long
agenda. So if we just
straightforward answers. Thank
you, Madam Chair representative,
you'd be glad to know that
concluded my questions. Thank
you so much. I hope you didn't
feel pressured. Not at all. I
got, I got chastised for someone
saying they didn't have pink,
and I said, it's time to go out
and buy some. They thought that
was bullying. Um, I'm
just the pink cheerleader, so,
so next we will go, we have
Representative Jones and then
represent a minority with.
Martinez
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. I know
we're all on the same page with
um treating.
People and, and helping them
with alcohol issues, um,
I have, I don't, these ladies
have done a really good job of
asking questions, and so I have
a few.
That are kind of pointed, um.
First, uh just a concern about
data and some of the statistics
and we talked about, you know,
getting good data in the future,
Madam Chair. So I just did a
quick search here uh trying to
find um confirmation about the
statistics of um alcohol alcohol
related deaths in New Mexico and
sure enough, we are way, way
above any other state.
But then I do a search on how
much alcohol is consumed in, you
know, which states have the most
alcohol consumed, and we're not
even on the list. We're not on
the list of the top 10.
So right away that tells me
there's some wrong data, and we
need to get to the bottom of
that. I, I have a feeling that
we are reporting um
alcohol-related deaths like
maybe cirrhosis of the liver
that perhaps have nothing to do
with alcohol because there are
people who die of cirrhosis of
the liver, for instance, that
have never touched alcohol, so
we may be, we may be reporting
our um
Our deaths in a different way
than other states, so I, I
really would like when we're
comparing and we're trying to
justify certain things and we're
horrified that we're at the top
of that list. We may not really
be that far ahead of anybody. We
may not even be at the top of
the list. So I just wanted to
put that out there and make sure
that we're comparing apples to
apples, so to speak.
Um
But um question about the
general fund, this the money
that goes to the general fund,
did you say that that's going to
change with this bill?
Madam Chair representative, yes,
it would now all be pointed to
the county harm alleviation fund
for the excise tax.
That's a good change. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um,
A lot of questions were
answered.
Um,
I still have an issue with my
district that I think is unique
to any of the others. Of course,
we have tourism is, is important
to us, our small businesses are
still hurting. We put
restriction upon restriction,
and I feel like this would be
one more reason that people um
had
Did not go out to eat, did not
go, you know, out to socialize
and did not spend money but even
more importantly than that,
Madam Chair, in my district,
we're just 30 miles from the
border. We have a lovely places
to eat and drink down there. No,
no age limits, no, you know.
It's just right down the road.
Um, you can take orders from all
your friends, go down, have a
few drinks, be on the road
drinking, coming back with
alcohol that has no taxes. So in
my district, I hate to say it,
but I think this completely
backfires, um, potentially, and
not only would we not get the
increased tax, but we may lose
altogether the sales, which
hurts our businesses, it, it
doesn't keep people off the
road. I know that's not, it's
not typical.
at all of of and maybe any other
place in New Mexico, um, because
of the, the international issue.
So, so for that reason, I don't
know how to resolve that.
Um, and for that reason, I
still, and, and also because
I'm justifying my no vote. I'm
sorry, but I'm just finished my
thought. Um.
I'm gonna, I can't support it. I
wish we could figure that out,
but I do hope that we can come
to agreement on, on how to use
our
many, many tax dollars to
address this issue and thank you
for your work toward that. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Minority whip Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and in
respect of time and wanting to
hear some of the other bills
I'll forgo my questions at this
time.
Thank you. And I just on our um
committee analysis, there's some
things in here that I think need
to be um put out into the, so
according to UNM, New Mexico
leads the nation in
alcohol-related mortality, with
1 in 3 adults under the age of
49, having deaths attributable
to alcohol compared to 1 in 8
nationally, so we're more than
twice the national average, the
rate of alcohol-related
mortality in New Mexico.
6.5 times the national average
with even greater rates in some
counties, um, alcohol-related
mortality in New Mexico
disproportionately impacts
indigenous people who have
alcohol-related mortality rates
twice that of the state overall.
Um
Alcohol more more mortality also
disproportionately affects the
Spanish Hispanic men.
New Mexico has many poor
outcomes related to harmful
alcohol use, including low high
school graduation rates and
ranking among the, among the top
5 states for accidental death,
suicide, underemployment, child
poverty and crime. These are
systemic social problems that
are both directly and indirectly
related to high rates of
excessive alcohol use.
So those are things that, that
are really important somebody
mentioned um STIs unintended
pregnancies, all kinds of risky
behaviors that we, it's, it's
not as simple as, you know, this
stands alone, everything is
interrelated, and we are really
working on crime this year and
alcohol plays a large part in,
in our high crime rate. So I
want to thank the sponsors and I
will entertain emotion.
I'd like to make motion, Madam
Chair, for due pass on um
So
sorry, thank you on uh house
Bill.
417417.
Thank you. And second from I
don't know. Tie
for each of us. Will you take
the roll, please?
Representative Anaya? Yes.
Representative Cates, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
No, and I'd like to further
explain my vote.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Santa Cortez? No,
and I would like to explain my
vote.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
Madam Vice chair is here. Oh,
sorry, I didn't she wasn't here.
I mean, the things, yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
So by a boat of 6 to 4, you have
a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee for your time. Thank
you, and we will go to
Representative Jones and then
Representative Senator Cortez to
explain their votes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you again, presenters for
the goal of treating people with
um
Alcohol harms issues. I just
wanted to make it clear that I
think um the goal of collecting
data to be less than way ahead
on alcohol related deaths is not
my goal. It would be, you know,
one alcohol related death is too
many. And so I just wanted to be
clear about that. I'm not OK
with being mediocre on this
issue, and I appreciate your
work. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Senator Cortes. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair and
Representatives. Um, I
I just want to reiterate that
I'm also concerned about alcohol
abuse, and I appreciate your
innovative approach to address
the issue. Um, I just wanted you
to know that I can in good
conscience do anything to raise
taxes, specifically for the
constituents and small
businesses in my community that
are already struggling and Madam
Chair Representative, I, I do
look forward to, to seeing
statistically significant data
that would prove that direct
correlation, I think that we all
want to see that, um, but that
concludes my remarks. Thank you
so much.
Madam Chair representatives.
Thank you sponsors. Next we will
go to House Bill 303 and just a
reminder that House Bill 344,
the Healthcare Equipment Gross
Representative down whenever
you're ready. Hello, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
And first, I just want to make
sure that I let you guys know
that I do have a shadow today.
This is Alicia Montoya from
Berlin, and so she's she and I
think 14 other fellow classmates
are are getting involved in the
process today. So, um,
This, this is a difficult bill,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
It's particularly difficult
knowing that in 2019.
I cast a vote with the majority
to to establish the carrot plan
in in the state of New Mexico.
Madam Chaot was vague.
We discussed that we would try
it out.
And if there were problems, we
would fix it.
That was in 2019.
I've been to 2 funerals for
infants?
Who are in state custody.
Or who needed care plans and did
not receive them.
When I see a headline.
It is my greatest regret to have
left it as vague as we did.
And to continue to leave it at
the hand of the agency to find
problems. We are the lawmakers.
It is our job. It's a 60 day
session. Now is the time.
And Madam Chair, this is a tough
on crime bill, and I know we do
not want to create a pipeline to
prison, what this bill does is
require that when a baby is
born, exposed to substance, and
they test positive, which is
done.
It through the um the umbilical
cord tubing testing. So that
tells them it's how long it can
tell that this has been the the
child's been exposed and they
are actively in withdrawals or
have active symptoms.
That law enforcement is
involved. This is what this bill
does. It does involve law
enforcement, and it gives them a
hold on that child so that they
cannot be released without a
plan of care.
There, no one's taking the child
from the hospital. This child is
in is in desperate need of care,
but it makes sure that before
they leave,
That we are saying.
That the mother needs help and
the baby needs help and the plan
of care will be in place before
they leave the hospital. Now, I
already know that we have
concerns about having substance
use as a substantiated form of
abuse. If we do not create a
substantiated abuse, there is no
intervention before the child
leaves the hospital.
And instead of
Creating an immediate response
at the time that the mother and
the baby needs it most.
The baby is going to leave. The
mother is in crisis, the baby is
in crisis.
And we're gonna have another
death.
And then we are going to spend
taxpayer dollars prosecuting a
mother for child homicide.
CYFD is gonna be sued, taxpayer
dollars are going to be used
because what's pre predictable
is preventable.
We have got to do something and
I'm sorry, we're halfway through
this session and every bill so
far has died.
This probably is tougher than
the ones that died on Monday.
What I'm trying to do is get
mothers the help that they
deserve, so they do not end up
in prison, but they do not end
up being prosecuted and that
these babies' lives are saved.
And uh that's all I have for
right now. You can ask questions
about the specifics of the bill.
Thank you. Thank you. So we will
go to Zoom if you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand, and I'll come back to you
in the room in opposition.
If you would like to speak,
please come forward.
You have one minute.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee, Mikeaini, policy
manager with both Futures. We
oppose HB 303, the provisions in
this bill conflicts with
healthcare approach to punitive
measures, we continue to
emphasize collaborative models
which include medical and social
support to keep families intact.
HP 303 introduces felony charges
and potential removals, which
may deter others from seeking
prenatal care and contradict
federal guidelines, this shift
towards towards criminalization
over rehabilitation could lead
to further increased family
separation.
child remover removals and
strain on the state's foster and
legal care systems. Please
oppose HB 303. Thank you.
Thank you, seeing no one else in
the room, we will go to Jasmine
on Zoom.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jasmine
Tying Fong. I'm an attorney with
the ACLU New Mexico, and we ask
that you oppose HB 303. This
bill favors punitive criminal
responses over rehabilitation
and criminal penalties for
pregnant people have been
criticized as being ineffective
as deterrents and can actually
cause further harm. People may
avoid seeking the medical care
for fear of prosecution, and it
does not treat substance use as
the public health issue it is.
The American College of
Obstetricians and
Gynecologist states that despite
similar rates of drug use
between people of different
races and income levels, medical
professionals and the foster
system overwhelmingly target
people of color who are poor and
for pre and postnatal drug
testing and reporting to child
protective services. We ask that
you oppose this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. So,
On Zoom in support.
If you'd like to speak, please
raise your hand, and we will, I
will take the 1st 5 and in the
room in support.
OK, I'm not seeing any hands in
the room, so we will go with JD
Larry.
I'm assuming that's not.
Trump undercover and Barbara ye.
So go ahead, JD.
Thank you, Madam Chair. JD
Bullington with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
supporting House Bill 303,
because this bill recognizes the
child abuse occurs when a little
one is exposed to a dangerous
controlled substance.
Negligent adults cannot continue
to be allowed to ruin the lives
of our most vulnerable. Our
children have to be protected.
Because substance abuse plagues
our communities. The chances of
a child being exposed are
enhanced, even tiny amounts of
some drugs like fentanyl are
fatal to children. One adult
dose is more than enough to kill
a child. So the message has to
be loud and clear, exposure to
harmful drugs is not going to be
tolerated. It's the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges you to vote yes on House
Bill 303.
Thank you. Next, we have Larry.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. Larry Sontag
here representing Better
Together New Mexico.
For reasons previously stated
and also I wanted to point out
that New Mexico has seen a
significant increase in the rate
of newborns diagnosed with
neonatal abstinence syndrome.
The recent numbers that I was
able to find from 2020 show that
2000 babies in New Mexico
hospitals were identified.
Identified as exposed to a
controlled substance.
What is very current is the fact
that New Mexico's rate of
substance exposed newborns is
higher than the national
average.
New Mexico's 2019 legislation
mandates that hospitals and
birthing centers to develop care
plans for substance exposed
newborns and refer families to
voluntary support and treatment
services.
This bill emphasizes the
importance of protecting infants
and children from harm. The
implementation of safe care
plans and the focus of
preventing substance use during
pregnancy remains essential in
ensuring the well-being of both
the child and their caregivers.
We urge your support of House
Bill 303.
Thank you.
Uh, admin.
Good morning. Good morning,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee,
sponsors and advocates. My name
is Nat Dean N A T D E A N. I am
a disability advocate and I am a
person with multiple
disabilities.
I'm in support and, and also
have some concerns, uh, early
intervention is key. An early
interventional strategies can
help move the needle and that
might not be the best word for
this subject matter, but move
the needle forward on helping
everyone, a mother, a child, a
family, a community.
But one of the challenges is
that the interventional programs
each have a different entry
point for an application and
reducing the confusion and the
complications of applying for
multiple programs will help to
support the early interventional
strategies. It is the largest
challenge that I help people
with is that every program has
its own application
will be helpful um to members of
the committee. Trump undercover.
Good afternoon. Good morning,
chair and committee members. My
name is Sharon Luna, and I want
to share a sad, painful
experience with you. In 2015, we
received a shocking call no
parent grandparents want to
receive our 3 week old grandson
was found at a drug house during
a raid. The state police and
CYFD urgently asked us to take
him in to avoid him being placed
in CYFD custody. We immediately
took him to the hospital where
we learned he had drugs and his
little system from his mother's
drug use during her pregnancy.
Now,
At almost 10 years old, Pinon
still battles the effects of the
trauma. We are proud to be
grandparents raising our
grandson, however, had his
biological mother received the
help she needed before she left
the hospital. She may be in
recovery today. She may have
even gained custody of her son.
I stand here today to urge you
to consider HB 303. This is a
serious form of child abuse that
needs our attention. We must
advocate for voiceless children
like our little pinon. Thank you
for your time.
Thank you, Barbara.
Hi, uh, I am Barbara Yale. I am
a foster and adoptive parent in
Chavez County, and I currently
serve on the Governor's CYFD
policy advisory Council. I fully
support this bill. I have
personally cared for multiple
children who were born in Mexico
positive for Schedule 1 and
Schedule 2 controlled
substances, and I have held them
as they have undergone the
painful withdrawals. I had taken
them to all of their physical
occupational speech and other
therapies that they
to recover from the trauma that
their tiny bodies have endured,
even before they entered the
world. I continued to parent
some of these children, and I
watched them daily struggle to
keep up with their peers when it
comes to education and even
certain physical activities.
These innocent babies did not
get to choose how they were
born. They didn't have a say in
what their birth parents did,
and yet they pay the price. This
is why we must include exposure
to the extent
the child tests positive at
birth for controlled substances
contrary to accepted medical use
please wrap it up.
As a form of child abuse. Thank
you.
Um, and that's the end of our,
and I'm just gonna make this
statement if you would like to
speak on Zoom, we would we would
request that you have a name as
opposed to a political
statement, so, um, just, just a
reminder that it makes it easier
for us and um.
Just please use your name. OK,
so we will, did you have
anything to, um, yeah, thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. I did see that,
uh, Rick Tedro with the
Association of District
Attorneys just came in and we
did meet with him before the
before the hearing, well, I saw
the FIR and I want to get this
right and his recommendation at
the, it was after the 24 hour
notice, but his recommendation
was to strike um the new
language or the section of L of
I.
Jay, and I'm perfectly happy to
do that. Also, um, for a couple
folks said it would prevent pre,
oh, I'm sorry, yeah, please page
4 H4 line 11, all the new
underlying language and page 4
section J, the underlying
language.
I would strike it, yeah, if I am
so lucky as to proceed to the
next committee, I will strike
that, and I think that's where
folks have concern.
About, um,
I if the if the DA wants to
speak to what that would
accomplish.
Madam Chair, I'm so sorry. Can
you repeat the other strike as
well, the second page 4, line
18, the underlying language as
as well. And was there another
place you would strike? Madam
Chair Representative Kate, 11
page, both on page 4, all new
language on page 4, so it starts
at line of 11 through 14.
And then again in 18 through 21.
And
this is not prenatal. This is at
the time of birth, if they test
positive through the umbilical
cord tube process that they do.
They test moms when they arrive,
they test babies, and then they
test the umbilical cord. And
again, I just want to reiterate,
I, I understand that it feels
punitive, but I could almost
guarantee that if Ricky Renova's
mother was sitting here, she had
the opportunity to see her, that
she would much rather be working
a CYFD care plan.
than being prosecuted by our
state for child homicide. In
addition to that, the MCO is now
being sued.
The care coordinator herself is
being sued.
NCYFD is being sued. And men who
chair can we ask if we could
roll the spill so we could get
that amendment to for it to be
represented.
OK. So, are you OK with that,
Madam Chair? Yes, I'm, I'm
totally fine with. I want to
have a workable solution that.
That we can all agree to. OK, so
we will roll this bill I'm not
sure we can get you on Friday
because we already have our
agenda, but we'll, we'll do our
best. So thank, thank you for
being amenable to uh
thank you, madaming us on the
straight and narrow. Thank you,
members of the committee. OK, so
Representative and Chavis, are
you, oh, OK, I just didn't know
if you were prepared.
And again, House Bill 344 is
rolled.
Go ahead whenever you're ready.
OK, Madam Chair.
Representatives, House Bill 345
is a simple bill that amends the
part of the Children's code to
require CYFD to provide a child
and adolescent needs strength,
trauma assessment within the 45
days of placing a child in
foster care. So based on the
assessment, the department must
provide referrals to appropriate
um behavioral health services
and this bill, um, I would like
to add did directly come from
one of the recommendations on
the um SM5.
task force to improve outcomes
for children in foster care and
behavioral health. And so this
bill also codifies one of the
requirements in the Kevin S
settlement agreement. And so
with that, we stand for
questions.
OK, we will go to the public, if
you are in opposition online,
please raise your hand, and I
will come back to you in the, in
the room in opposition.
Seeing no hands either place if
you are in support on Zoom,
raise your hand, and I will come
back to you if you are in
support in the room, please
raise your hand. If you would
like to speak, please come
forward. No, OK. So, OK, I see,
uh, Larry Sontag, Knapp, and
George Davis.
Go ahead, Larry.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. We
just want to thank the bill
sponsors for bringing this
forward and um we encourage you
to support this bill based on
the reasons articulated by the
sponsors. Thank you.
Napp
And for those of you who are
listening now is having
difficulties with their
technology and getting her name,
but
She's a, she's a frequent flyer,
so we know. Go ahead now.
They
Thank you, Madam Chair. I hope
frequent flyer is a compliment.
Oh, thank you. My name is Nat
Dean. I'm a disability advocate
and a person with multiple
disabilities and um I'm not a
lobbyist. I am simply an
advocate. Um, I think that, uh,
the message has been clear and
the support of early
intervention and interventional
strategies that help support
people in their health
improvement journey is uh
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, I'm in
support. Thank you.
Thank you. And now we will go to
George Davis. I'm I'm sorry, I
was having trouble getting
unmuted. Um, my name is George
Davis. I'm a child psychiatrist
working with the Kevinness
implementation team. I, uh,
strongly recommend this, and I
just want to point out
That the uh the cans, which
stands for the child and
adolescent needs and strengths
screen is um an essential part
of the review of the child's
needs when they come into care,
um, without this version and
another version and other kinds
of assessments, including a well
child check. Without those, um,
it's unclear what the needs of
the child.
Actually is. And so they can go
for months, even years without
getting appropriate treatment.
Um, I think this, uh, assessment
is essential to do and uh I
strongly recommend passage.
Thank you.
So we will go to the committee
questions. Let me make start a
list representative Senator
Cortez, Madam Chair
Representative, I'd like to
reserve my comments to make a
motion for a due pass, please.
Are there any other questions?
Oh, no. Oh, Representative E
Chavis.
Thank you, Madam Cherry. I do
have a question. Um, well, I
agree that that kids in custody
need some assessments. I guess
the question is how are we going
to do that, right? They're not
getting them now. So question
number one, why Mountain Chair
representative, why aren't they
getting them now?
Um, and then, um, second
question is how are we going to
move that along, Madam Chair
Representative.
So I, I wish I can answer the
why are we not doing it now, but
I'm going to reserve the rest of
my response to either I have two
expert witnesses. I have Marilyn
Beck with children first, and
then I also have um Doctor
George Davis, who was part of
the Kevin S settlement as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Chavez. Um, I
think the answer is that's why
we have to codify that there,
um, because it's not happening
now, we know it's a problem. I
can also
say that with the investments of
the house appropriation and HB
2, we're seeing unprecedented
events, investments into
supporting the efforts of the
Kevinness settlement agreement.
And so there was concerns in the
FIR, but if you read the FIR
correctly, I think it's
important to note, um, CYFD
stated that they would need $5.9
million to ensure that every
child entering foster care
receives this assessment, but in
this fiscal year, if you read
it, moreover, A, they moved
money from, I'll just read it.
However, in FY 24 CYFD received
a recurring appropriation for
963,000 for this um to support
additional behavioral health
clinician positions with the
department since this money is
recurring.
CYD will get it again, and FY
25, the department completed a
budget adjustment request a bar
for 1.25 million to move funds
out of personnel, which could
have been used to hire
additional clinicians and
instead was used to purchase
laptops, desks, and other
furniture.
Moreover, CYFD reverted over 6
million in FY 24 from their
behavioral health services
division, meaning that the
department could likely absorb
the cost of implementing this,
the cans, and I think it's
important for the department or
for US legislators in the
appropriating body to know that
the reason we're putting this
into statute is to hold them
accountable and ensure that this
does happen. The money is there.
We have to make this happen.
Madam Chair, there are
representatives from CYFD in the
room. I'd like to hear from them
if they can answer the question
about why, why, uh, we're not um
able to or why the behavioral
assessments for each child
coming into care have not
happened.
If you can.
They're deciding which one, so
give them a moment.
Mhm
OK, we have Liz Hamilton coming
up.
Good afternoon. Uh good morning,
Madam Chair. um,
representatives. I'm Elizabeth
Hamilton. I'm the director of
Children's Behavioral Health
Services with CYFD, um, and the
cans is partially being
implemented. It's actually
created as a screening tool.
Through the Kevanness
settlement, so it's not a
behavioral health assessment.
Um, and so the screening tool
was created so that all of the
behavior not none nobody had to
be behavioral health clinician.
And so the screening tool was
created so that the PPWs or the
permanency workers, those
particularly um individuals that
are assigned to the case can
screen with the needs and
strengths of that child are, and
the team can develop a plan, so
it's to help develop the plan
when a child comes into custody
and follow them through the life
of their time in the custody.
Um, and be able to track
Their behavior health needs,
their developmental needs, their
school needs, including in the
individuals that are caring for
them, so their biological
parents, it could be their
resource parent, it could be the
kin that they're living with. So
it's a very big large
comprehensive um screening tool
that's to be utilized by the
department. Behavioral health
screening tools.
would be something different, a
full behavioral health
assessment would be something
that a clinician would need to
complete.
Um, which is where we utilize
our community providers for
that. So that they're doing the
full behavior health screening
tool and then they can also
implement the behavior health.
Services, that would be the most
ideal for all of our children
that are in custody, so that the
community can also step in and
work with the whole family
setting and the child. Madam
Chair, um, CFT representative
so can you tell me, I, I
understand the screening tool
piece, but if, if the behavioral
health assessment is already
embedded in the Kevin S
settlement. My question is, why
has the department decided not
to do that. So the Cannes
screening tools.
embedded in the assessment,
which is a screening tool.
And so, unfortunately we are, we
are fortunately we are.
Engaged in training all staff
when they come in during their
new employee training. Part of
that is identifying how to help
staff understand within their,
their workload.
And their caseload, how to
implement that cans from the
beginning. That's part of why
there's a huge push right for
hiring and to get case low down
so that those workers can
implement.
All of the required screening
tools.
And can you in in the AFIR Madam
Chair Representative, you heard
what the um expert witness read,
can you tell me why you would
need 5.9 million to make sure
that every child received.
The accounts assessment.
Madam Chair, Representative, I'm
not aware of the 5.9 million. I,
I don't, um, have the knowledge
of the budget, uh, so we would
have to have, uh, our budget
people be able to answer that.
I, I apologize for not knowing
that. And one last question,
Madam Chair Representative, how
long will it take CYFD to be
able to do that assessment.
The cancer assessment for every
child to get up to speed to be
able to do that, you said that
there was training ongoing now,
um, and I'm not sure why the
training hasn't already taken
place.
Um, but if you could tell me how
long uh it will be before you
are up to speed.
Representative CYFD has been
training their staff.
sense to
021, I think when the cans was
implemented.
The staff are trained, they're
certified. There are 2 re
certification training that
happen every month to make sure
that we're tracking staff that
are certified. A lot of it has
to do with the ability to have
those case loads lower so that
they can actually implement the
can, um, completing a a can can
take up to 1 hour to 2 hours
because it's really digging
through.
child's needs, parents' needs,
um, school needs and really
being able to know that child in
the whole entire case, and
that's part of why the, the
workers are completing that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Actually, I do have a
couple of questions. So the
title requiring that a
behavioral health assessment be
conducted for a child prior to
the child entering foster care.
So does that mean we're gonna
have children sleeping in
offices until this gets done
because CYFD has been
short-staffed for probably
forever. I, I, I.
I'm a little worried about how
that's gonna be in reality.
So thank you, Madam Chair,
that's a great question. As we
were looking at the title, um,
we actually and maybe we could
do it today because it's just
one word, um.
Wanted to change that second
sentence to show uh behavioral
health assessment be conducted
for a child upon instead of
prior to the child entering
foster care.
Uh, I'm not sure that that fixes
it, um, and, and then while I'm,
while I'm on that point, um, on
page 3.
Um
Line 2, and maybe the difference
it within 45 days of placing the
child into foster care, the
department shall provide for the
child to receive a child and
adolescent needs and strengths
trauma assessment. Are those two
different things.
If not, then one says before and
one says within 45 days. Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
what this was identified as just
a drafting error. It should be
when the child enters foster
care. This is codifying
Keviness and so Kevin S and part
of that, which is why Doctor
Davis is on, is that part of the
Keviness agreement has already
agreed the department and the
plaintiffs have agreed to within
45 days of the child entering
foster care, the department
shall provide this assessment.
So,
Representative Chavez is
correct. It's to be conducted
for a child upon the child, so
it would be marked out prior to
and create just a pond. Yeah,
I'm, I'm not 100% certain that
that gets at what I'm at, and,
and my, my other question is, so
that the um online too, online 4
on page 3.
Is the needs and strengths
trauma assessment different than
the um
Behavioral health assessment.
Are they two different things or
are they the same thing?
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, Doctor Davis could actually
answer this question. OK, so if
we could bring up Dr. Davis on
Zoom.
Whenever you're ready, doctor.
Man chair and uh members of the
committee. It's um it's, it's a
little more complicated. Uh, it
doesn't need to be more
complicated in the bill, but it
is more complicated in actual
fact, there are two versions of
the cans. One is called the cans
itself, and one is called the
Crisis Assessment tool. The
crisis assessment tool, which is
a reduced version of the cans,
um, according to the Kevins
agreement is supposed to be
performed before.
The initial 10-day hearing. So
it's virtually immediate, so
that the child's immediate needs
are made known in the cans,
which is a longer version, um,
is, um, uh required to be done.
Buy a 45 days or at any other
big change, like change of
placement, um, uh, change of
medication even or any other
kind of incident like that. So
it, there are more details built
into it, but I, did I answer
your question? Yes, you did.
Thank you so much, Doctor Davis.
OK.
I'd like to point out that we
have the deputy secretary of
CYFD here, she could, um,
Answer any questions about the
45 days and 30 days to explain
that if needed. Oh,
I'm, I'm confused. The doctor
said it, it's not exactly clear
and if we, if we don't make
things clear in law, they can
go, however, so what I'm
suggesting is that we roll the
bill, you make those changes to
clarify which, if there's two
tests, which one is which was
just, I think.
clarifying that it's uh.
Much broader explanation, but
there's no change in the titles
of the tests, or the two tests,
Madam Chair, could those be
changes be made in the
judiciary.
I, I'm also in on the judiciary
Committee and we'll go there
next, yes.
So who, who is comfortable
moving it along just by a show
of hands.
OK, so who is not comfortable?
OK, so I think, I think you
won't have the votes to move it
along.
Um
Real quick. Can we bring Doctor
Davis back up in the amendment
because there's not a difference
in testing, so what amendment
are you trying to ask for? He
did say that there were 2
different tests. One was the
screening and one was a test.
Yeah, so, so just the fact that
we on this committee are
unclear, um, you, you couldn't
answer, but I don't think it
will.
Actually, thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. I can answer
this and so can Doctor Davis.
This is one test in the
comprehensive and and Doctor
Davis would, I don't wanna speak
for him, he's gonna say the same
thing. There's well child checks
with have which are have to be
done by the MCOs in 30 days.
Those are federal requirements.
This is a simple, this is a
simple amendment to follow and
codify Kevinness on the
specifics of the cans
assessment, which was
recommended by our SM 5 task
force. We are only codifying one
piece of it and I just
Doctor Davis, but there the
there is no other, we don't want
to complicate it more than it
already is what is in writing.
Doctor Davis.
Yes, can you hear me? Yes. OK.
Um, so, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I, Maryland is
exactly right. It's not that the
bill itself is unclear. I just
mean the assessment process.
It's one of those cases where I
probably know too much about it,
but the bill itself is perfectly
clear, and I think it should be
uh passed as written, frankly,
Madam Chair, I have another
request from the the secretary
is asking to meet with Rep
Armstrong and to me.
and come together on the
language. OK.
Or Chavez
go ahead.
Um, good, good morning again.
Representative chair. I just
wanted to give a little bit of
explanation regarding the CAT
screening tool and the CA
screening tool. So it's a
continuum of care like Doctor
Davis says. The cat screening
tools a short screening tool
when a child is first coming
into custody and an ex parte
custody order is has been um
sent to the courts. It is to be
completed by our investigators
within that 10 day hearing. It's
a very short screen of about 30
questions to try to identify
immediate needs of that child.
When they first come into
custody, and again, that's done
by the investigator who has the
most information on that family,
um, and on that child during
that time to try to address the
needs of that child and what
they're displaying, including
their parents. From there, the,
the case is transferred, they
remain in custody, and then the
Kans is completed, which is a
much larger tool, um, of over
230 questions that the
permanency workers then
completing upon 45 days from the
child coming in into a placement
and into
custody and so it is a
continuation, but both of them
are screening tools that are
being done by CYFD staff. None
of them are specific behavior
health assessments. They do have
portions of it that are
addressed in their ACEs, their
trauma, and they're looking at
their behavioral health, and
that's how it was written to
look at the child as a whole to
be able to look at their needs.
I just wanted to give that
clarity. Thank you, and it still
is that there's the short one
and the long one, and that is
not spelled out in the bill,
which I think is, is confusing.
There, I guess there's not a
short and a long one as Doctor
Davis stated, I think you're
referring to what CYFD currently
does and what we're trying to
codify in law in the bill.
Madam Chair and secret, we're
only codifying the cans
assessment. There are many, many
assessments. This is one single
specific assessment. So if you
codified, which I don't, and
again, Doctor Davis still has
his hand raised. I don't think
you can codify every single step
of every single day because
there's so many pieces we are
codifying one assessment very
clearly that in agreement with
the Kevans that they've already
agreed to. It's a very specific
request. It was one of the SM5
task force, um, recommendation.
word for word, this is
intentionally just about the
cans assessment. So, so.
Where in here does it say Can's
assessment.
And, and that's it spells it out
on page 34, the child and
adolescent needs and strength
trauma assessment.
That's what it stands for.
OK, um,
So I, um, committee, what's,
what's your
I'm sure there is some motion on
the table.
Is there?
OK.
It's a due pass. OK, we will
take that, uh, uh, and
understand if this doesn't pass,
then we can do a tabling motion
and that will make it much more
difficult to bring it back.
Just, just so that you have the
facts. So do you want us to go
ahead with the, with the vote,
or do you wanna
try and clear up some of the
confusion while we have the
expert on the phone and here
what amendment are you wanting
to see in the language change
before voting to make that very,
very clear.
So, uh, for me, um, the, the
prior to the child entering
foster care is in direct
conflict to within 45 days. So
that's confusing to me, and you
can explain it all you want here
but when someone who's trying to
figure out what the law is, you
won't be there to tell them
that. So I think uh what I'm
saying is I personally think it
needs to be more clear in the
law because as I said, you won't
always be there and neither will
doctor.
Davis when folks are trying to
implement this law.
So, so it's up to you,
Representative Senator Cortez.
Wrong representative again,
wrong Latina that you keep
but um she made the um she made
the motion and I'm still, I
would be more than happy to
clarify the title change if we
want to do that before we take a
vote, but is there any other?
Question that you're asking, are
you still wanting information
about the testing, or is it just
upon shell. The difference
between prior and upon. So I
think my confusion is that the
um
That where it says that um I
can't even remember where it is.
The name of the test for those
who aren't really familiar with
realize that that's the name of
the test as opposed to just an
idea of a test. Do you
understand what I'm saying?
That you are, you are asking for
a certain um measure, measuring
tool, and it's not clear in here
that that's what it is. To me,
that could mean any suggestion?
Yes.
Maybe capitalize the um
The title of the actual test. I
know it's C A N S, and as I told
uh Madam Chair Representative,
I'm having the same issue in
drafting in talking about LGBTQ
issues. I have to spell
everything out
so that might help drafting
conventions, there's weird rules
about capitalization, so maybe
even just a parentheses, you
know.
Madam Chair, would it help if I
retracted if the representative
agrees if I retracted my motion
so that it could be rolled and
amended if that's what she
wants. Well, you don't need to
retract it cause we haven't
taken action on it, so I'm, I'm
leaving the decision up to, uh,
I'm sorry, representative.
and check.
Representative Kate, I'm sorry,
let's just clarify. I guess
we're asking for an amendment
capitalize the title of the
test, then there is also you
were seeing a drafting era with
the.
There was a word that you
mentioned, Miss Beck about a
drafting error that you want to
be able to address as well.
Madame Chair and
representatives, uh, are
drafting language won't allow
you to capitalize words.
Those words they won't allow
you. That that that's a part of
our draft or drafting um
procedures.
Yeah, it, it confuses us, um,
you know, if you the drafter
could figure out a way to to um
indicate that that is a, you
know,
well, it is spelled out, but I
mean, I know we have this simple
facts of the bill and all it is
is changing prior to a po I can.
Have this amendment drafted
before we hear it in judiciary,
which I'm on the committee and
next we know the basis of the
bill and the need um in order to
comply with the Kevanas
settlement. So it's one word and
we already know that we can't
capitalize the title of the
assessment.
Madam Chan represent I have one
last suggestion then, maybe
instead of, uh, to receive a
child and adolescent needs
assessment. It's the.
Time a lesson needs assessment.
That that would probably
Yeah, work.
So, um,
Um, just by a show of hands.
Who is OK with moving this along
with the promise to amend.
Or no wreck, who's in favor of a
no wreck.
OK, so we don't have any
agreement up here. Um,
I promised to change those two
words, very simple before moving
on to judiciary. Oh, I know I'm
in the committee, so um.
So we have a motion for a due
pass.
With the assurance that these
changes will be made before
judiciary. Yes, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So we will take a
vote on that.
Representative Anaya? Yes.
Representative Kate? Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez.
Yeah. Representative Ferrari.
Yes
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
by a vote of 7 to 0, you have
it, do pass with the, with the
contingency plan. Thank you.
Thank you committee members,
ma'am. OK, and then in terms of
HB 349 and 350, um, they are
mostly an appropriation, and we
are still working on getting
that, getting that.
Through, so we will, we will
roll those bills, um, so we are
completed for today. Thank you
all.
I'm sorry.
