Representative Stephanie lord.
Yeah we can't hear you
Representative Lord
Representative Marian Matthews.
Your.
Representative Roger off five.
Roger Montoya.
Is here.
Oh dear.
But I have a real kinship to
Representative that us
Representative Roger Montoya I
was playing with my gallery.
Representative Lujan we got off
of.
You're saying here
Representative.
Representative Liz Thomson.
I'm here and it sounds like it
is going to be a fun morning no
hi I just chair Joanne for our.
I'm present and I saw
Representative Gail Armstrong
this morning
She is she has built to put on
this morning so still trying
make it later so she's excused
and and Phelps Anderson
Representative excuse.
And madam chair Deborah
Armstrong I'm here and
Representative Lord can we hear
you yet let's start can you hear
me now yes every thank god I'm
here I okay thank you all right
so we have as you'll notice we
have sign language interpreters
this morning and of for our
second bill that will here and
when we hear that bill anyone in
the public wishes to speak will
actually make them panelists so
that they can see the
interpreters when as a when
they're allowed to speak but
first we have Representative
Lara with house bill two twenty
four and I believe I saw I am.
More yes.
Good morning Representative Lara
morning madam chair do you have
any experience you wish to bring
over madam chair I do I have a
Carolyn Vander decent.
And don Hummer.
To give us just a moment thank
you.
You said
okay don don Palmer okay I think
we have both of them.
The house bill two twenty four
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair of the
members of the committee it's an
honor to be presented to you for
the first time in my legislative
career so that this is welcome
you.
So each B. two twenty four is a
bill that currently there are
six community action agencies
around the state community
action agencies or organizations
are committed to the empowerment
of our communities and to the
elimination of poverty in
general.
I still personally Madam have
been on I have been a board
member of this community action
agency of Southern New Mexico
for quite a few years now even
before my legislative career
started and I can personally
attest to the great work that's
being done to this community
action agencies this bill
what we're asking in this bill
is to reduce the number of of of
of board members from fifteen oh
two more manageable number of
because there are many areas the
the the committee actually
agencies cover many rural areas
and it's very hard to find a
fifteen member of the board and
and when we do get there's a lot
of turnover it's it's it's it's
it's a big commitment and and
many people are are are are are
prepared for that type of
commitment so what we're doing
with this with this bill.
Madam chair is reducing us to
reduce the amount of four
members for for the community
action agencies and now madam
chair if it if you.
Uses I would like for of my
extra witnesses to give us some
artist money please.
All right I had.
It was the first representative
Carolyn this this would talked
on okay done.
Hi good morning.
Madam chair sorry moving my
computer things on my computer
yeah morning madam chair and
members of the committee and on
Hummer with the community action
agency of Southern New Mexico
and also the chair of the New
Mexico association of community
partners I'm in in just for a
little bit of clarification what
we are requesting is that the
current state statute says that.
All community action agencies
must have fifteen board members
so we're asking just district
that completely and then it also
does speak to term limits it
says that are members of our
board are only allowed to serve
on our board for ten years and
so we're asking for that
language to restrict us as well.
I'm and I'm here speaking on
behalf of all the CA's we've
discussed these changes for a
really long time however they
definitely have become more
important over the last year
partially due to the pandemic
we believe that our board size
and term limits should be an
organizational decision that
works best for each community
action agency and to be clear
board size in terms of our
address some of our by laws they
are approved by our respective
boards
And they are reviewed by the C.
S. B. G. state office annually
and after any change
there are also reviewed by an
attorney at least once every
five years.
We also do you want to be clear
that our request is not a
criticism of our current boards
we love our board members and we
have amazing board members
Representative Lara is one of
those but obviously managing a
large board is difficult and
time consuming I'm trying to
coordinate schedules for
meetings is difficult even the
letter support for this bill
took a lot of time I need to get
everyone to sign on you're
chasing everybody to try to get
them to do something that would
take thirty seconds and other
concern that we have is that the
minute someone leaves is
specially unexpectedly we're
technically out of compliance
until a new person committee
voted at the agency spent a
significant amount of time and
resources on on boarding and
recruiting new members and
lastly we just feel that the
cost for training and other
expenses are are and necessary
we ask that you please vote yes
on H. B. two two four thank you
for your time and consideration
this morning Adams I stand for
questions after Caroline has a
chance to speak.
Thank you Carolyn go ahead
Carolyn hi good morning chairman
and members of the committee I
am Carolyn Vander decent I am
the executive director of the
association which means that I
am in constant contact with the
sixty eight that are located
throughout the state just to
give you idea you've just met
Dawn who is in southern New
Mexico but we have an agency in
Carlsbad which covers seven
counties we have an agency into
can carry which covers
approximately seven County we
have an agency in Albuquerque
these are where their
headquarters are that the county
they also have locations in
other counties help New Mexico
is in Albuquerque and covers ten
counties we have echo which
covers farming in ten and we
have
I believe that the Midwest in
las Colinas
so each of you Representative
and probably one of those
locations fall it into your
purview I would like to talk
about how many individuals and
families that we serve we serve
over a hundred thousand many of
you probably know that we get
approximately four million into
the state annually for CSP G.
but we recently it through the
cares funding received an
additional five point one
million we are at the agency
each of them I've been in this
environment for ten years and we
know that they was serving over
those hundred thousand.
It is very difficult time wise
to meet them at the
requirements especially when
we're looking for board members
and it's very much a time
consuming but we are over at we
are do you get overseen by the
CFPB State CSPD Office and they
are in support of this change we
feel as don said that it would
be better handled through bylaws
and through oversight at the
local state office so with that
I ask you respectively to.
Making changes to this wouldn't
support health bill two twenty
four to eliminate both the
required fifteen members and let
that be done at the agency level
through bylaws and also to
eliminate that ten year
requirement as many of our board
members at dawn said are
excellent members and many can I
do and can agree to serve a
longer term thank you for your
time.
Thank you madam chair and with
that we stand for questions okay
great first we'll go to the
audience and what we do first is
a poll.
To see how many in the audience
may be in support or opposition
of house bill twenty four.
You our mission view and respond
to that poll.
Two seconds.
Support for opposition support
or opposition to hospital to
talk for.
Community action board changes.
Okay.
Our.
Well it's like we have
forty four in the audience and
support and sixteen propose.
So we'll go to the audience for
For their comments if they wish
to make comments so we will go
first to opposition.
If you wish to speak in
opposition of house bill two
twenty four.
And looks like we have Lunney
Tischler.
I'm just curious what happens to
the campus and the
community in Santa Fe what
happens to the school in Santa
Fe it's additional I'm Mr
Tischler were not on that bill
yet we are on house bill two
twenty four.
I think we may have had some
misunderstanding in the audience
in voting as well okay I don't
see
I'm Johnny Robertson.
Did you want to speak on house
bill two twenty four.
I apologize I have a question is
there an interpreter or captions
on any of this.
there is when we get to to to
there is if you are watching as
an attendee there is
interpreters when we get to
house bill two thirty seven you
will be able to see the
interpreter when you when you
speak.
Okay we are not on that bill
yet.
Okay thank you.
Was.
Okay again opposition to house
bill two twenty four.
Our Theresa.
Blank Myer Bourke.
This is doctor Burke I'm
wondering why we don't have
captions I filed a disability
rights New Mexico complete title
to eighty eight there are no
captions and I'm really unhappy
about this I was assured that
the state of New Mexico
legislature would be providing
captions to all of the sessions
what's going on thank you we'll
we'll try and I'll try and
Get an answer to that but
we are on house bill two twenty
four right now.
And I am a citizen of New Mexico
and I have interest in all of
the bills of the state not just
this one I'd like to access
thank you everything.
Okay any of one here in support
of house bill two twenty four.
Roger Gonzalez.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Roger Gonzalez and the president
of health New Mexico we sent
full support this legislation
thank you.
Eric Martinez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Eric Martinez of lobbyist for
a helping Mexico and I'll just a
echo in support of of the
sponsor and the experts and and
the president Mister Rogers also
we are support this legislation
thank you thank you.
next we have looks like DJ
Nagel.
Yes.
Go ahead yes okay it is someone
who has been and as someone
who's been involved in many non
profits helping people that are
disadvantaged
hamstringing them with the you
know government regulation
May seem appropriate at some
point time what we're talking
about people who are severely
disadvantaged and are being
helped and I think it's really
unfair
you know moralistic Lee to apply
any kind of rules and
regulations that slow that
process down.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Our next we have Danielle.
Good morning madam chair I
apologize for not entering my
last name my name is Danielle
get I don't and I just wanted to
speak in support of this bill
and would greatly appreciate you
in the follow committee members
to vote yes on it thank you.
Next we have Marcus Crawford.
You madam chair my name is
Marcus Crawford I've worked it
the community action agency of
Southern New Mexico for a going
on eight years here I just
wanted to speak in support of
house bill two twenty four I
think that maintaining a fifteen
member board just as someone
who's done that for a number of
years it really does constitute
administrative burden for staff
and it limits the opportunities
we have for board development
and for training I just because
I can tell you someone who's
organize a border street for
fifteen board members it's a
logistical nightmare you have
fifteen schedules to consider
fifteen families to consider and
unfortunately you know these
past couple years fifteen sets
of tragedy to consider
That we can still have the same
level of representation
and empowerment our communities
with the smaller port without
those unfortunate side effects
thank you for this opportunity
today and please vote yes on
house bill two twenty four.
Thank you.
Okay now we'll go to the
Committee.
And Representative Thomson.
Madam chair and thank you
Representative Lara for the S.
and.
How many community action agency
are there.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I think
correct me if I'm wrong my
experts but I think they're six
okay and and I'm in full support
of this having served on
numerous boards trying to find
people who are willing to give
up their time and do the work is
really are out and I was much
encouraged when I heard that
there would be still be
oversight in terms of you know a
lawyer review with the by laws
every five years and all those
kind of things I think I think
this will be very helpful thank
you madam chair that's all I.
Thank you
Representative Montoya.
Good morning madam chair and
Representative Lara thank you so
much for bringing this bill
forward I live and work and the
champion for rural areas.
New Mexico needs streamlining I
think this bill is going to
improve the flow of service and
if you live in a rural area you
know that health care and job
creation and even food
insecurity efforts are
absolutely essential I've seen
in real time how important that
is I rise in support I look
forward to supporting this piece
of lead legislation
and also as a non profit driver
for thirty years I know how
difficult it is to find the
appropriate number of board
members and this will absolutely
help to serve those rural areas
I yield back madam chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Lord madam chair
thank you I just have a few
questions just wanna make sure
I'm I'm sure and what the bill
states it seems like it's a good
bill so I just want to make sure
so if I understand ma'am share
we're striking out consisting of
fifteen members so that leaves
it to each board to try to
determine how many board members
that they will need.
Madam chair representative eight
yes we do it up to the to to the
individual agencies to determine
how many of our members it would
require yes thank you
representative madam chair I
think that's a great idea
especially I guess you know how
hard it is to find people and
and to fill spots and especially
in rural areas and then the
other one I just wanna make sure
of so no persons elector
caricature three are still serve
more than five consecutive years
so so they're gonna serve up to
five and apparently used to be
ten before is that what I'm
understanding.
Madam chair and I would like to
defer to my experts will assist
of the.
Dawn or or.
Thank you.
Then.
Lord.
Hi Karen Representative Lord
madam chair members of the
committee
It we are striking.
No more than ten years for term
limits and we would like for it
to be silent there as well.
Okay I'm I'm always on I I look
at this and I know how hard it
is to and thank you madam chair
I look at this I know how hard
it is to get more board members
I would understand if somebody
left the it you have to replace
them and I like the idea of you
guys having on a Tanami to build
side how many board members you
have also like some sort of term
limits with new ideas and new
perspectives and more
opportunities for people who do
want to serve so thank you for
bringing this forward and I will
be supporting your bill I yield
my time.
Thank you on next we have a
representative to rass.
Morning madam chair
representative just a quick
question.
I wonder.
I was fifteen was that basically
to cover all the because I heard
that there was a number of
areas that were covered up to
seven counties is that is that
accurate for me to state.
Madam chair a Representative I'd
also like to differs this to my
experts because it's a
historical context and and I
wasn't I'm not familiar with
that aspect.
Yes this is Caroline again from
the association and I serve all
fixed up and yes help New Mexico
serves up to ten there are five
that serves seven counties each
and echoes Services
Farmington so you're correct in
that there are multiple counties
also involved it was there
another question that I miss or
does this answer madam chair no
no Madam chair representative
and thank you Matt for answering
that I I only I mean I think
you're you're you guys are right
to do and ask for this my only
question would be is there
anything here that could
possibly leave certain counties
out of the building that bears
ten so will they be of minimum
is that what what what's the
right number I mean if the board
covers ten counties can we at
least have one representative of
each county it does have and
maybe that a minimum of one
person for county would that be
something that would be us would
be friendly to to put in this
legislation.
Madam chair at I will defer to
Dawn or Roger Gonzales is on who
serves the ten counties
Both the amendment R. Edie's are
CEOs of the actual organizations
don do you have.
Yes thank you thank you
Representative for your question
and
Yes so we definitely want to
make sure that every single
county is is representative help
is a and and I apologize for
speaking on behalf to help but
they are bigger organization and
it is absolutely part of our
requirements that we have at
least one of board member from
each of the geographical
locations that we serve so we're
not able to bypass that that's
part of our our regular
administrative our our regular
operating
requirements and so that would
not be we would we would
actually make sure that every
county is still Representative.
And as far as that we have no
idea where that history came
from it's it's beyond any of us
did indicates indicates.
Madam chair your.
I would just like to add that to
this goes back to the sixties
our community action agencies
have been serving New Mexico
since nineteen sixty five and so
the coats Act at the federal
level
describes the part part a board
which Dawn just described so yes
a federally there are some
mandate to this that.
Okay madam chair representative
so.
Is it outside of that that I'm
assuming that we took this
portion out of the entire
legislation and this is just a
piece of the whole puzzle so
what you're telling me is that
in other parts of this
legislation it requires
automatically for you to have
one representative from each
area.
Board is part of the federal act
yes Sir.
That's what I wanted to know
okay I just didn't want of
certain you know we have this
Madam chair representative of
sometimes we have this rule and
and and up.
What is it up.
Basically the cities and the
rural areas sometimes fighting
for representation and sometimes
we get overruled us people that
are in in in the rural areas so
that was just important to me I
believe this is a red very good
deals the last question I have
we see the Democrats democratic
process is in a public an actual
public election where is that
done something internally
somehow.
Representative Madam chair
representative eighty eight it
depends on the agency in the in
in in my experience with this it
has been you know it is of
posted and and and people who
are interested in that I want to
participate or to senator
meetings they they can but if I
don or Caroline would like to
try and and you know that that
would not be a good time.
I'm.
This again it's Caroline from
the Association and yes there is
an election process and the
agencies by law of and each
agency has their own
determination I think the
representation is important here
to there are low income as well
as public and private that is
dictated in the federal law.
Making the tripartite board so
the election process of low
income is a process that is the
in each agency I lost.
Thank you very much that that's
all I have thank you very much
to I think it's a very good bill
I just want to clarify those
those few points thank you madam
chair yield thank you and so
just to be
clear Representative and experts
there's federal law over
overseeing the US and removing
the federal law doesn't require
that you have a fifteen member
board or that
no more than ten years our
service so you're removing that
in order to do local bylaw
control all of which will still
meet the federal law
requirements correct madam chair
that is absolutely correct there
is a federal law all yes great
thank you okay what's the
pleasure of the committee.
Do pass I will second.
I have a motion for do pass and
who was the second.
Representative Thomson okay deal
is there any objection to a do
pass.
I'm not seeing or hearing any
signs so representative of are
you have a do pass on house bill
two twenty four and we have your
first we have nine of us here.
Thank you madam chair zero.
Thank you thank you.
For.
Okay.
All right we are going to pause
for just a moment committee us
so that we can try and get the
closed caption are going we are
having some difficulty but are
trying to do that if we can
pause for just a moment and then
we will
get to house bill two thirty
seven.
wave I will go ahead though and
bring in
Representative.
My Estes state.
And Representative my ****
someone to bring in your
experts.
Representative Martinez I'm in
my system to I'm trying to find
Dr Karen Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair.
There's through as well yeah I
have the honor.
It this puts it in alpha order
but if they sign a doctor or a.
The organization or something it
makes a little harder but I've
got or thank.
Then of a COVID co sponsor
Rebecca Dow.
Okay these to be let in.
We're gonna just hold for a
moment as we're there
governments trying to get the.
Everything to work thank you for
that.
The closed captioning him.
I'm sure I think we have the
closed captioning working now
okay.
All right.
We are on house bill two thirty
seven and Representative
Martinez and I I don't know what
I'm doing that my my has system
apologize it I haven't had
enough coffee
at you can go ahead and just so
that the audience knows we have
the closed captioning available
there's a closed caption button
on the bottom if you need to
closed captioning we have the
sign language interpreters and
when we get to public comment
Representative we will make the
people who wish to speak of.
We will make them up panelists
so that they can see the
interpreters
because when you
when you become are allowed to
talk as an attendee usually you
see a blank screen so we want to
make sure that they can see the
interpreter we will be for the
audience limiting comments to
one minute.
and we will do that shortly
don't worry about raising your
hands to be first in line will
hear from everyone and will
direct you through that when
it's time so Representative
Maestas go ahead.
Thank you madam chair on
renewable members and thank
thank the interpreters for their
hard work madam chair I made up
I'd like to address the
amendments if I could if I can
request that they be moved for
discussion of for discussion
thank you so very much because
the amendments are the crux of
the bill and I think will solve
a lot of the questions and a lot
of the concerns that folks have
we're so happy to be here of
madam chair of joined by race
Martinez who is the
Of the essentially the principle
of sign language academy in
Albuquerque which is a charter
schools serving definite RT
hearing families my co sponsor
Rebecca Dow and of course Dr
Karen Trujillo who is the
superintendent of dynamic County
school district or Los crucis
school district rather so we're
happy to talk about death
education is the first time in
my fifteen years there's been an
actual bill dealing with death
Education in the state of New
Mexico and we're just so excited
to to find it the amendment
madam chair strike section one
it strikes section one in its
entirety.
In section one essentially just
talks about the school for the
deaf when it provide services to
the area school districts
that stricken completely one
hundred percent stricken so the
bill actually starts on page
four.
Line twelve also the amendment
strikes any reference to the New
Mexico school for the deaf also
it strikes of on page four line
nineteen.
The words and with the New
Mexico school for the deaf.
And it strikes on page five
lines three and four including
students attending the New
Mexico school for the deaf so
the school for the deaf it is
not a part of this bill
New Mexico has made a tremendous
commitment to the deaf and hard
of hearing community
historically of the New Mexico
school for the deaf is an
international jul and it's one
of our most prized institutions
here within state government it
was it was part of our
territorial of.
Government and it was codified.
In stone in our constitution and
in the the enabling acts that
preceded it and so the deaf us
this New Mexico school that has
just done a remarkable job of
teaching and providing a
marvelous quality quality of
life to deaf and hard of hearing
students in New Mexico.
That attend the school.
But what we learned today is
that.
I gotta six students.
I wanna six about four out of
five definitely ring students do
not attend the New Mexico school
for the deaf.
And so the various school
districts have DeBernardi
hearing kids that need a quality
education and pursuant to
Martinez Yazzie the state an
equal education to every single
that student in the state and
that's what we hope to do and so
this bill is relatively if you
look on page four what it does
madam chair is it says the
public education department
shall employ a deaf services
coordinator.
That's the bill.
That's the bill that the
department shall employ a deaf
services coordinator who will
work closely with school
districts and charter schools in
which different hard of hearing
students are enrolled to ensure
that the range of services
needed by a deaf or hard of
hearing students will be
provided in the most efficient
equitable and cost efficient
manner and that's what we're
proposing today if this if this
committee adopts the amendment
which we hope it does Bernalillo
that's what I would hope folks
who are commenting focus on the
initial of introduction as bill
cause tremendous tremendous
stress as a result of massive
disinformation with regards to
section one
it is apparent that of that this
is that we just need to go with
Pat this is a paid bill
And so so I'm gonna turn it over
to my experts madam chair and
but before I do I'd like to draw
our attention to the house
committee analyst.
halfway down the first page and
it says with regards to
amendment substitution.
Are substantive amendment will
be presented to strike all
references to the New Mexico
school for the deaf the title is
abbreviated to read in this will
be the title of the renewable if
if this committee sees fit
relating to death Education
creating a deaf education
coordinator in the department of
education access health but it's
it's should say department of
education all of section one is
stricken as are various other
references to the New Mexico
school for the deaf in the bill
the amendment eliminates the
significant conflicts raised in
this analysis and by several
state agencies regarding house
bill two thirty seven and the
constitutional requirements in
New Mexico school for the deaf
so that's what we would hope the
committee focuses on we want to
improve deaf education for kids
in jail for kids in Deming for
kids in Farmington for kids in
Albuquerque for students all
over the state who don't have
the opportunity
To attend the school for the
deaf here in Santa Fe and with
that I'll turn over to raise
Martinez and I will go to drive
to heal for their remarks if
they could have about maybe
three to five minutes each chair
thank you very much.
Go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
having me my name is right
Martinez I'm the executive
director and co founder of the
Albuquerque sign language
academy we're a public charter
school has been in existence for
eleven years this is our living
here finishing up we we serve we
were built to serve to our
mission to serve deaf hard of
hearing hearing and special
needs our kids within a very
inclusive language rich
environment we this year we
serve a hundred eleven students
all of those hundred eleven
students sixty five percent our
run through the special ed
umbrella meaning they have IEPs
most of those kids are
designated do level special ed
which is the highest out funding
mechanism for to the state
equalization guarantee that the
for school funding formula
about twenty seven percent of
all of that hundred eleven kids
are kids who are considered had
to have severe to profound
disability along with beating
death and then of the entire
hundred eleven kids about half
our population is designated
deaf hard of hearing I think to
it it's relevant to give a
little bit of a background to
the school in that I think see
can understand our my background
so I'm also the father of a deaf
child and the school came into
creation.
Because we up from a grassroots
movement to to help kids that
didn't.
That they didn't attend the
school for the deaf for whatever
reasons and there's really three
categories for that one there's
eligibility requirements
connected to getting to school
for the deaf so so my son in a
lot of of multiple needs deaf
students just don't impose
eligibility requirements to
their families that choose
because of their own familial
philosophy.
Not to send their students away
to a residential school for
commute you know from
Albuquerque two hours ago when
our up in our back and then
three this ideal that hearing
kids should be able to go to
school with their deaths
siblings right and this and that
was kind of the the the.
The impetus for how are school
came to be you know one thing I
would like to say as far as.
Being able to to speak to our
expertise I think when we first
started this school it was a
heartfelt movie right we we we
wanted to do something that
would help our kids because you
know what for whatever reasons
it was just that they didn't
quite fit in in different
systems and I think when we
first started we lead with our
heart rate for sure I'm however
in the eleven years that we've
been working as a charter school
we've developed working formal
working partnerships with the
likes of Harvard University
McLean hospital Penn state
university university Minnesota
DeFede university of Arizona
death that
Our University of New Mexico
through it through a teacher
training program New Mexico
highlands university right now
we're discussion with the
possibility of jumping on in
partnership with the US State
University southern California
Raj Department around that the
brain science of education right
I think.
One thing I would like to say is
I'm here to answer questions
around the public school funding
formula with regard to deaf hard
of hearing students and what it
means in the context of special
ed purses DeFede and and and and
also you know to to emphasize
that this this bill really is
about how to make sure that all
students across the state they
will do H. H. receive equitable
and adequate funding so that
they receive the services they
deserve so I stand for questions
and thank you very much.
Thank you.
We have an extra thank you we'll
go to a doctor Karen Trujillo
and then Rebecca Dow thank you
madam chair thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee it's very nice to see
you all this morning my name is
Karen Trujillo and I am the
superintendent of Los crucis
public schools and I was asked
by Representative Dow
Representative Maestas and Mr
Martinez just provide some
context from a large school
district that serves numerous
students we have about thirty
four students that qualify as
either a deaf or hard of hearing
we employee up to ten
interpreters because we have
eight students that are on the
AP that require a one on one
interpretation it would be great
if all of our definite students
were in first grade at one
school but you know you have a
first grader at third grader
fifth grader seven middle school
some in high school so it really
does require that one to one
when we look at the amount of
funds that are required to
support
our students here in Los crucis
it is over a million dollars
just to support those three for
students with those eight
interpreters so when we look at
what that takes from both our
operational funds and this their
idea of the funds
we just stand in support of this
bill because we feel that you
know like Mr Martinez said.
Being in Albuquerque and
commuting to the school for the
deaf is one thing being in Los
crucis and being willing to send
your child across the state is
entirely something different I
know we do have some families
that do choose to do that but
the majority of our deaf and
hard of hearing students choose
to stay in Los crucis we ask
that you support this bill when
you look at the public education
department and the fact that the
school for the deaf is under the
higher education department
there's always a little bit of a
disconnect there so again I will
also be available for questions
but I hope that you stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Martinez for letting me co sign
on to this bill when I saw the
bill last session our last sixty
day session I knew this was
something I had to get involved
and I'm relatively new to the
body but one of the first call
that I received from my district
was from a family with a young
child who is deaf and hard of
hearing and they were very
concerned about the lack of
local resources in the local
school district to serve their
child and the decisions that
they were having to make to
separate as a family throughout
the week and for their child to
receive the best education that
New Mexico has to offer and with
this amendment we address the
concerns of the important work
that happens in the zero to four
the pre kindergarten educational
opportunities that happen under
the family planning at aspect
and I think it's really
important to focus on the fact
that eighty percent of the deaf
children in our state are served
in their local school districts
those children deserve equitable
education and those staff and
administrators and and and folks
at the district level deserve
the resources and the funding to
do their jobs effectively the
Yazzie Martinez ruling calls on
us to provide remedies to
improve educational outcomes and
deaf and hard of hearing
students who reside in their
home schools are no exception to
our mandate so this is.
I am not as concerned about the
comments that I've seen from
past alumni from the school of
New Mexico School that what I'm
concerned about is the over five
hundred students right now in
our K. twelve system throughout
our state who are.
There are you key calls for
their services to be provided in
the least restrictive most
inclusive setting to the
greatest extent in their home
schools and by having this
conversation and passing this
bill on to the Education
Committee we are doing our
responsibility our our
obligation as lawmakers and our
mandate from the recent ruling
the Yazzie Martinez six thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and I
appreciate all the public is
here today
We will listen to every single
comment and try to incorporated
into the bill but I think the
majority of the comments may be
with regard to section one which
I'm gonna ask this Committee to
strike at the first available
opportunity and and and thank
you all thank you madam chair
okay thank you.
So we will of first
we usually do a poll.
To see on members of the
audience in support or
opposition.
Your house bill two thirty
seven.
Madam chair Paul I don't know if
anybody else is having trouble
but mindful is not working you
won't see it
drive on as a panelist until
we're done only the attendees
can respond.
Okay looks like we've got.
All right are you seeing the.
results.
Sure the results are it looks
like we have in the audience
twenty four or eleven percent in
support and a hundred ninety
seven or eighty nine percent in
opposition.
Okay so first we're going to go
to the opposition.
For those who wish to speak on
you don't have to speak but it
for those who wish to speak in
opposition.
The house bill two thirty seven.
And first we'll go to Peggy.
Thank you again I'm from up in
nasco.
I have a son that is death and
he was going to a public school
and they had no help whatsoever
for any of he stated that school
for four years and he's entering
nothing because they have a lot
for him once I moved into the
school and Santa Fe for the
school for the deaf he has
improved a lot we have learned
sign language I mean there is a
yes they help us with a lot a
lot of the.
And it would really hurt me to
see that my so want to be able
to go to school anymore because
of this thing that's going on.
I.
Happy with what he's going
through what he's learning and
wearing as a family we do know
how to sign language we're
learning how to do all that and
they have like really really
great people.
And that's all I have to say
thank you Peggy.
And I'm not sure because we have
the sign language
going on whether everyone can
see the clock but we're trying
to keep comments limited to a
minute
So that we can get to everyone
our next we have
Randy hatch yes thank you madam
chair good morning everybody I
actually live in Silver City New
Mexico which is representative
of Taos district in my son.
He is in the pre K. here in the
district and we receive services
from the New Mexico school for
the deaf and I'm not sure if
everyone is aware of all the
outreach services that they
provide for small rural towns in
New Mexico but because of my
son's condition it is been there
help has been vital in helping
us in our family and our
community and everyone we
associate with.
It and helping us learn sign
language learn about deaf
culture
they have provided us the
opportunity to attend family to
family weekend in Santa Fe ASL
margin in Santa Fe they provide
us with the deaf mentor every
single week that we meet with
they have provided me with an
education coordinator that comes
into the schools and provides
education and assistance and
help the IEP meetings helps give
everybody everybody on the same
page I'm sorry my my time is
allow.
Thank you next we'll go to
Allison.
Rattigan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Allison
Rattigan I live in district
nineteen in Albuquerque and I
oppose house bill two thirty
seven my daughter Leila is a
kindergartner and and misty in
Albuquerque for three years our
family has received early
intervention services from
highly trained developmental
specialist and deaf mentor
through an amnesty together we
have encouraged this development
and our families learning ASL
and deaf culture this is our
community however we have
repeatedly battled with our
local school district regarding
the best placement for Leila
despite never meeting we love
the local school district
insisted she attend a local
public school where leave a
would not have been immersed in
her primary language our
daughter is thriving because of
NMSC inclusion in the deaf
community it's good to thirty
seven would strip away the power
of the deaf community to make
decisions for the deaf community
it is unconstitutional and not
in the best interest of our kids
thank you.
Thank you next we have.
True love was.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm here Lovelace and
my child receive services from
Presbyterian clearance to New
Mexico school for the deaf each
of these institutions have come
down on different sides of house
bill two thirty seven the I. for
New Mexico school for the deaf
against after doing my own
legislative analysis I am also
against house bill two thirty
seven I urge you to vote no for
three reasons one Mexico school
for the deaf was not can the was
not consulted in the process of
drafting this bill which is a
primary focus of the deaf
community as the central hub two
that the language in house bill
two thirty seven affects
financials of Mexico school for
the deaf and increases the
number of students that services
that it has a financial
responsibility for and is there
any business person would tell
you that the quality of service
is the first thing to go on that
situation and agree that the.
Difference between equal
education technical education is
is very big house bill two
thirty seven has language that
would actually make education or
any goal in the section three
changes for the education bill
of rights please vote no.
Thank you next we have rose
merry guide goes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is rose merry
guide us on the superintendent
of the New Mexico school for the
deaf New Mexico school for the
deaf as opposed to house bill
two thirty seven even with the
amendments that should be tabled
indefinitely not amended there
still remain multiple issues
with the language in the bill
problems with the pros proposed
amendments
to only limits and eliminate
section one of the bill include
page four section two line
twenty three twenty five given
the authority of a coordinator
to PED to oversee the equitable
distribution definitely children
problems with this is that
equitable resources to students
is determined for individual
students to be I. E. P. process
required by federal law the
system's already establishing
carefully monitored by the
Public Education Department of
coordinator for deaf education
would create an inequity with
other disability groups House
Bill to to to special education
on but may be a solution for
concerns related to equity
creating an equitable education
for deaf education is very
complex it is not only charters
that are needed but a critical
mass of students and staff
individuals who can provide role
models and of fluent community
and direct communication to deaf
children.
A page I'm I'm sorry my time as
a last go had I would like you
to finish okay thank you page
six section line two to four
adds language to the death
Education bill of rights and
equal education will be provided
for all deaf and hard of hearing
students regardless of the
school intent section fort needs
to be fully removed it does not
comport with federal and state
law IDA IDA requires education
to be individualized based on a
child's evaluation
identification of the academic
and functional needs are
identification of academic and
functional goals services to be
provided to support the child in
meeting those goals and
appropriate placement the two
thousand three bill of rights
and two thousand sixteen task
force report represents a
collaborative over thirty
constituencies agencies and
stakeholder groups from all over
the state the bill unilaterally
revises the work of this group
the deaf community and experts
in deaf education were not
included in this proposed
revision thank you very much
thank you superintendent.
Our next we have Katrina
Garcia's
Spillman.
Yes thank you my name's Katrina
Garcia's Spillman and I'm an
adult child but also a master's
teacher with the level three New
Mexico license and special
education and a teaching
certificate and defecation from
Oklahoma I'm here as a parent
and a professional to oppose
house bill two thirty seven I've
worked for all the public school
programs and defecation
available in the Albuquerque
area as well as an MST and my
son has also gone to the schools
and misty provides a critical
service for the community and
must be one option of a deaf
Environment the proposed bill
would try to replicate services
across schools and create a
microcosm of these opportunities
which is an impossibility
significant language in merchant
has supported my son and he is
also an adult in the special
education range which the bill
seem to limit commuter access
for him to NMSC our state
already provides comprehensive
services and it is required by
federal law so let each program
remain as the experts in their
area and the NMAA do continue to
provide transportation excellent
services I oppose house bill two
thirty seven that proposes
restricting and would dismantle
the services thank you.
Next we have this Herrera.
Is that the students
I am the grandfather of the deaf
and hard of hearing child and I
oppose house bill two thirty
seven for the reason of the
language as a superintendent
spoke about I do know first hand
and forgive me if I'm speaking
out of turn on this but I know
the school for the deaf
employees drivers that travel
around the state in New Mexico
and pick up some of these
children and commute with them
on a daily basis back and forth
to the school so they can
receive the services my
granddaughter our families
receive services as well for the
deaf mentors for weekly to help
improve our site language so we
can communicate with their so
and by them not being able to
provide these services to us
would be unfair to my
granddaughter be able to speak
with the Sanford just to be able
to communicate and the two
questions that I have for all is
on this funding that they want
to do for this bill for the
funding come from and is any of
the funding could be taken from
the school for the deaf for
funding these programs that they
are seeking to incorporate into
this bill.
Thank you Vince.
Next we have Calleva Hayo.
Yes.
I'm Kelly Billy ho and our
daughter Mandy receive services
from amnesty's issues about
twenty months old one thing this
bill takes away so early
childhood education services
which we have depended on since
she was first evaluated eighteen
months with a speech language
communication yes at about a
four month levels she severely
severely behind she is one of
the students someone in these
kids who do not fit in any meat
boxes she is a little too young
to be tested for some of the
disorders that she seems to be
presenting for which I have
actually been diagnosed with
myself so due to NMSC we receive
services a full family we just
also where we get that mentor
support and we get support with
her I. E. P. at the preschool
she currently attends and Los
Alamos public school system we
oppose this house bill because
my family we would lose
everything absolutely everything
and we depend on the services
for for functioning.
This would really really hurt
our family we ask you to propose
a spell thank you next we have
mania Tapia.
Good morning madam chair thank
you for allowing us to speak my
name is for me a Tapia and I am
the mother of a deaf child here
in Santa Fe and he has been
going to NMAA decency was six
months old
we reached out they reached out
for services to us we did not
reach out to them.
Yes.
And so we would strongly oppose
this bill limiting NMSC services
would be heard our family is
significantly thank you.
Thank you up next we have
William Wilding.
And madam chair I am promoting
William to panelists okay he
will be using the
interpretations Services thank
you.
Once William is up if you want
my spot leading as well that we
helpful thank you.
Hello my name is William Wilding
thank you so much for your time
this morning I wanted to speak
to my child's experience for
children all of which attend and
misty.
And have since they are very
young.
They went to public school for a
certain amount of time because
there audio Graham show them
that they had enough hearing to
do so and that experience for
them was that they went through.
Different testing and diagnoses
to try to figure out.
What their exact needs were
there are experienced autism
there have very shy
personalities and so it was a
long journey for that.
We would test for something find
out we thought that was what it
was and then find out that was
an incorrect diagnoses.
And.
Amnesty focuses on what that
children need no matter what
that need is so we took all of
our students back to NMSC and it
was such a relief to be able to
do that.
And I feel that I must do knows
what to do with all of my
children and they're very unique
needs.
And so we need to look at deaf
people and deaf children.
And we need a group that
understands their culture and
their identity and provide the
services necessary for them to
thrive.
So I my children utilize and
misty Services and.
They have helped my deaf and
hard of hearing children.
And the best way possible so I'm
opposed this bill and I hope
that you felt the same way thank
you so much for your time thank
you William the.
Next we have.
Sander Medina.
Unmute yourself Sandra.
There you go the.
Yes
when is yes Representative the
members are from me Daymon
number sometime in the next the
one Honda.
And the letter read Google
what's the project early then
when I.
At the end of your address
you'll see at the side of the
shows but but but them and is
the by the force of my office
where less.
And even this quit line as
supporters of the State on the
hook one of the most critical
when we see this as of yet.
Is this too that we see this in
the past when the specialist
because of the seal on the CVC
does the specialist but it is
still out on also looked on the
glasses and SLD near them yes
Maestas wetland.
The glasses but but then the
misty your family a mostly the
Santa Fe happen that quickly
that's what are A. S. L. and M.
as in also in the founded in
televised showdown also just in
those ID be the subway and and
dollars and up in the state.
Is the senses Reese's of the
commercial but I will focus on
the stuff on media but on the
some might is just going to say
on the fourth of a syllable in
the second you want to go.
Miss more showcased a project to
a lake on the other side of the
system they may have just had a
few enough money that were done
before but this time this is V.
show them in NMAA the.
What I may have I mean if I'm in
the correlation with my your
feet up in the in the is cell
but a couple yes that many
deaths in which addresses.
Thank you Garcia.
And that in our town and so this
would have been a lot more
difficult if oil and misty
wasn't willing to come out and
meet us so we've had a teachers
come out to visit us when we're
happy when we have our I. E. P.
to help us make sure that we're
connected we have been able to
go to Santa Fe and learn ASL and
learn the culture and this
school has just meant so much to
my daughter I have a daughter
older daughter who's now going
to college and she wants to
learn ASL in order to support
her sister and that would have
been possible without the
support we've gotten from MST so
this bill what are negatively
impact my daughter and I am
against it thank you.
Thank you.
Okay now Julia.
Hello can you hear me OK yes we
can go ahead okay hi I am doctor
Julia hacked I am a pediatrician
and I am here representing the
New Mexico pediatric society we
oppose this bill and I and I
commend the sponsors for
responding to the public
comments on the experts on the
regional bill
because it was not a good bill
and it was very concerning to us
however even with the amendments
I don't really fully understand
what this bill is and I would
say that the stakeholders have
not had a chance to fully
understand.
What is being proposed here and
to examine the impact and for
this reason I think it's
inappropriate to rush this bill
through in its new form which is
very difficult to understand how
it's going to affect the health
and welfare of deaf and hard of
hearing children across the
state thank you thank you next
we have Rebecca Marshall.
I
morning madam chair and members
of the committee thank you so
much for hearing all of us my
name is Rebecca Marshall and my
son John attends New Mexico
school for the deaf.
We have been in public school
with him and like many others I
won't repeat please many of the
same service.
As the others and I continue to
oppose this bill because of the
concerns stated with the
language I'm the coordinator
needs RT provided through an MST
and this bill is
unconstitutional because of the
continued language even with the
amendments and MST is
established to do all the
coordinating services statewide
to create a hub of expertise and
I would like to have a chance to
see the amended bill so that we
could respond appropriately but
for now I would like you to
please oppose this bill and vote
now and stable at thank you.
Thank you next we have Temer
crystal curly.
Hi good morning.
We have ATM profoundly deaf and
he was born into a hearing.
Are against this bill but we
also are in support and giving
more.
We started out with in.
Yeah unfortunately couldn't
we agree with Mr Martinez.
The Navajo Nation try we believe
in raising our.
We have had him in the cottage
but we've also had Amanda
Farmington municipal schools.
There isn't and.
Our whole family get child in
classifying him as a special and
at.
The public system does need more
services the work is in a PO.
In the language of the bill.
I realize that the along with
that in New Mexico with the
death and hard of hearing kids.
You know being in a public
school and having an interpreter
follow him around daily lesson
for him and knowing.
Thank you.
Next we have Monet Contrarius.
Yes I am but I'm from
Albuquerque New Mexico New
Mexico and I oppose this bill my
son received early intervention
services with a deft
developmental specialist who's
also indigenous just south D.
was about four months old the
NMAA Services receive help give
me a better understanding of how
to communicate and interact with
my son also getting him the help
he needs at such an early age is
so important to me because well
as any mom I want him to live a
successful life I'd never want
to disadvantage because of his
hearing loss and receiving these
services at such a young age
help give him the opportunity to
forced with all other children
his age I know these are most
crucial test for his learning
and with that being said morning
his future I'm greatly concerned
that this bill will change the
services she's receiving in my
part of the state services and
support that we truly rely on so
I just ask that you please
protect is needed the most you
services thank you for your time
and your service to the state.
Thank you thank you Monday
connects we have Lucy Freeman.
Lucy we're gonna promote you to
our panelists because you have
an old version of zoom.
Go ahead and.
My name is Lucy Freeman and I
oppose house bill two eighty
seven
my daughter is is death and we
receive services from an MST I
deaf mentor and they've taught
us sign language and I and the
public schools has has built
this.
And misty picked it up and by
getting this bill through you're
taking away Benny from me you're
taking away my desk mentor.
And I just feel that that's not
fair and that's not OK.
It's unconstitutional you guys
didn't bring NMSC into this
group and they want to.
And even with the amendments
like Dr Gregoire said it's still
unconstitutional and not fair I
oppose house bill two thirty
seven for my daughter
Alexandria.
Thank you thank you Lucy.
Next we have more so the sure.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Martha share I have too hard
of hearing children who both
attend NMSC when my daughter was
first diagnosed she was five
years old and she was in the
public school system and it was
a huge struggle every day was
hard for her every day she came
home in tears and we fought for
a whole year to get her.
To let them go her go to NMSC
and it was.
It's a really difficult time I I
was dealing with both her
diagnosis trying to get her move
to NMSC and my other son's
diagnosis as well
once she moved it and MST her
life changed she is now a very
vibrant child who is very
intelligent and is able to
express that intelligence
my.
My second child we received
services from the time he was
too because he was also late
diagnosed
we got death mentor services
developmental specialists they
both receive occupational
therapy.
thank you and again try and and.
Keep your comments to one minute
and I apologize for.
Or cutting some folks off we
have a lot of people to hear
from next we have Britney a
wassail.
I hope I didn't butcher your
name Britney.
That's okay perfect I oppose
this bill because there is not
enough information about how
creating a new position and
paying an appointed government
official is going to be more
efficient than continuing to
fund the longstanding experts
and misty who provide these
services I'm not confident
either that the services will
continue at all in rural areas
where we are at many people
don't have the option to move
the local services in these
areas are often behind an
insufficient we need support and
services for NST not the
government to continue serving
our local children thank you.
Thank you Britney next we have
Karen the Cerro.
Members of the committee my name
is Karen those hello I am
objective and early intervention
program in Albuquerque and we
have partnered with the New
Mexico school for the deaf for
many years and find that their
services are very much needed
and provided throughout the
state to all communities they do
serve about seven hundred kids
all around the state I'm
concerned that this bill would
eliminate or severely curtail
early intervention services
there's been no consultation
with the early child hood
program regarding this bill I
think that it would be premature
to move this forward without
we're keen and setting it's a
packed with partners in the
community.
Thank you thank you.
I'm next I have it says bill is
iPhone.
If you could introduce yourself.
Then you need to on mute.
Okay there you go okay good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Billy
consists and my daughter is
Riley we are from a small
community and twin lakes New
Mexico located just north of
Gallup we oppose the house bill
two thirty seven the services
received we received from the
New Mexico school for the deaf
our through visits to my home
before comment from a
developmental specialist and
deaf mentor as as we live in a
rural community these services
have benefited my daughter Riley
who was diagnosed with that
bilateral hearing loss at birth
since she was six months old and
through the services we learned
so much about the deaf culture
and through ASL in education and
has brought our family a lot
closer we only don't see these
services and resources as.
Services be considered all the
specialists as family we have
known them for over five years
and I still these resources are
very important beneficial to our
family.
And they have provided so much
support and encouragement and a
lot of information to the
outreach programs.
Thank you thank you Billy next
we have it says moderator if you
could introduce yourself.
You'll need to unmute.
We're not sure who moderator is.
You can on mute.
There you go.
You could introduce yourself.
Actually we just got word of the
parliament Dr Carla Garcia
Fernandez okay under the
panelists please okay.
Go ahead issue spotlighted.
Thank you.
Which good morning madam chair
and members of the committee.
If we take the time.
Really learn and pause and learn
about the community.
That community around the United
States.
And the injustice in the
education system and in equity.
It become complete particularly
harmful historically to
marginalized F. and hard of
hearing students and children
this rents a fundamental to
democratic values.
Do is well reputed for
developing and sustaining
meaningful interactive
relationships with.
Variety of communities such as
municipalities school districts
community members and nonprofit
organizations as well as other
state agencies and this also
includes providing rich and
equitable resources for families
and their children all over the
state of New Mexico.
And this is what I call
community partnership.
To be a successful community
partnership each of us and I
mean each of us has a
responsibility to learn
acknowledging monitor our bias.
And privileges.
Okay thank you process allows us
to better understand how
systemic oppression has promoted
different forms of violence
towards deaf and hard of healing
hearing children.
House B. two thirty seven was
drafted without consultation or
do respect for NMAA do and their
leadership.
This shows a disregard for their
excellence in teaching and
serving deaf and hard of hearing
students.
Thank you thank you more
importantly not your ordinary
interests of deaf communities.
Just because there is interest
aligned with ours is our social
responsibility to truly listen
to death communities and I for
more their voices are heard.
Eighty two thirty seven
contradicts that empowering
space the NMAA find thank you
your your time is left thank
you.
Thank you so much for your time
thank you I'm next we have
Patricia Beecher.
Good morning
This is Patricia Beecher on the
superintendent of the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired as a
constitutional specialized
school we would like to voice
our opposition to house bill two
thirty seven and request that it
be tabled indefinitely we echo
the concerns of superintendent
guy a goes we think that the
amended bill's proposal to add
it does services coordinator
duplicate to position that's
already in New MPD in the
special bureau hello instance
coordinator under which deafness
heart of hard of hearing
blindness and visual impairments
fall special schools work with
this coordinator and with
cooperatively with districts
around the state equity of
services is addressed through
the IP process and state cut and
constitutional specialized
schools are part of the students
continuum of services.
Thank you very much thank you.
Mark Ramirez.
Unmute yourself mark.
And mark.
About it soon okay.
And promoting him now great.
And it just takes a moment to
spotlight and so I appreciate
everyone's.
Patients.
Should I go ahead.
Sorry I apologize.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is mark I mean this I
live in district sixteen.
And I also want to add that in a
world where black lives matter
where non black people of color
and white people need to be
listening in a world where love
is love.
Why do heterosexuals determine
the validity of a relationship.
In a world where women's rights
are human rights.
Many need not be making
decisions for them.
The same is true when it comes
to students with disabilities.
Those who live three study and
know the disability first hand
are those they should have the
most seats at the table.
It makes sense that the the work
in the best.
In the state's best interest is
to have NMAA do operate at the
capacity that it does to
guarantee that it is a critical
mass of deaf students deaf
educators and deaf people
themselves who serve the
population best and have their
best interests at heart.
Lastly because the intent.
Lastly because the intent and
the development of this bill
pertaining to our state's death
youth livelihoods occur once
again with out and MSD's
involvements.
The impact of this bill.
He's quickly for seen.
Which is increasing the risk of
those already highest at risk in
a rural state.
So please.
I consider you to oppose this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have.
Melissa Mexico Canada.
Hi thank you madam chairwoman
and members of the committee my
name is Melissa called cana and
I live in Albuquerque New Mexico
my daughter is hard of hearing
and we receive developmental
specialist services through
NMSC.
The services have been
invaluable to us as we have been
learning sign.
And just navigating her
diagnosis and what it means for
her life moving forward.
we oppose this bill and are
concerned about the interruption
to services that it could cost
also concerns that it was
created without the input of an
MST.
which is a vital resource for
the deaf community.
once again I propose additional
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Next we have
Elisabeth saints.
Yes Representative thing in the
thank.
Thank you when Hopson.
Thank
you very much.
It is locally of a we need more.
Representative Benham
who knows what I would just
make medical getting businesses
and yeah.
What is the city this will open
up and it I see even the
committee that if
the HSD ninety.
Is the the purpose of the
economic and political.
On page three he can get a good
reason to have a seat in the
back of.
What the reason is is that is
that.
This is what the incentives and
stuff.
If you
interpreter Orlando based so to
give a recap in English that
would be very helpful great go
ahead.
Well I know you've never you
have thank you.
This was a parent this is nine
saying that you live in a rural
area and Hobbs New Mexico where
she receives early intervention
services from a development
specialist as well as an admin
for I she also mentioned that
she works closely with of the
New Mexico school for the deaf
alongside local early
intervention agencies back up to
receive specialized services to
help her daughter who has date
was diagnosed with multiple
disabilities I am was born
prematurely.
She mentioned that she is
concerned that her family may
lose services due to the nature
of this bill and the way that is
dropped it and she fears that by
losing those services it would
be a great disservice to her
daughter and to her family who
have greatly benefited from the
services that they have been
receiving from the New Mexico
School.
Thank you for your time and
thank you for your service to
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you for that
interpretation next we have a
Tiffany guy Ecosse.
Madam chair members of the
committee and we think this and
I live in Las Vegas New Mexico I
receive services from the deaf
mentor program the early
intervention team and the
preschool Services NCC T.
services like that family and
soccer classes and family to
family weekend sh I oppose this
bill because it will limit the
services my child receives now
and in the future in my part of
the state in addition to that
this bill conflicts with the New
Mexico constitution.
My daughter has a wide range of
medical disabilities and being
hard.
It involves one of that.
In NMAA do has been expertise
that is help not only my husband
and I but my daughter aunts
grandmas grandpas our entire
family to learn a language that
we can all communicate with my
daughter.
This bill.
It thank you next we have a list
of Hodgson.
Hello my name is Alyssa hi Jen
and I propose bills to thirty
seven.
I live in Artesia New Mexico
which is a very rural community
in southeastern New Mexico.
I am the parent of hunter who is
three years old and has trisomy
twenty one also known as down
syndrome and is hearing
impaired.
We received early intervention
services through an amnesty
including a deaf man tore and
expert in language development
for deaf and hard of hearing
children.
Not only have the services
benefited hunter and his
language development but his
social and emotional development
as well in fact our whole family
is benefiting from the services
through immersion in ASL as my
husband and I along with our
seven year old daughter are able
to participate in the home based
or as soon based services
through an MST.
Our local district offers
nothing even remotely compare of
all to the services provided by
the experts at MST and while I
agree that the lack of services
in local districts is a problem
I firmly oppose this bill
because it is wrong to take
funding away from NMSC the
experts in this field who are
currently succeeding in their
role in order to provide
services in the districts.
Thank you.
Our next we have Amy cone.
You madam chair she's also.
Okay.
I think we've promoted her.
Thanks bye yeah right yes yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Just wanted to briefly mention
that there are two interpreters
on screen and it has been very
difficult for me to focus I just
wanna make sure you know that
but I'll go ahead and move
forward my comments I'm a deaf
person I do have some residual
hearing left and I speak very
well it's been my experience
that.
You know I've been placed into a
public school and people are
making decisions for me thinking
they knew what was best for me I
have many generations that that
folks in my family as well I
have a deaf brother and his
experience was much different
than mine
It's hard to see medical experts
making decisions for us
especially with language
deprivation for possibly no
language.
Acquisition at all for some deaf
children and my involvement with
several local and national
organizations in last year's has
allowed me to see the same
concepts being attempted here in
this bill nationally these
concepts have not worked and
have been detrimental.
With my current work in the bay
area is truly given me the
experience of seeing what it's
like when children do not have
access to language acquisition
that they need the model in
California closely resembles
what is being attempted here in
this bill in New Mexico on the
claim of equal opportunity.
The funding for deaf mentors
interpreters early
interventionist decided by
hearing so called experts.
And so often are not
prioritizing def needs thank you
help.
Thank you.
I'm thank you for being here our
next we have Jared burns.
And madam chair members of the
committee on promoting Jr and
now he on the interpretation
services.
Thank.
Okay there is areas we're just
waiting for a spot.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jerry burns
I am currently a senior at an
MST and I'm also the president
of our student body governments.
I came to an amnesty just two
years ago but I've already found
such an amazing community.
Many of the students are so
concerned about the passing of
the bill of what will happen to
them and their families.
Please close this bill and vote
against it I so appreciate your
time.
Thank you Jerry okay next I have
NMAA state alumnus if you could
introduce yourself.
And madam chair I believe this
is somebody who may be in need
of interpretations and to
promote the now okay.
It is not giving me the option a
spotlight and madam chair.
And ask them to start their
video just to see.
Okay I'm
we can go to the next person and
if I see that their video comes
on I will let you know and then
we'll go back to okay yes so
next we have Nicole
this is Dennis.
I yes
when I was first hearing the
bill I was and then a reading it
before hand I was a little
confusing when it was after
hearing of many people's point
of views and stories I would
just like to say that I also
worry about the new funding for
the in the state thank you.
Thank you and it looks like we
can go back to NMAA state
alumnus.
Hello.
Hello.
I'm a former student of MST and
then I I graduated.
what from a school in Talis
receiving it in Albuquerque and
APS.
And if we can make this bill
work.
For students.
Who are not supported under an
amnesty.
But they're not in the under
that umbrella.
But at the same time not affect
the students.
And employees.
Here.
MST.
I'm actually switch to speaking
that that's going to be easier
for me.
The interpreter is not helping
right now.
All right
okay thank you thank you for
trying.
next we have Antonia Roybal mac.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I
support this bill and
particularly because this is not
a due to an amnesty bill this is
a deal with an MST the last
speaker that just folks had it
spot on this is really about how
do we make this work for all
students including those that
are not under the NMAA the
umbrella thank you I support
this bill.
Thank you.
and we're on opposition now but
I thank you.
Antonia
Nina Simon.
Hi hello madam chair thank you
so much for allowing me to speak
as a parent of a child with
special learning needs and
health care provider in the
state of New Mexico I am in
strong opposition to this bill
due to the disservice it seems
to support for all deaf and hard
of hearing children their
families and the deaf culture
itself NMAA do is a crucial part
of our state and makes New
Mexico stand out as a community
that embraces specialized
services for all people in need
as a parent that sends a child
to a boarding school out of
state I know how critical it is
for a child to have the
opportunity to attend or simply
receive services that are often
overlooked for those people of
privilege.
I often hear from members of the
deaf community in my clinical
practice that receive support
from NMSC and without that
support my patients would not be
able to have rights or be able
to advocate for themselves
please oppose this bill as it
can put our state at risk for
another public health emergency.
Thank you next we have Nathan
gone.
And madam chair representative
he will be using ASL services so
okay me just a moment.
Good morning madam chair members
of the community.
I'd like to applaud the steps
being taken to amend this bill.
I think this technology is a big
issue that we need to address.
The issue being that we do need
full participation of all
stakeholders and
representatives.
With a throughout New Mexico not
just one group coming together
and making decisions or another
but coming together as a larger
group to envision what is best
for deaf education here in the
state I think raising funding
for all deaf children is a good
thing but we need to take a look
at hard look do our research and
make sure we do that correctly
we also need to take a look at
but not violating the
constitution and making
difficulties that are
unnecessary.
We need to think about equal
access equity.
And not just funding.
I really hope that we can come
together for more discussion in
order to figure out how to make
this bill better because this
bill as it stands does not work.
Thank you.
Next we have Lynam Barbero.
Yes good morning madam president
members of the committee thank
you for your time my name is
Linda M. Barbero and I have a
forty plus year history with the
New Mexico school for the deaf I
am currently serving as the vice
president of the board of
regents responsible for
overseeing the operations of the
New Mexico school for the deaf.
I remain opposed to house bill
two thirty seven and like others
have stated I do applaud of the
amendments that have been made
to this bill however I I remain
opposed for the reasons that
have been stated previously by
superintendent diagnose and
others I believe there are still
issues with the language of the
amendments and additionally
creating a position at the PED
is duplicative of services that
already exist within PED yes the
low incidence coordinator
position so I urge the committee
to table on this bill
indefinitely until further
discussions can occur to make it
work for all deaf and hard of
hearing children in the state
thank you for your time and
services to the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you next we have
Blau or blue.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee we're
fine and those for our son is
blue with more the second he's
three years old and was born
deaf.
We're from the village of pariah
he on the Laguna reservation and
we are strongly opposed to this
bill.
Services that we received from
New Mexico school for the deaf
for visits to our home before
COVID course of from a develop
spit mental specialist visits
from a deaf developmental
specialist and our son attends
the NMAA the preschool in
Albuquerque these services has
taught us about deaf culture and
how to communicate with our son
using ASL our son is brought our
family closer together because
we're all learning American Sign
Language we're also helping some
people on the Pueblo by sharing
our story and being proud of our
son and how far he's come with
the services from NMAA do
receiving visits from a
definition for shows is that our
son will be able to do anything
he wants as he grows older the
good it does not have qualified
staff to help him reach his full
potential.
Thank you next we have because
Sandra Perez.
Madam chair Scott Mohammed
actually mixtape promoted him
hello can I am of this all right
he's going to be on at eight
using using interpretation yes
and we are almost.
Right hander.
That would.
Rents and.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
My name is Scott no Lujan.
And I'm sixth generation that's
I worked in deaf education for a
very long time and it is so
critical committee understand
the field of deaf education is
very small the teachers the
people the experts working in
this field are quite limited in
New Mexico is even more limited
because of our size and so I
want to make sure that all
services are possible for every
child who is deaf and hard of
hearing in all four corners of
this great state and so students
that go to MST are able to go
and get their services their
families are able to get
services as well my niece and
nephew and friends children
attend the school and what I've
heard is that they have received
a lot of services throughout the
years they've been there and
they work very closely with
other school districts both
large and small and it is
critical that we continue to
serve all of the deaf and hard
of hearing children in New
Mexico that attend our school
thank you for your time.
I'm in this bill thank you now
we have because Sandra Perez.
And I'm promoting her just
because it says she has honest
okay I believe she will most
likely need the interpretation.
and I give me one moment I
apologize.
There she is all right thank
you.
Good morning madam chair and
committee my name is Cassandra
caress and I am eleven this from
an MST my story is short and
sweet
What adults think and feel.
It's not the same as what a
child feels I came into the
school for the deaf.
Between the age of two and to N.
seventeen or eighteen years old
and I had complete one hundred
percent access to a language
rich environment for those
children in the school system
and parents may be concerned
about sending their children are
why I understand that as a
parent as well.
But what the child feels when
they're in a death community
with full access cannot be
ignored and is critical thank
you so much for your time I
appreciate it I'm sorry if I
might add also I am just opposed
to house bill two thirty seven
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you our next we have to
Reese blank Meyer.
Hello I would like to say my
comments please can you spot
placements.
Everio can waste spotlight
to resend bring her over as a
panelist.
Yes madam chair at doing that
now I apologize is working off
of a an abbreviated list of
folks so let me.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Really I'm very happy to have
the opportunity to participate
in this event today I.
I.
And Dr Teresa blank Miner Burke.
I and my research is in the
education of deaf children
related to ethics and politics I
am policy rather I am a teacher
at the university.
I.
A gallon at university.
I.
And I have three concerns about
house bill two three seven.
I feel that we don't have enough
information.
For us to really vote and pass a
proposal.
Secondly my concern is about
this bill it seems to duplicate.
Services.
Provided by MSD.
Thirdly.
If we in the disability and deaf
communities.
I think.
That is nothing about us without
us.
This means that when we have
policies or built for anything
that applies to our lives being
proposed it is important that we
have representatives from our
community and so I'm concerned
about.
The thing.
A specialist.
Under PED that would work for
the deaf education which is
hearing centric.
And doesn't necessarily have a
great knowledge of and misty or
education and their needs.
I and that is the concern.
Because if we place a hearing
centric.
Person in this environment.
With one excuse me
if we have one deaths specialist
in a hearing centric environment
than our voices are lost.
And that.
Is not ethical.
Or appropriate.
Thank you for the opportunity to
make comment thank you thank you
for.
Next.
Next we have those who are
speaking in support.
If you would raise your hand
madam madam chair I apologize
there are still a few members
that are opposed to that needed
translation services if any will
to raise their hand okay I'll
I'll let you go
with the rest of the list
Gabriel thank you okay so the
next would be any
I do have her promoted and I'm
waiting for it to allow me to
spotlight her madam chair
halls any has spoken thank you
okay thank you I wasn't sure
that the next would be Carlo
weeks.
And she is promoted we just a
moment to spotlight.
It does sound like that at.
Problem worse.
Okay.
Thank you for the.
I am unsure as to why Carlos and
spotlighted.
And I'm no longer seeing her in
the panelists.
Hold on try this one more time.
I just promoted her to panelists
again.
Okay and I believe I can
spotlight her now.
Thank you.
Hello.
My name is Carla weeks.
I'm from Albuquerque.
Thank you madam chair for
letting me speak today I'm sorry
for the technical pick up there.
I am opposed to house bill two
three seven.
Because.
I've met so many adults.
Who graduated from MSD or public
schools for anywhere along the
spectrum and I actually talked
and misty previously and I was a
case manager for their outreach
program at one point and that
job and that job and that many
adults and recognize that those
adults better graduated from MST
or that have had services from
the Mexico school that always
seem to do better they seem to
have more language knowledge
understanding.
And so when I met those adults
most people.
It hadn't had those services or
had been able to take advantage
of that our reserve or perhaps
were resistant to it it seems
that they have harder lives and
so I don't want to take away
services from families that are
part of an MST it is so
important to continue to get all
the services available to them
statewide.
It's really so important so I
would like to make sure that
those services are capped and
that is why oppose house bill
two three seven thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Gabrielle is there anyone else
yes madam chair we have Lana
Peterson time.
Hello my name is Lana and I'm a
mother of four daughters.
Who all attended MSD and have
gotten the early intervention
services from the get go live
seven year old a five year old
and twins the age of two R.
eighteen months.
So I my focus now is on my
babies as the five and seven or
older at and misty at the early
intervention department has been
a lifesaver to my family.
And the reason for that is even
though I'm a deaf person I
should know what to do with the
deaf parents but people who come
to my house have come weekly
monthly and they are deaf
experts and they have helped me
feel that I know how to interact
and raise my children.
They can communicate directly to
my children as well which is
amazing with other services
don't have that they don't have
that capacity the I. DS has been
a lifesaver for my family.
I've gotten a lot of other
community services and other
services through an amnesty as
well and I oppose house bill two
thirty seven.
If it passes my little ones will
not receive the same services
that my two older girls have
received and that is not right
so I oppose this bill and I
implore you to do the same thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair next we will have at
Bruce through we're.
Junior
I do have him promoted and I'm
just waiting.
To be able to spotlight him.
Okay
I can't spot like him until he
started his video.
We also have Melinda Johnston
available.
Videos going a good start with
her okay these last two that I
had on our list okay Madam
chair.
Until we go over to those in
support okay I'm spotlighting
Melinda Johnston.
Hello madam chair.
And.
Members.
Of the committee.
I wanted to say a few things.
About.
My experience.
I went to and misty as a
preschooler.
And.
I also.
Attended.
Public school yep a public
school.
And I steep order people around
the school.
SLA.
And they.
Didn't try.
Yes it.
Mowing tended to preschool mom
saying.
And.
Then transfer to the school for
the deaf but it wasn't possible
she was planning to.
So she came to a public school
here and she also attended SLA.
But they weren't good matches
for her and then she transferred
to the school for that.
And everything worked out
beautifully after that in terms
of getting the support we need.
And also I and other.
Like Melinda is the name on has
disabilities.
I just think that so thank you
for your time.
Thank you.
And madam chair members of the
committee I do not see that
produces video.
Has come on.
effective thinks actually
disappeared.
From the panelists side
I'm I'll try one more time and
then we'll we'll go to those in
support of the legislation okay
thank you Gabriel.
It is not panelists and he
starts his video I can spotlight
him for his comments.
Okay I think we need to
move on.
to those in support and and I
just before we get started I
just want to announce to the
audience this will be the last
bill that we hear so if you're
here for house bill two forty
nine to fifty or the house joint
memorial one house memorial two
we will not hear that today it
will have to rule to Wednesday
this will be the last bill since
we have a floor session coming
up shortly so we will go now to
those in support of house bill
two thirty seven and first I
have doctor torrez go ahead.
Dr Torrez we can't hear you it
shows you're on mute it but we
can't hear you.
And I just want to madam chair
members of the nation I confirm
I have the name of one person
that I know will be needing
translation services and support
I don't have any other names so
okay.
I'll just take it personally
percent if if anyone knows that
they need services hi we are in
support and that will come back
to drive torrez because we
couldn't hear her let's try
Joe dell'acqua.
Joko had.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
actually on the opposing side
just wanted a little the last
okay but my name is Joe to aqua
and I'm from Albuquerque and
thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak my son
Jonas is seven months old and
was born hard of hearing and you
can imagine how overwhelming
that can be for a new path but
MSD has helped us every step of
the way the legislative speech
hearing and education resources
that frankly we didn't even know
existed and we've only been
living in New Mexico for five
years and everything.
Has made us incredibly proud
here.
We've simply been amazed I'm I
remain opposed to this version
of house bill two thirty seven
even with the amendments
NMSC is vital in this community
and I am deeply concerned that
this bill will dramatically
affect the care that they
provided for so many families
including ours for so long on
the bill should be tabled
indefinitely until these
concerns can be addressed
specifically and directly with
MST thank you for your time and
consideration thank you so let's
try to after torrez again.
Back to tors can you're on mute
yourself.
Are we have Dr Torrez later in
the list to let's take this one
gonna take this one down.
And we'll go to Matilda
Cristiano.
Matilda.
Tell go ahead.
Madam chair would you like me to
promote people as panelist and
then we can see if they need.
Service okay.
I'm doing that for Matilda now
okay.
Tell the is the panelists now.
There she is okay do
interpretation thank you.
Want to see clearly now okay
great.
Okay so I feel strongly against
house bill two thirty seven and
the reason is is in my
experience you know I I am an
alumni and graduated from the
New Mexico school for the deaf.
And I see folks that have
graduated from NMSC become quite
successful it successful in
their life they have a
foundation they have supports.
They have the education and the
experience to develop their
skills to go to college or
whatever they would like to do.
I feel like if the school is
close to what is going to happen
to these students that should be
attending NMSC I feel that this
is not right this bill NMSC is
very small.
And really they need the
resources in New Mexico most.
And so I think that the language
needs to be removed from this
bill to do fun NMSC.
The language I'm not sure why
the removing the language from
the nineteen sixties that was
written into the bill already in
the nineteen sixties and so I am
against house bill two thirty
seven thank you very much thank
you.
Okay and just a comment we're
trying to do in support now but
I understand that some folks may
have we might have missed them
on the opposition so this may be
a little bit confusing but stand
rounds.
Areas.
You need to undo it yourself
please.
There we go has been as good go
ahead thank you madam chair
members the committee again
stand rounds of the executive
director of the rest of school
superintendents association and
the coalition of education
leaders we support house bill
two thirty seven NMAA state is
an important player and Services
turned deaf and hard of hearing
students but they are not the
exclusive point of service as a
thirty year superintendent New
Mexico we continue to try to
work best relationships with
them we believe the hospital to
thirty seven is an attempt to
address this we asked the user
Committee move this bill forward
on to education so it can be
considered from all angles thank
you very much madam chair.
Thank you.
I'm next we have Jennifer
Martinez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer Martinez and I'm the
parent of three children
including a son and I am happy
to hear the stories of families
who are receiving early
intervention are we services
from an MST my family receive
those same services early on and
the other part of their stories
though has been this lack of
quality options and services
available in local districts
schools and we agree and frankly
thank you for making our point
to quote one NMSC parents the
public school has failed Act.
The vast majority of deaf
children statewide are falling
through the cracks in the public
education system and I ask the
committee to focus on those
students for for a moment judge
singleton's ruling on K. twelve
education stands equity is not
optional nine NMSC students the
other eighty percent I've just
used in the state also deserve a
quality education and adequate
funding it is not only a legal
obligation to New World wine in
atomicity has no authority to
oversee the public education
department and local school
districts and I urge you to move
this bill bill for it to the
Education Committee thank you
thank you.
Our next we have Dana.
Good morning madam chair members
of the community of the
committee my name is Dana group
miss I stand in strong support
of this bill
The Yazzie decision requires the
state to provide equal funding
to all students and that's what
this bill does thank you very
much.
Thank you next we have Francis
Vigil.
Francis on yourself there you
go.
Thank you I was waiting in the
on the opposition side but I'm
gonna get my god that Madam so
many Mr speaker I'll build I'm
here to speak in bold opposition
to house bill two thirty seven
and all related amendments I'm
an educator and it served as a
teacher and administrator at the
school districts state and
federal levels most importantly
I am the father to profoundly
deaf dollars have been attending
or seeking services from an
industry in the early childhood
years.
We're not thirteen to sixteen
years old and that that are in
the state.
As a result each B. two thirty
seven requiring greater
coordination cooperation between
and misty in public schools this
legislation does not have any
greater purpose to put more
control in the state
operations and the ability of
the PED and reserve two points
PDS experience issues with
internal turnover and lack of
proper assistance and guidance
as evidenced by the Martinez
lawsuit the lack of response to
the lawsuit second New Mexico
spoke with Representative
serving the deaf community in
Mexico since eighteen eighty
seven they are the epicenter for
the for the deaf community and
the you not only by please for
W. Mercuri people to grow
cultivate identity learn
valuable life skills to find a
place for governor appearing
people families and loved ones
connect.
The last thing.
thank you Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists both for
the New Mexico trappers network
as well as New Mexico kids can
which is an education advocacy
organization and we do support
the legislation the disparity of
the funding deserves further
evaluation to ensure students in
all settings in this case our
deaf students are getting
everything they need to succeed
it seems that the amendments
before it by the Sanchez may
have address the concerns of
many of those were supposed to
do not want to see changes in
services during the early years
with the amendments the bill is
now focused on helping local
districts receive the resources
they need to implement robust
IEPs for families with students
who are hard of hearing if this
bill were table today would
further delay the at this
important conversation that
needs to happen now we cannot
wait until twenty twenty three
for the next sixty day session
we certainly think that this
bill deserves further
consideration and should receive
a hearing in the Education
Committee thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm.
Now I have something and I have
an MST alumnus.
Yes promoted them madam chair
okay.
And.
Just looking for them to
spotlight.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes go ahead I support.
I support this bill.
If.
It does not affect the NMAA the.
See that they're already doing
what they're already doing what
NMSC is already doing.
So we need to support other
students.
Or in other schools.
Who are not.
under the umbrella of MST.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next I have Kimberly Moyale.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am the parent
of three children including my
deaf son Thomas was medically
fragile and has special needs
and I'm also a co founder and
board chair of the Albuquerque
sign language academy and we
started our school because we
literally felt we had no other
options for our deaf children
because of their other special
needs it simply was not an
option for my son to live away
from home or during the daily
commute to and from Santa Fe
health challenges.
I'm we believe that every child
in the state deserves equal
opportunities resources and
funding regardless of where they
go to school currently eighty
percent of deaf and hard of
hearing students in New Mexico
do not.
Representative nurse our school
and had a great resource.
It's important for everyone.
Any.
You're in the state.
What
we want.
Okay thank you.
Our next we have Dr Torrez.
Dr Torrez on mute yourself.
Madam chairman I try to promote.
Because of that may have been
why we couldn't.
You're from them before.
They are promoted now.
And.
In the spotlight.
There we go.
I just worry
I'm a deaf person I couldn't of
voice for myself so I'm gonna
I'm gonna signed so this bill I
want to talk it's gonna be short
and sweet first of all.
I'm from a gala University I'm a
professor
I teach first year freshmen
sophomores and each semester of
the first week I asked the
students you know.
Tell a story and some of them.
Some of the students are from an
MST some of them were mainstream
and they tell their story and
they say.
When they were mainstreamed in
the transferred to NMSC they
felt like they had the support
they had the quarter they had
the identity all of that when
they were in a mainstream
setting before they went to
NMSC.
Hey which that they had that so
I can see the difference I can
see the students in their
stories when we talk about it as
for adults.
At in a misty in that setting
they had that be cool they felt
like they were equals in the
mainstream setting they did not
feel that.
so that deaf children in the
mainstream setting
I can see how important it is.
To them to be in a situation
where they feel like equals.
So I asked them that and they
don't know that as
In those mentioned how important
it is to be in a setting where
they feel equal so thank you for
your time and I appreciate.
Thank you madam chair just to
clarify Dr Torrez was against
the bill okay thank you.
next we have Martin.
Thank you for hearing me I
support bill to thirty seven.
My daughter came to me through
foster care at a year old and
had no support for the entire
first year of her life when we
got here it was kind of a mad
dash to provide services and we
kept being directed to MST and
I'm by one of their employees we
were actually told our daughter
was not deaf and asked to be
helped by them.
And.
Thankfully we found the
Presbyterian your Institute.
again my daughter.
Amazing opportunities.
And I think every child should
have the same off virginity is.
Thank you thank you.
Up next we have Merioles back.
Good morning members of our
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Marilyn
back I stand in support and H.
B. two thirty seven and ask that
you send that on to the house
Education Committee for fair
review from the house Education
Committee house bill two thirty
seven is proposed in direct
response to the martini yes the
lawsuit ruling that mandate
equal and adequate funding for
all students being at rest her
the last two students with
disabilities are specifically
named as those students whose
needs to be addressed HSD thirty
seven is not intended to harm or
affect the New Mexico school for
the deaf the NMAA do is governed
by constitutional law and exists
within its own legal structures
I stand in support of H. B. two
thirty seven because there are
eighty percent of New Mexico
students impacted by this and
they need to be addressed as
well so please but H. B. two
thirty seven to house Education
Committee thank you.
Thank you on next I think we've
heard from DJ Nagel before have
we you if you did but it was on
the other on the other bill
thank you and I recognize the
name go ahead.
Yes it's I really have more
COVID than anything else what
this whole discussion is brought
to me is one there are people
that may not being you know deaf
hard of hearing people being not
being serviced properly and to
we have an organization in the
state as was said much much
earlier is is really a jewel
across the country and has the
expertise so why not
the increased funding for them
that really they really know
what they're doing increase of
funding for them and you make
use of modern technologies like
zoom
two or you know to support.
People in rural areas which they
do now but now how to support
people in the school districts
just make sense we're gonna
throw money at it.
Given to the people really know
what they're doing and that's
really evident by all this
conversation thank you thank
you.
Our next we have Jessica I am
neki and hopeless said that
right.
Good morning.
Go ahead and insurance this is
Jessica I NEC as a mother of
that child I'm for H. B. two
three seven my child went to
Presbyterian Institute and where
he flourished and he is still
flourishing and the mainstream
program we have moved to
multiple different states to
find a program that we have here
in the state of New Mexico we
have moved to the state of
Maryland we have moved the state
of New Jersey and we have come
back to the state of New Mexico
for this purpose here at in New
Mexico and it's a program that
is not very well advert not
advertise but people don't know
about this amazing or a program
for our deaf children and the we
really need for other families
to see all the choices in the
state of New Mexico so thank you
so much.
Thank you.
I'm Mary Catherine Santa.
Can you hear me yes go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee I support this bill
this is massive disinformation
by New Mexico school for the
deaf providing a deaf and hard
of hearing coordinator does not
limit and MST in New Mexico this
idea of NMSC or nothing is
unacceptable we need inclusion
for everyone I have a niece who
is yes and by through the
services provided by the
institution other than NMSC she
was able to experience for a
language education through this
she is now able to communicate
with her family including myself
and her cousins of all ages well
it's understandable to fear
change we need to shift our
perspective the offering the
deaf community more options and
blow the boundaries of inclusion
and what we call that right now
again this is a deal with not
due to NMAA and while we hear
from the other families here
that changes that make we need
to understand that their
families out there who are
opening their arms to more
possibilities and other options
thank you.
Thank you I'm next we have
Dominic Silva.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my next on it
so well my nephew Thomas so what
is a yes in medically fragile
twenty years old now but just to
give the the committee a little
history fifteen years ago we
brought in not superintendent
stern from amnesty and told them
that are concerns.
And at that time he promised
that he would do something to
make it easier and provide more
services my sister can work
with.
The school for the deaf for
years nothing happened so it
took those parents to develop
the charter school but it wasn't
just those parents and I hope
you hear me out here it took the
likes of Bernalillo county Linda
in the facility for free.
So they could have the school
for those kids and it thank you
so be drug to fight for one
dollar dollars a capital outlay
to simply provide the basic
framework within that building
for those kids one hundred
thousand dollars in capital
outlay and since in my nephews
graduated many many hundreds of
kids have gone through that
school I would simply ask the
committee to move ahead house
Education Committee because we
need to look at how many
students are going to NMAA the
currently and how many steps
students are around the state
right now in the house budget
there's only two hundred fifteen
thousand dollars for statewide
outreach that is nothing that's
a drop in the bucket and
disservice to all the death
students and families around the
state thank you.
Thank you our next we have
Andrew favor.
Yes good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Sandra Faber and in light of the
Garcia Martinez lawsuit and the
limited funds for education that
we have.
And you just muted yourself.
Sorry about that.
My name is Sandra Faber and in
light of the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and the limited funds
for education that we have in
our state I truly believe that
we owe it to all children in New
Mexico to reevaluate all of the
funding options that we have
available for them therefore I
am in favor and support house
bill two thirty seven thank you.
Thank you madam chair we have
one more attendee I just try to
hand Thomas still the okay let
me spotlight him now.
Good morning my name is Thomas.
And I went to the Albuquerque
secluded you can I mean and I
want equal education I want
equality for deaf and hard of
hearing students it doesn't
matter where they go and so I
support equal funding from the
state.
For all state.
And I want to
really thank everybody who set
up the school for me so that I
was able to be around staff
hearing hard of hearing people
and peers and so I really want
this partnership and I feel like
it's
Good to have.
Equality for deaf and hard of
hearing students and I felt
really comfortable with my
education and I thought I was
able to interact with my family
and I appreciate my experience.
The.
I'm here
for I think water where deaf or
hard of hearing students go.
Eight whatever school they go I
think we need to support them so
I do support house bill two
thirty seven thank you so much.
Thank you our next we have C.
mobile.
Good morning.
Go ahead.
Same are you are you have to
unmute.
Can you hear me now there there
you go go ahead you I thank you
so much for the opportunity my
name is Dr C. military I am the
executive director at the
Presbyterian ear institute and I
do stand in support of this bill
of bills that house bill two
thirty seven
I work with deaf children I am
an audiologist I work with deaf
children starting at birth I'm
going up at all ages including
adults not all data part of
hearing children have or require
the same services for education
not all of them require site
sign language interpreting
services to be educated and this
bill would allow for different
kinds of services different
kinds of resources for school
districts to be able to support
deaf and hard of hearing
children across the state of New
Mexico especially those that are
in rural areas so please support
house bill two thirty seven
thank you.
Thank you.
And that is
all that I see.
So.
We are supposed to go to the
floor at.
I'm now so I'm gonna ask one of
Representative Maestas do you
want to make some statements and
then I'm going to ask my
committee members to to think
about whether it if they've got
a long line of questioning I
think we need to probably rolled
over to Wednesday for that
discussion with the committee
and to anna
if the questions are really
shorts done which I kind of
doubt.
We could proceed but a first
Representative do you want to
make
statements following a public
comment thank you madam chair
honorable members and and thank
you health committee for all the
time this morning really really
appreciate it
There's up you know I I accept
the criticism not including
leadership of the school for the
deaf and the drafting the bill
but we're a citizen legislature
were on as soon we can talk to
each other the very next day
there was a you tube video
produced by the school for the
deaf that had seven patented
lies in it.
And I feel so horrible for these
families so horrible for these
for these alarm not alumni.
They love the school for the
deaf the school for the deaf is
a jul.
This does not touch a dime of
the school for that this does
not touch any aspect of the
school for that section one
actually brought him to the
table as the head of the table.
Section one if we move takes
them out this is about that
eighty percent of the students
that are not under the school
for the deaf and we asked the
committee to just look at the
words on the page just look at
the words on the page and and
and not and all the I'm here to
answer any health questions
thank you.
Okay
Committee members I think that
we should hold over the
questions that you anna and till
Wednesday I don't want to give a
short shift to the US
Representative Maestas and and
Pushin rush through it in
competition with needing to go
to the floor so I apologize to
you I would hope we would have
gotten it all through at one
time we did this with the campus
the holes two the important
thing was to get through all of
the public comment and make sure
that they could all make COVID
just award to the attendees we
will not take anymore public
comment on Wednesday.
so no more public comment on
Wednesday but we will go to
quest.
Madam chair J. and make a
decision about the bill at that
time.
Madam chair.
Yes could I have just thirty
seconds I I I madam chair I
worked with a lot of debt get
that a lot of families with the
deaf kids and I see them on the
participate with and I just want
to take a second and say hello I
I think you're out there and I
wish I could see you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you and I really want to
thank all of the participants we
had a close to three hundred
attendees are today and
I think it was really important
to hear from everyone who wish
to speak and well I had the
clock up I tried not to cut
people off so that this is a
really important issue for
everyone who wish to speak so
with that members of the
committee we will adjourn.
Yes Representative madam chair
what does that mean that we will
being that we're rolling it over
to Wednesday that we'll be able
to accept the amendment to this
bill.
Yes we can deal with the
amendment on Wednesday as well
give you a chance to look
through that amendment.
And compare it to the bill and
the gives a little bit more time
for that and like we did with
the cannabis bills we will go to
two and a from the committee but
no further public comment and
I'd I just really appreciate
everyone's attendance today and
the ability to hear from
everyone and I apologize for any
glitches we have in the
technology this was a new for us
to offer all of the
interpretation services so
thank you and I think with that
we are adjourned and committee
yeah we can join the floor
session.
Thank.
