House Bill to well.
I'm jumping ahead of doors you
want take role.
Good morning everyone.
Rep Phelps Anderson.
I am present.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Karen bash.
More.
Representative Brittney by the
US.
I'm here.
Representative Stephanie lord
here.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Louise that.
Representative Liz Thomson I'm
here.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative.
Marian Matthews.
I can see you're trying to
connect to audio.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Is putting on the bill okay so
he's excuse madam chair yes
Representative Anderson I mean
Armstrong is putting out of the
bill Representative Montoya is
putting on the bill
Representative arises is having
is in the snow trying to get yes
PSE I just spoke to him he's
having issues like I was this
morning getting.
Okay vice chair Joanne J.
Ferrary.
Present.
madam chair Deborah Armstrong
I'm here.
And I can see Representative
Matthews trying to get on but
so officially I guess we're a
subcommittee she should be
connecting here momentarily.
But and madam vice chair of if
you could take over as chair
will move on to house bill two
or three.
Okay thank you madam chair.
And let's say I have
Merry now or bring over my.
Expert Mary Feldblum.
Merry are you there.
Making sure you can yes I am
more if you can okay good
morning all right madam chair
and
members of the committee.
House Bill two oh three.
Is creating a Health Security
planning and design board.
And I'm gonna step back a moment
particularly for those who are
new to kind of give you a little
history.
Certainly
I expand on that if we if we
need to or if there's questions
what the hell security plan
Health Security Act has been
introduced many times over the
years
going back to
twenty years or more with
next call if anyone recalls that
name was
House Appropriations chair
twenty years ago.
And.
The Health Security Act health
security plan is a plan to
essentially have universal
coverage in New Mexico a New
Mexico specific universal
coverage combining all
Kerrier sources and and everyone
where you're automatically
enrolled we not necessarily we
can't do
the self insured arrests a plans
they would have to be voluntary
or federal employees and it's
unclear whether Medicare could
roll into that but it it is a
plan that has been
talked about revised
fine tuned over many years.
And a couple of years ago we
were able to get funding to do
of a fiscal analysis.
And that this one else's
in the end it wasn't terribly
helpful in in a couple of ways
and it it worked out
What it would cost
to move everyone on to.
On to the health security plan
but it didn't really.
Answer a lot of questions and
gave several scenarios.
That would have cost to the
state anywhere over the first
five years of implementation
as much as five billion or as
little as break even so that's
not helpful to know it and the
difference in those was was how
Funding to providers was are
organized and how what the
contributions from individuals
and employers was was organized
so.
We have a lot of questions about
how do you appreciate the health
care system to save
to save money by combining
efforts if you well with the a
decrease in I did assume in that
study some administrative
savings by having one single
system instead of multiple
systems and multiple carriers.
But it didn't really change the
way we do or contemplate the way
we deliver health care and big
outstanding questions we don't
know whether we can get a waiver
for Medicare we don't know what
what a waiver for Medicaid would
look like.
We don't know what a innovation
waivers that's allowed under the
affordable Care Act what the
parameters around that would be
and all of those answers would
have been different in the prior
administration I potentially
than in this our current one.
So what this is what this house
bill two or three is proposing
to do is it's not and you're
welcome it's not a hundred pager
two hundred page bill creating
the Health Security Act it is a
planning phase.
So that we can
Really recruit and experts are
and a technical assistance and
begin to answer some of the
questions and do some big
systems thinking about if we
were going to be able to go to a
universal coverage in New Mexico
how would we get there how would
we finance it.
for implementation how would we
finance it if it's
are to be able to bring in all
the uninsured how would we think
differently about how we are
delivering health care how we're
paying for health care.
And so that's this bill is
starting with that framework and
goal of coverage for everyone in
New Mexico.
How one of the things we need to
figure out and questions we need
to answer that would make it
possible to move forward.
And so this is a proposed two
year our board
of composed of experts and of
funding for and we have to go to
appropriations next funding for
staff.
And funding for technical
assistance and and contracted
expertise.
it I would note that one thing
that's important about getting
all this expertise around the
table is R. as legislators we
don't have staff to help us with
policy development we don't have
the interim committee is part
time short
come
you know over five months or so
committee that has to look at a
whole host of issues and talking
about Health Security or
universal coverage because maybe
a day and that's not enough to
really answer these questions
and nor do we have dedicated
full time year round dedicated
to Health Care policy in
Legislative Council we we don't
and so my desire is we really
have to invest in.
Digging deep and answering a lot
of fundamental questions and
start to do that planning and
design work to see if there's if
and what the path forward is to
try and and
provide access to health care
health care coverage for
everyone.
In New Mexico and so this is and
obviously it's called the health
security planning and design
board and that's the basic
premise where we start at the
the history of what the order is
about what that design is but
the whole reason you plan is to
figure out what you can and
can't do and what you have to
change or tweak along the way in
order to achieve the goal so
it's also I think flexible
enough to know to be able to.
bring fresh ideas potentially to
the table or look at things a
little differently and to think
out what we would want a waiver
to look like from the federal
government what what our
partnership being how could we
design this so
with that madam chair merry if
there's any
details that you want to add to
this I think that's the overview
and.
and then we'll be ready to go to
questions merry do you want to
add anything yes I do since
there's a new legislators here
that really don't know me and
I've been the face of Health
Security for many years Mary
Feldblum and I'm the executive
director of the Health Security
Empain I'm I'm also an academic
I was an academic for many years
my PH uses sociology and
economics.
And in addition I got involved
in this in the early nineties
with Representative Max call in
looking for LA
because I was fired by consumers
union the publisher of Consumer
Reports director New Mexico
health care project and that was
one of the health care issues
that they were concerned about
and early nineties everybody was
talking about universal health
care some form or fashion.
And we are at the at this time
probably the largest coalition
in the history of our state over
a hundred and seventy diverse
organizations from around the
state are supporting the Health
security plan and that includes
the New Mexico Seiki Association
lack an AC P.
there are many providers and the
nurse practitioners association
the pharmacists and community
groups it is just enormous and
what I want to stress is that
that we have shared table of
contents and an index of the
whole security plan we've done
workshops with people so they
could read the bill and that's
why over the years we've gotten
feedback from so many people
about if we're going to set up
our own health plan in the in
our state what are the concerns
that people have how would we do
it and the the the principle is
simple businesses large
businesses self insure so why
not the state of New Mexico and
there are questions that we know
who could be.
Who can be automatically
included in this who can't be
and what providers would be paid
up all kinds of issues that have
to be worked out but what is
very clear is that there have
been now three studies in our
state.
One done in ninety four one in
two thousand seven and one more
recently they all have different
assumptions which is
understandable because separate
making projections of of a plan
that its down the pike and they
all have concluded that if New
Mexico self insurers most were
all residents of the state there
are they will see dramatic
reductions and rising health
care costs no economist is ever
going to tell you that health
costs are going to go down
the rate of increase of of
health healthcare compare it
with that Health Security plants
compared to the current system
and the Hey Angie study came up
with the to work scenarios and
they said they came up with a
range of coach savings between
one point six billion two point
seven billion dollars in a five
year period that's dramatic and
so the issue is not only
covering people but how do we
put our arms around the cost
issue and so with all the
workshops and all that meetings
we've had the whole security
plan as a result of using our
thought it is mother being read
Shelley is there's no I've read
bills from other states is no
bill like it it is very much a
homegrown clan and I often
described it to people is a
great recipe and with lots of a
great.
As the chairwoman as as
Representative Armstrong states
there are there will be
adjustments based on certain
realities that we have to face
because we are state within the
United States and has to look at
what waivers or what laws are we
have to comply with so it's not
a simple let's just cover
everybody it's it's how you do
it and that's what this bill is
about it's it's such up our
process of experts who are going
to take the time with public
input with advisory committees
from from physicians hospital
nurse thank you know I hate it
when.
from from all kinds of groups
the deal with the very specific
issues
that have to be addressed in
order to come up with a at a
real cost analysis down the pike
and it's going to take on that
to do this so that is what this
this bill is about we are very
appreciative of Representative
Armstrong and senator Ortiz.
Epinal and we have for the month
actually months we're we're
talking about what what this
process entails and how long it
would take to do this and how
interim measures must take place
that that you know you're
hearing a lot of very important
bills so that the ship doesn't
sink and so that we can do both
we can look at the long term the
cover people and get virtual
rising healthcare costs with a
very new card on and and we can
also plug the holes in our
current system so people don't
drown so with that thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you we stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair and
we'll go to the audience and
Gabby can we do a poll first.
Okay if I'm there we go people
will take the call.
Okay we have everyone I believe.
Okay we have a eighty six
percent in support and fourteen
percent in opposition okay we'll
go to the audience.
And
if you are in opposition to this
bill if you'll raise your hand.
Those in opposition.
Do you want to speak.
Okay we'll start with an
automatic and I think he's in
support so okay so we want to be
sure if you are in support lower
your hand will take opposition
first.
Thank you madam chair thanks for
noticing that okay we'll start
with Ashley Wagner.
Fuel yourself.
Okay actually do.
I guess didn't want to speak
with I'm sorry I'm sorry it
reconnected me.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and I
represent both large and small
employers across the state we
respectfully oppose this bill
according to the KNG fiscal
analysis of the security pant
plan if implemented the Health
Security Act would be the most
ambitious state based health
reform ever carried out in the
United States state government
controlled health insurance
systems like the health security
plan would have unintended
consequences that could force
families to pay more to wait
longer for worse care such a
plan could hinder economic
growth in New Mexico and making
impossible to attract business
as you Mexicos lawmakers
consider the best path forward
on health care for the state
especially during this critical
time we must make sure there's
transparency and that all
stakeholders are brought to the
table including representatives
from the business community we
need to build on and improve
what's working where private
coverage Medicare and Medicaid
work together not start over
with a new government controlled
health insurance system we asked
legislators to eliminate the
exclusion in section three he
one of the act additionally we
recommend adding language to
section seven B. and C.
requiring at the status report
and final report including
fiscal impact on the state and
provide an independent actuarial
analysis by a qualified actuary.
Locust street group on behalf of
New Mexico's health care future
surveyed eight hundred likely
voters in New Mexico and the
survey was fielded online from
January eighth to January twenty
fifth twenty twenty one of note
they found that a majority of
New Mexico voters do not support
the health security plans and
are deeply concerned about how
the state government health
insurance system what it impact
access to quality care coverage
and the state economy and budget
deficit seventy seven percent of
voters prefer for law makers to
build on New Mexico's health
care system rather than create a
new state government designed
health security plan seventy
nine percent of New Mexico
voters are unwilling to pay more
in health care costs and seventy
percent are unwilling to pay
more in taxes to finance the
cost of the Health Security
plant thank you so much for
allowing me to speak today thank
you miss Wagner and I'm sorry I
forgot to ask for of the timer
to be set up.
Madam chair representative I can
get that set up it's just gonna
take me a few moments is okay
just for clarification do you
want to time are for every
hearing from now on because that
it does take a few minutes to
get set up.
Madam chair do we should
probably re ready to do that
okay thank you yeah thank you
thank you let's see I did see Mr
read more with T. did you lower
your hand.
Madam chair I was in I raise my
hand and then it put me into the
meeting but I'm happy to make my
comments now okay want to go
ahead well we set the timer if
you can keep it brief we have a
lot of people what amount of
time are you allocating.
I'm one minute.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Roy Moore and I'm a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
is the national trade
association health plans with
members in New Mexico.
We respectfully stand in
opposition to house bill two oh
three because House Bill two oh
three with is for the purpose of
designing the health security
plan and ultimately we know
where the hell security plan
leads the KNG study was was
commissioned in order to look at
the costs of the plan and the
costs are prohibited it
prohibited if you look to your
FIR on page four you look to
some key findings from that
report the last three bullet
points really make the case that
the Health Security Act for just
New Mexico is cost prohibitive
we simply cannot do it in New
Mexico of the planet.
Analyzed for different scenarios
to pay for the plan the first
cost five point eight billion
dollars that's the budget
shortfall over five years other
scenarios reduce that amount
over time but what's happening
there is you're suppressing the
range that you were paying
providers you were slowly
squeezing them out and as we all
know we have a shortage of
providers in the state of New
Mexico we desperately need them
Health Security Act really only
works if you squeeze providers
to the point that they won't
want to be in the state of New
Mexico this is not the plan for
New Mexico and simply not
fiscally possible.
The other point that I would
make about The Health Security
Act is you can get additional
dollars but those mean payroll
taxes in those mean hitting
small businesses and that is an
additional stress on businesses
that are hurting because of the
pandemic thank you very much
madam chair and members of the
committee at thank you Mr more
next we have of Quinn Lopez.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Quinn Lopez I'm a vice president
of government relations at
western sky community care
although we support many of the
health and social service
proposals introduced in this
session we respectfully stand in
opposition to house bill two oh
three in listening to the
discourse on house bills I
relate to the anger and
frustration expressed by the
public about health care
specially during this pandemic
health insurers have taken the
brunt of this anger and
frustration in which is
understandable but I believe
it's misplaced and out of
context the truth is that since
the seventies people are living
longer healthier and more
comfortable lives than ever in
history and this is due to the
rapid breakthroughs in science
technology medications and these
advancements have also been
accompanied by rapid fire
medical inflation which is the
true cause of everyone's anger
and frustration we've all
received multiple and surprise
sometimes doctor hospital and
other bills with medically
inflated bills amounts and for
this reason over the past fifty
years health insurers have been
called upon to contend with
medical inflation through
financing and management
solutions to assist individuals
and employers and government
payers with premiums note that
this is been done in a
restriction and complex
regulatory framework that limits
our profit margins insurers at
the maximum amount of dollars
actually go to health care
services a single payer
solutions is not right for New
Mexico today with the fifth
largest state with two million
culturally diverse residents and
forty three percent of which are
qualify for Medicaid in over the
past fifty years we just have
not fostered a thriving private
economic engine like surrounding
states to afford such a solution
much last maintaining
appropriate health care system
or provider network for our
residents.
Unless we take the steps we
cannot continue to leverage that
we have to leverage the talent
resource and expertise and
national health insurance
because we haven't developed the
right tax structure or the right
job in economic structure to
encourage business investment so
we need innovative national
health insurers to construct
provider networks that provide
New Mexicans with local regional
and national access to health
care services and prescription
medications second to design and
implement innovative solutions
to manage costs while delivering
value based health care improved
health and social determine
needs of each community and
third to it effectively contend
with medical inflation true
there's there's no set up fees
yes I will sorry madam chair.
In any event you know there are
no simple solutions but we stand
ready to work with lawmakers
regulators healthcare providers
to come up with a really unique
and appropriate approaches to
this problem for New Mexico
thank you thank you we now have
the timers
Marlys show it's.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla Schultz
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
we stand in opposition to house
bill two or three which sits at
the single payer government run
system this is been tried in
Vermont Colorado both of which
have a much more robust economic
based in New Mexico both had to
forego the approach the cost is
too prohibitive on taxpayers did
not want the burden of
exhaustive tax increases to keep
the program solvent the benefits
touted by proponents company
ministry of savings health
insurance companies are already
held to administrative cats the
M. all L. are requires eighty
five percent of each dollar be
directed to direct medical care
we do not believe the state can
do this more efficiently.
We also have concerns with the
makeup of the board which limits
the expertise of deport
minimizing the complexities of
health care delivery this
volunteer committee meeting
intermittently will be according
to the FIR responsible for
provider payment systems global
budgets for health care facility
all purchases of drugs medical
supplies and equipment
information technology systems
waivers and agreement options
for federal programs including
Medicaid and Medicare
supplemental health coverage.
Okay at and it cuts people off
okay now we'll go to if you'll
raise your hand if you are in
support of this bill and
Remember the the one minute and
it will stop okay we have a
Gloria Doherty.
Gloria if you mute yourself.
Yes great good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Gloria Doherty and
I'm speaking in favor of house
bill two oh three both
personally and as the vice
president Representative of the
New Mexico nurse practitioner
council I've been involved with
the Health Security campaign for
the past two to three years the
citizens of our state has
certainly benefited from the
expansion of Medicaid and the
affordable Care Act however
there's much of the population
that remains without coverage or
the out the ability to afford
copays deductibles and other out
of pocket costs these are
barriers for the citizens of our
state because these costs
prevent them from seeking
preventive care and care of
acute issues in a timely manner
I recently had an encounter that
is unfortunately not uncommon
spoke with the family member
with the patient being admitted
to the hospital for an illness
and they were concerned about
medications they were still
paying bills from twenty sixteen
and forward I also had a family
member with advanced cancer due
to the inefficiencies of our
current healthcare system and
all that referrals that were
necessary providers will be
satisfied and less stressed with
having one.
Okay
We'll have to have people watch
their time because it will cut
them off John that ****.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipsky it's
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO are
representing tens of thousands
of workers throughout the state
of New Mexico we are very lucky
to be able to bargain in many of
our cases are good health
insurance and health care with
employers however we do
understand that many workers do
not have such benefits and as an
organization we do believe that
universal quality health care is
a basic human right more than
anything else and for that
reason and many more which will
be mentioned I'm sure we I think
the sponsor for bringing up this
measure and I urge you very much
to support it thank you.
Thank you Mr Dale tanker.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Dale Tinker
I represent the New Mexico
pharmacists association our
association has been supportive
of moving forward in valuation
and looking at a single pair are
are a how security system a
complete health care system I
would like to say that comments
sounded much the same as they
did thirty years ago from the
opposition same same rhetoric
we still are not comparing to
the rest of the world in terms
of our quality of health care
people that claim that were we
have the best care in the world
our our.
Finding that that's not correct
I do want to point out New
Mexico is already almost there
for those that say we can't
afford it we are got forty two
percent of our population
covered by government programs
so would like to also point out
that we need to move forward
I've been involved with with
this health security program for
since the beginning.
Okay.
Next we have Tracy McDaniel.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Tracy McDaniel and I'm here
today on behalf of two
organizations first as the
interim chair of the Bernalillo
county community health council
board of directors The council
promotes and advocates for
health equity for all early of
County inhabitants the
community's guaranteed access to
high quality comprehensive
health care including behavioral
health care is critical to our
mission the proposed Health
Security planning and design
boards if necessary step to
helping us move from our current
fractionated healthcare system
or healthcare system that works
for all we serve I'm also here
on behalf of the southwest
women's law center where we work
policies that improve the lives
of women and girls including
access to comprehensive
healthcare so I'm half of those
organizations I ask you to vote
in support of HB to a Hey thank
you.
Thank you next we have Brown.
Hi my name is Hamilton brown I'm
a retired physician community
health Dr.
In addition to the fact that I
support health care to as many
people in the state as possible
I want to make a point that this
bill is also looking at global
budgeting for hospitals and most
of the rural hospitals in New
Mexico are struggling to make
enough money to stay afloat and
many are are closing.
And the global budget will allow
them to have a regular annual
budget to say that they can then
find
Opioid services to their
community and not have to shut
down I think this is an
important part of this bill and
it hasn't been mentioned yet and
I support this bill very very
strongly thank you.
Thank you next we have a lane
bright water.
Alain you have to unmute.
What I did I'm sorry.
madam chair and committee can is
this going through now yes go
ahead thank you so much
So I've been a certified nurse
practitioner for over forty
years.
Half of that time my practice
was in Texas which and have
will go there is absolutely no
comparison I want to talk about
one specific issue this morning
and that is and distinction with
the
Papers that are put out that
often say positions are leaving
the state yes they often do and
among my colleagues who talk
about and worry about the system
of health care
in the state all the time we're
saying that gets rid of the
people who are all in it and
money nurse practitioners the
pandemic palm innovation and
patient centered care that means
that you start with the patient
and you come back to the page in
what I almost every study that's
ever been done has shown
improved nurse practitioners
column in care if not better.
Okay next we have Claudia effort
ink.
Hello.
Yes go ahead.
My name is Claudia for doing I'm
a grandmother in Silver City I'm
really speaking on behalf of the
many families I know here in
town we have a large part of our
population mostly families who
have jobs with small companies
or nonprofits and they do not
have health insurance provided
with their employment and they
find that the cost for them is
being kind of in the middle
for Health Care is prohibitive
and if they get it they have to
pay a maximum amount and have a
high deductible so having a good
public
health care system would help a
large number of these mid range
people who often leave the state
because of this problem health
care so I hope this bill is
passed.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have Joanne of
been a nadie.
Good morning I'm show ended in
nineteen I live in Gallup
McKinley county in November I
received a potentially life
threatening health diagnosis
when my local doctor called me
with the pathology report she
said she would we would refer me
to the best provider in the
state for my condition my
immediate response to her was
well it depends there in my
insurance network as soon as I
got off the phone with her I
called my insurance company and
began the long journey of
navigating the system.
surgery I spent hours on the
phone with providers and
insurance representatives
reconciling bills and insurance
benefits when faced with serious
health issues the last thing
anyone should be concerned with
is how to pay for the necessary
life saving care they need they
should only have to focus on
getting well the health security
plan will allow us to do just
that please support this bill
thank you.
Thank you our next Eleanor
Chavis.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Eleanor Travis I am the
executive director for the
National Union of Hospital and
Health Care employees district
eleven ninety nine
Representative over five
thousand hospital workers across
the state of New Mexico our
members see that affects daily
of those New Mexicans who have
no or limited access to health
care especially preventative
healthcare lack of access
brought prolongs Care and
creates more complicated
problems down the road and it's
far more expensive we must
address the issue of rising cost
of healthcare we believe that
addressing this issue is also
imperative to our ability to
provide comprehensive health
care in New Mexicans all the
studies done so far show that
implementing the Health Security
Act will reduce health care
costs COVID has amplified
inequities in health care and we
believe that implementing the
planning and design board is a
first step in creating
healthcare equity for New
Mexicans.
We ask that you vote yes on
house bill two of three.
Thank you next we have Sonya
Burke.
Seven yes can you and are you
are muted
there you go madam chair and
committee.
My name is Sonya Berg and
Representative A. A. U. W. a New
Mexico we have approximately
eight hundred members and
supporters and we support H. B.
two oh three The Health Security
for New Mexicans Campaign has a
broad and growing coalition of
over a hundred and seventy
organizations of which A. A. U.
W. New Mexico is one and
thousands of individual
supporters across the state
studies have concluded the plan
will cost less than the current
system and ensure that nearly
everyone in the state has health
coverage key points include
freedom of choice provision for
comprehensive services.
And private insurers will place
up within a role as with
Medicare on a personal note my
husband had stage four cancer
for three years his treatments
were at times eighteen thousand
dollars every three weeks we pay
very little out of pocket many
do not have this coverage thank
you for your support.
Thank you Sonya at listening
Paul Gibson.
You you yourself.
Mister Gibson you yourself
please.
There you have done this enough
I should have a program.
My name is Paul Gibson I want to
thank them that co chair and
founder of retake our democracy
and we have twenty five hundred
member statewide I want to thank
the Billsponsored for bringing
this forward I'm here to hear
from opponents of this bill that
this is not the time to be
entering into a bold new
direction are on charted tech
territory I would say this is
precisely the time to be
entering into poll doing bold
things and I would say that this
bill is not asking you to go and
uncharted territories it's
asking you to spend six hundred
thousand dollars in two years
while we have the largest state
budget surplus in in our history
and with that study you will be
be able to understand exactly
how this plan will be
implemented exactly how will pay
for it and so you'll be able to
proceed in two years confidently
passing this bill I ask you to
strong I strongly support this
bill and ask you to do the same
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have
demeanor Norris.
Hi everyone members of the
committee thank you so much for
hearing this bill my name is to
be an enormous I am a pharmacist
and pharmacist clinician your
practices in Los crucis New
Mexico and I must add that I'm
in need of New Mexican
originally from the big town of
cliff New Mexico.
I as a clinician I see on a
daily basis the problems we face
with our current system that
wages cost of prescription
medications the overall rising
cost of healthcare the amount of
time that clinicians waste
navigating the multitude of drug
formularies and submitting prior
authorizations and the lack of
emphasis on primary and
preventive care to name a few I
believe the New Mexico Health
Security plan is a homegrown
solution that addresses many of
these problems that both our
patients and clinicians across
our state face I want to briefly
comment on a few statements made
by opposition number one is that
we cannot afford this in fact
it's the opposite as the fiscal
analysis showed us we cannot
afford to continue with the
current system thank.
Thank next we have neck are in
deal are in DCS.
You could and you yourself that
there I think I successfully and
within myself.
Okay great thank you first of
madam chair committee members
thank you I am the executive
director of the psychiatric
medical association that Mexico
our president Dr Caitlin or
media wants to be here but she
was busy with our clinic today.
As the director I would like to
express our support for this
bill this act will bring Mexico
culture delivering higher
quality more cost effective care
and we're resources towards New
Mexicans health care and less
towards overlapping to this
ministry of costs it also puts
power in the hands of smaller
regionally Representative areas
where local stakeholders are
most familiar with local issues
madam chair thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you our next we have
Robert Pearson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Robert Pearson I live in mostly
out of New Mexico my main
qualification for speaking to
this is a firm long commitment
to human rights and health care
is a human right it was
estimated in twenty nineteen
that a hundred and eighty seven
thousand.
New Mexicans did not have we're
not insured and therefore did
not have access to health care.
There is an alternative please
do not be tempted and stick with
the status quo be bold
courageous for New Mexico and
support this bill thank you.
Thank you our next we have Tyler
Taylor.
Good morning Dr Tyler Taylor
family physician from Los Alamos
and I would like to address two
things that the KNG report did
fund in its fiscal analysis that
are really critical the first is
that.
If we go the Health Security
approach route we will have a
ninety nine percent of people
covered.
From the get go versus eighty
eight percent of people if we
don't.
The other is there for scenarios
they looked at the average
savings per year was four
hundred and thirty four million
dollars every year for the five
years they look at that's their
average imagine what New Mexico
could do with four hundred
thirty four million dollars to
lower premiums for people
individuals and companies.
To build an upgrade facilities
and to recruit and retain.
New health care workers thank
you.
Thank you Esther griega.
Esther I need yourself please.
It yes you are go ahead thank
you my name is Esther Griego I'm
a member of the New leader with
Albuquerque interfaith and a
member of St Andrew Presbyterian
church the health security plan
HB tool three is a major step
forward for universal health
coverage reform.
This bill will make New Mexico
the first state to invest in a
publicly accountable and
transparent process to create
our own health plan that
provides comprehensive and
secure coverage including mental
health care coverage for the
overwhelming majority of state
residents.
Our plan that offers real choice
freedom of choice of providers
including across state lines no
more networks to deal with
particularly for physicians are
planned that three step.
And included will slow the
increase of ever escalating
health care costs our plan that
sets up its own fund like a coop
that we.
Sorry Esther next we have Janet
wallet.
Ortiz.
Go ahead and.
Can you hear me yes go ahead yes
okay thank you chair and members
of the committee my name is
Janet wallet or T. Steinborn
retired professor from western
New Mexico university I fully
support S. B. two oh three as a
professor there are countless
times when students would come
to me after class talking about
medical expenses that they had
that were out of sight and they
had to drop out of classes to
actually find a job to work and
we're unable to continue their
education for some time or maybe
for ever creating this planning
board is committing to carefully
constructing the framework for
health the health how the hell
security plan will eventually be
implemented the HSA as planned
when implemented could benefit
New Mexico by it because we'll
have a dedicated fund for these
premiums to flow into and
estimates are that it could be
it as much as eighty eight
excuse me eight billion dollars
plus interest this could
potentially attract doctors to
New Mexico we're interested in
patient driven care versus
having to deal with for profit
insurance companies and the cost
of the headaches that involves
thank you.
Thank you our next we have
directly in.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Derek Lin and I am representing
New Mexico voices for children
we are in strong support of this
bill because science shows that
universal health insurance
coverage is one of the most
effective ways to improve public
health our current healthcare
system is not working which is
part of the reason New Mexico
has some of the worst health
outcomes in the nation.
The pandemic has worsened the
situation further exposing the
dire consequences of poor health
insurance coverage ensuring all
New Mexicans have act access to
high quality health insurance
will not only improve health
outcomes will also benefit our
state economy and strengthen our
health care system taking steps
now to develop state based
universal coverage is a forward
thinking strategy for making a
health care system by New
Mexicans for New Mexicans
investing in the Health Security
Act now we'll be investing in a
healthier future thank you.
Thank you Aldon mark be.
Hello there can you hear me yes
we can okay good morning to you
all my name is all the more to
be on a small business owner in
Santa Fe about thirty five years
old I do good work and I make it
okay amount of money but I fall
into this gap between chair and
and being able to really afford
my own health care at five six
seven thousand dollars in
premiums a year I really don't
require a whole lot of health
care but I just simply fall out.
I just want to get on here today
and say that I I stand support
of this bill and I I really ask
you all to do the same for
myself and and on a number of
other thirty to forty year olds
here who may just leave because
is not a good way for me to get
by here so please support this
thank you.
Thank you next have Donna
Dowell.
Good morning madam chair and
members and I want to also thank
the sponsors a universal health
I'm a nurse practitioner by the
way a practice in New Mexico for
over thirty years
universal health care coverage
is so complex that only thirty
two out of thirty three
developed countries have been
able to make it work.
Yes which one has not.
Additional money went to the
pharmacy to get is insulin life
saving drug.
He was paying five dollar copays
suddenly went up to two hundred
dollars he left that day without
his informed another patient
always getting her labs drawn at
the same facility a hospital
facility.
When in and subsequently.
Got a bill for eight hundred
dollars these are called
facility fees.
Price gouging cost shifting
passing inflated costs on to
consumers has reached its limits
let's start with a good
investment of six hundred
thousand dollars.
Thank you our next we have Judy
hurts all.
Good morning.
I am a.
entropion or in Santa Fe and I
wanted to bring up two things
one is that I think that so many
self employed people that have
small businesses.
But struggle with health
insurance as this young man
before me said and in countries
that have.
Nation health insurance there's
a higher level of exploration
people creating businesses et
cetera on the same note my
health insurance is from school
and yesterday I discovered that
they pay seventeen thousand
dollars a year for my health
insurance and my sons and I
think that schools would also be
freed by business officer said
it's outrageous how much we pay
so I fully support this bill and
I think the ripple effect is
phenomenal let's people.
Thank you Judy next we have Max
Bartlett.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
My name is Max Bartlett.
I'm the chair of the Health
Security for New Mexicans
Campaign.
And naturally we stand in
support of this bill.
House Bill two oh three will
take us the next step on our go
slow careful look before you
leap approach to moving into
this dramatic restructuring of
our health care restructuring
our health care system to make
sure that works our New Mexico.
In the study says that will have
over ninety nine percent
coverage once we adopt the final
how security plan.
I do want to clarify one point.
How security is not a tax based
system it is not involved or
invasion raising anyone's taxes.
It takes existing government
funds that use those paid for
medical.
Okay and then additionally
Amy Adams and.
Okay next we have Kate Nelson.
Do we lose Kate.
I think so madam chair okay
maybe she'll come back on let's
there she is here right now.
Please.
Turning on madam chair and
committee thank you for hearing
me are born and raised in New
Mexico and a registered nurse
for ten years I've seen
countless love once and patients
suffer unnecessarily because
they could not afford care as a
family nurse practitioner
student and future primary care
provider I urge the committee to
stand up for all New Mexicans
right to access healthcare I can
confidently say that everyone in
this hearing wants access to
health care for themselves and
their loved ones.
Committee vote as if your
family's health care access were
on the line because money is.
Thank you Kate next we have Ian
colbern.
To be lose Ian also.
K. there is go ahead Ian.
Hi yes thank you chairman and
representatives and thank you
for your hard work this session
in your court courage to take
bold action and make choices the
session
so I I'm a small farmer and
business owner here in
Albuquerque and I represent the
Rio Grande farmers coalition
which the Albuquerque area
chapter of the national young
farmers coalition and as many
New Mexicans surely do every
year are members.
Life choices are constrained by
their access to health care.
You farmers across the state are
forced out of this work to see
complete based insurance.
Or to go uninsured or
To to change make changes in
their career instead of growing
food for their community simply
because they they don't have
access to high quality
affordable health care
And so speaking for a large
group of folks that want to grow
healthy food for community
please support each B. two oh
three thank you thank you in
next we have father Vincent Paul
Chavis.
Can you meet yourself please.
Thank thank thank you madam
chair I'm father Vincent Jarvis
of St Therese Catholic Church in
Albuquerque former board member
of health centers in northern
New Mexico former board member
of southwest cares and current
member of alpha interface
universal affordable health care
is a human rights I lived in
Belgium for more than a decade
and imagine going to pick up a
prescription for Claritin and
it's sixteen cents a hospital
visit
replacement of hipster needs
costs nothing
to the individual
this house bill two or three
it's about quality of life for
all New Mexicans it's about
human rights it's the right
thing to do it's innovative and
it's about seeking the well
being of others when we do that
we provide our own contentment
thank you.
Thank you next and last we have
Barbara Casey.
I guess not quite last.
Are ready when and you yourself
yes thank you can you hear me
yes we can.
Thank you my name is Barbara
Casey I'm a former state
representative I represented the
Rossel area district fifty eight
twenty
Representative Ezzell now
representative for twelve years.
And this issue came up.
For the first time in my life in
nineteen ninety six.
And I really I guess my biggest
issue is it's about time that we
do something about this I have
dealt with literally hundreds of
people who have no health care
insurance no or they're so
terribly under insured if they
go without getting the medical
assistance that they need and so
I really urge you all to vote
for house bill two or three I
think it's a very important bill
and I hope that you can support
it I think it's the best thing
that has happened in a long long
time thank you so much for
giving me the time to speak have
a good day thank you
Representative next we have
still yes in.
Thank good morning madam vice
chair for our in committee
members shall be of think of a a
U. W. New Mexico from
Representative bash is district
ten.
J. U. W. as in our organization
that supports research into
issues for planning such as H.
B. two oh three is research and
New Mexico's current health care
and design at the health
security plan.
Currently our population is
uninsured or underinsured costs
for medical care are expensive
in a radic recent published
studies on disparity and
hospital cost of treatment only
intensify in need for an overall
plan for New Mexico.
We approve the designated
expertise requirements for me
members.
Thank you for your support and
we look forward to its report in
two twenty twenty three a day
thank you next we have Veronica
key at the checker and bill
landed landed out.
Hello thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
very need to younger and I was
born and raised in Brussels
Belgium where health care is a
birth rights and nobody goes
bankrupt because of health care
bills.
Health care for profit is simply
wrong this plan would save a lot
of money to the states in many
different ways for example when
people don't have health care
they wait until it's often too
late and go to the emergency
room which is paid by the state
so the state would actually save
a lot of money of the support
this bill thank you.
Thank you New Mexico have Jackie
Cooper.
Thank you madam chair committee
members signed Jackie Cooper I'm
a volunteer advocate with a a RP
and we send a strong support of
this based on the excellent are
statements that you've heard
already thank you so much thank
you next we have Richard Mason.
Good morning.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
chair the action committee of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico thank you members of
New Mexico has a long standing
position in support of the
Health Security bell and we like
this planning for you know to
move forward but I also want to
talk to someone who's worked on
it for mental health care reform
over the last seventeen years in
New Mexico.
And I doubt the sincerity of
some of the opposition here
because they say let's consult
almost every incremental reform
that we've proposed they have
blocked they come to the table
they say they want to talk but
then they end up blocking any
type of incremental report
support that reform that would
help improve health care in New
Mexico so we are to.
well I do pass on eight on H. B.
two oh three thank you.
Thank you I that concludes our
public comment let's go back to
the committee and
Chair Armstrong would you like
to have any closing remarks
before we go to the committee.
Thank you madam chair I I just
wanted to make a couple of
points that I didn't make in my
opening and that is that we have
a very silo to system even
though we have more than forty
percent on Medicaid isn't
multiple managed care
organizations then we have
public employees public retirees
Medicare we have Medicare
private insurance group
insurance and it's it is.
It is some.
public dollars are going into
almost in health care for almost
three quarters of the population
of the state when you add it all
together and none of it works
really well together and I'm
providers it's all separate
billing and separate plan
designs and separate processes
to get approvals it at Sentara
and so I I am this will help
break down some of those
barriers to make it a lot easier
on on providers and knowing
how the entire system works and
works together.
And additionally I wanted to
what we mentioned and I
mentioned that the costs are
estimates on the from the latest
study what was as much as five
billion that was for
implementation and over the
first five years it went down
every year so that five million
was total and all studies that
have been done related to this
have shown in the long term
after a for few years
implementation the savings is a
significant compared to the
projections of the current
system.
And so the the financing
figuring out is how we get from
here to there not about long
term it will be less expensive
than what we're spending in our
health system now.
And then
I also wanted to
point out that this is a this is
planning work and then a
proposal has to be put together
and presented to the legislature
before we would ever implement
anything and we hope by this
planning
design over the next couple
years that what what is
ultimately proposed is something
that we know will work and we
know how it will be financed and
what it will cost.
So there is this is not an
absolute enactment of the Health
Security Act now it is planning
so that we can put together a
proposal that will work.
And and lastly madam chair and
members of the committee I just
want to say if you've learned in
to the new members if you've
learned anything about me yet
it's I'm doing and all of the
above approach I'm trying
everything I've got lots of
proposals I've had lots of
proposals over the years as have
others about how we get it
prescription drug costs how we
address the uninsured how we
make it our health care more
affordable for those who are
purchasing health care how we
support our primary care
physicians and build a workforce
how we look at at all of that
and I think that everyone of
those efforts is helpful in this
direction it's not an either or
and so I Wall you'll see lots of
of proposals and support for me
on a variety of
A different initiatives and ways
to attack health care and
affordability and access this is
a one this is an additional one
that is maybe more
comprehensive but not in
conflict with anything else that
were that we're doing
And and so that's all I have
madam chair I do have an did
move in one of my co sponsors
Representative Lujan if she's
still on and wants to make a
comment I know she's juggling
bills as well.
Good good morning madam chair
thanks committee.
and I want to just from the
bottom of my heart thank to
sponsor me sponsor of this bill
can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead thank you I
have my video off because I'm
running about four different
computers we have home home
schooling and
And everything else going on to.
I just want to again thank the
sponsor and all those who have
been working on this bill four
the previous bill an output it's
come today with the sponsorship
today it is
with great pride that I speak
with you all today and let you
know that.
this is this is the issue and
this is a.
This is something that I've been
a.
Somewhat born into my mother her
name is Elizabeth dolling Lujan
and she was a nurse at Saint
Vincent's hospital and for forty
five years and she along with
her colleagues moved this this
legislation in its original form
forward over twenty some years
ago.
And there was a time when it
almost got passed under.
In one of our administrations
during those years it failed it
it continued and I was the
fortunate to also work on it
during my time as a provided
assistant to then senator Harry
more that is.
This is this is the work that
needs to be done in a
foundational ways that
are chairwoman R. J. Marchand
has taken on and this is this is
this is the the place we need to
be to get this accomplished and.
Obviously that as you're hearing
from me today this is this is
the this is an effort that has
has shaped me and my mindset and
why I am a legislators today to
be quite honest are working in
health care health policy is
been something that I've done
I would like to say for almost
the entirety of my life as I was
born into it to the efforts my
mother and her background your
work.
And I just want to say.
I
I ask you for your support and
for your vote today from the
committee and that we can move
forward in a new day and you
like of how we are approaching
this and helping all of our
citizens all of our people of
New Mexico regardless of and I.
Withstanding the help we need
help in New Mexico and this is a
bill that will provide.
What we we need moving forward
says thank you very much again
to sponsor thank you madam chair
thank you committee members are
listening and for knowing and I
ask for your support within the
sport thank you very much.
Thank you Representative madam
chair you ready to go to the
committee yes please thank you
would stand for questions.
Thank you first we'll go to
Representative Lord.
I hope that I just a need a can
you hear me yes and and excuse
me just some housekeeping acquit
do we have to shares this
morning.
I am the chair while
Representative Armstrong
present hello okay I just want
to make sure it's less of a
guttural addressing both you and
I apologize.
So I'm gonna.
I'm gonna start over something I
I'm gonna be very honest I'm
very idealistic and I so wish we
could just send equal
representation and have in each
state send equal dams and equal
Republicans to
Two on a federal level and lock
us all in a room and to we can
figure this out it's so
frustrating it's a bipartisan
issue really is it's something
everybody wants I know we we all
want the same thing we have
different perspectives right so
it's not single payer some of
this down and I just would love
if equal representation
Democrats Republicans from every
state got together locked us in
a room and had
Less leading information right
leaning information and experts
and we all had to stand that
rents we figured it out this is
my little patch on on being
idealistic because I keep seeing
all these bills from different
angles and I understand what
you're trying to do
It's frustrating is very
frustrating health side because
we all want the same thing we
just have different approaches
to getting to it and I just wish
we could sit down as bipartisan
in a room and figure it all out
and figure out for me it's
always primarily low in those
health car care costs and
lowering the premiums and
there's so many ways I think we
figured out of whack shall work
together so that's my little
side note on that I did have
some questions on this bill
so this would not affect Madam
chair representative this will
not affect.
Medicare or Medicaid correct
this this this doesn't affect
them because they they March
their own beat is that correct.
So madam chair and
representative it is one of the
things that we want to explore
so Medicaid it is possible that
we could get a Medicaid waiver
to be able to do this that's one
of the charges of this board is
to explore what that would look
like and what the parameters of
that would be.
Chair there are some innovative
waivers on Medicare there are
some long term care waivers on
on Medicare that combined with
Medicaid no state has done a
Medicare waiver like this that's
an additional thing that we
would want to explore is that
even possible
I don't know that it is but if
it is what would that look like
and what kind of partnership
would we have the third thing is
under the affordable Care Act
there there is such a thing as
an innovative innovation waiver
what that the affordable Care
Act itself is is not very
specific about what that would
be and so that's another thing
that we would want to explore
what could our partnership be
within innovation waiver because
we have a lot of dollars coming
into the state to support the
health insurance exchange and
subsidies and so forth so how
could we potentially and not
give up that support how what
that with that look like so it
doesn't affect any of those up
front because this is just
planning and exploring what are
the possibilities and if there's
possibilities what what's the
parameters around what we could
potentially do in partnership
with the federal government.
Thank and thank you madam chair
representative I I I
Representative appreciate your
answering that question because
that's always my concern is how
much you know how can we work
with the Medicaid Medicare
because they're doing their own
thing and then we have private
in such health insurance right I
get that
I did I have one other question
so Madam chair representative of
how does this play into.
We are ready passed I think
they're two committees I believe
that the affordable health Care
Act so how will this play into
that if let's say the affordable
healthcare act gets passed.
Will that have any effect on the
study that we're doing if I'll
them correctly eight yep madam
chair and representative I think
you're asking about the the
health care affordability fund
yes okay so that fund is and as
I said I'm and all of the above
try everything to get access to
health care and that's
affordable and so that fund is
really designed to go after
the uninsured and those who are
currently insured but can't are
barely making it because that
they can't afford those those
deductibles and so forth.
Those efforts will be fairly
implemented before this would
ever get off the ground
and the this is going to take
several years of planning and
then do a proposal and then
several years of putting
together everything to fully
implement because this board
would not have the authority to
make any deals if you will with
the federal government is just
exploring what the what the
parameters would be so we're
looking at it's probably five
years down the road before it at
a minimum before
something like a Health Security
plan could be of potentially and
implemented.
in the meantime so the
affordability fund it is more
more immediate to try and get
help to to folks
it does have a allowed under
that fund
planning and design of
innovative approaches and I
suppose and I've heard that some
might have assumed that that was
tied that bill directly to this
it does not planning and design
is planning and design in a
channel contacts about anything
you do going forward and then
that bill how you address
uninsured takes some planning
and design work to put together
the infrastructure to implement
those
whether as of this we're looking
for general funds whether the
Of finance people see that we've
passed that are going to pass
that and that's a source of
funds to the general fund also
but that bills not passed yet we
don't usually budget.
On based on something that might
happen and might get passed so
to the extent that there's
allowed planning and design out
of that Fund potentially in the
future that could help fund some
plant more planning and design
on that but it's not tied
directly to this.
Thank you Matt helps it did
thank you and I appreciate you
taking the time to explain that
that's all the questions I have
thank you madam chair and
representative I yield my time
for now.
Thank you and I thank you
Representative for your interest
and let's put our heads together
and in San getting people health
care and that's affordable thank
you I truly believe in that
thank you thank you.
Right next we have
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair and madam chair
I love this I hope we can do it
you know I I was listening to
that to the comments in the
somebody said something about
squeezing providers out and as
far as I'm concerned one of the
best ways to squeeze for
providers out is to make their
paperwork and insurance work so
odious that they that they will
leave I'm I have a friend who
runs that
and agency for people with
developmental disabilities and
with one of the recent that
changes he had to hire on to new
people to just do the insurance
part of it so I'm in I one thing
that bugs me when we talk about
national health care or or
blanket health health insurance
for everybody is oh my gosh oh
my gosh the cost the cost but
they never subtract out what
we're already paying we're
already paying way more than
ever comes out in the and it's
not like those dollars will just
float up into the air and be
gone instead we can madam chair
and madam chair I have a real
problem with profit in health
care particularly when it keeps
people from from accessing the
health care actually I was
talking to a friend last night
madam chair that her husband was
in desperate need of a hip
replacement and he couldn't even
get an appointment to talk to
someone about it for I believe
four months here in New Mexico
so we thought he thought he'd go
to Phoenix and and get his
surgery he what he called and
was scheduled for the surgery in
less than a week.
So this is the the system is not
working the way we intend to I
don't really have a question
madam chair
I just done.
What.
I will go back to to the a
little bit to to how much we are
spending on administrative work
of all the hoops that you have
to jump through to get anything
I mean we and and I know there
are people who say well because
our jobs you know that that
people doing all the insurance
that part jobs I'd rather have
those people doing jobs that do
something as opposed to what to
running little wraps through
mazes to make sure I haven't
done this for a while madam
chair but when I used to have to
work trying get kids approved
for wheelchairs for instance
it could easily take over a year
to get all the approvals and by
the time you got the approvals
the kid had outgrown the chair
that you had ordered for them
because that because the year
past so I I I'm I thank you
madam chair for sticking with
this and thank you Mary Mary's
been like I have like to have a
workforce on this and I truly
appreciate it and now I'm ready
to move I'm ready for it to
start tomorrow madam chair but
yeah I I know we're not there
yet but but I think we need to
get there as fast as we can
because we spend way too much of
our of our gross national
product on on health care
including lots billions for
profit and billions of
unnecessary work for insurance
craziness so what that madam
chair I IBM I'm done thank you
thank you representative
Thompson next will go to
representatives for office.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives you know it's I
think a.
Everyone on this committee has
expressed the same concerns
about
I'm getting an echo give me a
second okay when we get it we we
see make sure there's some ideal
here will echo so but anyway
everyone has expressed our
concern of what
What we all feel about health
care I personally myself who
expressed in many times we all
agree that this our health care
system is it has many issues
I've I've expressed the high
cost of health care all together
how it is very very expensive
to both buy insurance and on the
deductibles are very very high
and of course we want to we want
to find ways to
to improve that obviously I know
that Representative Lord native
could point to.
I don't know if you guys want to
get locked up in a room with me
for about.
So we got all this figure out of
madam chair but it is something
that I think we all are in
agreement that it something has
to happen but up you know
some of the things that I'm
gonna say say if by the way I
know that Representative
Thompson mentioned madam chair
that about the hip replacement
and I've maybe that was COVID
that kept a lot of our
people that needed certain
surgeries elective surgeries a
concert out one of them that's
probably the reason that didn't
happen maybe it wasn't very
COVID I don't know but I know
that first hand that a lot of
people that were were able to
get your knee replacements hip
replacements all kinds of
different services surgeries
that were needed.
But that's that's another topic
okay
I will tell you that New Mexico
is behind on their health care
system I know first hand my
daughter had to be flown every
single one of my kids except for
my son twenty three years ago
have had to have all their
surgeries in in in Arizona
Phoenix whether it was a lack of
of our ability to provide those
services
is probably the number one
reason we have my daughter had
to get special surgery when she
rolled over had to be in Phoenix
my son.
I'd have is appropriations at in
Phoenix it's a long story I'm
not going to tell you and I
myself went to probably about
twenty five I.
doctors here specialist all over
the state and and was told that
I would basically remained the
way I was declining in my in my
vision which I was at twenty two
hundred and twenty four hundred
my other I was legally blind I
just a few years back having to
get surgery in up in Scottsdale
Arizona because I built that's
what we could get the proper
care and so I know first hand
what it is to lose your
insurance not for failure
payment but for some of the
unintended consequences to our
state and federal government
making changes I know first hand
how much the the costs have gone
up and included might might if I
compare just even the last
fifteen years it's just
completely declined so I do want
to express to all those for what
you madam chair and I'm glad
that
Representative chairwoman
Anderson excuse me Armstrong
expressed that up that this is a
study and because I've got a lot
of emails that you got a
supported the because I think
that they're going to that this
is actually the bill is going to
change everything it's far from
it this is only a a study one of
I don't know I think I saw for
my computer just went to sleep
right now that's what I was
reading all you guys were
talking madam chair so my mic.
So my question is so again I
want to remind everyone this
listening them this is another
study are I would.
From what I read this will be
the study number four maybe I'm
wrong but
so my question is the other
three studies that I read which
I go by it by what what we're
you don't being that it's just a
study I'm not reading the the.
Information that I have and it
looked like it.
The cost to New Mexico and and
look at the end of the day I
know you have some they're
concerned about cost.
We have to be if we're going to
fully implement this if this was
literally going to be
implemented we have to be
concerned with cost because we
can't pay for it we can pass
everything we want and we don't
want to fail
no I'm not I hate to.
Up.
Put down things but you know
what we we filled a lot of other
sectors in our in our in in New
Mexico whether it's education
and and and and other facets I'm
not gonna get into that I just
hate to see this fail so the
conversation is this is what
we're having here committees
conversation so my question is.
Being that the last three
studies give us a range of cost
between five point eight billion
I remember during at eight
hundred and sixty eight million.
that's the cost that that and
unless one like.
Madam chair that representative
Armstrong expressed that it is
the last one I believe was five
point eight billion our total.
My understanding that our our
budget that in appropriations is
approximately seven billion.
And this is what I just want to
make sure that that that
everyone understands
is that we only have seven
billion to to appropriate and
this is going to cost five point
eight billion I think she
several reputed time but still
even if you separated over a
period of three to five years
it's a billion plus dollars a
year and so that's that's really
what concerns that's part of
what concerns me and it and
Madam chair representative
please I know through a lot of
information real quick if you
please advise me on on on what I
expressed.
In case that I got something
wrong that I read something
along these.
And the thank you thank you
Representative I'm trying to
juggle somebody putting on my
bill another committee for me
thank you Representative and
the.
That's of that estimate for our
cost is exactly why
I decided that we should take a
step back and do this deep dive
planning and and design because
that assumes maybe some basic
assumptions and there was
difference of opinion about some
of those assumptions and they
get it they said well depends on
how you structure it you could
do that you could do this and it
maybe five billion over five
years you could do this and it
may even and that five year
period save you some money well
that's not helpful that means
that left a whole lot of
questions to be answered about
how you design it and I do think
we have to look at how you
finance until it is less costly
and so that's part of the
picture also it also those
studies made assumption that we
could have everything we wanted
if you will from the federal
government on a Medicaid waiver
or Medicare waiver or an
innovation whatever it made
assumptions that part of it
would be funded by
taking all the the premiums that
devoted to medical on on hello
workers comp and auto insurance
what I don't know that those
things can be done they assume
that because that was what the
plan design was but I don't know
that we can actually do that
yeah and what that would be so I
appreciate your concerns and I
have the same concerns which is
why I'm we're not proposing this
year to actually enact The
Health Security Act but taking a
step back to do that really deep
dive planning and tweaking it
based on what we learn so that
we can be responsible and in
alternately coming back with a
proposal if we can find one that
will work in a way to finance
getting through the train.
Transition till it's ultimately
less costly.
how can we do that and so that's
what this is is that step
backwards to give enough time
and it's more than just a study
it's it's really a a deep dive
figuring out how you would
design the system how you would
design payment structures what
the parameters for partnership
with the federal government
would look like.
How we would
you know do anything different
and delivery of healthcare.
It that would
but take us to a new paradigm
in providing health care for New
Mexicans and so I understand
your concerns and I said all the
studies showed that ultimately
they thought it save money but
they didn't propose how you get.
Or where you are.
To that point where you're
saving money.
They made assumptions based on
what the what we think what has
been thought is a good idea.
But without doing the work on
how well any of that will
actually work and can be done so
this is the step back to do more
than study but to to really do
plan and design work.
And madam chair representative I
know that the well my fault my
this this wonderful computers
wanted to freeze on me to have
my stuff here but anyway.
each one of those studies and
and it is more it just froze on
me I believe were three to four
hundred thousand dollars a piece
is that correct madam chair
representative.
I'm that's correct of
representative madam chair and
again I think we need to to do
more than study we need some
devoted time.
To actually taking different
approaches and figuring it out
and as a representative lord
said put us all in a room and
trying to figure this out what's
not quite that but is trying to
bring a lot of us thinking to
the table and a lot of public
input and spend some time to
really work this through and and
not those studies just looked
at.
How it would what it would cost
if it was implemented exactly as
have been proposed.
This does more than that.
Madam chair representative and
so that was my next question was
where those three studies where
they exactly the same study over
and over again.
Or was a scope of of I guess
where I'm going with this is
I'm.
Look what program to certainly
right madam chair.
Representative we're we're
always well program and how we
how we view the the the.
A situation like this I'm a
business guy survives when said
Hey I'm gonna propose this I how
can I do this to my company and
I get these answers that are
half baked it sounds like
they're half baked answers I
would be concerned like did I
goof up and not open the scope
of of of.
Of what I wanted to accomplish
in this mission or did they fail
me and the information that I
received as one or the other
that's what it is we've when
we've already did it three times
in one what is going on.
This is so madam chair
representative I'm gonna let
merry jump in because it was
more familiar with the exact
studies but all state this over
the almost twenty years
difference in time between those
when those studies were done
health care has changed.
And
Health care has changed
the what the federal government
is providing has changed.
And so it's it's not exactly
comparing apples to apples those
were done in the context of the
times and how much information
we knew if you think about
twenty years ago how much data
you had access to.
Versus what we have access to
now because everything is done
I have more you know
electronically we also have more
information so merry do you want
to add a let me let me just to
that point madam chair before we
want unless I'm wrong I'm
reading here that the last king
of KNG approaches and KNG Health
consob consulting team just
presented this in June of twenty
twenty that's correct that's
correct so I mean I know you're
saying it was twenty years ago
maybe that was the first one
what this right right I'm you're
asking me the difference if it's
the same madam chair by the same
a study over and over again and
I'm telling you the the length
of time between those studies
been significant only because I
it I'm sorry I mean it could
drugs it's only because I read
that that was only seven months
ago was of the last report and
that's one I'm that's the issue
from the which is seven months
ago and so the I'm at so madam
chair let me just tell you this
number one I admire you for all
of the work that you've done you
and Representative Lujan have
passion in in trying to help
everyone I think we all do in
our own ways and and I I think
Representative work expressed it
perfectly that we're all trying
to find an answer but the
question is very complicated for
all those are listening and it's
not an easy fix it's it's not
that easy to fix its big
complicated system that we're
not one we just look at a
hundred eighty nine pages and
you know what happened there
does a lot of work and there's a
lot of of this discussion that
was that was that was I feel
that needed to continue but I'm
gonna yield so that I can hear
your your expert on that thank
you very much chair.
Merry do you have any comments
about the difference between the
studies absolutely.
Chair representative Armstrong
it's my social science
background and I've looked at
enormous numbers of studies from
other states and the one that
was done I mean if you were a
business owner and request did a
study ten years ago about
whether you were going to enter
a certain market certainly
today.
You would want to adjust those
numbers and assumptions and that
the three studies that were done
are very different one The
Little in study and nineteen
ninety force and everybody was
in.
and that is that automatically
to Medicare it suits the tribe's
it is assumed the risk the
company said everybody was and
it did not assume any savings
from pharmaceutical drugs
because there were no studies at
the time since that time there
have been numerous studies
including here in New Mexico if
our state agencies were to cool
of purchasing a drugs that that
gives you an idea of what what
might happen and so there are a
lot of social science studies
that have check that a given us
more information about the
system the three studies made of
very different assumptions and
of course the KNG study was done
in and twenty twenty and we
didn't know who was going to be
president we didn't know with
the staff you know we still
don't know that Supreme Court
status of the affordable Care
Act there is a lot of what it so
they came up with four different
scenarios but in the report they
say there could be others and
that's I think what
representative Armstrong is is
emphasizing is that it is time
to really look at not a what if
but what it is and that's what
the design process will do we
will let you know for example
the KNG analysis assumed that
provider rates would increase
that the insurance company that
snow but they're wrong they were
is state route the rates
increase according to the
medical care and acceptance of
consumer price index and is that
a and is that how Security Act
sent raises the issue of should
providers in rural areas receive
arms of supplemental payments.
The question and then what would
the cost be for that so they're
the ideas to come up with the
the real all cost analysis
accosted used in two ways
madam chair and Representative
assets eats its use just talk
about the cost of the actual
system.
And then the cost to pay for.
And you can't figure out what
you need to pay for it until you
know what the real cost of the
system is and that's what's
going to take time on to not
only lock up all you legislators
in one room but to have a lot of
experts you know a lot of
knowledge have a lot of
knowledge on a ballots relating
and it's actually what big
businesses do not should we self
insure most Mexicans and I have
before may in fact this society
of actuaries because of a paper
on risk schooling and they point
out that in general the larger
the risk pool the more
predictable and stable the
premiums can be the it's known
in the insurance market so in
our state was such a small
population.
How many can we include.
And what is the impact of that
on on premiums and rising
healthcare costs it is more
about what model I think you
that it's not it's a citizens
board farmers and ranchers of
told us you know this sounds
like a call up and so is
somebody several people pointed
out our premiums and and our
employer contributions we're
going to a dedicated fund that
would interest that would help
expand health infrastructure in
needed areas of the state so
that's it so the the ask your
question I think is is it is
this is not just a study this is
really answering questions about
how much providers are going to
be paying their what we're just
seeing of drugs their estimates
across the board about if you do
that
by how much would your drug
costs go down well let's figure
out how this program works can't
figure that out you know until
you know how the program would
work you're not gonna be able to
figure out whether they're
there's lower drug costs and the
same thing with with our global
budgeting which is extremely
important for hospitals it's a
system that Maryland is
experimenting with and
Pennsylvania is experimenting F.
and Senator Ortiz Y. Pino is
introduced a bill because
there's federal dollars
available of the state decides
we should set up a system where
hospitals have budgets and and
and secure revenue streams not
this our system of multiple
costs that affect the insurance
industry as much as it affects
all of us so so let's that's the
ideas as roll up our sleeves
let's see if it's possible for
our state to ensure as many
people as possible self insured
and and what that looks like
specifically and then figure out
the cost and the revenue side.
Thank you Sir anything else
Representative process.
Yes ma'am sorry I.
Madam chair representative and
this is Feldblum.
Dr building what is it.
Dr Feldblum drive Feldblum thank
you Dr building could you
pronounce my name pretty good
the process you leave it but you
all but it's so.
The
yes some analysts by noon ET so
that that and other school
neutral okay so.
Madam chair representative back
to the point said Dr Feldblum
made about what the actuaries
were actually do a larger the
full.
The better the the rates right I
agree with that I I have seen
Church background I'm agent for
for life insurance so what's
that's all kind of some of the
things overlapping this isn't
life but it's still some of the
procedures and policies of how
these pools are created and how
these help rates and premiums
and copays or whatever you all
follow the same sort of basic
rules and so you let me to my
other my other question what
Madam chair representative
which.
We all have a different approach
so being that pools larger the
pool the better the rate and my
question is why when we open our
borders.
For a competitive market and get
into larger pools New Mexico is
a small state we have a small
population and with that being
said we can increase our pool
because our postal small yet if
we open the market and I don't
know if it's been studied or not
remember of New I it would allow
other companies and other in
possibly allow us to get into
other polls are much larger and
allow
New Mexicans to have lower rates
better and and lower deductibles
and copays and and and I'm gonna
go on real quick because I no
one probably move on that's my
first question my second
question is I know that the help
committee is already passed the
bill one fifty four one oh seven
a tunnel to my notes which
addresses some of what you you
brought up Madam chair
representative and Dr Feldblum.
Which which talk about some of
the
I do drugs and at.
Should Congress their
prescription drugs and other
things that that it that we're
trying to do this how we're
trying to fix this Madam chair
representative I know that this
committee and some of the
members of work very very hard
and and and trying to hit this I
think she Madam chair
representative I believe
Representative Armstrong
specifically set she's trying to
hit it involves in all sorts of
ways because she's really trying
and and I get that and I want to
be part of that and I want to
help in that I just looking at a
different approach this is the
same we've we've we've seem to
be studying the same thing over
and over.
Wanting to get a different
result.
My question is why would we
change gears and try an open
market approach and study that.
madam chair and representative
you know there has been
discussion I'm a variety of
levels about potential
partnering.
With other states.
to do various health initiatives
and I don't know that that would
be off the table if there is
another state that is interested
in doing the same sort of thing
other states have explored or
are exploring or have tried
various approaches to providing
broad based coverage to all the
residents of their state and
that's that's so that wasn't
specifically contemplated in
what has been previously
proposed in the house Security
Act however that's one reason
why we have to do this deep dive
both on financing and design
about
is a yes or another if there is
another state that is interested
in doing the same sort of
approach is their ability to
partner.
I don't you know I think there's
been talk in the past about
partnering with other states on
bulk purchasing of drugs there's
been
talk in the past about
partnering with other states
around health insurance exchange
there's been talk about
partnering with other states on
various health initiatives at so
I I don't I don't see that as
necessarily off the table that's
the point is to have some
innovative think outside the box
we we have to probably think
about this is not just taking
the same system we have and
transferring it to of a broader
based in the state but how do we
transform the system that's more
for it not just more affordable
but has better health outcomes.
That is more accessible and
better health outcomes and how
do we do that creatively and so
I I think your idea of thinking
outside of the box and
potentially going broader is
you know I I think that that's
not necessarily off the table
although
and.
That's a little bit about you
know.
Whether it's Medicare for all or
or national initiatives that's
not exactly what we're looking
at but the
you know Medicaid it's it's a
little trickier because Medicaid
is just state thought of federal
funds but state funds for for
our residents and how you would
partner on Medicaid but there's
ways we could potentially
partner as part of this maybe
not the whole thing but
potentially like I say drugs or
or prescription drug store or
other things that would lead to
a cost savings at a higher risk
pool and greater buying power.
Madam chair representative we're
also seeing drugs after the
seven hour nobody wanted.
You madam chair Representative
So.
I would love to sit there and
have a conversation hopefully
when this passes maybe in the
future of sitting down with you
you have a wealth of knowledge
that that admire very much and
this this particular
Committee and and and need at
the same time I would like to to
see if we could work together
maybe in the future on on not
only will you just as well
describe right now of open it up
maybe sharing it with other
other markets on and and I'm
talking both I think it would be
a good study to study both Hey
if we work together state to say
let's just say we use just the
scenario that you're giving the
government is more working on
the your I think you're talking
of a single payer system for
multiple states work together or
whatever it might did I
understand you right making sure
I didn't misunderstand you madam
chair Representative yeah Madam
chair representative I think
there's a whole host of
possibilities yeah all right so
madam chair representative I I I
feel that we could look at that
approach and then compare it to
just the freedom of open market
of insurance where people could
buy and search for insurance
coverage in multiple market open
range both both both approaches
and get I would love I would
support a study like that only
because I would it would give me
a better idea and understanding
of what we could potentially of
what would better serve our our
our our our
residents you know I I was just
looking at that KNG report
hundred and so twenty six pages
I I just want people out there
Madam chair representative to
understand that this isn't this
is a we're looking at hundreds
and hundreds of pages and and
we're all asked to make
decisions on just really just a
few hours and and and that's
what makes this so difficult for
everyone here because you might
read some pages are you know
some alright that that that that
I haven't seen him and I have I
read something or scandal or
something that I that I
understand.
And so I at this time I just
want to make sure I don't have
another little.
Another question but because I
think we
Just have one last question by
the way who's who would be on
the board is that even if you
guys decided that already madam
chair representative.
madam chair and representative
we put it in the bill a
structure for point meant by it
to the board by of the
legislature and the governor to
make those appointments with a
broad base of background and
experience not all and health
care either to go do some
systems thanking economists and
you know actuary and health care
providers and scientists or you
know I think it it's going to
take all
all everyone at the table and
and the huge of broad based
public support public input at I
have a hard time imagining it
representative madam chair what
the system would look like
because I've been immersed in
the current system for forty
five years.
How do you change that paradigm
and and and turn it upside down
and decided to different way
that's hard to do and I think
you need a combination of of a
different thoughts and
perspectives and people who
it'll just health care but
in a great expertise but that
they're not immersed in what the
current system is and so it but
it is appointments by a
combination of the legislature
and the governor.
Madam chair representative I
just appreciate the respectful
rhetoric in and and discussions
that we have of really trying to
Really trying to come
to provide the best legislation
possible
and I just wanted to know what I
guess what my last question is
is any of this already
appropriated each P. to chair
representative.
madam chair and Representative
no.
Okay so we have to we have to go
to appropriations next and hope
that
they see the wisdom of doing
this kind of planning after
spending money on studies that
don't really get us to the next
point
and so we will try our best but
this is and
madam chair and representative
you didn't you haven't seen the
evolution of this over the last
twenty plus years it is this is
what takes it takes a long time
to get some major stuff too but
I we saved you other two hundred
page bill
please go to the this planning
and design board the madam chair
thank you very much for letting
me play catch up you know
playing catch up to some of you
guys have a lot what you guys
have heard some of this stuff
over the last few years three
and four ten times and so that's
yeah I appreciate you allowing
me Madam chair representative to
have a conversation so I can get
up to speed with all these all
were at and up what we're trying
to go thank you so much that
that I yield my time god bless
you.
In reference.
Next we have Representative
Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman the
manager not.
So that the first I I to salute
the Representative for bringing
of this comprehensive study who
are the committee this morning I
think you in New Mexico I often
say I believe in ready aim shoot
up and in New Mexico I sometimes
think we don't employ ready aim
shoot so I am very supportive of
what I label it ready aim shoot
approach to a very complicated
and complex in large area which
is health care for New Mexicans.
as we look into this study.
I'm going to save some of my
questions for the next committee
which I also serve on and try to
just visit with the the
representative about a couple of
things that I heard this morning
one one one I hear a a number of
five point eight billion dollars
in the first five years and
that's going to get further
discussion I'm sure
appropriations but.
then then I I I hear the
testimony this morning basically
a concept of of
Not being able to afford care.
And I think okay then up to the
Representative my question is if
this bill after the studies
done.
Addresses of New Mexicans not
being able to afford care of.
It simply put who then pays.
Representative.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for that question this
is essentially a self insured
plan for all of New Mexicans
that don't otherwise aren't
otherwise excluded under federal
law.
And so the resources that are
being put into paying for that
now.
Would be put into paying for the
system as a whole in the future
but we hope organized in such a
way that it's is not as costly
and that we have a full control
over a different approach to
health care maybe an upstream
approach if you will to trying
and improving the health
outcomes which also saves money
in the long run but rather than
silo in all those programs where
we already put public dollars
public state and local
government dollars into health
care for probably three quarters
of the population of the state
now they would that that would
be re purposed in a way that we
hope over time
doesn't keep escalating but our
reduces cost compared to what it
would be in the current system
going forward and improves the
health outcomes of of the state
and have everyone covered that
isn't already
you have
like risa plans and since that's
self insured other self insured
plans could come involuntarily
but we can't force them
federal employees we probably
couldn't force Montoya and we we
don't know about Medicare so
those yeah.
Thank you for that in a follow
up to that is I heard a comment
earlier this morning about.
Sensually could this not
suppress provider rates as a way
of cheapening Health Care in New
Mexico could you comment on that
concept please thank you madam
chair and representative you
know that's one of the issues
that I had with the study in
that the difference in cost was
how much you paid providers how
much employees and individuals
contributed and I don't think we
can do this on the back just on
the back of providers and
individuals and businesses
paying paying more or taking
less in
and provider rates so that's
part of what we have to figure
out because the ultimate goal of
getting coverage if we and just
nickel and dime our providers we
lose our providers we we can't
do that but there's also savings
to those providers if they don't
have to deal with merry out of
insurance companies and and and
different systems and that we
have a.
More singular system is helpful
and reliable
reliable revenue for those
providers including things like
global budgeting for hospitals
so they can count on what the
funding is that they have to do
to do their work and serve the
community thank you thank you
for that I
then.
Follow up to that goes to
another comment I heard it has
to do with of for profit
nonprofit in health care and I
course my money come from of
part of the state that
recognizes for profit of is an
important part of our economy
and therefore an important part
of health care being a dominant
are an important component to
Connie
this you do you envision in
anyway this study going forward
a dressing or having a bias for
or against for profit versus
nonprofit.
I'm.
Madam chair and representative I
think whether
a health care provider is for
profit or not for profit is not
really in the equation in this
how we pay them
and how we structure
structure that is what's more
the focus on whether their for
profit or not for profit.
Okay.
Thank you then I I heard the
representative Thompson make
great point I hope somehow it
gets bills into a final result
has to do with the amount of
paperwork providers are being
asked to.
We're conducting and and.
Yeah sort of a non.
Billable way and I think we've
got to be very careful not to
let our
health care practitioners become
paper work administrators
because they need to be seeing
patients not paper.
so I hope is that goes forward
you'll keep that money in my I
think my last quick lying to
questions or or point to go
something like this.
New Mexico's health care system
today is Medicaid that is our
primary way in which we deliver
health care to New Mexicans.
I think I'm satisfied but I am
concerned as we start this our
study process I just want to
make sure you're comfortable
that in no way shape or form the
finished product might affect.
The system we already have in
place which serves so many New
Mexicans with health care your
comment please.
Thank you madam chair and
representative the point of all
of this is to get everyone
covered and to our our Medicaid
funding how we use it
effectively and that's that's
what we need to figure out with
the federal government what a
Medicaid waiver to do this would
be like and that so coverage in
the state won't be income based
you won't have to prove that
you're low income because it
will be coverage for everyone
who's not otherwise covered
under some are precluded by some
federal law so
it would.
Not negatively impact Medicaid
recipients now that's a that and
you're correct that is our
primary health care system
today.
Very good and I appreciate that
of in in again as you go forward
I urge you to if the size that
only because
in the I any good idea in
improving health care that
affects Medicaid in a in a
negative way would would
certainly
The perhaps more detrimental
than good
I'm to date meta meta madam
chairman of.
Thank of this bill is important
Representative state a
tremendous part of the New
Mexico economy and I think it
deserves a hearing in another
committee and up whatever vote I
make today is no indication of
where I will be at the end of
the next committee which will be
in about ten days because we
have to complete house bill two
and then we start hearing house
bill's and so you've got a bit
of time to
to think about that so I'm gonna
just say that that what my
question is appropriations to
give you a sneak preview of
something like okay I don't know
whether we can afford the answer
to the six hundred thousand
dollar.
And I don't think we're going to
talk about that today I wish you
the very best and I think if
it's so it's so old concept
cannot do like ready aims to
thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative.
Thank you.
Okay seeing no further questions
what is the will of the
committee.
I move.
Yes.
I was second.
Thank you Delores we take roll
call please.
Well the.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Sanders thank you of
Representative Anderson votes
yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Britney but I.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
you know.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative you least have
also lost.
No I'd like to explain level
please.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative I'm going back to
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Is excuse.
Right I saw her come on.
Barreras chair doing for ari
yes.
madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
that is.
Nine eight.
Okay to know and one excuse.
Thank you madam chair you have a
do pass on on your bill R.
Senate bill two oh three house
bill two three three.
Thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
committee members I think this
is an important discussion.
I want my will madam chair I'm
sorry I didn't hear that go
ahead Representative madam chair
although I want to support
something similar to this I I.
It didn't feel at this it's
built like we're doing some of
what was already redundant and
so I would really support Madam
chair representative
the study of what I ask no we're
described against better earlier
where it says that we work
you know to study both the open
market and we would and and look
at possibly the other one where
players costsharing among state
to make the the the the pool
larger and that would hopefully
help us reduce rates in and
change gears and going to
different direction just to see
if we can make that pool a lot
bigger but I do admire all the
the work for every that
everyone's putting in in in
trying to find a better way to
lower rates and help our state
move for thank you so much thank
you did anyone else mentioned
they wanted to.
Explained about again I think we
get.
All right thank you madam chair
Thank you
Madam madam chair if we could go
next to house bill two oh four
and then I will Representative
reams internet is back up all
over him that he'll be I don't
think this bill will be long I
don't think alert him that he's
next and then Representative
Hochman Vigil is finishing up a
bill and another committee so
then
sensual be available okay great
all right will now here
house bill two oh four notice to
court in certain domestic
affairs
madam chair go ahead to present.
And madam chair I could bring
over my experts.
and I I can just do it because I
seem Glenn Cadiz I'm gonna move
her to panelist and when the
Siegel.
How did that from.
Okay third is sitting.
Say that we get Linda hope.
I'm sorry my.
I just found her settlement okay
all right here.
Thank you madam chair and I do
have an amendment so don't let
me forget that and probably if
we could do that first.
Okay go ahead with your
amendment please.
thank you madam chair and and
committee
The amendment strikes.
On page two.
The paragraph B. that's that's
new language it to it takes it
out.
Thank you madam chair did you
explain a little bit further.
you madam chair what and I
apologize I should probably
explain the bill a little bit
because and that makes that
removal a little bit more makes
a little more sense.
this is a House Bill two oh four
removes the requirement for
public notice a posting in
newspapers on specifically
for someone who wants to change
their name.
And the impetus behind this is
particularly for victims of
domestic violence who
To have to publish in the in the
paper
a couple of times I just let's
their perpetrator.
No
Hey are in tracking down so
that's the purpose
the
the amendment for part B. was a
suggestion of legislative
Council about including
a requirement to seal records on
our children and that opened up
a big can of worms about sealing
records or not and department of
health have you to hiring
additional staff in order to
manage ceiling public records
vital records and so that wasn't
part of our original proposal
but we had included at the
suggestion of large Council and.
Are withdrawing that particular
it just opened up more
issues than what we had intended
so.
That's that's the
That's the quick overview
would you like to take
discussion on the amendment or
have your.
With the experts speak of what
let's go to
let's go to the.
my experts and if we could have
Ogwen.
first.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Glen
status and I served as director
of policy for the New Mexico
coalition against domestic
violence I also in the vice
chair of the New Mexico intimate
partner violence death review
team the current staff to
present the danger for domestic
and sexual violence victims to
change their name in the process
of escaping an abuser just as
the operator he to roll in New
Mexico's confidential address
program name changes are tools
available to victims to escape
from an abuser
this they may be part of the
safety plan advocates do with
the victim but the difficulty is
that publishing old and new
names in the community where the
applicant resides and alert the
abuser and harm the victim name
change information should not be
made public for victims and the
confidentiality of victims
warrants the assistance from the
state government
publication in the newspaper
isn't an efficient way of
notifying interested parties
anymore it originated to prevent
people from changing their names
to avoid that creditors and
other third parties do not now
rely on newspaper publications
notice name changes
publication of the name change
is also a financial burden for
low income and unemployed people
in particular the cost of
publishing and name changes
significant.
at right now fees for filing the
name change has petition are
also high so one thirty two
on hundred thirty two dollars
for the attention to file and
five dollars for the civil
packet and so that the cost of
publishing your name in the
paper which could range from
seventy to a hundred dollars
additionally it just kind of as
a side note name change
petitions have tripled since
twenty sixteen likely related to
real ID which requires for
documents all of which must have
matching names the names don't
match citizens have to do a name
change before they can get a
real ID so the cost is beyond
many of the citizens abilities
Hey and Representative the
barrier to accessing state
programs and benefits so this
creates a hardship and the
publication is is an additional
cost.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair effects we
could go to Linda sickle if
she's got anything to add.
Linda are you there you need to
you.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry.
Technology.
When the state for the coalition
against domestic violence and I
think my colleague has covered
it or well so I'll just be here
for questions.
Thank you madam chair we stand
for questions and we can deal
with the amendment after you've
taken public comment okay thank
you madam chair.
I do get to.
Can we do the poll first.
Those who
are in support or opposition if
you will take the poll.
Hello all in support that's
great.
Okay that poll will close.
And then
Just in case there was someone
in opposition if you'd raise
your hand for public comment.
Okay and if you are in support
if you'll raise your hand.
And would like to speak.
Please raise your hand if you'd
like to speak on behalf of in
support of this bill.
I'm not seeing a Gabby are there
anyone raising their hands
either okay.
So madam chair we can go to
questions from the committee
okay I just want to make sure
there wasn't something
technically wrong okay no madam
chair I just checked and it does
show that attendees are still
able to raise their hands if
they would like.
Okay seeing then we'll go ahead
and go to the committee.
And.
for well madam chair should we
go ahead and vote on the
amendment for discussion.
Madam chair I'd like to move the
amendment for discussion.
Thank you.
Okay is there any discussion.
On the on the amendment.
Okay is there any opposition to
the amendment.
Okay seeing none of you have a
do pass on the amendment so now
we can go to discussion from the
panel from the committee excuse
me
Representative Anderson your
first thank you Mr chairman
Madam not be shortened to the
point of does this only apply to
public notices in newspapers.
Madam chair and.
And representative I believe so
it proof of publication thank
you just news.
Madam chair my next question is
is sort of a simple one day the
sponsor may not be able to
answer but I suppose it it just
makes me wonder why why did name
change ever Rigby ever require
public notice New Mexico is
there such a thing Sir.
Madam chair and representative I
think this is a long thing
Looks like it was passed in
eighteen eighteen eighty nine
I'm not sure exactly when I it
used to be creditors relied on
looking at public notice in the
papers who to provide fine folks
but that's not true anymore
there's ways to track
Vigils and predators because of
electronic means since you're
the number thank you shin and so
for it so.
I and reading the paper every
Thursday or whatever public this
is published.
Thank you madam chairman of.
To sponsor thank you I support
your bill my questions are done.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Lord.
Thank you for always give me a
moment to and get everything
ready takes just a minute.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you I actually do really like
this bill I just have a few
questions for you the me turn my
head set up.
Yeah okay I'm my question is
this on this bill so on this
portion on B. it's as if the
courts find that notice of one
of more legal parents of
applicant whose under fourteen
years of age.
Well jeopardize applicant's
personal safety the court should
not required notice so I'm I'm
assuming and so when they I
don't know her name change works
in the state so they go before
judges at how it works for name
change madam chair and
Representative first of all the
amendment eliminates paragraph
B. okay so that's gone but yes
they have to go to court and
part of going to court has been
that they have to prove that
they have published and right
now that that group of
publishing is twice that they've
published
the name change and then they
have to show that proof and go
to court and
if my experts if I'm saying
anything wrong when do I have
that right.
Correct okay thank you okay so
madam chair representative thank
you for answering that question
so that was stricken and I
apologize I do not have the
amendment from me I want to make
sure.
So.
When this does happen then how
do we know which children will
not have to put their name in
there if B. isn't in there now
how that determination be made.
madam chair and representative
it's requires noticed currency
up above noticed both parents
okay okay so the reason I'm
asking because I'm actually the
survivor of domestic violence
and I know how scary that can be
and anytime you put your name
out there it opens you up to
having a Stocker like actually
have since I started running for
office which is also very
frightening
so it to me I'll see I think
that anybody that is a survivor
of domestic violence everyone
including the children including
the adults who are survivors of
domestic violence or are being
stocked should have the ability
to change our name without
putting the information out
there ever I would actually get
bored with that in its totality.
And madam chair and
representative and let me just
be clear so to go to court they
don't have to show shaped and
then unless the court finds that
there's reason not to.
both parents would be notified
so if there is a reason not to
the court could decide that for
safety reasons
of those one one are I guess
both of the parents would not be
notified but that would be up to
the court and they wouldn't have
to have done the publication
first okay yeah I like that
there's a set thank you madam
chair representative of I like
that there's some sort of buffer
the first when I read this I
thought our kids to be able to
change your name to Barney or
something but then I realized
what this is actually for and I
did actually do support your
bill so thank you for that
that's all they have a yield
thank you.
Next
I guess we do yes
Representative Gail Armstrong
I'm sorry thank you madam chair
and my apologies for being late
this morning I had an
appointment
one of my questions madam chair
and madam chair is the a
significant issue that was
brought up
Are we changing it to fourteen
years of age or older or well
over the age of fourteen years
because it says that they may be
violating the Fourteenth
Amendment of the constitution.
Madam chair and representative
no I don't believe we're change
we're not changing the
Of the age that that's existing
language okay just be aware that
maybe by the constitution from
what.
It says on from.
At Amy Greenwell and madam chair
and representative it's it's
actually that's not a limit it's
just
there's a difference between
adult and under fourteen.
Okay.
I know about notifying parents
thank you madam chair I support
your bill thanks for bringing
thank thank you for I move it to
pass.
Second.
You have we have a due pass and
is there any opposition.
Okay seeing none
Representative Armstrong
European additional up that's
not opposition no no ma'am.
Okay great so by a unanimous
vote you have a do pass thank
you madam chair and just to be
clear do we have everyone yes or
anyone missing just make sure
that we've what the vote count
as
there's eleven okay yeah I think
we're all here okay great I have
my thing up so.
Thank you madam chair I.
Turn things back over to you I
believe yes thank you and thank
you thank you everyone next we
will go to
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Has to built up twenty two
fifteen and two fifty three.
So will need to bring her over.
And we can
It's.
Can I am just promoted her to
panelist.
And Representative do you have
expert witnesses.
Thank you madam chair I am
actually acting as my own expert
on to fifteen.
And I will have a couple experts
on to fifty three when you're
ready okay.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and other
behavioral health bill for your
consideration so I think I I
touched on this a little bit in
my last presentation to you
madam chair but ever since
getting elected to the
legislature in twenty eighteen
I've taken mental behavior
health matters as a I'm a pet
project is the well doing a deep
dive into the status of the
provision of mental behavior
health services throughout the
state and I talking with many
people throughout the various
agencies the public provider
networks NCOs film directors you
name it and so after the
behavior health licensing bill
which use that so graciously
unanimously passed your
committee the last time the
second issue well the second
third and fourth issues that
have come up that were
identified in my in my search
were
the what has culminated and and
and at into the spell so this
bill madam chair members of the
committee does three things
it allows for the provision of
what we call spurts which is
screening brief intervention and
referral to treatment services
it also requires of
practitioners to prove who
prescribed and today as the PM's
to report that to the
prescription monitoring database
so that providers can monitor
those prescriptions since they
are for a very dangerous
controlled substance and it also
requires county jails county
sheriffs and jail administrators
to provide Medicaid it
medication assisted treatments
for persons under their
supervision if there is
available funding so madam chair
I'll begin with the provision of
first so spread is a
comprehensive integrated public
health approach the delivery of
what we call early intervention
and treatment services for
persons with substance use
disorders as well as those for
at risk of developing these just
disorders
primary care centers hospital
emergency rooms trauma centers
and other community settings can
find these two.
Provide opportunities for early
intervention without risk
substance users are before more
severe consequences occur so
madam chair members of the
committee we've actually had a
few pilot programs that
implement strict protocols
throughout the state one being
in Rio Arriba county they've
been tremendously successful and
in my conversations with Dr
Scrase and members HSD in the O.
H. we feel it is time to expand
the use of support throughout
New Mexico because it presents a
tremendous opportunity for us to
train physicians and providers
in support protocols to be able
to recognize substance use
disorder issues that might be
contributing to other other
issues so in context a
and context early example would
be you have someone presenting
and an emergency room for a
broken leg but it's very clear
that there might be other
substance abuse issues going on
that contributed to that patient
breaking their leg character
someone who's been seen an
emergency room quite a few times
for this substance use related
injuries or illnesses this would
allow for the trainee
utilization of such protocols to
Canada and dignify the the the
holistic issues are going on and
it really helps for an early
intervention and we know with
mental behavior health and
substance use disorders early
intervention is is key I it
saves the state a tremendous
amount of money that saves lives
and it can help people you know
get help in the treatment they
need to to get their substance
use disorder and other mental
health issues so that's sports I
do want to bring up to the to
the committee madam chair that
there was supposed to be an
amendment put on to this bill I
apologize for whatever reason it
didn't make it your committee
even that was drafted there were
a couple of hospital providers
that reached out to me they had
concerns with section one AA and
basically those concerns were
due to.
the
and the federal and taller
rule which basically states that
you cannot determine whether or
not someone has coverage in an
emergency room before providing
services to them the way the
bill is drafted now and I agree
with the hospitals that reached
out to me that that does because
the concern so we're gonna be
bringing amendments in the next
committee to address the concern
make sure that the utilization
of support services is that the
discretion of the provider it
does make sense to make a
podiatrist you know do sport
evaluations that they don't have
to and also making sure that the
provisions for services is not
subject to the determination of
you know Medicaid enrollment so
there's that issue madam chair
moving on to the it's a diazepam
issues so right now it is in law
under the opioid opioid
controlled the opioid act in New
Mexico that doctors prescribing
opioids have to report the
prescription to the prescription
monitoring database so that we
can keep track of those
providers through who are you
know providing these
prescriptions of making sure
that the patients receiving them
I'm getting them from other
doctors or you know doubling up
or or utilizing these controlled
substances in a way that is not
recommended so right now at the
I believe the pharmacy board but
I think should be corrected if
I'm wrong has already promulgate
rules that bring benzodiazepine
M. under the purview of the PNP
but we just want to codify this
in statute because
benzodiazepines are indeed a
dangerous controlled substances
can have the same consequences
if a dependency is developed on
them as well so we wanted to can
equalize it and bring that under
the statute and then also the M.
A. T. the provision of Medicaid
assisted treatment so for those
of you who do not now and maybe
T. is a system are treatments
for substance use disorder that
allows people who want to break
free of their drug addiction the
ability to utilize.
Another substance to kind of
help them stabilize and get
their lives back in order so
that they can hopefully hi
traits down and hopefully off of
the substance altogether but if
you have a serious drug
addiction and you know going
cold Turkey is not an option for
you David M. A. T. it has proven
to be extremely successful I and
and helping those suffering with
drug addiction and substance
abuse disorders are get their
lives back so we've identified
again through my research and
and through you know my
conversations with many people
throughout the state the
provision of MHC specifically in
county jails would be extremely
helpful because anybody who is a
criminal justice involved
individual has to go through a
county jail that's the first
point of contact whether or not
they're going to be released on
their own recognizance Sir but
on probation or parole or move
to another facility this is the
first point of contact and those
two might be interfacing with
the criminal justice system
because of a possible substance
use disorder again this is an
unaffiliated to intervene
quicker and get get folks access
to M. A. T. so that they can bet
begin the journey to healing and
getting off dangerous substances
while they're doing their time
we as senator Neville was
actually introduced
Representative Romero a couple
years ago but the difference
with this bill is that in my
conversations with you know that
the municipal league and and
county jails we don't want to
force anybody to do something
that one they don't have the
resources to do and to they
don't feel like they're in that
position or the infrastructure
they don't have the
infrastructure to to utilize our
to to give access to this type
of treatment so we feel we've
struck a pretty good balance
with this it's not quite a
mandate but it is our it is a
mandate for those that have
access to the resources so that
we're not doing it at an
unfunded mandate but we're
hoping that this will expand
utilization of those programs
throughout the state if it works
in the six.
Also in county jails in our next
move will be implementation and
the at your department
corrections so sorry for the
long winded introduction that's
what you get when you have a
Representative axes round Axford
and for that all after that'll
stand for questions chair.
Thank you and your fast talker
to.
Thank you
so we'll go to members of the
audience first our.
I and I guess we all do you want
to put up the pole.
So members of the audience if
you're here in support of our
house bill two fifteen or
opposition if you would respond
to the pole.
Gives us a sense of the.
Speakers potential speakers in
the audience.
Okay.
I think we've we've got it so we
have eleven in support zero in
opposition.
so we'll go to public comment.
Not next and in case someone
this putting their hand up in
opposition is there anyone here
who wishes to speak in
opposition and of so raise your
hand.
Can see none if you wish to
speak and support.
Are we have your votes in
support but if you wish to speak
on this if you would raise your
hand.
Okay we'll go first to
brother guarantee.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rita Garrity I'm a student
intern with lobbyist Julianna
Koob I stand in behalf of house
bill two fifteen on behalf of
New Mexico behavioral health
providers thank you for your
time.
Thank you for it sorry to what's
your name anyone else.
Okay we'll go right to the
committee done and first I have
R. Representative Montoya.
I believe madam chair that
Representative Phelps had his
hand up first
well I think you did and then it
did that and then I'd yeah it
dropped or one offs
Representative Anderson go
ahead.
Thank you madam chairman I do I
did have my hand up and down
madam chairman to the sponsor
just real quick I I
The only thing that I I hear the
presentation that gives me a bit
of concern and and which to ask
a question those on the county
jail.
In is it is it only county jails
because I I think I then heard
from your expert
department of corrections
in the idea I believe was a
delivery of prescription drugs
into the county jail if funding
is available that that that
that's really what gives me the
most concerned if funding is
available and then I'm also
wondering if there is a broader
implication for
Funding available drugs
delivered into the county jail
with that of so that's my first
question rather brought one for
your expert to the sponsor who
happens to be the expert thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Phelps that's a
great a great question actually
so
we learned from what happened
the last time a similar bill was
wrong and so we wanted to really
avoid any sort of an unfunded
mandate but what's going on
behind the scenes madam chair
representative is there are a
number of state grants that are
available through various HSD
programs and other state
entities that have allowed for
administration at MHC
programming and so it's really
just incumbent upon those jails
to to know that these requests
are available at which point you
know that information will be
shared with them there are
administrators of such programs
through the behavioral health
that the HSD entity which is a
subset of HSD and so there are
coordinators that worked there
county jails to make should make
them know that this funding is
available however not every jail
chooses to take advantage of
this funding so one of the
issues that we continue to have
a mental behavior health service
provision in New Mexico is we
still have a good deal of stigma
and some areas around the state
and so for those county jails
that you know do do not want to
administer M. A. T. you know
they this I guess there's a lot
allows them to do that however
it is our hope that once we get
enough jail operators take
partaking in this program and
they see what a difference
access to this this resource
agency programming does too
substance abuse disordered
involved individuals that they
will they will certainly want to
take part to and then we will
probably have to consider an
appropriation down the line but
again this is this is a baby
step you know incremental
changes they tell us that the
legislature and so this was our
idea to do it we did have a
couple of forms with County jail
administrators when we were
working towards drafting this
law and this is based strictly
on feedback from those county
jail ministry but I spoke.
Thank you very much for that
follow up question Madam
chairman.
Was there any discussion about
medical marijuana is set to
prescribed is that require
prescription under your
definition and it is a concern
that with funding available
that other considerations may
enter into a reluctance to
deliver.
That medical marijuana if it is
covered so it's really two
questions one is it covered and
then let's talk about it please.
Thank you madam chair
representative Anderson I am not
a physician but based upon my
understanding of it and and my
journey with this proposed each
piece of legislation I do not
believe medical marijuana is
classified as dedicated as this
medication assisted therapy
those jobs are usually classes
those trustees identified
something like suboxone or
methadone or another injectable
drugs
But I'm blanking on the name of
it'll come to me I'm sure after
I've already answered your
question but I it's I do not
believe medical marijuana at
this time is considered part of
the ninety.
Thank you for that because I to
understand it that way in my non
medical way
and madam chairman that
concludes my questions.
I thank you on next
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
hoping he'll I stand in support
and I applaud this legislation I
live in work in Rio Arriba
county I've been a member of the
health council of you for about
ten years and the disruption
that the Martinez administration
because with the behavior health
system is still troubling daily
for our communities to recover
this is a responsible piece of
legislation you called it a baby
step but the notion of early
intervention resonates so deeply
with me I spent thirty years
working improve prevention would
use through schools and after
care programs unfortunately many
of those you there now in the
streets either homeless or
involved in courts substance
misuse etcetera so I don't have
a question I just want to state
publicly that this is vitally
needed I think the notion that
you have taken.
The the torch from
Representative Romero improved
upon it and moving forward
incrementally to improve the
health and wellness of all of
those needed across our state is
commendable I yield back to
Madam.
Thank you Representative next I
have Representative Armstrong.
Right as I answered my phone
thank you madam.
That's okay I'll get back to the
thank you madam chair my
question is I was reading in the
analysis all there was a pilot
project.
And that are there was allocated
on one point five million
dollars for the pilot projects
and if I read it correctly you
get my guard printer to work
each of by reading it on my
phone but did it
Madam chair representative did
help forty three people that I
read that correctly.
Thank you madam chair
representative I have not seen
that analysis so I obviously I
would very much welcome and
having an opportunity to what
are project with regard to start
or in eighty.
It was so thank you madam chair
it was from.
I'm pulling it back up on my
tiny little screen here.
It was from the.
The LFC it's the LFC analysis.
I'm AT and.
Yes I are.
And it gives just a little bit
of of our previous to that so it
looks like.
A total of forty three people
were helped which is I mean
forty three is forty three but
one point five million dollars.
You know that doesn't quite
balance out to be one of the
problems that I think madam
chair and representative that
we're having is implementing but
just health.
Into our county jail I don't
know if you're familiar with
just health but it's to help
bridge.
inmates that are incarcerated on
to Medicaid and then help keep
them on afterwards or drop them
off in state if so be it but
it's it's not been implemented
properly and we're having real
issues mainly and and support
county and I've been asking for
help for this for a year now.
And so as long as we have the J.
last health implemented
correctly in the in the
detention centers or the the
jails the county jails I think
this will be helpful but if we
don't have that step first this
is not going to be helpful and
so you might want to look into
that I've talked to I I think I
may have gotten some help from
my County jail but if they
haven't all implemented it it's
not gonna work and so that's the
other part of the piece madam
chair and representative the my
seem concerned with what
Representative Anderson brought
up and so I want to make sure
just because the funding is
there and they may not be
applying for it or maybe they
are applying for it and they're
not receiving it.
So you know I I don't want to do
mandates I am all for your bill
I'm all I'm all about it
appreciate it but I I don't want
to do mandates on my County
that's already suffering.
so if you could look into that
just health and make sure that
that.
The first step is there then I'm
all for it thank you madam
chair.
Thank you unex we have
Representative Lord I thank you
madam chair so I always like to
check on things so I called a
bunch of share cynical to people
that are very familiar with how
the jail system does work and
one two three four five five
that I was able to talk to this
morning told me that they really
do this they told me that when
people are brought into the jail
this is how the system works is
they all get an evaluation they
do get a medical evaluation are
they are if people come in if
they're addicted to drugs they
do give them the methadone and
soapbox and and they win them
off of that and that they do
already give them
benzodiazepines to give them
CENIC's and valium as needed and
if they have prescribed meds
they also get those while
they're in there I also want to
make sure somebody double
checking on the private jails it
looks like they do that as well
so can you explain to me if
they're ready doing that is
there something I'm missing that
we need this thank you.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative lord thank you
for checking up on that and it
is that is correct that we have
a number of county jails are
doing it you also have the
number of deals that are not and
so again this law as a step
towards you know letting our
county jail administrators know
that this is a program that we
would like to see implemented
again not as an unfunded mandate
but as a real opportunity for
that county jails to help of the
part of the early intervention
services for substance abuse
involved individuals.
Thank you for answering that
Madam chair representative do
you know which jails offhand are
not so I can call to make sure
that they are not implementing
in the cell why because I called
some of the big ones and some of
the small ones to get a nice
cross section and it seems like
everybody is doing this so do
you know which ones are not in
the program right now Madam
chair representative board I
don't have that information from
me but I can get it for you
through the association counties
they have a log thank you I
appreciate that because right
now you know because like I just
a sampling of Pete chair said I
know and and people that work
with the jail system they
already said that this is in
process so I guess what I'm
concerned with all this I
understand you trying to say it
but I'm looking at it's ready
being done so I would have to
respectfully say that I won't be
voting for this bill just
because I think it would be
better if you went to the county
the jails are not doing it find
out why they're not doing it to
find out if there's much money
issue and focused specifically
on those because all the ones I
called including big counties
are already doing this and I
just wanted you to know that
that would be the reason I would
be voting no on that especially
when it's a tremendous amount of
money and it seems to be it's
already in progress so thank you
very much I yield my time.
Thank you
just on that on that point if I
can also add to that
conversation Representative is
that
Probably a majority of the
counties do not do this now
in the last couple years
Albuquerque has has started
doing it and a few others have
done it
partly it's the money but partly
it's also having the available
providers to do it because to do
medication assisted treatment
you need a special certification
federally and you can only have
so many patients under that
approval and so you have to have
a number of providers that are
trained and certified to do it
and you have to have a lot of
them if you have a bigger
population so it is it's a combo
of things and so I like that
and.
By including this in here it
doesn't hurt any of those that
are already doing it it just
affirms that would like to do it
so that's not a negative to
those that are already doing it
and I thank you Representative
Hochman Vigil the the start date
of that isn't till twenty three
correct.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee I believe so I
think I think so and and that
gives some time one not just to
try and and hopefully we help
support that funding but or
local governments but also to
train more providers and get
more providers that are able to
do medication assisted treatment
so that I just wanted to make
that clarification and thank you
madam chair and chair thank you
madam chair for addressing that
yeah I did actually find out
that Bernalillo county was one
of one that called the sorry
doing progress thank you just
like for the last year or so not
not for very long Representative
trusses.
Thank you madam chair same same
thing I just first want to start
with the it this didn't go
through probation today.
Thank you madam chair
Representative access note was
not assigned appropriations.
Thank you madam chair
representative but as it hasn't
been reviewed all.
Use you need you could
The call when they're auction
stuff you speaks fast.
What you said Representative I
need to see.
No you're fine it doesn't bother
me at all chair representative
but it's just that.
But when when when when I see
you outside of places you're it
is I appreciate I'm just teasing
you a little bit.
Because he speaks but best well
you did it but it's good I like
that you know your stuff that's
why thank you madam chair
representative go ahead and
answer my question can remember
what I said thank you madam
chair representative up
someone's calling me so I have
to get rid of that so the reason
you know I can't speak for the
speaker and and and the various
committee assignments that were
given to the spell but I I can
surmise of the reason why it is
not gone through appropriations
because there's actually nothing
in this bill that are is
requiring the expenditure of
funds are that was the whole
point of putting in the language
for inmates see that if the
funding was available again at
pending approval and I County
jail seeking the availability of
the the grant funding that's
already there that's already
been allocated for this purpose
and then I don't see anything
else in the school that required
expenditure of funds that
spurred protocol is simply an
additional protocol that could
be added to your training given
to these types of positions and
and medical professionals and
again the reporting events a day
as a pain for the patient to
control about databases already
happening so really there's
nothing in here that costs money
that's already allocated.
So
Madam chair representative it's
only because I saw this
estimated additional operating
budget impact and it showed that
it it starts in our FY twenty
two at seven fifteen and it
ended up.
This seems to go up by seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
every year on year three it's up
to two point two
two million two hundred fifty
thousand dollars and this is
reoccurring and that's why I
asked I'm just looking I'm just
reading you know what we study
these bills obviously madam
chair representative based on
the paper the work that we get
in front of us and that's that's
that's what I'm going that's why
I asked you that question thank
you madam chair representative
and if I may respond I mean the
way I read the FIR and I see
what your concern is and I I
agree but the way I read it was
R. yes it is going to
require the it is going to cost
that amount of money but again
it is through implementation of
funds that have already been
allocated for this purpose so
yes it will cost that amount of
money but as a and and the way
some of the federal grant
programming programs work the
more of a need you have the more
the more grant award is
available so that's my
understanding of it I can't
speak for the LFC analyst and
that if you want to double back
with them we can but again
there's nothing in this bill
that requires a direct
appropriation of funding that's
not already there.
I think I made a representative.
Was the one twice I I just
couldn't see where it was
allocated about five I was
trying to.
Of figure that out it you know
back to the point that was made
earlier from madam chair
representative that
Representative Gail Armstrong
made that.
Point four million in order
eight thousand dollars that was
appropriated for the the program
out uses I'm sorry one point
five million I read on here will
further of those that those.
Forty three participants ended
up being of almost thirty five
thousand
dollars for per person in order
I'm and so that just concerns me
so would this be considered and
and and bear with me because
just like you are our phones are
going off and getting emails and
we're getting you were reading
or try to and then we've got
other things we're supposed to
be doing so a bit distracted
this morning Madam chair
representative but my question
is would it would just be
considered a unfunded mandate
for those that are already
implementing something similar
to this it does it implement
more of a mandate.
To piggy back on top of what
they're already doing expanding
that and and causing you know
issue in that way for four again
unfunded mandate is really the
question.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative asked us you know
I I believe the answer to that
question is no that was the
whole reason why we word Smith
this bill and the way that we
did and that those County jail
providers that want to already
provide the services are
providing them out without the
gentle nudge provided station
and for those that would be
looking into providing the
services they are only required
to do so if they have the
resources to do so and so it is
not an unfunded mandate because
of the funding that
infrastructure is not there the
funding infrastructure is not
there but for those who already
want to do it our and for those
you are you know need to be able
to do it because they have
access to what they need are you
know that then they'll be able
to do so.
Well thank you very much I just
a I appreciate your you know
you're you're looking.
Again I mean this is another
bill the all which would like to
see
people get off of drugs you know
as a fuel rector myself.
I've seen a lot of terrible
things in my career a lot of
terrible things from overseas to
people being murdered or drugs
fighting over drugs and so forth
and it is something that
obviously is a big concern our
state in our and our country and
so anything that we can do to.
Our work toward bettering our
communities is is is is good R.
I also called my mic because I
mean you know.
One of the things Madam chair
representative is I try to do
some homework so that I don't
know that something goes please
I got to go home right.
Right.
I gotta go over there when I go
home from that also is very do
that or we don't do that or
whatever so I'm just trying to
do a little bit I did reach out
to our share of chair
representative it they're
already doing this
and so.
It I just wanted to express that
and and and and and I see what
you're trying to do and I think
a big question that I would have
R. O. what would help me a lot
is to know who Madam chair
representative who actually is
in providing this is a wonder
three or five and I know we got
numbers and and it's hard you're
juggling a lot Madam chair
representative with up with with
all the bills that were
Are two of keep up with it and
and and and so forth so I I'd
like to see that information
form for for me to see how all
this would actually
better serve the the people of
New Mexico the still have that
at the school report that's
it's kind of making me go wait a
minute why they put all this
money here and it increasing by
seven hundred fifty thousand a
year recurring at but in the end
so those are things that just
make the stall on it but it
really I really really
appreciate that thank you so
much madam chair representative.
Thank you what is the pleasure
of the committee.
For the past have a motion for
do pass I'll second that.
Source you want to call the
roll.
Yes.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Britney but I
costs.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
no.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Louise I.
Your view that Sir all right
ma'am
No.
I like to explain.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative I'm sorry I'm
going back to Representative
Phelps Anderson yes.
By Joanne Ferrary yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes.
Total of nine four two against.
Hi Representative you have a do
pass on house bill two fifteen
and Representative trusses
briefly if you have an
additional explanation otherwise
we you've already stated why
you're not supporting I believe.
Thank you madam chair yeah I
just again I just would like to
see more information on this
market would support it I I was
just I I again have that in
front of me to make a solid
answer I do support programs
like this I just that was my
only hesitation thank you madam
chair thank you okay
Representative are you ready for
two fifty three and you have an
expert on that thank you very
much madam chair I do have an
expert Paul Garin.
is going to be in my experts and
then that we want to move over
also
See here.
Let's start with that with Mr
during first madam chair and if
we need anybody else to let you
know that that sounds good I'm
sorry Charlie Charlie very plot
plow.
Okay.
Remove both Paul and Charlie
over and also Dr Richard Larson
and Dr Larson I thought I saw
him on there.
All right and Dr Larson okay
thank thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
house bill two fifty three seeks
to amend section thirty two a
six eight twenty four of the
children's mental health and
developmental disabilities act
to allow for limited disclosure
of confidential health
information for research
purposes without a signed waiver
from the child of the child the
your legal guardian and twenty
nineteen eighty two sixty nine
is passed to allow disclosure of
confidential health information
for adults and this bill seeks
to allow similar disclosure
process within the children's
behavioral health ACT this type
of this disclosure to happen the
following conditions are
satisfied one disclosure has to
be for the purpose of research
only to discuss this can only be
made to a governmental agency or
its agent a state educational
institution and duly organized
state or county association of
licensed physicians or dentists
a licensed health facility or
staff committees of such
facilities and a waiver or
approval by an institutional
review board made in compliance
with all federal guidelines
statutes and laws related to
human research participants
right this bill also seeks to
bring New Mexico statutes in
line with the applicable federal
laws and allows qualified
entities to conducted meaningful
and beneficial research into
effectiveness of behavior health
programs throughout the state
through that research we can
evaluate what works and what
doesn't so we can adjust improve
the relevant programs to ensure
their affected upping people
address any behavior health
issues that they may be facing
understanding how the programs
work and whether they are
effective is absolutely critical
on the balance the protections
offered by this will help insure
that we can conduct the relevant
research while still complying
with federal law and protecting
the privacy of the relevant
behavioral health information
with that madam chair I'd like
to turn it over to our doctor
Garrett if you want to make a
payment.
Dr Karen go ahead.
Good morning my name is Paul
Garin and I am the director of a
small research center within the
institute for Social Research at
the university of New Mexico in
addition I also teach part time
and sociology.
I'm.
In short and I think the
representative said this fairly
clearly recommended changes
would establish a research
exemption that would allow
researchers like other working
under the approval of a
federally approved institutional
Report wrist Review Board to
simply study impact and
effectiveness of behavioral
health service so currently we
do have this research exemption
for adults but this research
exemption does not exist for
minors and we're trying to place
this exemption for minors into
statute as well as it exists for
adults I think the primary point
I would just make is that
without a research exemption in
many states have these research
exemptions we are unable to use
identified data to study the
effectiveness of programs what
we should be seeking to do in my
opinion is we should be seeking
to fund programs that we know
are based in some kind of dress
practices and then in addition
to that we should be trying to
understand the outcome as
effectiveness of those funded
programs we should be trying to
use information you're trying to
data to better understand
whether programs work or not and
this research exemption will
allow us to do that more clearly
and ably than we currently are
able to do that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
doctor care and I also want to
turn it over to
no actually that's the only
expert is going to make a
statement madam chair so with
that we will turn it over for
questions.
Okay thank you first we'll go to
the audience.
Gabrielle if we could put up the
pole.
Okay for those in attendance if
you're here in support of house
bill two fifty three or in
opposition could you go ahead
and respond to the pole.
And it looks like is money is
going to respond to have done so
so we have US seven in support
and zero in opposition.
And so.
First we will go to
and given one last chance to see
if there's anyone here in
opposition to speak.
Okay saying none anyone here in
support who wishes to speak.
Okay looks like Jason Weaks.
Morning madam chair members the
committee thank you Jason Weaks
registered lobbyist for
Bernalillo county Bernalillo
county stands in strong support
of this legislation as
Representative Hochman Vigil
explained earlier House Bill to
sixty seven was passed in twenty
nineteen it it opened up the
ability to do research our
disclosure for research purposes
without consent for adults
really though that only gives us
the picture as it relates to
adult behavioral health programs
so this change basically brings
the children's code in parity
with the adult code researching
and understanding the relevant
data behind these programs
understand relevant data behind
these programs is absolutely
critical to being able to
approval and to being able to
modify them so they properly
address the relevant needs
obviously behavioral health
services are huge thing
throughout the state but we need
to be effective in the way that
we deliver we can't know for
being effective unless we can do
the relevant research so that's
what this bill seeks to do we
also that in this bill with CYFD
and through the sentencing
commission so they've had eyes
on it as well thank you.
Thank you I'm next we have
barber Daman welcome Barbara.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Barbara Damron on the
professor university Mexico the
chief government relations
officer registered lobbyists for
New Mexico we want to thank the
sponsor we worked very hard with
the sponsor with folks in the
county on this bill we support
this bill because we want to
make sure that protection is
there for for children in terms
of a disclosure related to any
at information with that we
certainly want to be able to do
have a good research like Dr
Gary speaking about to make sure
the programs are evaluated
accurately and they were given
the best types of programs to
children course of this age
group of behavioral problems and
such so we just want to be sure
that we were able to address
that it would work with the
county with the sponsor on that
to make sure that the R. B. of
record of was looking at the so
that there can be protection of
children's rights so thank you
so much if you would stand
support of this bill thank you.
Right.
Thank you next we will go to the
committee.
And first I have Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair of the try to be short
because I know we're running
long on time to the sponsor
madam chairman I would would to
ask
on this data collection user
short broad statement that to be
satisfied that the sharing of
this data would be hippa
compliant.
Thank you very much I'm sure
thank you Representative
Anderson for the the question
and yes absolutely that's
actually one of the the need to
the sauce so that we can be in
compliance with federal law and
so that's one of the reasons why
the institutional review boards
are part of this process they
have a requirement to uphold all
have the standards especially
confidentiality of of medical
information and so you know
keeping confidential
confidentiality of this type of
information especially as it
relates to children is top
priority and we work very hard
to make sure that sufficient
protections are in place thank
you very much for that in the
follow up question to that is
the data so we pass this bill it
creates data for somebody and
I'm always concerned to put it
in non medical terms that that
if I have a child and I'm
worried about the child suicide
that all of a sudden on my
screen on my home page jump up
ads for a child the.
Options I I just want to know in
my mind that we're not creating
a new commercial form of data
that will be exploited by others
with other intentions other than
program evaluation question.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative Phelps you
know that's a great question I
don't have the answer for you so
I'm gonna turn it over to Dr
Garen first see if he does and
then I will have a couple other
people we can consult as well
said Dr guarantee you know.
Thank you madam chair
representative in fact the data
the use of those data are
governed by the institutional
review board approval and in our
case when we have had the state
in the past those data or do a
down to five first point when
they can be de identified and
then the data actually how long
they can be maintained are
governed by the approval and in
our case those state or
destroyed when studies are
complete I'm in my experience in
the couple of times
and I've been at the institute
for twenty nine years there have
been two times I can recall
where data has been trying to be
imported from us in both
occasions those data were not
able to be very different from
us and they had to go back to
the original source to try to
obtain those date so we've never
released any data the R. Beason
factor pretty strict in terms of
how the data is protected in
terms of how it's transported
how it's used and those data at
rest.
Thank you thank you for that and
out of my concern on the data
goes beyond this bill but it
it's always of interest to me
last the drive gear and a real
quick when we talk about program
evaluation
over the course of the summer we
learn New Mexico the one in the
suicide and that with that
expanding the data that
supported that was two years old
begin your mind Sir if this bill
passes and this is granted could
we have better more timely data
on New Mexico's teen suicide our
issues question.
So Madam chair representative
Anderson so part of your
question I think pertains to us
part of it does not so part of
what you're asking is there is
data that's nationally out
that's in New Mexico that could
be reported and whether can be
reported more timely or not
about the current situation
regarding teen suicide I don't
know but is it would regard what
we would want to do Bernalillo
county as an example funds
several programs that are
focused to suicide prevention
using their behavioral health
initiative dollars in our hope
would be able to obtain data
that we could be used to better
understand how prevention
efforts would reduce the
incidence of attempted suicide
and suicides.
Thank you for that answer doctor
you were right on the point and
I appreciate that Madam chairman
of I think that concludes my
questions thank you.
Thank you Representative next I
representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair I'll be quick
and to the point thank you
Representative for your gentle
touch on the F. I R. S.'s
disclosures can be made to a
governmental agency or its agent
a state educational institution
a duly organized state or county
association of licensed
physicians or dentists a
licensed health facility or
staff committees for such
facilities.
So my question is what is a
state educational institution.
I thank you very much and chair
representative Armstrong so case
in point right now University of
New Mexico runs the
institutional review board that
would be charged with reviewing
these types of disclosures so
all you know that that's exactly
how the system works as as it is
today so that language I guess
would open it up to other
potential review board to review
agencies but right now that's
that's the main mechanism we
have.
Okay so any state educational
institution would that be public
school.
I'm madam chair Representative
Armstrong hi I see your point I
suppose another follow up
question asked would be you know
what that what a public school
have the professionals with the
education necessary are the need
necessary to put together such a
review board but is the
languages stated I I I don't see
how that would be specifically
prohibited now but I'm gonna I'm
actually gonna turn it over to
to one of my experts if they
want to pipe up.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong I think that there are
some simple Albuquerque public
school system does have a
research review board and I
assume that and that if they
were the review board of record
that someone could submit to
them I would also assume that
researchers from out side the
state of New Mexico or any other
university in the state of New
Mexico with the institutional
review board.
Could submit a study for
approval.
Thank you madam chair and answer
that's that concerns me a little
bit just because of students
transferring in and out of
schools.
And you know our is that going
to be held against them or are
they going to be researching
every student that transfers and
I just want to make sure that
we're not
unsafely moving children around
where people have to have access
to this kind of information just
wanted to bring that to your
attention to what it actually
says in there and and it raises
a little bit of concern for me
but I do understand I think most
parents would probably submit to
saying yes use this information
to help someone else's child or
see what's working and what's
not working in our state.
So I I have a little bit
concerned.
but there was no one in
opposition and I had I don't
know that I would or would be if
I had a a child like this so
I'll take that into
consideration thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative goodnight
Representative Larson did you
want to add to that the experts
Representative.
The thank you very much madam
chair and representative of the
executive vice chancellor at the
UNM health science and and I
oversee the institutional review
board.
so.
One of the things I want to
first point out is we very much
appreciate the ability to
collaborate with the sponsor on
this and come to a a bill that
we feel comfortable with being
able to protect the rights of
children particularly who are
very of considered very
vulnerable populations and their
rights I'd make a couple of
points
the IRB of record is required to
have the proper expertise to
make these decisions and what
happens many times if they do
have or research for our record
Dale defer to someone like
health Science Center who
actually has the expertise to
make the decision.
And we we accept those deferrals
almost on a weekly basis because
there's just not the capacity or
the understanding of the people
on those institutional Reports.
The second piece I'd point out
is institutional review boards
operate with some autonomy from
the institution they're given
that autonomy by the federal
government so that they can
operate without the influence of
administration in a way that
really protects the safety and
the privacy and the
confidentiality of the
participants and research and
one of the key things have parts
of that is.
In most research particularly if
it's identified people know
who's participating there has to
be consent.
And so there is a consent
process that anybody who would
enter into some sort of research
study are would.
Consent that the I. R. B. makes
a determination of whether there
actually there are cases where
you don't need consent but then
there's most cases with you're
going to know who you are.
As you're asking where there
really has to be a consent
process that involves the
parents as well as a child.
Thank you Dr west Larson thank
you yeah thank you.
Thank you Representative
process.
Thank you madam chair
Representative question I have
is make sure I understood this
right bill was passed in twenty
nineteen that's what I
understood that included only
adults is that correct thank you
madam chair representative ****
that is correct.
Okay that being said madam chair
representative
what were the results of that.
Still.
Thank you madam chair
representative also said it
wasn't one study per se it's
it's on going it's it's ongoing
research that allows for
continual and constant
improvement of behavioral health
programming throughout the
state.
What were we gotten that in that
the study Madam chair
representative I thank you madam
chair representative we don't
have any results yet because we
just passed in twenty nineteen
or work on it government move
slowly.
Thank you madam chair
representative of the reason I'm
asking that is I I would like to
see if possible what what the
results of that study were
before we move on to children
I think it's a behavior health
is very very important but in
order for us to
have.
I think it was smart in the the
had to been reason that they
only allowed adults at that time
thank you I think we're we need
to take it a step at a time
Madam chair representative only
because we don't have the
results of the first of the
first of jump you know the first
part of this process so that.
I'm I'm just I'm just can
started just don't understand
why we're moving so quickly on
the other what we don't have the
results of their good or bad on
on the other it was going to
actually improve what we're
going to do you have any
comments that Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I mean that
the purpose of the data review
in the first place is to do what
we hope to do with most
programming which is constantly
and continuously evaluate
reevaluate make improvements to
programming that we know is
always is already is already
making a difference in people's
lives so it's to your dataset is
scientifically to start amount
of time to reach any sort of
conclusion but we do know is
that there are other states that
are already have these types of
research processes in place and
again we're not looking for a
specific study that's going to
concluded that we're gonna have
results this is an ongoing
process this process is designed
to continuously help us improve
upon the programming that we're
offering it's also been in
conjunction with another bill
that was passed in twenty
nineteen that allowed for at
data about data collection
reevaluation of government
programming so that we can
always have real time
information on on whether or not
the programs that we are putting
into place are effective and
work so it's really it's really
an accountability measure.
Thank you madam chair
representative I guess I guess
where I'm kind of hung up is I'm
always.
Look all of our information is
important and and and is it
should remain private especially
if we want it to be and we're
talking about children here and
Madam chair representative.
And that makes just you and that
much more sensitive
I I see that in twenty seventeen
the The New Mexico statutes
chapter thirty two A. passed a
section there that a person
shall not without all the
authors of child or.
Disclosure transmit any
confidential information from
which a person well acquainted
with that child might recognize
the child as described and
personal bottle by goes on
basically it says we need
authorization what are we going
on and on about it
I think what scares me a little
bit is on the first page five of
the bill just.
We're waiving our right to this
confidential information to
children and although I think I
I I I think a studies always
good to to better serve people I
think we should be asking
authorization for from from the
custodial parent and any anyone
you know that because a child's
I mean yeah we're going to get
consent from a five year old so
we need we need consent from the
parents you know it was my kid.
I don't want to wait a minute
house is going to be
implemented how's it going to be
used where is it going to be
used who's going to see it and I
think it's just a.
Real question as a parent I mean
I I kids at a call freeloaders
Tilly Tilly graduate in the
moving on supporting themselves
but it is so important madam
chair representative press to
please in my opinion to protect
their information we we have to
do that I'm very careful about
that it might it might building
might might might for my
business to protect everyone's
information even above and
beyond what what were required
I'm very very tight lipped about
it so what we're talking about
children here that if you would
be able to get consent I'm a
hundred percent with you because
I I think that to me is is
important for a for a.
Parent guardian
to give consent to to that
information.
Would you consider amending that
part Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative actually think at
this point I'm gonna defer back
to doctor Larson again you can
kind of better explain the
institutional institutional
review board processes and
procedures because that's
actually part of what's
implement implemented as as it
as their process.
If I could jump in on that point
and then we can go to doctor
Larson if we need to
Representative institutional
review boards and research is
very highly regulated under
federal law and what you can
under federal law for protection
of information this the whole
point of this is to not have to
go through the process of of
getting a consent when it's
being used to evaluate program
effectiveness in the aggregate
and they they won't be releasing
I think you heard individually
identifiable information will
never be
released the of results of the
study would be in the aggregate
around the effectiveness of
programs and if I said anything
wrong on that Mr doctor Larson.
You can correct me.
Thank you madam chair
Representative if I could just
enhance and described the
process a little bit I think it
might satisfy Representative
give you the assurance he needs
so an institutional report
review board is composed of a
variety of experts who
Representative the correct
medical knowledge there's also
people on the board that
represents the community this
community representation on our
institutional review boards to
make sure the community at large
is Representative prison
representatives on our board and
there are representatives who
represent the rights of
children.
So that institutional review
board is not only medical
experts but it's also
representative the community at
large and they're all trained
and they're at.
Ethics.
At the forefront when they're
trying to make these decisions
there's also a hip Act for the
border and there's IT experts to
keep the data secure.
And when a protocol or research
study comes before them they
have a very
large set of tools as mentioned
by the chair of promulgated by
the federal government that they
need to follow principles
ensuring.
The protection of those patients
or participants are health
information.
And there it will make a
judgment depending on how it's
designed and whether there needs
to be informed consent.
If the persons in individuals
identity is going to be linked
to their health information
consent will be required.
The times where consent is not
required is usually as the chair
mentioned is when for instance
data is aggregated someone else
anonymize since it not the
people doing the study and
they're given an aggregated data
or they're given data that you
could tell who it came from and
then they can do the analysis of
but there are there are very
clear principles and regulations
around trying to assure that.
Confidentiality is never broken
and to make sure that parents
would always give informed
consent in the appropriate
situation for a young child or
children of different ages.
Thank you chairman Madam
chairman and representative I
guess I guess what I'm as you
can tell it if I'm reading all
this information some of us that
are reading this information
they can get confusing imagine
what the parents are thinking
wait a minute how to just get
out and it could cause some
confusion on our part
Madam chair representative
I think you know every time we
see you know and and that and
time just use this as an example
every time that we we take our
children to the school the to
start the new year.
We sit there we fill out these
forms it my wife and I go every
time the home my gosh again as
and and what is that important
the same data birthdate and all
the the the people that are
involved in their and and and
who they should call concern
urgency and doctors so for.
I think all I'm saying is what
can we.
What this on the on through the
educational system and say Hey
let's just add one more
requirement giving consent to
release that that I just I just
feel that.
You know by us just waiting.
The rights of parents to just
knowing this and just having to
a consent to just say Hey I'm
okay with that.
A short synopsis with the is it
okay for us to use some of the
information that we're gathering
here could be used for study do
you for better behavioral health
and programs simple little
Would you cut out what no Sir
waiver but maybe some sort of a
I guess I would be waiver of of
of them giving their they're
releasing that information for
the child that that's that's all
I'm saying
again always we want to work for
getting having better health
that's so this will committees
all about every day that we
listen to this but I also don't
want to undermine the education
of our parents and knowing what
is happening and just giving
getting their consent I just
don't see why we would have why
we would have the.
Hesitation to that I mean is
there any is there any.
Restrictions are on this bill
madam chair representative
twenty pictures or photos or
anything like that I mean what
is what we draw the line on on
the information.
Thank you madam chair of
representative I will defer
probably to drive occurring on
that committee there at the
process.
Madam chair representative so in
in our case.
We are only seeking to have
identified data when it's not
practical to have consent.
So in terms of some of the
studies we might want to do some
of those studies might use data
that was collected several years
ago and is not currently
available so consent is not
practical to get from.
parents of the individuals that
we want to be studying.
So in those those are the only
cases in which were seeking
these types of studies when it
is practical to get consent from
someone we are going to seek
consent when it's appropriate
from both children in a cent
from parents.
Thank you Dr grant.
Thank you madam chair
representative unfortunately the
bill doesn't read that way or I
don't see that when was some
misunderstanding but even if
Representative again that's in
I. R. B. and have regulations
and not and specifically in this
bill.
Thank you madam chair
representative cannot that you
know
Only request that I have is to
spell out what can be used I
don't think I got a a response
concerning the pictures of
whether or not they would be
used and I just feel that I
would like to see the consent of
parents even though it's just
aggregate.
Just as small disclaimer that
with the parent can ever come
back and say Hey but they those
guys up there in Santa Fe past
waived my rights to to release
my children's information that's
really where we're we're I'm
going with that I think we did
this the other day Madam chair
representative we did it on on
we we released to the
information of people allow them
to make a decision the other day
when it came to the
permit land grants Fund I I just
don't see anything in the reason
why we would allow people to be
part of that that's all I have
chair representative thank you
very much of the outside of that
it is a wonderful bill thank you
that thank you representative
Representative Thompson thank
you madam chair I'm just I'm I'm
actually puzzled at this point
at and I'm just going to ask one
question I hope so what you have
said all along is that this is
is essentially data that is not
personally identifiable there
will be no pictures that will be
no dates of birth there will be
no names this is kind of like
okay fourteen kids who get this
hat this outcome more six are
you know we we looked at a
thousand records and out of
those thousand records of kids
that are middle school age we
have blank so am I correct in
that that there will by
definition there will be no
personally identifiable
information on the data that's
released.
Thank you madam chair
representative Thompson my
understanding is with regards to
the reported data and and and
the data that is aggregated to
make up that report that is
correct also hit by has very
specific prohibitions against
the release of of personally
identifiable information that's
codified in federal law and I
will defer to drive here and
again to use our to restate
anything are together further to
listed it further on on anything
I may have left out.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I I believe that the
Representative Hochman Vigil
stated that that correctly so it
would allow us to have data
identified but in the aggregate
reporting those data nothing
would be reported and upon
completion of the collection of
those data that data would be de
identified so we would have
individual data but there would
be no identifiers linked to
those people any longer thank
you madam chair that's all I
have.
Thank you what's the pleasure of
the committee.
For the past
Motion FOR do pass on a second
Torrez would you call the roll
and then committee we have one
more bill.
And
Phelps Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative right.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Louise that
awesome.
Yes.
Representative Liz Thomson.
Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Please advise madam chair.
I'm he's excuse to yes I if he's
not there.
Eight people are still going in
and out of bills vice chair
Joanne Ferrari yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Madam chair Armstrong yes.
That's a total of ten one excuse
okay Representative
you have a do pass on house bill
two fifty three thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee great to see you again
thank you okay our last bill
this morning Committee is house
bill one eighty six
Representative Rehm will have to
bring him over.
As the panelists there he is.
Representative Rehm welcome do
you have any experts you wish
to.
Join.
No madam chair I don't have the
expert all right here you and
Representative Hochman Vigil on
our first billion experts.
Welcome and of sorry you had to
wait so long and glad you're
internet's back up.
Go ahead goal dries my internet
went down for about an hour
really yet be messed up anyway
madam chair helps build one
eighty six I gave the committee
a hand out everyone should have
something that I'm looking at
also and you know this is not a
criticism of U. N. M. it's care
you know when I was a police
officer I was in the are a lot
of.
You know if if I were in a car
wreck I'd want to go to you any
I'm so this is not a criticism
but as we look on page one you
see the purpose of the indigent
hospital Care Act in is to care
for in the jets and I've
highlighted the were bold and
some areas in our current state
statute in that stand out we
look at the bottom of that we
see that there were some changes
made agency wa in the late
nineteen nineties.
Why choirs will go to page two.
We see that number F. County.
Does that mean Bernalillo county
UNM hospitals specifically
excluded themselves from this
indigent Care Act.
And they're gonna transfer we're
going to move the money they're
gonna move instead of collecting
money from the engine Care Act
they're going to get it under
the hospital act.
In when they did that they also
cut out all these other
providers that you see on page
three.
So all the money is going to U.
N. M..
Are in Bernalillo county other
counties it's totally different
there they County commission
determines how they're going to
spend the money and who they're
going to send it to.
By excluding Bernalillo county
and now moving it over to the
To the our our hospital act.
They use the money for
hospital operations and they
were not giving any information
about what is the
Indigent care that they were
providing.
Here for Bernalillo county I'm
talking about Bernalillo county
because of Bernal UNM hospital
does care for indigents
statewide as well.
When we get to page five we look
at all the changes in this law
but the mainly the changes in
the late nineties is the ones
that we're looking at.
We're we're they have changed
the purpose of how they're
collecting that and now they
don't have to account for their
indigent care costs.
The bottom of page five we start
to look at.
Well before we get to the bottom
every county must file with this
county commission how it spends
its indigent Care Act but
because
University of New Mexico
hospital it excluded themselves
they now we're just tell
Bernalillo county commission
well.
We're collected a hundred
million and it's about ten
percent of our operational
costs.
And and that was the answer that
they were giving.
At the bottom of page five.
We note in two thousand that the
mill levy is three point four
six seven and for our new
members milled one mill is equal
to one dollar of tax per
thousand dollar value of your
home remember it's reduced by a
third when they go to the tax
but that's basically what it is
so it's three point four six
seven dollars per thousand
dollars value when we go to page
six we note that they increase
the mail to six point five.
Now my recollection was that
there was a construction project
that University of New Mexico
hospital wanted to complete and
they needed the money I have
never gotten a firm answer from
UNM hospital none of us over
several years what was the
increase.
Anyway we look down at twenty
ten there it there at ninety
million dollars out of
Bernalillo county only.
And today they're collecting
over a hundred million.
As we continue to build
or there's more construction and
Bernalillo county in the
property values increase this
this of money that will go to
your amendment will continue to
increase.
As we go to the bottom of page
six on to page seven now I
bolded on page in you'll see a
mostly on page seven.
The
The mill levies if you will that
most counties that have a
hospital are collecting to
support their indigent
a care.
And I want to highlight a couple
of it now most counties actually
collect a gross receipts tax not
a mill levy but this the
legislative count council
verdict this to a mill for each
one of those counties but if we
look at Dona Ana County.
They're collecting two point two
two seven eight you know mails
for their hospital operation for
indigents.
And when we go to.
Eight we see Santa Fe County is
collecting one point zero two
nine five mills.
And so we're you know it when we
look at Bernalillo county is
collecting six and a half mills
there's quite a disparity there.
And you won a has taken the
position that the.
Cost of indigent care is so high
that they're losing money well
the bottom of page eight is kind
of a description of what is
occurring at that time and I
think this is twenty fifteen
according to the state auditor
there meaning making thirty
million dollars in capital
improvements they're giving pay
raises to their employees and
administration and they have a
fifty million dollar profit per
year and that's not out of our
company that's failing.
When we go to page.
Nine with the if we look kind of
this is a the
a statement that was prepared
for the county commission and
when we look there and I've kind
of there's an error over on
Capitol initiatives you look at
it they're doing sixty million
dollars.
And in their actual capital we
mission is which you know I want
to see the hospital would prove
I don't want to go bankrupt so
this is not to to do that on
page nine we look at all twenty
ten UNM hospital again twenty
three million to Sandoval County
for their UNM hospital they
built out there.
Twenty in twenty eleven you and
hospital again
money to this soul provide
community provider fund.
The spread out across the.
Let's go to page two and so what
were they doing with this money
this increased revenue when they
went from.
Twenty four seven to six and a
half we should look at the first
one the UNM CEO and this was
Steve McKernan look at his pay
increase over thirteen years two
hundred and thirty four percent.
And when you look at these seven
top positions they account for
three percent of the mill levy
from Bernalillo county.
And that.
You know I I I understand
administrators make money and
I'm not criticizing Steve
recurrence operation of the
hospital it is advanced Andrea.
But
you know to go ahead and have a
government job and get a two
hundred and thirty four percent
increase in thirteen years as
it's a little hard to swallow
for the public.
So I asked the LFC the go ahead
look at UNM hospital and and see
what's going on.
So at the bottom of page two and
I'm talking about the FIR the
comes out the following year and
on page eleven.
Look at it and the LFC
determined this is from the FIR
my legislation the US taxpayers
from Bernalillo county or
bearing a financial burden of
providing health care services
for the entire state.
And you want them if they're not
receiving enough money from the
other counties that's an issue
they need to take up with those
counties and not Bernalillo
county.
Then we go ahead we see December
twenty fifteen.
U. N. M. there's an article in
the in the newspaper you NM
constant uncompensated care.
Has been cut in half.
So the the indigents you know
the money they're spending on
order going down.
Of there is a state auditor's
report from twenty fifteen in
the you know I don't want to
read it all you know I think we
all want to get the lunch at
some point your.
When we move you to page
thirteen so I started I was
working with our county
commission originally it was
Deanna Archuleta and then it
became Maggie Hart Stebbins and
they began asking questions of
U. N. M. and how many indigents
they haven't we have been
Bernalillo county and how is the
money being spent.
So when we look at the first
table there you'll notice that
in June of twenty thirteen
there's ninety eight thousand
indigents and Bernalillo county.
As we start to have the
affordable Care Act RubyAnn we
see down here June twenty
fourteen there's now sixty six
thousand.
And then in the last six months
of
of twenty fourteen there's only
six thousand then we're leaving
the antigens to Medicaid which
is the proper thing to do but
they're now in an insurance
pool.
So in twenty twelve R. E. U. N.
M. was planning on building
ninety six bed hospital thanks
to the unit state and at the
time they were saying well we
don't have any money and then
suddenly the state returning
comes up and says that he's got
Bernalillo nine million in cash
savings to pay for this and even
the state auditor at the time
could find where that money was.
Then in twenty sixteen chairman
and Ross told me they had over
three hundred million it was
three hundred twenty five
million in cash savings.
If we look at November.
Of twenty sixteen the
Albuquerque journal.
We're talking about how.
You know these images have been
moved to Medicaid and the actual
cost to care for Bernalillo
county and Sandoval County
has gone down to about sixty
four million for the two counts.
So when we get down to page
sixteen about the middle the
total earned compensate the care
of the uninsured.
Is now down to forty four
thousand.
So.
You know clearly we've we've
gone quite a ways we've moved a
long way away.
I don't like the twenty twenty
data that's on page seventeen I
think that with COVID it's not
accurate data but we see that
basically what they've done is
they've moved to about thirty
million a year for Bernalillo
county indigents and twenty
nineteen.
U. N. M. R. on the bottom is
seventeen but when Steve for
Kernan retires they give you a
golden parachute we're gonna
paying
A basically at the end of this
they're paying a hundred and
fifty thousand just to sit at
home.
On page eighteen.
September eleventh twenty
twenty.
In this article it says that
they've got a thirty six million
dollars surplus in twenty
twenty.
One of the things about all the
hospitals every hospital must
provide.
Charity care or indigent care
however you want to call it to
keep their nonprofit status so
if we work at Presbyterian
Hospital.
Who's here in Albuquerque in on
page nineteen they've got forty
million in uncompensated care
remember back in is we began
press hospitals cut out of the
loop of receiving any money.
Because of the the definition of
a County.
The mill levy is approved every
eight years and Bernalillo
county in the the purpose of
this is they will continue to
receive the eight hundred of the
hundred million.
Our until twenty twenty four
Andrew this is voted on again at
that time it would go down to
thirty million so over this
period those continue to move
more people into Medicaid or
other insurance.
And
we all know with the affordable
Care Act all of our.
Individual insurance went up to
help pay for the larger plan for
everyone.
Anyway that's so what this
legislation does I saw the FIR
was a little unclear of the date
perhaps we need to make the date
more clear but this is it is to
go in effect not next year
because a new election but when
we go to renew the bond that we
renew it or at the question goes
to the voters at that time would
be for a thirty million dollar
Miletic and with that madam
chair of stand for questions.
Thank you Representative first
we'll go to the audience are we
don't have very many people left
here but if we have our poll.
In support or opposition to
house bill one eighty six if you
would.
Time.
we're we're dwindling on our
audience but we have one in
opposition is there anyone in
the audience who wishes to speak
for against.
Okay we will go to questions
from the committee.
Representative trusses.
There thank you madam chair
Representative quick question up
was it seems like
Representative you're just
trying to.
You're asking for transparency
is that correct.
Representative crosses.
Currency we need to recognize
that the affordable Care Act is
brought our actual indigent care
costs down and we need to move
the mill back down just to cover
the interject here.
Thank you thank you
Representative I was just trying
to understand I know you were
concerned about the mill levy
and stuff this is that this is
going to help it out keep in
mind again of these madam chair
representative forgive me for
what we're we're trying to
navigate two or three things at
once here and so I did in that
does this bill in any way shape
or form help or hurt any rule.
Hospitals.
Madam chair representative
process it has nothing to do
with any other county than
Bernalillo county okay I just
wanted to thank you madam chair
representative I just want to
confirm that make sure I hadn't
missed something at and and
that's what I had read thank you
that's all the questions I have
Madam chair representative thank
you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair like to
put for a motion to do pass.
I'd like to make a substitute
motion to
At table and I will second that.
Okay that takes precedence
Torrez would you call role on a
motion to table.
And.
Motioned to table Representative
Phelps Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Britney but a
hostage.
Yes to table.
Representative come bash yes to
table.
Representative Stephanie lord no
to table.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Able.
Did you say yes ma'am yes.
Representative Roger.
I'm.
But I enjoy that.
I felt the power of unity there
for a moment
yes to table thank you sorry.
Representative Lewis but also.
No to table god bless you guys.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Representative going back to
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Madam chair please advise she's
used.
Representative vice chair Joanne
Ferrari yes to table.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes to table.
The madam chairman yes we were
unanimous vote I was in the
other office and I ran in and I
didn't understand the motion
could I vote no.
Sure.
Can change your votes in now.
So we have three knows and I am
yes and one excuse.
Okay Representative you keep
doing the good.
The trying on this
We have some more years before
the
it goes back to the motor so but
this morning your bill is
tabled.
Your.
You all have a good day thank
you.
Okay
Committee that is our last
Committee meeting for this week
and I'm trying to figure out or
for
for now I'm still trying to
figure out of time for Saturday
to make sure that we have as the
low least amount of conflict
between different committees
going on so I will is by as soon
as I know what time I'm trying
to aim for Saturday morning
madam chair seeing as you have
three members on C. pack we are
not meeting on Saturday saying
that sorry about antioxidant and
judiciary's meeting in the
afternoon so I'm at your yeah
that hello energy is meeting
Sunday okay month meeting Sunday
instead yes anyone else conflict
yeah if it'll help but in it
everyone I would like to start
at four in the morning I'm
totally teasing.
Just
after all the series drive
somebody knew him.
You madam chair.
There is no you should start at
four AM and will join in yes.
one of the COVID before on the
I'll do all the public comment.
Anyone have not have any known
conflicts for if we met at nine
till about noon.
I haven't heard yet from
agriculture at that time they
met in the afternoon okay so the
that's a tentative and all
confirm as soon as I can I don't
know about education okay.
We'll try and work it out.
Okay thank you everyone and
we'll see you sometime on
Saturday thank you.
Everybody got as.
