Okay.
So we are going to start.
We are going to start with
I don't know what bill is I
don't have.
Health no actually eight we're
gonna start with health bill
eighty three because we expect
that to be very quick if we want
to get folks on the way and we
don't expect that next bill to
be very quick so so go ahead
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of the appreciate
to you letting us go first and
this bill relates to the
practice of the dietary and it
makes for very simple changes in
the projector built to centrally
be sure that the dietary is is
set in terms of the of the the
license fees and the other kinds
of things is is treated the same
as as physicians
and of.
With that I will let my expert
Dr Janet Simon who is a
wonderful for dieters and very
briefly explain what we changed
and hopefully that will satisfy
everyone and but we're here to
answer questions certainly if
you have them.
Great thank you madam chair
Thompson and then you hello
Representative.
Matthews you move your Mike
over.
This way yes that better okay
transplant you no problem on
that.
So my background with the bill
is.
First I have been a practicing
podiatric physician for thirty
three years here and had served
on the New Mexico board of
podiatry for almost twenty years
having been serve moved into and
enriches status
a year and a half ago.
These changes including the
increased time for renewals has
been something we have talked
about for many years to decrease
the burden of every year have to
renew our license and we
consistently have had problems
because of the end of the year
December thirty first and the
new licenses getting that
information in a timely manner
back to our hospitals and other
credentialing bodies that always
need our current license so this
is an effort to decrease some of
the burden on the paperwork.
With that said we know the
Medical Board their licensing
renewal time is three years we
have requested two years based
on that that is the average for
podia Ettrick physician
licensing across the country the
other major changes is in
regards to.
Reciprocity licensing allowing
others licensed in other states
to come to New Mexico the
requirement had been for five
years of prior practice we are
requesting three years.
Mainly because there is clearly
much more flocks in how long
people stay in any one position
now
if we can get people to stay
three years in a practice I
would say that would be great on
the other is in regards to
the sunset.
I mean we're requesting an
extension on that because this
again cycle presents challenges
when we're trying to update and
get our practice statute
as I sort of say in the twenty
first century thank you and and
chair I would also note that
this bill was passed by the
house
a year ago and it got caught in
the Senate back up
and that ended up not making it
through
And so with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative and Dr
Simon so is there anyone here in
opposition to the podiatry bill.
Anyone on zoom we're doing the
podiatry bit bill so if you have
your hand raised for something
else please lower it until we
get to that thank you
Of okay Daniel banks are you
here on the podiatry build.
I need yourself please.
You madam chair I was trying to
hand as you asked what it
apparently went up and then went
back down so that
thank you anyone here in support
of the podiatry bill.
Not another sexy Bill Marian.
So anyone on zoom in in favor of
the podiatry bill.
Okay seeing no one we will go to
the committee representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair just just
for.
To clarify everything especially
for my constituents what happens
if this bill doesn't pass.
Madam chair representative of
because of the sunset clause is
at the end of I believe it's
twenty twenty four the board
would did a web existence if we
weren't able to extend.
And so that that would be a very
negative impact on the practice
of podiatry and the availability
of podiatry services thank you
very much want to anyone else
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Matthews it is so
what it's.
What has been your feedback of
your requests to double the fees
in this process.
Then Madam chair representative
we're not doubling to the fees
we're making the license.
Period two years so we're saying
fees with the same three so it
was three hundred dollars I
think was three hundred dollars
a year now it's six hundred
which you you renew every two
years so it's really no change
fees remain the same these
remains thank you very much.
On that point actually
In one of our analysis and says
it appears that it is currently
five hundred is it five hundred
hours at three hundred.
The renewal fee is three hundred
the five hundred I believe is
for initial license okay you you
may want to clarify that I am
not sure where you're going next
if it's very I would advise that
strongly and then the other
thing is
What are of regulation and
licensing says the bill
increases the fees so if if you
would just do a minor amendment
and so you know maybe make it
more clear that the five hundred
is the first time thing and and
Representative why is there a
sunset clause that was the first
thing that caught me in the bill
it's like oh they're going to
have to be back I mean
admittedly it's a few more years
down the road but why did you
put in a sunset clause at all.
Madam chair because this point
in time
this board has had since it and
so it would be a fairly major
change to change that and I will
I would say that we are talking
with R. O. de about doing some
more to make it won't much more
similar to the medical board.
Thank you for that any more
questions
You.
Okay second okay so well.
So Ferrary and lord are the is
there any opposition.
Seeing that and you have a do
pass.
Right.
Okay so we're gonna go on to
house bill seven
and I'm gonna lay down some
ground rules first so each side
will have thirty minutes of
public comment one minute per
person.
And what we will try to what
what I would like to ask is is
when I when we get to that point
people on
zoom who want to speak and we
will do opposition first of
people who are in opposition
please raise your hand so we
could I can figure out how many
of you I should take versus how
many people who are here in the
room no I'm I mean I'm they will
raise your hands I can see you
here but I don't know the ones
who so and we will get to that
point after the bill is
presented and I'm gonna request
that everyone be mindful of your
time if we need to we will have
a sergeant come in and
Help you away from from the
microphone
and it also we are going to be
simple and kind no name calling
no no excusing no no bad
behavior let's act like adults
so with that go ahead thank you
madam chairwoman and thank you
committee for hearing this bill
this morning I have with me
today a little rush forth who is
the managing reproductive rights
and gender equity attorney with
ACLU of New Mexico and I also
Dr Malinga claim who's ever
elected.
I also have a little rush forth
with me the ACLU and then only a
claim who's a gender affirming
care provider in New Mexico as
well and we have yes money for
many of the other folks who can
help with that too so well thank
you so it as you know I'm
Representative with Sir Linda
Serrato and as many of you know
less I have two youngsters my
first pregnancy I had decision
diabetes and for the last six to
eight weeks you need to go in
for regular twenty minute alter
sounds twice a week just to make
sure things going well and in
those experiences I've met many
women and folks from across
northern New Mexico who traveled
more than an hour plus just to
come to these regular
appointments as we know health
care New Mexico can be hard to
find it hard to reach and this
bill house bill seven the
reproductive and gender
affirming health care freedom
Act ensures that we are not
adding fear on top of that what
it does is it prevents public
bodies from discriminating
against the the use of or
refusal to use reproductive or
gender affirming health care on
that is simply what it does and
what we know is that eight out
of ten maternal deaths are
preventable and prenatal care
can make a difference in that
and we know that eight out of
ten transgender individuals have
contemplated suicide and forty
percent of those have attempted
suicide with increasing numbers
among you so these are life
saving health care treatments
that we want to make sure people
in New Mexico understand that
they have access to without any
fear of persecution prosecution
or discrimination I like to head
over to Ellie for for the
comments and then drive clean
thank you thank you
Representative madam chair
absolutely.
I can project.
Here the fact is raise your hand
and all okay well.
Maybe a.
That.
Hi of.
How bout now you hear now yeah
yes to speak really loud.
Yeah yells on the back.
I don't actually yell at anyone.
So
Madam chair representative hi my
name's Kylie Rushworth.
Thank you for the opportunity to
be here today.
I'm from Los crucis.
I I'll turn the volume up okay.
Sure hold on.
Are there from.
No that just connects to the
yes.
What I pretty.
Yeah.
Could.
Madam chairwoman.
Madam chairman could people hear
me when I was in this Mike with
this one okay.
I'm I'm pretty.
All
has ever accused me of being.
Let me see.
If this any better for the folks
in the back.
I can also in some of our.
Yes
justice okay.
She has at last.
Right.
There's another way to I.
All right.
Let's try this one is this any
better.
How is it in the back.
So so.
I'm not comfortable taking on.
Let's try that that better.
Okay online.
Full if if you all can't hear me
like you said I can speak
louder.
So thank you all for your
patience while we work that out
like I said from the tap my
name's Ellie rush for I am an
attorney at the ACLU of New
Mexico and I'm a mom I grew up
in Los crucis and I've been
practicing in this area for many
years.
I want to take this opportunity
to describe what this bill does
not do Representative Serrato
outlined what this bill does to.
What this bill does not do.
Is create an affirmative duty
for anyone to provide health
care that they do not already
provide for that they do not
feel comfortable providing.
It does not change medical care
standards.
Clinical guidelines anything of
that nature.
It is not expanded clinicians
scope of practice in any way.
Nor does it require.
Elementary school teachers to
quote facilitate abortion care
or gender affirming health care.
What this bill does is
incorporate explicitly existing
constitutional statutory and
regulatory law.
It protects people from sex and
gender based discrimination and
provide and complements the
already comprehensive regulatory
framework in medical care.
New Mexico has always been a
leader in access to high
quality.
Compassionate medical care.
Let's keep it that way.
Thank you madam chairman and if
I can have my expert Dr McLean
State briefly a few words thank
you.
Representative Committee members
and representatives I just want
to first check if folks can hear
me.
In the back.
Okay.
Does this better.
Thank.
Good work.
Thank here in the back that work
okay I see a thumbs up okay good
if it if you see a thumbs down
just let me know and I'll start
over again I'm sure person
committee members Representative
I really appreciate the
opportunity to be here today to
discuss the Representative
reproductive and gender
affirming health care freedom
Act I have been working with
gender expansive people
providing medical care for
people of all ages here in New
Mexico since I graduated from
residency it University of New
Mexico in two thousand seventeen
and today I am here on behalf of
my patients my colleagues and my
loved ones who are gender
expansive I hear every day about
how much resiliency is required
simply to exist as a gender
expansive person today in our
world and it is it is purely
social economic exclusion that
leads to the poor and avoidable
health outcomes that gender
expansive people experience for
example in one study of nearly
twenty eight thousand gender
expansive people forty one
percent of respondents reported
having attempted to kill
themselves in their lifetime
that's compared to four point
six percent in the general
population and that's simply one
example and in order to be very
clear any group that faces the
level of pervasive
discrimination the gender
expansive people sit face on a
daily basis that would be with
that would make any individual
in any group sec this is not
specific to gender expansive
people to specific to human and
health care I am so proud to
work as a physician in New
Mexico where the values of
autonomy freedom and choice are
held so dear this bill
represents those values and also
sends an important message to
gender expansive people and
their families that their lives
and access to lifesaving and
evidence based medical care is
both valued and protected here
in New Mexico again I appreciate
the opportunity to be here and
I'm ready to answer any
questions thank you madam
chairwoman.
With that we stand for questions
thank you
First with the show of hands who
here than opposition.
Okay who here is in support.
Okay so for public comment
I have a bunch of people on here
I'm trying to figure out how to
do this about twelve fifteen
people on here so
again if you're in opposition
and want to speak raise your
hand.
Okay if you will go ahead and
come up I think with with you
and with the people on zoom we
We should be able to get in
thirty I hope.
Yeah.
Yeah does at.
Okay so Ellie has given up Percy
so if you can come come over to
the seat on the side and and we
will be timing you and when your
time is up
Well let you know.
So go ahead thank you James
Langenbrunner nuclear physicist
Santa Fe this legislation is an
attempt to provide human
consensus by uniformly
compelling public bodies is to
provide it is advisory bodies
county commissions school boards
universities quasi governmental
bodies to follow reproductive
health care rules such as those
on big issues abortion and
sexual transformations rules
given by this legislative body
by way of example if Bobby bart
were to inject himself with
hormones to grow groups and Eddy
County he should be able to do
so and Katrin county that's
uniform application.
This is understandable if for
example a sexually transmitted
disease were to be rampant and
encountering could spread to
everybody in the county sexually
active or promiscuous because
there would not be health care
to stop it that's your one
minute thank you.
I.
My name is Julie for I wanted to
come in and ask for you to vote
no on this house bill Wednesday
it was announced that here in
New Mexico the satanic temple
was opening T. S. T. health to
distribute free religious
abortion as part of the rituals
our freedom of religion should
be taken to the degree of human
sacrifice we are worse than the
Aztec Indian sacrificing
children to their Aztec gods we
sacrifice children to Satan from
the mother's womb we are
responsible for the shedding of
innocent blood I'm gonna share
songs one of six they worship
their idols and they were in
sneered by them they sacrifice
to the gods their own sons and
daughter shedding innocent blood
the blood of their own sons and
daughters whom they sacrificed
to the idols of Canaan
desecrating the land with
bloodshed they defile themselves
by their actions becoming
adulterers by their conduct
genesis chapter nine for your
own pledge of life blood to that
that I will demand an accounting
thank you.
This is human life.
We will mean maintain decorum.
Go ahead.
So I study a lot of black
American history and there's
been a lot of blacks that have
been removed removed from
history books like Lamar Haynes
Public preacher who had no white
congregation the legislature
does as the Minutemen to fall
directly under George Washington
the revolutionary war but
there's been other times that
blacks have been removed and
Margaret Sanger would quote we
don't want to were to go out
that we want to exterminate the
Negro population and this is the
foundation of abortion.
Sir I I'm did you did you
introduce yourself.
Just for the record.
Thank you.
Published on all from Roosevelt
County appreciate the
opportunity to speak to you
today the statement is made that
this bill does not affect our
educators in New Mexico the way
I read this bill they face
consequences if they do anything
to deter or stop any of the
activities listed listed in the
bill we cannot afford to lose
more educator to stay in New
Mexico we'll have people who are
we leaving the education process
due to being forced to violate
their moral ethics and they're
conscious do not stand for
what's right I ask you to oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Hello madam chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Jody Hendrickson I am the
executive director with New
Mexico Family action movie we
represent thousands of families
across New Mexico and we ask you
to oppose this bill for several
reasons first of all the legal
recourse mechanism in this bill
is not clear that it will not
violate a person's right the
public body or the agent of the
public bodies right to be able
to stand on moral or conscious
objections we want to make sure
that people maintain their right
to be able to not participate in
this service they don't agree
with also we do not believe that
local governments and bodies
should lose the right to
determine what's best for their
community if the community votes
and the votes says that they
decide not to offer service in
their community they should
maintain the right to do so as
the people have voted for that
also we recognize that these
services in this bill are
elective procedures the
abortions and the gender
affirming services in the bill
are elective procedures because
life affirming life saving
health care is available
wherever you need it to be
available so what we're really
talking about here is making
sure that these elective
services are unrestricted and I
don't believe that should be
imposed on someone the public
body or the agent of the public
body to have to offer
unrestricted access if it is
something that they object to
thank you.
Thank you.
Hello my name's Bridget Rivera
I.
Come to tell you the real life
story of a child that was born
to unfit mother unfit mother
that was hooked on drugs that
was in a relationship with the
serial rapist me and my sisters
was were born to that mother.
That mother put us through hell
by the age of six years old
courts were not given us to our
father after court appearance
after court appearance after
being.
Put through the system and
therapist over and over the
therapist went to my father and
said I'm sorry Sir but your
daughters will not have a normal
life I tell you all this to tell
you that no matter.
What life is given let them live
because you never know what can
come out of that and I'm asking
you to please do not pass this
bill it doesn't matter what the
child is going through let them
go through life and the process
because it does take time it
took me almost I'm thirty six
years old and it took me that
amount of time to figure out who
I am why am here what the
purpose of all this was and I
don't regret it not one bit
thank you ma'am.
Hello my name's Committee
Sanchez I'm hoping you guys sing
noted as well only because
several reasons actually so my
knees was told over over she won
the past seven they give my my
because in our my sister sorry
more than
More than of options
opportunities to go into the
abortion because they said that
she would have so many issues in
life she's twenty one today they
said that she won the past seven
and she's pregnant with with a
loving husband
so yes say no it's please say no
to abortion given the
opportunity of as far as the
other option their kids I mean I
wanted to be a superhero when
when I was a kid I want to be a
cop when I was a teenager I
wanted to be a firefighter I
became none of those I don't
know what I wanted to actually
be until I was an adult I'm in
the I. T. field you know kids
don't know what they want we've
taken a picture of that time why
should we let them pick their
gender we know as parents we we
try to pick the best foods for
them
you know we don't yes thank you
guys.
Ready okay madam chair members
of the committee my name is Lisa
Martinez I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Alliance
for life I yesterday morning for
the deadline we turned in over
fifteen hundred petitions
against H. B. seven hundred and
I echo the concerns of now two
thousand New Mexicans across the
state who are concerned about
what this bill does and to
clarify I know that we heard
earlier that it does not
facilitate I have a definition
of facilitate from Merriam
Webster's page click clearly
says that is simply to make it
easier and help bring about and
so we're gonna hear from
testimony from everyone on the
side of the aisle in favor the
bill including the sponsors that
this bill would indeed help
bring about and make easier the
access to reproductive health
care gender affirming care which
is a concern especially as it
pertains to students to our
schools to children in the
future of New Mexico the you
know I think the concern that
many folks have again is also at
in section three do that would
ban any effort by all lot
lawmaking bodies at the local
and state level from legislating
against it this is violating our
constitutional rights for due
process in addition to this the
violation of conscience and
religion religious freedom
protections please vote no thank
you.
Hello madam chairman members of
the committee my name is Tanya
Watkins.
I'm a concerned citizen and I am
requesting that you vote no
against this Bill.
And the timeless words of Thomas
Jefferson one of our forefathers
founders of this country the
care of human life and happiness
and not their destruction is the
first and only object of good
government.
This this bill is destroying
people god's creation and.
I
have employer you to vote no.
Whenever you do a thing act as
if all the world we're watching
again Thomas Jefferson.
Not only the world watching you
but god himself when you stand
at the throne of judgment and
you will we all will will you be
able to say I stood for life I
stood for your creation thank
you so much for your time.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thanks
for having me my name is at the
heart and the executive director
right to life committee in New
Mexico and I ask that you vote
no on this measure there's
several things that this bill is
kind of convoluted has three
different points to that one is
reproductive health care which
addresses only abortion and
which I want to ask you is is
this going to also affect
pregnancy centers because the
way the face act now the
department of justice is not
recognize them I don't think
that was your intent but that's
what exactly will happen also
trans gender has nothing to do
with the reproductive rights as
you know that they will not
reproduce and the third is the
all the third on the per third
page would be where your trip
the attorney general's attempt
to stop a communities from
passing ordinances so they might
self govern themselves and
they're going to be finding
themselves fighting in federal
court because the trafficking
abortion bills is against
federal statute is a constant
the Comstock Act is CYFD
eighteen sixty one sixty two so
we have to to respectfully vote
no because this bill definitely
need to be separated for one and
it is against the will of the
people thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm car less Sonntag
im with better together to
Mexico there are thousands of
people in the state that oppose
this bill I ask you to really
consider what you're doing here
you have the right to make
decisions for yourself but
you're forcing.
This bill on counties in
communities that may not agree
with it by passing this you
would be forcing them to do what
you may feel is right but they
don't feel is right.
That is not New Mexico that is
not the way that we should be
managing and governing ourselves
so I ask you to consider that
let people make their own choice
in what they're going to do and
that includes your county and
your communities in how they
manage their selves please vote
no on this thank you.
Thank you we will now go to the
zoo and we will take the first
fifteen on the list and
unfortunately I'm not sure who
got on first or last because
that that doesn't allow me that
so I'm just going to start with
one Chavis if you can unmute
yourself and you have one
minute.
Good morning can you hear me
yes.
Thank you I'm gonna do a prefer
light.
Mary right down of the New World
mother of the living do you do
in trust that because of light.
Look down mother upon the vast
numbers of babies that allowed
to be bored.
Of the four whose lives are made
difficult.
Of men and women who are victims
of brutal violence of the
elderly and the sick kids by a
difference or out of misguided
mercy.
Read that all believing your son
may proclaim the gospel of life
with honesty and love to the
people of our time obtain for
them the grace to accept that
Goss was a gift every new the
joy of celebrating it with
gratitude throughout their lives
and the courage to bear witness
to it resolutely in order to
build together with all people
of goodwill the civilization of
truth and love to the praise and
glory of god the creator and
lover of life a man that is
Saint John Paul the second's
prayer for light.
Thank you and I would be there
except that I'm COVID compromise
so I looking for you guys I'm
not there thank you.
We appreciate that.
okay next we will go to mark.
Cavell Larry I'm probably
mispronounce that but mark if
you could meet yourself go
ahead.
Yes thank you very much
somebody's not crowd we're with
the southwest coast of life out
of Los crucis and I we just we
stand in opposition house bill
seven simply that could cause
this is an egregious overreach
by the state government in New
Mexico Thomas Jefferson said
that what has destroyed the
liberty and rights of man and
every government that has
existed under the sun it is the
generalizing concentrating of
all cares and powers under one
body the way to have good in
state government is not to trust
it all to one but to divided
among many it is the dividing in
the subdividing of these
republics that all will be done
for the best local governments
are best suited to understand
the unique needs and challenges
of their communities and they
should have the ability to take
actions and address those
challenges by preventing local
governments from passing
necessary regulations house bill
seven undermines the ability of
communities to protect the
health and well being of their
residents I urge you all to
reject house bill seven and to
please support the rights of
local governments to regulate
manage their local medical
professions in a manner that
best serves the needs of their
communities thank you guys for
your time thank you
Billups
F. J. M. J..
Go ahead.
Yes can you hear me OK yes.
Thank you very much I have a
quote from this can you
introduce yourself first.
Yes my name is Philip McCabe I
live in Williamsburg I'm a
member of the true Catholic
Church our spiritual leaders
Richard jobs of Michael have
granny website John the Baptist
dot US.
I have here a quote from psalm
one oh six.
And they were mingled among the
heathens and learn their works
and serve their idols and it
became a stumbling block to them
and they sacrifice their sons
and their daughters to devils
and they shed innocent blood the
blood of their sons and their
daughters which they sacrificed
to the idols of Canaan in the
land was polluted with blood in
it and was to file with their
works and they wanna side after
their own inventions and the
lord was exceedingly angry with
these people and the imported
his inheritance and he delivered
them into the hands of the
nation's and they are and that a
thank you to that that's time
over.
Okay next is Mary ng
Good morning also stand in
opposition to this law I I
believe that it is a mixture as
has been stated of the
transgender issues with the
reproductive rights issues which
really do not belong together it
is is not of clear clearly
stated bill I believe also that
is an attack on the family
and we are in New Mexico we
actually losing people
You know in in terms of
population and increasing our
and does not help with that
I I think the taking of the
parental rights away in in the
course of abortion and also in
the
With transgender issues that not
long ago in the schoolbased
clinic a child was not able to
have an aspirin without the
permission of the parents and
now we move to this point where
were these types of issues can
be that time thank you.
you sissy gal.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Okay great yes I'm my name is
Susie and I'm moving and cranky
so as a I'm here to speak
against this HB seven as a
mother of two young children I'm
horrified to see this type of
pushing General for me without
you know parents at the moment
managed care to consent this is
a does it really I'll reach a
reach the the quality of this
mentioned that you don't have
you should not be forced people
to do what do you want them to
do people coming their choice so
this opportunity personal choice
so I'm okay here's our speak
again please well not on this
this bill is coming is very the
most medical bills so far on
this issue thanks thank you next
we have Brandt Van ****.
And thank you and madam chair
members of the committee I
increase you to please the no
and H. B. violates our
constitutional rights of all New
Mexicans for the process for you
free speech.
Engine enable protection it will
force our and school and
officials to participate in
things that are against their
conscience if the person is not
happy with me they are created
to be then they will be happy
that adding or subtracting a
**** or a **** yes and it read
that was an increase on the
local entities abilities to self
regulate and and the our local
law should be created and in
regards to the and people in the
stands at their area I will not
be to spring the families we
should not be discreetly
autonomy of individuals I
encourage you to please don't
no on eighty seven thank you for
your time and attention in my
prayers are with each one if
you.
Thank you we have Angie Smith.
Good morning thank you my name
is Angie Smith I'm coming from
Roosevelt County and as I'm
sitting and I constantly listen
to stories of and it is sad when
young people get into mental
health issues and that sort of
thing and they're being told all
the way to fix it is to
completely change your body or
the way to fix it is to remove
the growing body in your body
instead of addressing what is
actually happening if you watch
any of the any documentaries
concerning young people they
will often say determines with
our specialty transitioning they
will say this is not helping me
at all I have heard numerous
stories of young ladies and
women of all ages that go
through an abortion and say that
abortion solve nothing it just
make things worse we used to be
a country that celebrated heroes
sell people that would celebrate
overcoming great circumstances
we make movies about the put him
in our history textbooks but now
we're just seven in somewhere
and say no you just need to do
this and the people that would
come along beside those heroes
were just as important and this
bill aims at those heroes those
that will come along the side
people who are struggling and
you're trying to help them make
a decision that is best for them
not just in the moment that in
their future you were targeting
those people and it's not right
the last thing that was fine
thank you.
Anastasia Griffith.
Yes they sure can you
unmute okay there you go.
Sorry about that I'm Anastasia
Griffith from Los crucis and I
just wanted to encourage you to
please vote no on this bill it
takes away the rights of local
governments to govern their
people and the way that the
people want to be governed every
life matters but even if you
don't believe that even if you
are pro abortion you should see
the value of the people being
able to have a say in how they
wanted their local government to
run things up both those who are
looking for abortion rights and
those who are looking for pro
life
and so I encourage you to vote
no and let local governments do
their job thank you for your
time thank you.
Next we have a Marci may.
This is Marcy may our little bit
you're a little off.
Okay this is better yes thank
you okay
my time starts now yes I want to
first of all say that this
there was language just calling
people that don't agree with
this bill silly and that goes
against in name calling of that
has no place in this place and
this legislation
we need to look at our when you
look at transgenders and the big
thing is has to be life
affirming
anybody who's had a surgery
knows that your body is never
the same and why would we put
children at risk who are
depressed or suicidal and and
mutilate their bodies I went
after they're done people have
tried to do transition or they
can't do transition they're
stuck with their bodies and who
is making the money that this
bill is a bullying bills to
those who don't agree it is
unconstitutional it is
establishing that transgenderism
which is a believe it's our
religious beliefs and even we
can see that satanic churches
are touching abortion that set
and then the we'll go to
religious and thank you Radley.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and committee I am on the school
board in Farmington.
And would please do not pass HB
seven we cannot afford more
liability we certainly cannot
afford to lose more staff they
are our district is suffering as
a the population.
And what we need is more mental
health care for these.
The students who are confused or
who just may need that
affirmation that they are okay
either way we need local
control.
by removing removing the
qualified immunity that the
results of that have been
catastrophic nationwide and it
prevents local cities and
counties from regulating on our
own
Our own values of our
communities and letting the
voters and the children and the
families can make their choices
on the local level we will go to
thank Edith downs.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee can you hear me
OK yes.
Thank you thank you for hearing
my comments with all due respect
this bill seems a rather than
being proactive it seems
punitive
Many of the treatments that are
listed in the bill our medical
interventions drugs and
surgeries and all surgeries and
drugs have risk and potential
side effects and the bill is
dangerous if that does not allow
agents of the public body to
fully disclose risks side
effects outcomes.
And to really evaluate pros and
cons of the different options
That discussion could be
construed as denying interfering
or preventing.
Treatment so I'm concerned about
that
Concern that there's no
conscience protection.
No statute of limitations on
enforcement that's tough.
We thank you we will go to Chris
Kelly.
Hello thank you can hear me yes
my name's Christopher County I
am a practicing.
Years in Las Vegas New Mexico.
And a parent of parents school
teachers and so this bill does
it prevents us from counseling
advising our patients our
students things that might help
them it also forces us to refer
people to things that many of us
find immoral so my one question
is do you really want nurses
teachers doctors.
Who taking care of your family
members taking care of the
children who are willing to
violate.
Their moral
believes just because.
You want them to even if you
disagree are you sure you want
people that we taking care of
you thank you very much thank
you.
we have two more it will be Leo
M. and then Logan so go ahead
Lee L. M..
Thank you madam chair and
committee of the board my name
is Liam exam and I am in Santa
Fe County I am a parent of four
children are actively in school
right now I also teach
Senator kirke high schools and
it's already a big problem there
is that we're able to the
students are able to access
things like plan B. without
parents even noticing or knowing
what's going on I'd like to echo
that not having the opportunity
for us to have a voice in this
being faced with sanctions are
teachers being faced with
sanctions I think some of these
issues need to be taking on at
home with the family we need to
empower the families more to
talk about who their children
are what their identity is and
what they're working through and
the school need to provide
mental health care for these
children substance abuse trouble
is a huge thing that children
face and they don't get any help
with that school and anything
they get told to go back to
class with their THC vape pens
with their pales in their
pockets they need help with that
staff and those are the things
that I time I thank all there
was a contributor we will go to
login.
Hello my name is Logan brown
from eastern New Mexico I
strongly oppose H. B. seven for
many reasons and request the
vote no today if you vote yes
consider making the following
amendments of the local
municipalities to not violate
their conscience and be able to
reflect the values of their
local constituents next section
two subsection C. defines what
this bill means by reproductive
health care of care according to
the Hippocratic oath is first do
no harm I requested admission
number two and all of fortune be
removed from this bill medical
definition of abortion is the
termination of pregnancy after
the death of the embryo or fetus
all the questions result in the
death of developing human embryo
or fetus ninety six percent of
I'll just leave that human life
begins at fertilization abortion
us harm because it ends the life
of a developing human in the
womb abortion also does harm
because according to the Mayo
Clinic has major emotional it is
illogical psychological
consequences among many other
possible health risks of the
mother.
The question is that when like
the in the when should we
protect life as a state we are
known as the late term capital
of the capital of the US for
questions that's your time thank
you okay we will go on to the in
support and I've been provided a
list so we will start with the
people in the world Erica Davis
Crump.
Marshall Martinez.
hope that I offer got on zoom if
you a please lower your hand if
you are in opposition on zoom
please raise your hand if you
are in support just so we get an
idea of
Okay.
Okay all right so I'm sorry
about that so we will start with
that Erica Davis Crump Marcia
Martinez because.
Some of the yes so go ahead we
have yeah we have a Mike.
Thank you how would you like me
to stand facing there is fine
great good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is indicative is crap and I am
the director of advocacy of
growth thank
he also know me as the co chair
of the respective when we passed
a year ago
I am here today to say thank you
for this bill and thank you to
the staff is from my community
career in community with the
most marginalized from a
personal lived experience as a
black woman.
I have realized the vital need
for health care that comes with
dignity and care and above all
without discrimination and
judgment as a woman of faith
raised in the church with a
bachelor's in Christian ministry
from the Baptist university I'm
clear on the tenets of my faith
and I have a cell seventy and a
ton of me as a primary birth
rate myself and the girls and
girls Inc fully stand in support
of this policy to protect from
the from the health care for all
building bodies and thank you
for giving this a new path and
also black women gave you
reproductive justice black queer
feminism again you reproductive
justice thank you.
Right on one minute
go ahead Marshall.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez executive director of
equality New Mexico.
The battle for LGBTQ liberation
is a battle for autonomy for
generations we have known all
too well the oppressions of
being told what we can and
cannot do with our bodies with
our identities and with our
lives house bill seven is about
autonomy is about being
entrusted no matter where we
live in New Mexico to make the
best decisions for ourselves and
our families.
It is about saving lives because
let's be clear abortion care is
lifesaving health care is a
critical piece of ensuring that
we get to decide our own
destinies and gender affirming
care is suicide prevention it is
about ensuring that we are able
to walk through the world as a
whole authentic selves without
restrictions placed upon us by
others house bill seven is not
full liberation but is one
urgent and critical step on that
long path for us.
Thank you.
Madam chair and committee
members good morning I'm because
timing pulley from some of the
funds will put them I'm a very
quick and community healer I'm
here today to speak up for
transistors and others those are
living in this time those who
have transitioned and those who
have yet to come I am inviting
all of you who have tracing
passing laws to move through the
land of your deepest humanity
first I have three believe
eleven children in my life who
we as adults come on binary or
trans the young this just ten I
but just before.
They turned for the state to
their pants they wanted to
change their name and gender
their parents a budget I watch
this child and wrap their wings
this child began to smile and
laugh more often and I could see
the confidence going in their
body at the black an indigenous
person I believe it to be true
that we do not disown our people
that we have always had non
binary and transistors and
others I believe in order for
communities to thrive we need to
allow people to show up whole
and fully who they are and it is
our responsibility to take care
of each other no exceptions I
ask you all to pass H. B. seven
in support of this bill we're
saying we want to families free
from physical and mental harm
and violence thank you heather
Smith
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is heather
Smith and I'm with bold features
New Mexico
I was born in Los crucis and
raised in Los crucis I'm a very
proud New Mexican I've been a
queer advocate for most of my
life and for most of my life
I've seen multiple struggles and
barriers that my trend family
and friends have had to navigate
through when seeking health care
it's not easy for them.
Some of them didn't make it.
The bottom line is gender
affirming health care saves
lives.
Hello with of different genders
deserve to choose the health
care that's right for them
without interference thank you
very much.
Michael Martinez.
Thank you for that you.
To make.
Good morning madam chair and
representatives my name is Mike
Martinez and I stand with
generation action Planned
Parenthood
and I believe that everybody
should have freedom and access
to abortion care and they need
without fear of arrest
interrogation and
criminalization and I believe
affirming care can save lives
thank you.
fifteen Armstrong.
So I will call on then Monet
archer back Mike up it's in the
and Noreen Kelly.
Good morning chair percent have
members of the committee I am
Christine Armstrong a black non
binary person and the director
of advocacy at the trans gender
resource centre of New Mexico.
I'm here in support of HB seven
from first hand experience I can
attest tender Fuhrman health
care is a life saving health
care and suicide prevention as a
black non binary person friend
and community organizer I've
witnessed gender affirming care
save the lives of many and then
a fab non binary person with the
ability to reproduce has saved
my life and from a data
perspective in twenty nineteen
the youth risk and resiliency
survey show trans youth were
four times more likely to
attempt suicide than their sis
appears.
Everyone deserves access to
equitable health care including
those of all genders.
And gender from health care is a
priority we all win and as such
I urge you all to support this
bill thank you and happy black
history month.
Okay next we have Monday are to
back.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I I am on a
budget back and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee we
stand in strong support of H. B.
seven because it prohibits
public bodies from denying
restricting or discriminating
against individuals right to use
a refuse reproductive a gender
affirming care as we all should
know gender affirming care is a
life saving care the most
influential factor in health
safety and I think spect in C.
for trance and non very binary
individuals of the access they
have to life saving gender
affirming health care thank you
for your time and happy black
history month.
Thank you
Mike up at city that chair
members of the committee say
Michael Brittany the search and
then
I'm here on behalf of table
women United as it's a native
women led community based
organization located in Espanola
serving rural and indigenous
communities in northern New
Mexico the organization
addresses the challenges of
reproductive health and justice
for indigenous women and people
this is why we support XP seven
the reproductive intent vendor
funding health care freedom Act
we believe that reproductive and
gender funding care is health
care and healthcare is a
fundamental right rural
communities already face limited
access to reproductive and
gender funding care and
indigenous burning people have
disproportionately higher
maternal let's have a mentality
rates every New Mexican deserves
an unobstructed access to the
full range of care that is
needed to make well informed
decisions about their own
reproductive health that
promotes a Tanami dignity
respect and empowerment so that
they may live healthy and happy
lives this is an alignment with
Taylor women United's
comprehensive approach in
building eleven communities
thank you sponsors a committee
members.
But next we have Noreen Kelly.
This is the.
He's not here okay so we are
going to we have done
Eight eight minutes and we have
the list of eight minutes on
zoom so I will allow
an additional fourteen people
who are in line.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Laura
like how long I am the acting
Medicaid director for the state
of New Mexico and with the
agency's current focus on
maternal children prenatal
postnatal and reproductive
health we stand in support of
this bill thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is a lot of
chances I am the Medicaid
medical director Loralai spoke
about the reproductive health
part I'm going to speak about
the gender affirming care piece
we are already working with
stakeholders on trying to make
our regulations more inclusive
eighteen states already cover
gender affirming care in in
Medicaid my role as a clinician
in Medicaid is to bring the
clinical perspective to Medicaid
policy the data is overwhelming
gender affirming care reduces
suicide self harm anxiety and
depression for gender pay
expensive citizens gender
affirming care is lifesaving
care thank you.
And points for being under.
Okay I don't I'll try to do that
can do that madam chair
committee thank you for being
here today I'm very pleased that
this bill is coming forward I'm
with the national organization
for women and we are in complete
support for this bill the gives
respect for as Marshall said
autonomy and respect thank you
thank you.
Good morning madam chair what
woman and committee members my
name is Dr Clare Lopez I'm a
family physician and I'm also
here in support of New Mexico
Academy of Family physicians.
in my experience.
It is incredibly important for
patients to feel comfortable.
Accessing the care they need and
for physicians to provide
appropriate and necessary care
without fear fear of
repercussions when patients
don't feel comfortable accessing
the care they need secondly to
the late care.
Person physical health mental
anguish and as we have heard
even death the delays the
providing of the prevention of
accessing care would greatly
increase the costs to
individuals as well as the
community and that is why I in
the academy support this bill
and would ask you to as well
thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is liming Care
us that's L. A. and then I am a
first year at UNM and moved to
New Mexico last August I was
raised and born in Texas and
when I was sixteen I came out as
a transgender woman the state of
Texas at the time had been and
continues to the state to
restrict the rights and access
to gender affirming care for
both adults and minors affected
children's hospital in Dallas
was forced to shut down its
gender affirming Connick two
weeks before an appointment just
imagine if my parents have been
supportive of states the state
would have taken me away under
orders from the Attorney
General.
So one month after I turned
eighteen I moved here for the
sake of my own personal safety
and to see care however if not
if not protected those rights
and my safety can be taken away
not just for me but funds others
in your.
Today I urge you if the
transportation assistant suicide
survivor of someone who's
experienced the worst case
scenario that I urge you to
support this bill support do the
right thing support the spell.
The protective case also nice as
well thanks.
Hi my name is Nathan I'm here
because I was able to get a day
off so couple of lying or access
to reproductive and gender
affirming care in New Mexico is
a good beginning of the next
that becomes clear if we look
outside California's Senate bill
one of seven from late twenty
twenty two for one currently
promises not to participate in
the arrest or extradition out of
state restrictions of
individuals who come to
California for their legal care
consider such an except for New
Mexico families are already
seeking shelter from other
states threaten thanks that's
all.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is J.
Roscoe and I'm with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs we stand in
strong support of house bill
seven as an organization working
to support survivors of sexual
violence across the state we
know that sexual about happens
in every community we also know
that trans people are vital and
important part of every
community therefore all
survivors entrance people should
have equal access to essential
health care no matter where in
the state they live violence
takes away a person's choice
about how what happens to the
body and the life to heal our
communities we must support them
by ensuring every single person
in them has the freedom and
choice to make their own
decisions about their health we
believe that every person knows
what is best for them please
support this bill thank you.
Good morning madam madam chair
members of the community hi I'm
sorry members of the committee
I'm Hannah Burling president of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the league support
everyone's right to reproductive
health care including abortion
access and birth control.
we believe that we propose
actually statutory and
regulatory restrictions that
strip people of their personal
autonomy and open the door to
a road more freedoms and
fundamental rights.
We also believe that the
patchwork of current laws
protecting LGBTQ people is no
we're good enough and that many
New Mexicans suffer in security
and potential discrimination of
affect their everyday lives
their medical care their health
and their personal safety L. G.
B. T. Q. people need.
Thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Meredith nation
speaking on behalf of the
American Association of
university women and we have
fought long and hard for the
rights of individuals to have
access to reproductive health
and to have no interference by
governments or individuals in
individual choices about one's
own health and this goes for
whatever your gender orientation
is we really appreciate all the
work that went into crafting the
this legislation the wording was
very very carefully put into not
require anyone to do anything
but here she does not want to do
and I think so there been some
misimpressions that people would
be forced to.
Provide care that they didn't
want to do their age should not
be any violations though of
anyone to restricting access to
reproductive care thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee he
result from the southwest
women's Law Center this bill
would put into law requirement
that there be no political
interference with New Mexicans
ability to make extremely
intimate and personal decisions
that can change the entire
course of someone's life it is
imperative that we respect
personal decision making any
knowledge that it is not our
place to decide for someone else
whether they get an abortion it
is better that they make that
decision with their family and
according to their fate we
should trust a pregnant person
to do what's best for themselves
this is why the southwest
women's law center stands in
strong support of this bill
today thank you.
Madam chair representative this
could morning what vehicle was
on a mouse I'm embarrassed that
I have no horse in this race.
I am unlikely to transition I am
unlikely ever to have an
abortion.
But I've known transmitted woman
a known women who've had
abortions every person in this
room most women who've had
abortions.
And I know people who live in
states where they are living in
fear.
This bill I ask you to support
it because it's the right thing
to do thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jennifer Rafael gets I'm the
executive director on the
commission for the status of
women and we stand in strong
support of this bill and ask you
to vote yes on HB seven.
Thank you.
Right now we will go to soon.
we will start with revered
Bethany Mayer Evans.
Hello my name is Robert Bethany
Mayer Evans and and the clergy
and congregational advocacy
organizer for the New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice as a
favorite organization we believe
that humanity was created in the
image of the divine and with the
sacred right to bodily autonomy
this means that each person
should have the legal right to
make their own decisions about
their lives their bodies and
their medical care our faith
calls us to work for a society
where all persons have equal
access to health care we know
that both gender affirming
healthcare and reproductive
health care decisions have a
remarkable impact on the lived
experiences of the person
seeking that care the
ramifications of these decisions
contribute to a person's health
safety and physical and mental
and emotional well being and New
Mexicans deserve the right to
make these life changing
decisions for themselves without
judgment or laws prohibiting
access.
We see protecting freedom of
choice and bodily autonomy as a
moral imperative and for this
reason we urge you to vote in
favor of eighty seven thank you
thank you right on one minute
crystal curly.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
crystal currently I'm the
executive director of a
nonprofit called indigenous I
place and I strongly urge the
committee members to support
this bill due to the alignment
has with indigenous belief of
self determination and knowing
that our people are capable of
making their own decisions on
their body and I don't want it
too much time but thank you so
much for all the
Sanchez for in the bill and for
the creation of this bill like
folks that before all eyes are
on New Mexico right now so we do
have an opportunity to to be the
change in the world that our
young people would like to see
he had.
Thank you.
by luck K. ATA.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is the
lake asada and I'm a high school
senior at New Mexico school for
the arts and with girls Inc of
Santa Fe to that it also seems
that I may be the only teenager
possibly the youngest person
here I'm in support of house
bill seven because of my loved
ones having access to gender
affirming care is a necessity
and should be a right I don't
want my friends and family to be
constantly worried about whether
or not they can have see health
care people need access to
affirming health care without
being judged or criminalized
this bill is vital for my peers
specifically my trans non binary
and LGBTQ plus peers who
identities are constantly under
attack thank you for your time
and forgiving my peers economy
they deserve.
Thank you next we have Jocelyn
rule.
Hello I just want to verify that
you can hear me yes.
thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Joselyn
woo I'm an OBGYN physician
practicing in northern New
Mexico and I'm here to represent
not only the American college of
we do I. ends in New Mexico the
support uninhibited access to
gender affirming and
comprehensive reproductive
health care but also all people
of order needed and wanted
reproductive and gender from
health care and people who don't
yet know the need this care who
will in the future rural
providers and patients can
experience severe stigma and
equity in access to health care
in general and referred act and
under firming Care are no
exception I find your to a large
catchment area at a critical
access hospital and responsible
for minimizing disparity in
access and outcomes once
patients the right to see me.
Asian of essential tools go
reproductive health services and
support of gender affirming care
our cornerstone and I have a
credit goes and harm reduction
practices an OBGYN and H. B.
seven will protect our ability
to provide this care and my
patients ability to access that
although rural medicine carries
inherent additional rewards and
challenges in our string system
whenever I think of the
stressors that I feel and based
they are insignificant compared
to the injustice of financial
difficulties housing and safety
challenges transportation
limitations and saying well that
many of my patients are asked to
face even outside of accessing
care reproductive health care
and gender in care at a rate
that was thank you thank you
Okay sister Marlene Kharadi I'm
sorry on the pronunciation.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Molly Perrott sister of mercy
of the Americas.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of HB seven.
HB seven insurers the New Mexico
state law protects families
seeking reproductive and gender
health care in every part of our
state including and especially
rural communities where families
have historically lacked access
to care.
The concrete realities of women
and trans lives within diverse
context of sexual and domestic
violence subjugation
subordination and oppression are
very much related to women's
entrance reproductive freedom
and gender care.
All of us let's recognize defend
women as a Torrez equal and as
moral agents women are capable
of making moral decisions and
accessing and that we provide
comprehensive reproductive
sister thank you so much Victor
Victoria.
Our.
The.
You'll hear me yes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Victoria of Lotto and I'm
speaking to you from Clovis on
behalf of eastern New Mexico
rising as someone who's been on
the front lines of the direct
attacks on reproductive health
care I can't stress enough how
important this bill is to me and
many others across the state.
I was pregnant when these
ordinances started to appear and
throughout my pregnancy I worked
with eastern New Mexico rising
to fight and make sure Clovis
focused on the real needs of the
community.
Need such as adequate medical
care.
The ones propelling these
ordinances have no regard for
the will of the people they
don't care that pregnant people
can get the care they need.
At thirty seven weeks my
prenatal appointment was
canceled and I was told the next
available date would be a week
after my due date.
Our family needs more access to
health care and we need elected
officials that support health
care providers not create fear
when I visited these
frustrations to local leadership
it fell on deaf ears but I
wasn't the only one being
ignored well our group gathered
petition signatures against our
ordinance we heard stories eight
thank you thank you Erin
Armstrong.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Here I'm sorry you're a little a
little how about in the back can
you hear her out was there some
yeses and some knows so little
louder if you can Aaron.
Okay my name is Erin or Mr and
when attorneys working for
years.
Policy generally and
reproductive health right
specific I'm sorry we're we're
having trouble hearing you
So sorry I am really orders
because six and
If you can hear me I know that
others of spoke and and and
share my position on the I thank
you for support thank thank you
Aaron.
Okay and finally we have Jan
Robinson.
Hi there can you hear me OK yes.
Right thank you chairperson and
committee members my name is
John Robinson and I live in
Albuquerque I am a mom I'm a
nurse practitioner and a nurse
midwife as serve New Mexico
communities for over twelve
years as a clinician I am
speaking in support of this bill
today and urge the committee to
pass the bill as a provider
access to health care for all
people is very important to me I
find that the common thread in
this bill is that we as new
Mexicans trust people to make
decisions about their bodies
whether it be related to their
reproductive autonomy for their
gender identity.
I've watched patients become
more comfortable and joyful in
their bodies through providing
gender affirming medical care so
this isn't just about suicide
prevention that's super
important but it's also about
people feeling comfortable in
their bodies and their
communities I've also seen the
positive impact on the we taken
off of my patients shoulders
when I tell them that I trust
them to know what's best for
their bodies whether it's
related to gender care for
abortion care.
In clinical practice I've seen
gender affirming care and access
to a question that only time
people I thank you so thank you.
So thank you all for your for
your decorum in your patience
and we will now go to the
committee for questions
Representative Jones and board
and Vincent first.
Your.
Can you hear me now okay fairly.
Close.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative.
David Jones I think you may need
to speak up a lot okay some of
these mikes don't have long
cords it in addition to serving
as a new.
For my district Dona Ana Hidalgo
is the I also had a long and
varied career as a medical
professional as a result
registered nurse I cared for
patients and then unital
intensive care newborn nursery
pediatrics I see you K. unit can
you can you hear me no okay.
This.
They're all on okay so.
Thank you.
Yeah of
the.
There.
Okay that's much better okay
okay I'll start over so so in
addition to being a new
representative from my district
Anjana Hidalgo Luna I had a long
and varied career and in health
care as a medical professional
as an RN I've been a I've served
patients at in the neonatal
intensive care newborn nursery
pediatric intensive care but
Pete in general pace Florida
worked page oncology pediatric
home care and with medically
fragile children.
so as you can imagine.
Given this is been my lifelong
career have a heart for nursing
and for the health and well
being from of my patients
also with so many of these years
devoted to pediatrics I have a
heart for children and their
families.
And that's why I have some very
concerned very serious concerns
about your bill it seems that
it's overly broad in the wording
of the bill is in conflict with
the introduction that we heard
earlier
in the New Mexico state statutes
section thirteen one and sixty
seven
there's a definition of
There's a definition
The local public body right so
as as a forty year veteran of
the medical profession I need to
understand the since the
inception to be which includes
the wording local public body.
So let me ask you for clarity
does that term public body our
public institution apply to a
public high schools.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative the question
I'm gonna go and handed over to
my experts on this but I do not
believe this but will.
Thank you madam X. another
handheld.
Thank you so much.
All right.
Should I say TGIF now any of our
committees are meeting tomorrow
sorry I have no working.
Yeah.
Yeah I mean does this I
apologize I am doing my best
year does not can folks hear me
can you hear her in the back no
hello.
But maybe.
We have seen.
Of the staff.
I apologize for the technology.
But I think there's prevalence
in the thank you.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee so to to clarify
this definition of public body
tracks with the definition in
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
and so to answer your question
and I I understand where where
we're going with this
absolutely public bodies include
public education institutes
however there is an incredibly
important legal definition and
distinction between an
affirmative duty to find
something and the inability to
discriminate against somebody
because they are attempting to
access health care additionally
this does this bill again does
not create an affirmative duty
insurers that public bodies are
not able to get in the way of
somebody accessing legally
protected health care.
Do I get my mic back.
The lines are working to.
So help me because I need some
clarity on that there's a
conflict in the law between the
public body means on the on and
this one statute and then
another statute is that true.
Can you.
Madam chair representative.
I know.
Let me just move on let me move
on with just two to to be
specific
I'm trying to understand this.
How do you reconcile that what
seems to be a direct conflict in
the definition of public body.
And then the New Mexico state
state statute and the wording of
the bill.
If you have to definitions.
I'm sure we can we ask for
clarification yeah
on this matter chairman and
representative our committee
member of the one it what is it
in conflict with that you're
seeing.
The definition that I'm seeing
right here in New Mexico
statutes chapter thirteen
thirteen dash one dash six sixty
seven which describes a local
public body means every
political subdivisions of the
state and the agencies
instrumentality is the
institutions there of including
two year postsecondary
educational institutions school
districts and local school
boards and municipalities except
as exemption pursuant to the
procurement code.
Yes so Madam chair
representative a couple of
things.
There you.
All right let's try this.
They try and sit over there it
seems like we were hearing folks
We'll give it a shot.
I apologize I this is awkward
Madam chair representative
I don't read these as
conflicting definitions yes this
definition tracks from the
definition in the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act and the
definition you just read
includes educational
institutions that are
subdivisions of the that
includes their included under
government and public bodies.
So I've had hundreds of calls
emails and and staff of I've got
over two thousand petitions from
folks across the state that
really need some clear answers
to these questions
are you telling me that the bill
does not apply to public high
schools public middle schools.
Click elementary schools yes or
no.
Madam chair representative
public high schools public
schools are included in the
definition of public bodies and
I'll tell you why they are
public entities that receive
state funding and they do not
have already in state law the
ability to discriminate against
their students.
Educational institutions public
educational institutions already
have a duty to provide an
educational environment free
from discrimination this bill
clarifies that they are not able
to discriminate against a
student for the health care that
they may need.
It does not create an
affirmative duty to provide
health yes so we already have
laws in place which prevent
discrimination is that what
you're saying.
Yes we have those laws so in in
my in my professional experience
in dealing with thousands of
patients over my forty year
career and their families my
concern is that we're mandating
every state employee including
our teachers to facilitate a
request for elective abortions
proleptic transition surgery and
for elective puberty blockers
and elective procedures within
the medical standard of care
that's in section three part B.
is this correct.
Madam chair within and
representative thank you for the
question on the AS Ellie has
said it is not require for
Medicare the scope of work in
which these public employees and
the and these institutions are
serving under does not change
their support and what they are
choirs you on only says that a
person cannot be discriminated
against prosecuted persecuted
first choosing to seek for
refuse reproductive or gender
for me can I relax on seventeen
to that madam chair members of
the committee
To clarify again this is not a
firm create an affirmative duty
for anyone to provide care that
that they are not already
providing the word facilitate
does not appear in the language
of the bill and it's simply not
a fair reading of the
legislation the proposed
legislation to say that it
requires.
Public employees agents of
public entities to affirmatively
facilitate somebody accessing
health care.
So a public body or agent of a
public body shall not directly
or indirectly to night restrict
or interfere with a person's
ability to access or provide
reproductive health care or
gender affirming health care
within the medical standard of
care could you tell me more
about the medical standard of
care.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative I'm happy
with you all about the funding
for the first on standard of
care federally regulated and so
there is a standard that is
larger Mexico but I don't know
if you want to add more sure
and I would like to also bring
and another expert on this madam
chair members of the committee
you know it standards of care
clinical guidelines are any
revolving body of work and they
are determined it a number of
different regulatory bodies and
by a number of different
regulatory framework.
They include the New Mexico
Medical Board The New Mexico
nursing board the department of
health federal bodies there's a
whole host of regulations that
help determine the standard of
care for patients and within the
standard of care include
I'll be allowance for health
care providers for whatever
reason not to provide care that
they find objectionable for that
they do not already provide and
and so again as part of the
standards of care include scopes
of practice ethical guidelines
and clinical guidance on
different types of health care.
If you.
Go ahead.
Also and upward Matt and Madam
chairwoman and Representative
Jones thank you for that
question I can speak
specifically to gender expansive
care in terms of the standard of
care we have quite a robust and
widely both.
We have widely robust and
generally accepted guidelines
for multiple sources that
overlap and inform each other we
have the most recent world
professional association of
transgender health that release
their standards of care version
eight in September of twenty
twenty two which is a robust
very well researched essentially
all the data that has been
compiled so far on gender care
and gender expansive health care
and we also have the indifferent
decided guidelines from twenty
seventeen as well as the
university of California at San
Francisco guidelines on both
primary care and gender care for
gender expansive people
consensys is wide among all
professional associations in the
medical world and that is the
list of the associations that
support gender care and support
as evidence based and life
saving is very very long I have
it here if if anyone would like
me to list that.
So expert claims shall not
discriminate is different from
compelling I'm sorry madam chair
I keep forgetting to do that
apologize and Representative
expert claimed shall not
discriminate is different from
compelling behavior.
please explain it for come after
claiming not discriminating as
in sections three C. says shall
not directly or indirectly deny
restrictor interfere with a
person's ability to access our
provide.
Reproductive health care urgent
reforming healthcare.
Is explain what's the difference
between not discriminating.
This act indeed compelling
behavior.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you Representative.
What about it can you head over
to whatever your I mean I think
I think just all get a jumping
off with you all on.
You know again what we want to
ensure that people are able to
see the health care they need
without fear of of of precision
resolution and discrimination so
it is not required anyone to
change their scope of work it is
not requiring anyone to provide
services that they provide alley
if you want to add on to that.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative again
there are important legal
distinction between an
affirmative duty and
discrimination or deny or
restrict there's the difference
between.
Getting in the way of somebody
accessing something to which
they have a right.
And providing them access to
that right.
And so for example and I'm loath
continues metaphors or examples.
If.
Someone were to prevent say a
student from leaving their class
to access gender affirming
health care because they knew.
They were going to access gender
affirming health care that would
be this discrimination.
Now if someone had a policy of
not excusing.
Someone from class that would be
issued to take up with the
school board more broadly but
again if the difference between
providing and again facilitating
is not seen in this bill
between providing facilitating
affirmative duties and getting
in the way of somebody
exercising their right which is
already unconstitutional in our
state.
And this provision it's
particularly important because
we are seeing access attacked at
all levels the manager of an
Representative one thing to
others that we are very clear
that is to use or refuse
reproductive or gender from here
which means that is within the
individual's right to also
refuse care if this is.
Thank you so if I as a school
nurse that madam chair
representative it has a school
nurse have a concern about a
five year old little girl
requesting transition surgery.
For reproductive health care at
her age would I be able to
express any concern about her
request if she came to me as a
school nurse.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
will handed over to my experts
in a moment I do just want to
make clear that you know with
gender affirming care it does
not.
Actuals and to to get to say
correctly.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative Jones thank you
for that question currently
under the standards of care
there's no allowance for
surgery.
Okay.
I have read.
currently the standard of care
do not permit surgery for
anybody under the age of
eighteen no assurance insurance
companies will cover that and no
provider medical clinician who
follows the standard of care of
would advocate for anything as
drastic and ridiculous as that
that would not be permitted or
acceptable.
But according madam chair thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative and
experts
My point is.
The bill seems to say that
as as a school nurse I would not
be able to share that
information.
With anyone that at her age the
it's it's inappropriate for her
to even ask about her age I feel
but
What I would not be able to
share that information about
my student with anyone is that
true.
Madam chair with an and
representative we can go to only
for this as well however the I
will say with the standard of
care that we have heard we can
trust children to identify
themselves and it is important
because it is suicide prevention
and it is lifesaving find saving
efforts under tally to clarify
that point as well.
Again it and Madam chair
representative thank you
in the bill it contemplates the
appropriate medical standard of
care.
That is determined by the
numerous regulating bodies the
clinicians of scope of practice
their own
at the goal guidelines within
their scope of practice and the
numerous regulatory bodies that
numerous clinical guidelines and
right again regulating entities
of the medical profession and
so.
Okay to to echo the
representative
and what I imagine our our other
expert will say
that's simply not a circumstance
that reflects the way modern
medicine is practiced and is is.
Not reflective of the language
of the bill that includes
standards of care.
Honestly.
Madam chair representative I
don't I don't think that really
answered my question I'm talking
about a practical situation
where I have a child telling me
apparently that you know she's
she has a.
is requesting transition and I'm
just wondering how the bill how
how would a student and then a
school nurse deal with that
situation when it appears that
there's no way we could consult
with parents
others about about you know this
being really inappropriate so
let me just move on and ask you
if I if I did share that concern
about this five year old.
what would be the penalty for
that.
To yeah I mean Madam chairwoman
Representative violations of
this act that would result in
the the person be able to have a
civil suit for five thousand
dollars for the cost of damages.
Thank you madam chair
representative so.
If I were to share the concern
about this little five year old.
I would be.
I would be
At risk of paying the five
thousand dollars or any
Any other and Spanish is that
correct.
Madam chair representative this
is where we return to the
standards of care and medical
practice if it is within the
standard of care for that
patient and this is why
individualized medicine is so
critically important.
Because it's a relationship
between a patient a provider and
within the medical standards of
care if it were appropriate for
that patient to discuss with
their parents and consultant I
again would return to our
medical expert here I.
That it that is frankly the
answer if it is within the
standard of care to do so it is
appropriate Madam chair
representative I I do want to
clarify.
Medicals are very difficult
because there's a lot of pieces
that that hello the information
is communicated if the student
was discriminated against if
that information was used to
discriminate the students all of
those will factor into this if a
school nurse is telling their
parents that a student has
expressed
they they may feel they may be
take transgender then that would
not be discrimination that is
expressing to a parent what the
child has experience that is
outside of what this is if that
student or of that family then
felt discriminated against
because of how that was handled
which again a hypothetical that
we're discussing madam chair.
That is you know we don't know
you know how that was handled it
is important again because we
know the gender affirming care
and recognition saves lives it's
very important that all of the
public bodies and their entities
respect those boundaries so that
we are sitting want to help in
the state.
So thank you madam chair and and
Representative and thank you for
that I still and based on what
we talked about the standard of
care you what you told me was
there so many varied standards
of care and as so many entities
I just wonder who's going to
determine what the standard of
care here is for the Madam chair
representative the standard of
care is federally regulated.
By many different entities by
the federal government.
And state for the state and.
Okay I'm finished for now thank
you.
okay with that I'm not finished
I'm not.
Yeah no in section three B.
Madam chair representative deny
restrict or interfere with a
person's ability to access to
provide reproductive health care
or gender affirming health care
when I read this particular
portion a person's ability to
access provided does this mean
third party entity.
Someone who provides.
Provides a provider outside
public body.
As defined in this act will have
does that mean that will have
unfettered access to schools.
Or any public institution to
provide reproductive health Kerr
a gender affirming care.
Again madam chair when
representative on this does not
change the scope that what
current law is and so hell
health issues are handled to
still go to the schools so that
is not you know that's not ship
what is current practice today.
Madam chair representative I'm
I'm reading that right out of
the bill though those are the
words in the bill.
A particular person's access to
provide.
Does that does that obligate or
force that person to which in
this case you know we're talking
about schools what does that
obligate this person to provide
and if so.
How does that happen it's it's
it's like I see that as as a as
a provider having access our
relationship with schools.
Is that a yes or no the will a
provider have relationship with
schools to provide this kind of
gender funding for reproductive
health care madam chairman
Representative again at this
there is no change in the scope
of work of the individuals that
work with schools or otherwise
we just cannot discriminate
against a person's decision to
use refuse reproductive health
care or or Jennifer care.
So it doesn't require any
changes to the scope of work
that people find.
Well I.
Thank you and madam chair
representative I I honestly have
to say that I'm still the the
wording is so broad and seems to
include
So much
so many questions that I at and
I have had overwhelming.
response from my constituents
against the bill I I don't see
the way it reads now as as
unclear as it is I don't see how
I can support that thank you.
For.
One of order real quick madam
chair.
State your point in on on page
twenty I believe in our handbook
to says we can talk more than
once is that correct
Representative it's it's at the
discussion of the chair the
chair can make that decision
thank thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
I literally probably don't but I
wanna make sure you can hear me
clearly okay thank you madam
chair representative
So I would like to go through
this bill because I have quite a
few questions on it and some of
A. B. redundant of what we're
just ask but.
Okay.
So the first question I have on
this is.
Going back to thirteen dash one
sixty seven that is in our NMSA
coding that we already have so
are you saying that this is
going to be a new addition to
what the code is for a public
body because there is
differences in what is said
right now and thirteen one dash
six seven versus what is here so
it's it's going to be a new NMSA
code thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for the
question I believe the co that
was referenced as the
procurement code this definition
that we find within the bill is
within the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act okay can Madam chair
representative can you point me
to where I could find that so
give somebody look that up real
quick while I'm asking other
questions thank you madam chair
on the Representative had to do
like to.
I just wonder with.
Could.
I.
Yes though before.
Because I think.
Can you hear me in the back.
The.
For some reason these on the
side or.
I guess I can just leave.
The need
to help us.
Given this.
And I will just shout and
hopefully.
I I what I wanted to Madam chair
representative what I wanted to
clarify
is that this language is modeled
after the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act it doesn't fall
directly underneath it
When legislation and and you see
this in multiple different
places when legislation
instructed we include specific
definitions related to that
legislation now this tracks with
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
but the definitions included
with this within the fact live
within this act it does not
create a conflict it creates
definitions and guidelines to be
used in the enforcement or
analysis of the bill.
Okay madam chair and
representative so let's go
through this so the public body
I want to make sure everybody
understands this is a state or
local government advisory board
commission agency entity that
receives public funding so would
that mean like UNM.
Hospital because they're not
private they're publicly funded
with that mean that they would
be an example of this thank you
madam chair on the
Representative yes.
So that leads to a great
question
so that would mean the doctors
that work at UNM would be under
this this bill if this were to
pass is that correct thank you
madam chair of the
Representative yes.
It would also include.
There's a lot I had to do a lot
of research on here because it's
not very specific and I want to
make sure that everybody
understands so this would
include municipalities would
that be correct thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative yes.
Madam chair representative would
that include water districts and
thank you.
Subdivisions of settlement
Chairman representative yes.
I'm just trying to make was not
included
because it they're publicly
funded madam chair.
The minutes.
Of your FIR manager want me
refer to my experts thank you.
Madam chair representative this
is as we as we've noted where
the definition comes into play
the definition that is included
in compasses political
subdivisions of local
government.
Thank you mentioned this I'm
trying to get it because it
seems like it's a lot it's a
schools of higher education it's
can commissioners it's a
regional education co opted
water districts acequia is and
as we've learned anybody who's
publicly funded which would
include the hospital which is
going to be very very important
here when asked more questions
I'm trying to make sure
everybody understands who falls
under this because it's not
listed specific things and I
want to make sure the people
here the people at home
understand so madam chair and
representative so can you
explain to me what is the
standard of care for abortion in
New Mexico New Mexico statutes.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative.
Madam chair representative if
somebody is the provider of
abortion Care those standards of
care fall within their licensing
body and so we can refer to the
medical practice act the nurse
practice act of the American
college of obstetrics and
gynecologist standard of care
again is a and involving
discipline and clinical
guidelines evolve as medicine
involves and that is one of the
main reasons that medical bodies
are largely self regulated with
the oversight of the government
thank you madam chair
representative in into the
question is there a standard of
care for questions specifically
for New Mexico on a statute that
I could go look up or and and
the care this specifically for
questions.
Madam chair representative
standards of care for all
medicine not simply abortion
care gender affirming care are
not included specifically in New
Mexico state statutes because
they are part of evolving
disciplines and so like any
other health care which abortion
care is there are not specific
state statutes delineated for
every single medical procedure
every single type of
intervention.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative answer my
question there isn't really a
standard of care for abortion
which opens up some questions so
if I have a doctor that is
working at UNM.
Do is there an exception in here
that due to their religious
beliefs or their moral beliefs
that they would not have to
comply with that and can you
point me to where that exception
would be thank you madam chair
on the Representative that exist
in law and is not addressed in
this in this bill because it is
already it is not a law this
does not change that law.
Madam chair representative could
you show me or point me to where
that lies so that I could read
out for myself the people home
could read that thank you madam
chair to.
Madam chair representative those
you know health care providers
do not provide care for all
kinds of reasons.
Some may be religious some may
be training and competency and
so when folks do not feel they
can find care or object to Care
we can look to again the
practice acts which incorporate
the ethical guidelines which
provide specific procedures and
guidelines for clinicians who do
not wish to participate in
certain kinds of care we also
have the uniform health care
decision act in New Mexico which
is read broadly to include a
clinicians ability to refuse or
simply not provide care this
circumstance can come up in a
lot of ways you know if somebody
is not trained to provide a
certain kind of health care or
it would be unreasonable to
expect them to do so.
Madam chair representative so
last session I believe it was
when they when there was the the
repeal of the abortion one of
the questions I asked that was
answered very specifically was
let's say in a very rural area
there's a doctor who does not
believe in doing a portion but
somebody came to them and said I
needed to questions if there
wasn't a facility they could not
accept out of that the huge
concern because our doctors need
to be able to have the ability
that if they don't believe in
abortion they should not and I
would like to see that put in
here print because that was a
huge issue last time that the
doctor would be forced and
compelled to do the abortion if
there was a concerted District.
So that's going to be one of the
big issues especially when.
We're looking at a civil penalty
now as you all know once we get
in the court system that's what
this bill actually gets defined
by the standings of what's going
to happen with this as it if it
moves down.
So we're looking at a doctor who
may say in a rural area weapons
were I was looking at pool list
out here of our government
funded hospitals.
There could be a doctor who
doesn't want to do that there is
no the local facility and I
could see this definitely going
to a lawsuit so what I like to
ask next Madam chair
representative.
So what we're asking here is
reproductive health care I
missed a reproductive health
care.
so to prevent pregnancy abortion
managing a pregnancy loss
prenatal birth prenatal
postpartum care managing peri
menopause menopause managing for
so
fertility treating cancers
reproductive health and
preventing a treat sexually
transmitted disease I want to
make sure that everybody
understood what that was for.
So on page three.
We go into the new material on
page three line three.
So this public body.
Should not discriminate against
a person based on the person's
use of what I just listed here.
So it public body agent of a
public body shall not directly
or indirectly denying.
Restrict.
Or interfere there's no word to
discrimination.
So explain to me how if
somebody.
As part of the public body and
again it goes can go to any
situation.
Explain to me how if somebody
were to interfere what what does
that mean like a minute they
physically blocking them they're
saying you can't go and explain
exactly what interfere because I
get concerned about again that's
going to court systems what does
inner for me thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative you know the
basis of this law is what is the
law of New Mexico what is
extremely important is that we
are not creating a ha
checkerboard of where people can
access health care and where
they can't and as we know in New
Mexico oftentimes someone live
in one county and travel very
far too sexy Health Care in
another county we do not want
patients of new in New Mexico
fearful that they're seeking
health care may result in
prosecution or persecution in
their home communities and it is
very important that that as they
see care they are not going home
to ordinances that may
discriminate them or their
access to to what they should
receive from from their public
bodies there.
Thank you madam chair
representative so kind of goes
back again to what I'm saying is
in a rural area because people
do have to travel that is a
reality here my big concern here
is that if somebody that went
against their moral beliefs and
you're saying that that's gonna
be financing it's not because
we're imposing a civil penalty
upon these people so there are
repercussions of somebody who's
in a small town and there's a
hospital it's government funded
there's a lack of doctors and
facilities if they can't get
what they want that now opens up
a lawsuit Madam chair
representative I'm hi
hypotheticals are are and I will
say two things that are really
important one thing I will say
about when we're when we're
creating statute and I I think
we work very well all together
to do the best by the Mexicans
that we can and I think we
respect each other in this body
in that way but when we're
creating statue I think it's we
want to make sure that we are
not limiting definitions in ways
that that you know accidentally
leave things out and and and in
a way that we did not intend how
this bill is it does not changes
Google works you cannot go to a
podiatrist as we saw earlier and
ask them for you know
reproductive health care or
gender affirming care that is
outside of what they do and that
is outside of that what we
expect them to our state what
this bill does is insurers that
if you live in part of New
Mexico you have equal access to
or or are in New Mexico you
equal access to lifesaving care
and as many of us know the
difference between an emergency
C. section and and and a birth
plan to goes exactly like you
thought is instantaneous and can
be frightening and we need
people to know that you can get
the care you need as as you and
your doctor see fit.
Thank you madam chair
representative still goes back
to the question that asked last
time and this came through and
health which was with a doctor
before so the answer is
basically yes because are going
to be forced to do this because
there is nobody else in the
community and now we're trying
their hands and say.
Let's just be Frank we know that
doctors are leaving here drugs
they're leaving all the time I
just talked to one of the
doctors whose work they just on
their malpractice insurance is
being cut off because they're
not going to cover New Mexico so
now I've got.
This bill that's tying their
hands yet again because if they.
Body shall not directly or
indirectly and that makes it
even more vague what is
indirectly I mean this this
we're going back to lawsuits to
define all these terms
indirectly the doctor rules of
science she rolls rice I mean
what is in direct lending we're
going down a path of New I'm
gonna say this to.
One of my very best friend to
stay in my house is transgender
I'm very much for somebody wants
to decide they want to transfer
gender when they're an adult I
have no doubt to that some
ninety minute dressing that
issue when addressing this issue
is what if a child what age at
what age does it become when are
they considered a person this is
applicable to if somebody came
and said
There Dr I'm trying to think a
hypothetical so the doctor I
would like to change my gender
and there I should they not for
six and they're not to say that
but any young age.
Should there not be a
consultation or something to the
parents to let them know that
this is happening or if the
doctor says anything like.
Well here's some information
about why you should hear some
information shouldn't is that
doctor now in trouble under this
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative as and I will
let I will make my experts we to
this more obviously she she's in
the field more what I will say
is that their standards of care
the different per age group and
different for percent of folks
and so in practice and how
people seek gender affirming
care it is not that is not how
it goes and I and I will turn my
expertise if you want to
elaborate and more.
Because I will say I got a
message from the speakers on
that committee members are only
allowed to use these bikes I
don't know if it's a technical
thing or whatever but so we're
going to have to make do with
that thank you.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
representatives to answer the
question about age I think it's
a very important question I
think it's important to remember
that gender affirmation is the
most important health
determinant for people who are
gender expansive that means
access to health care if they
desire it at an appropriate age
which is guided and supported by
the standards of care that also
means use of names and pronouns
in as many settings as possible
and that means family support
when I'm seeing a family I'm
seeing a patient whether the I'm
seeing a child alone seeing an
adult see the entire family I
feel like it's just as important
medical intervention for me to
get the agreement and support of
the family on board I think it's
a medical intervention to
prevent suicide to encourage
parents to use names and
pronouns and I also think it's
medical intervention at that is
evidence based that an
appropriate age a you should
have access to people
suppression or hormone therapy
but I do not believe that it's
appropriate to do that without
the involvement of the family
given the importance of gender
affirmation in the form of
family support.
Madam chair and representative
agreed to hundred percent about
family support they don't want
to see people doing things
without the parents being
involved for the support issue
I'm but I do have a question so
let's say
Let's say we have a child that
shows up at UNM and she's twelve
years old and she was right.
And.
What happens if the doctor.
Does it refer them out for what
you feel is appropriate care
like let's say they say they
want to get an abortion the
doctor doesn't refer them it
doesn't do anything that our
sport cans of a pandemic that
says here's an opposing view
both use how is that going to
play out Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative that would play
out exactly that it it does
currently under law and it would
not change that all it does is
ensure that is equally
equally.
Set for throughout the state and
we don't have a checkerboard of
how laws or are
are applied in our state chair
representative of let's say that
person see that's the on call
doctor in the child comes in and
this doctor has a religious
exemption and they look at the
child and say well you know how
to be thought about keeping the
child.
Isn't that.
Directly indirectly denied
restricting or interfering with
them getting to questions they
say they want to have an
abortion the doctor says if you
thought about something
different madam chairman again
with hypotheticals I will just
say that current law stays in
place and what this does it
insurers of the pull that the
current law and access to
healthcare is equally accessible
across our state chair
representative this is where I
see the huge problem coming if
the on call doctor is against
abortions and they have the
extension and that child comes
into the only doctor in the ER
and they happen to say.
I share some other choices I see
this is playing down the pike of
that getting the feed possibly
losing their license because
eventually there's going to be
have to something by the medical
board that says this now plays
in to you not doing things you
need to do for the medical board
and the branch you gonna lose
our license so again this is
super super vague and it's not
spelling out directly and I'm
not only looking at the five
thousand dollar fine and looking
at lawyers please ask for really
racks up because you look at ten
twenty thirty forty thousand
dollars and and lawyers fees to.
Is there a chair representative
is there a funding or
appropriation for what this is
going to cost is very
appropriation for this thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative as you saw the if
there is no funding requests in
the FIR doesn't spell out that
will be a significant impact.
So madam chair and
representative because there's
so many things involved.
With
Gender treatments.
If a doctor.
If and it's hard to have that
position looking at the real
world so if a.
Child went to a doctor and the
doctor didn't give them the
options of doing that.
I'm looking at.
I'm looking at a doctor's trying
to make sure that they're not
going to get penalized.
And I understand what you're
saying we don't want somebody to
gross negligence of that's
horrible that's a bad thing that
we don't want that we want to
the workplace we don't want that
medical field.
But in trying to figure out how
somebody navigates this.
With their moral moral compass
versus something that is
mandating them to do something
they don't want to do and I know
you keep saying the conscious
that they can make the objection
to it.
I tell you right now the family
comes in with a ten year old
daughter that was very good she
wants an abortion and that
doctor says anything this is
going to directly fall under
that.
And it's problematic for me and
I know you want at six six
you're like I got to the state
but also for that go ahead I'm
questions but go ahead and
answer that one form thank you
madam chairman thank you
Representative I I to sorry I
appreciate.
All I know I I appreciate the
question what I think is really
important is is to understand
that if someone is not trained
to provide medical care it then
they are not infected to give
that medical care in the same
way that you know another type
of doctor would not be expected
to the same thing so well again
I I'm I'm wary of hypotheticals
and especially look at gender
affirming care because what we
know is that Jennifer we care is
a life change the seating and
their seventy five percent it is
associated with seven five
percent lower risk of suicide in
our youth and so for that reason
I I'm where you have the tools
when I do look at the real world
I think we both want to operate
to the best of our to all our
tire State that's what we're
seeing and that's that's with
the reality that our our
communities are facing.
Madam chair and representative I
have a really important question
so.
When I look at the backs are to
the definition.
On the first page have a go.
So we're looking at anyone
that's going to get the public
funding.
Would that be a foster family.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Now the battery's dead.
Madam chair representative
already and and I'm not going to
pretend to be an expert in the
foster care system and we can
certainly provide additional
answers but it is my
understanding that for very good
reason when folks open up their
homes to young people in need
there is an expectation that
those homes will not be.
Discriminatory against that
person or interfere with their
access to medical care.
And so we can addition we can
provide some additional answers
on on that but.
I believe it's it's I know that
homes that are open to young
people should be free from
discrimination.
And and I agree I chair
representative nobody should be
discriminated agree within that
however I'm trying to think in
my head what if there's a foster
family and there's two parents
and when the child does get
pregnant and one adult says I
support you want to help in the
other ones great to find about
that that actually would open up
a lawsuit for that other parents
because they're denying their
industry and they're getting in
the way we already have so much
issue with children
Representative whole bunch of
bills for CYFD trying to fix
that issue and foster cares and
I don't want to see our foster
parents now the people as well
I'm not going to get involved
with this because what if I
don't agree with this one thing
that the child want to the one
thing that they are requesting I
as a parent and loving parents
foster parents trying to take
care of the child to guide them
all of them I see that playing
out as well and and and and
basically Madam.
Sorry that I did was I was as
part of participate in its in
its problematic for me because
you know.
I'm worried about doctors I want
to protect your doctors I want
to protect their teachers so
they don't get involved with
this and have lawsuits I'm
trying to make sure that our
kids are families providing
foster care are not going to be
in the middle of this and
they're going to cause a health
they're very small right so
they're going to talk to each
other it's a holy smokes did you
hear about this family they had
a disagreement and the father of
the mother got sued for five
thousand dollars because the one
program at the other parents so
that's another big problem that
I see with this I'm.
And I worry about the people
also on duty waivers because
also get government funded and I
can see this being two different
moral compasses and household on
that point at which leads me to
a question.
What if.
Myself and my spouse we hate pop
that goes but again so what
myself my spouse for both public
body we're we're in a position
or both public body and one
person got the.
Let's see the wife got pregnant
and she decided to have an
abortion the husband says no
he's a public body to the public
body how does that play out
chair representative.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative again I'm I'm
I think it'll be very difficult
because in the details really
make a difference with this is
what this says though is that
someone who becomes pregnant
does not have to fear seeking
health care that they're
providers in and and within
consultation with their
providers is best for themselves
and their families that is the
basis of it and so anyway you
cannot stand in the way of
somebody accessible refusing to
access reproductive health care
abortion care or trick or or
Jennifer you can.
Thank you mentioned
Representative.
These are things that I see
point I see the doctors nurses.
People that are considered in
this public body UNM doctors
there I see them.
Can to face more lawsuits which
already freaking out about
because we passed that bill of
with the medical malpractice and
they're starting to leave from
that I worry about a.
I we're but this does being.
I understand the quality totally
understand the quality but what
I don't understand is the
penalty and penalizing the five
thousand dollar fine it to many
scenarios where this could be
hugely problematic even within
couples and may.
I just worry that this is going
to go down that path because
it's so vaguely worded that this
is just gonna be lawsuit central
of one lawsuit after another as
we try to play it out in the
courts of how do these
hypotheticals how do these play
out I'm.
I.
I feel like none of my questions
were really answered in a way
that are making me happy our
constituents because see if this
is just a couple hours of people
saying about now I've got the
same email got the fifteen
hundred things that two thousand
petitions I got people flown by
phone and email today so because
my constituents are right that
seven guesses because my
district is more likely will
turn district where they like
their freedom and they can
pretty much self contained
solves about not I've never met
anybody at this discriminatory
against anybody and I don't want
to put my doctors under the
pressure of thinking that
they're going to be lawsuits if
anybody that's involved with
this public body and also I
think part of the main thrust I
may be wrong on this it seems
like it might be
Targeting the counties that have
made you know resolutions to we
don't want to do this we want to
do that and it seems like it's
going to penalize them in
municipality so.
I don't want to penalize our.
Special doctors from leaving
here and I don't want to.
I don't want to make it that our
teachers are gonna want to leave
the state and doctors more than
thirty eight so that.
Thank you
for that we start the floor at
eleven thirty so Representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair and also
if I could a hopeful I'm not a
big parliamentary but procedure
guide I really am I've got my
book here and I'll have another
point of order for me.
Program on page twenty of our
Canadian books and this is for
my colleagues for instance
motions to limit debate should
not be allowed there are there
and there should be no limit on
the number of times any
community committee member is
permitted to speak to limit the
debate or the number of times
members may speak would defeat
the purpose of which a committee
is created.
So I would I would ask you madam
chair if my colleagues would be
able to speak again if they need
to Representative Vincent as I
said before we have thirty five
minutes left
so if if there have been a lot
of hypotheticals and the sponsor
keeps saying I can't really
answer hypothetical so as long
as you're doing things that
aren't really answerable work I
feel like for spending time that
we don't so if you could be
direct to the point with
questions that would be much
appreciated.
And madam chair I have re wrote
a lot of my questions and they
are.
Those kind of questions and I
have a lot of them because I
don't feel like I have I don't
feel like the questions have
been completely answer but but
I'll go ahead and start
Representative Vincent the
reason that questions are
answered is because you we can't
say what would happen in any
given situation as the sponsor
has repeatedly said it's the the
devil in the details I mean you
could say well what if you know
what if on next Tuesday correct
meteor crashed into the earth
what will happen we don't know
so if we can limit the the
theoretical it would be helpful
you madam chair I am I am a very
procedural type person so that's
why I have my hypotheticals
because I want to give me a
procedure on how things are to
work.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative is.
Again this legislation applies
to all local and state of local
and state public bodies.
Including quasi governmental
agencies and one of the ones
that I brought up was like the a
safety is so for example we're
on a board and
somebody wants to bring up to
the border one of the people on
the board that they want to
transition or get an abortion or
whatever what is the procedures
of that and could they get in
trouble for that thank you madam
chair with the presented of that
is outside of what that board
would do they are not allowed to
have discriminatory practices
towards those individuals or
create the policies against
folks that seek abortion care
reproductive health care or
gender affirming care and I do
think it is really important to
remember you know there are many
people that are listening in
today and there are likely
transgender use their
individuals that may want to
seek gender affirming care and I
think it's important that as we
look at you know protecting
everyone even in these counties
where we're we're some of these
things are being discussed it is
important that they feel and
know that they can access health
care in New Mexico within
completely within their rights
that they can thrive in their
lives and I just wanna mention
that because as we're talking
about individual areas there
there will be people who may
have abortions or who do need
reflector or refusing to Care
that is come and that they
should know that they have
access to health care and that
is fundamentally what this
outlines that is already law and
makes it absolutely clear and
because we can thank you thank
you madam chair representative
however because it does say
public body and it is a clause I
government.
If that was to happen.
That data sake a committee could
be sued correct thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative for the question
again the hypothetical is very
specific but it again the just
cannot engage in discriminatory
practices towards an individual
that six this type of health
care.
Madam chair representative I
understand that but it does of
the let's go to of let's go to a
fire station this publicly
funded.
And say I'm on duty and somebody
comes up and tells me or
somebody in my department tells
me that they want those services
what in my to do and cannot be
punished for that thank you
madam chair with the
representative for the question
at as I mentioned earlier as a
fire station I would not
anticipate anyone I I don't even
have that said but again I'll
say there they are not trained
to provide gender affirming
health care they're not trained
to provide if the person on you
know at outside the scope of
work that is outside of that if
the however the treat someone
with discriminatory early that
is when they would be subject to
this this act and I will go back
to what my experts at earlier if
you are denying someone to go
because they're seeking this
type of health care that is
discriminatory if you just have
a policy you know broadly then
that's a discussion for the
school of policy how that works.
Thank you madam chair
representative so let me change
let me change scores.
In this bill what exactly are
the legal Representative
remedies available in this
legislation the manager on I
think it was a new I'm sorry you
want to I I guess I don't police
in the quest what exactly are
the legal remedies available in
this legislation so thank you
madam chair the representative a
person could bring for civil
suit if necessary and and it
could be you know we the
Attorney General and and.
can also bring for action.
Thank you madam chair
representative I think we're on
we're we're communicate now
because it seems that the like
the Attorney General and local
dust can go after local and
public bodies under this
legislation.
Thank you madam chair and
representative they we are
ensuring the civil suit can be
can be brought forward on behalf
of the individuals because again
we don't want certain health
care to be applied in certain
places on when people are making
very tender decisions with their
doctors we need them to be able
to have Frank conversations with
their doctors without being
worried about being penalized
thank you madam chair
representative you know it seems
like it might be a good time to
you know with this legislation
to become a trial lawyer because
it looks like sky's the limit.
you know it it opens trial
attorneys who want to sue public
agencies please stay on the bill
and and
This bill will be going to the
Judiciary Committee and it's not
the job of this committee to
necessarily figure out all the
provide legal points it will be
going on to Judiciary thank you
my apologies Mr chair madam
chair and representative so.
How about people who have moral
or religious obligation no
objections to any of these types
of medical treatments this
legislation seems to force them
to provide or facilitate care
that they don't believe in.
What happens if they don't
believe in it thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative they're already
covered in New Mexico statute
and it when I say that it's
important to remember going back
to what he said is one member
that no one is expected to go
out of sight of the risk of work
they're not trained in any sort
of care they're not and expected
to that it is not an affirmative
as my money to my experts said
it is just protecting its
discrimination thank you madam
chair.
Representative well they were
that will there be any
government oversight of stuff
like this on this bill and madam
chair representative I mean
again that it would be through
people could take action if they
are discriminated against in
many of the ways that discretion
what works in our state.
At census gonna impact teachers
and and I heard teachers and
we've already had a problem with
teachers finding teachers just
went over a bill you know trying
to recruit teachers do you feel
like this is going to put
unnecessary strain on the
teachers at all thank you madam
chair the representative for the
for the for the question no I
believe that it is in the same
vein is that teachers are
expected to not discriminate
among their students for whoever
they are are over they are so I
think it's very important that
you know that is still apply in
these scenarios as well thank
you madam chair representative
will we know how many violations
are being reported thank you
madam chair on the thank you
Representative I mean they would
be to the judicial branch of it
yeah.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative while
the state mandate applaud anyone
who decides to do transition.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the
question again what is important
of this is that we cannot deny
restrict or interfere the
person's ability to access our
provide this care for all and
then we cannot do it we cannot
do it if they refuse to to
utilize as well so however
people are are seeking the care
they need and and working with
their doctors and what's best
for themselves and their
children and their families to
thrive that is the objective
here and one last question I
have because I did watch quite a
few videos on people that had
transitioned and they felt like
that made a mistake do you have
any data on you know the
percentage of people that
thought that might have been in
the state thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative I
will have some expert you
probably who's not in her head
but I do want to say is that we
know that gender affirming care
is a life saving knowing that
that would when users are able
to access the healthcare they
need for for gender affirming
care they are more on par with
their peers on on suicide rates
are drug use when they are
cannot access that care the the
rates of suicide and drug use to
skyrocket and so this really is
about ensuring that children can
feel comfortable in their own
skin and as diverse and
beautiful as New Mexico is we
are are reinforcing that not I
don't have you know the data
and Dr.
thank you madam chair and
representatives I just want to
highlight the fact that gender
expansive use are among the
highest mortality risk in the
world and while I appreciate
people being concerned about
doctors like me staying in the
state and teachers I think we
also have to remember how
important it is to protect
vulnerable children and gender
expansive children are among the
most vulnerable in the world not
just in our country in New
Mexico alone both in two
thousand seventeen and two
thousand nineteen under the use
of resiliency and risk survey
the both of those surveys
essentially demonstrated that
three point two percent of
children in New Mexico identify
as gender expansive which would
equate to about ten thousand
children in the state alone
there was an additional group of
two point eight percent children
that describe themselves as
being unsure of their gender if
we had those two groups that
eighteen thousand children who
are at high risk for multiple
health outcomes in that same
study the gender expansive use
reported being the victim of
sexual violence in the past year
at a rate of almost thirty
percent compared to their
cisgender counterparts who
experience that also at a high
level at ten percent more than
thirty two percent of gender
expansive used in the study
reported having tried to kill
themselves in the past year
compared eight point three
percent of their cisgender peers
and so I think it's important to
remember that the folks who need
the most protection the most
protection against
discrimination and the most
protection to continue access to
appropriate and affirming here
are the gender expansive use of
every state and particularly in
New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair
representative so if I turn that
around and somebody did
transition and they decided to
do transition could that same
suicide.
Clause still be there.
Did we do what was right by that
person.
I'm thank you madam chair and
representative like I said
before the standards of care
version eight that were released
in September of twenty twenty
two compiled all data regarding
regret for engaging in gender
care and also the rated the
transition and the data that
they found was actually very
consistent with what I
experiencing clinic which is
that the rates are terrifically
low I've seen about a thousand
patients in my time and two of
my patients have decided to stop
taking hormones but it wasn't
because they wanted to it was
because their families would not
allow them to be part of their
family if they decided to choose
to be who they were and it took
about two years for both of them
to make that decision because it
was agonizing and so as a
provides a medical clinician and
as someone who cares deeply for
my patients I'd ensure that they
always had access to primary
care and that they were welcome
to come back any time and I
would be on their side no matter
what they chose the data around
regret is very very low actually
and that if you're interested in
learning more about the details
I'm happy to provide the
standard of care version eight
thank you madam chair
representative so I did do some
research and I found that eight
percent make a mistake I want to
go back.
And.
Just for the record eight
percent wanted to do transition
they had made a mistake so as
health care providers are
standard of care whatever.
You know there's eight percent
that we that we didn't do
justice to.
They thought they wanted to do
something but they changed their
mind madam chair I yield my time
thank you for.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to move it to pass on house bill
seven.
Representative tax.
Yes Representative this.
Ferrary.
Yes Representative Jones.
For now Representative.
Yes.
Representative no.
I share this.
Yes.
By a vote of seven to three you
have a two passed thank you.
Thank you all.
Thank you for your decorum and
your patience.
Like I have.
We are in that.
We are in.
If you're.
