Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Here.
Representative Louise that also.
Representative Liz Thomson
Representative vice chair Joanne
J. Ferrary.
I just Joanne flowery.
Madam chair do we have found.
Yes we're hearing everything
you're not.
I'm not hearing anything.
You must be.
She is here and she can't hear
you right is Representative
Anderson and Representative Lord
and representative Louise cut
off so stark excuse.
Yes is Representative Anderson
are you here yes there I'm here
and prepare to present the first
bill I believe.
yes we are going to finish up on
house bill one forty seven
quickly we've already heard it
and
we asked of the sponsor
Representative bash to come back
with the committee some and that
she did and so we'll do that
will finish up that one real
quick and then go do you
Representative of Anderson.
Thank you madam chair.
And Doris yes Representative
Lord and Representative to rises
are excused thank you so much
mmhm.
Okay of for the audience we we
heard
Monday house bill one forty
seven and there were amendments
that were up pretty long and
additional amendments that were
talked about so we asked
Representative bash for you to
go back and get it all put
together in a committees and you
did that and had it in to us
a pretty quickly and so I I
think that everyone is have an
opportunity to review that are
there questions error or
Representative bash do you want
to say anything before we go to
the committee.
No I think I said that this this
bill
updates the scope of practice
and the regulations surrounding
dietitians and nutritionists
and.
So.
For questions all right
thank you and I think all of the
amendments that we spoke about
got rolled into the into this so
that at some a lot clearer and
easier to read any
and
Our analyst Karen.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and.
I didn't make a note of the two
additional amendments that
weren't in the original list of
amendments but our insurance
corporation and it is could I
just have those highlighted for
me for my analysis that I
of what those two additional
small amendments for.
Representative bashes looking
for her notes okay thank you.
I believe one was removing
moral character from a spot that
had been missed in our.
And then the other one was
adding
Criminal background checks to
the other spot that had been
missed.
Yep thank you.
Okay.
All right members of the
committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
The past madam chair I have a
motion for do pass on.
As.
Excellent as a committee subs of
do not pass okay so one forty
seven and it is under.
I forget this to one house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
but one forty.
And Representative Thomson you
seconded okay is there any
objection to do pass.
Seeing none Representative you
have a do pass Committee sub for
one forty seven and I believe
there's ten of us here so tend
to tend to zero.
All right thank you thank you
committee for giving a set time
to clean that up Representative
Anderson I I am wasting the
time.
Let's say we we have to excuse
of two apprised.
So.
Representative madam chair you
September and I only see not.
So who are we who are we missing
I thought we had to have
your inner offices are excuse so
we have a total of eleven so it
should be nine nine yes ma'am a
yes you're right I can't.
I haven't had enough coffee this
morning thank you you see.
Right now we're all going.
That's exactly what I do count
the boxes in the in Hollywood
squares.
Okay Representative Anderson
house bill one seventy four
you're up.
And you have any experts you
wish to be brought over.
Madam chair I don't this
morning.
I believe it's a solo flight on
a three page bill all right
you're you're you are in charge
go ahead thank you madam
chairman madam chairman the
committee I'm pleased to be here
this morning and present house
bill one seventy four
it is a short bill it's very
clear in what it sets out.
And the that of course is
doubling.
The income tax exemption for
lowincome New Mexicans who are
sixty five years of age or older
or who are blind.
I am the committee this morning
without of the FIR so if you're
working off that please to
simply be aware that that I've
seen it but I don't have it
exactly ready this morning to
help me and my responses but in
my responses I would simply say
of as you can see of.
We're dealing with exempting
existing low income tax credits.
The tax exemptions credits and
and exemptions are two different
thing we're dealing with
doubling they've not been
doubled for about thirty years
they've not been touched for
about thirty years so this is
really an ideal of of of getting
help.
During this pandemic after this
pandemic in where I believe tax
relief is really needed and that
is those of New Mexicans retired
sixty five years and older were
blind who.
Well are in the bottom of the
lowincome of scale in a state
that is forty eight and per
capita income so when we talk
about New Mexico's poor we're
talking about a very poor
population in the sense of the
net of our of our country so of
yes you can see of of the bill
simply lines through eight
thousand dollars in ramping up
for individuals filing tax
returns is it simply of for
heads of households in filers
and surviving spouses heads of
households bribing spouses and
married individuals filing joint
returns yet
Doubles from eight thousand to
sixteen thousand and.
I presented I I introduce this
bill two years ago of I got it
to the tax committee were was
tabled of the tax Committee was
more focused on a broad tax
issued of which we those of us
who served two years ago
remember.
And in the course of all of that
for reasons.
This call is overlooking this
particular low income tax
exemption was
Was
overlooked.
And the I'm on my way again to
the tax committee and hoping for
a better reception and attention
to this our.
Hacks of exemption which is most
needed by New Mexicos.
Smallest taxpayers madam chair I
stand for question.
Thank you representative will
first go to the audience.
And Gabriel are you able to do a
poll.
Yes madam chair let me get that
on for you can.
I I want to clarify were on H.
B. one seventy seventy four
awesome.
Okay for members for those in
attendance if you would like to
register your support or
opposition to house bill one
seventy four that gives us an
idea of.
how many are here on this bill.
Okay.
All right
Representative it looks like
there's and nine people voted in
support and shockingly no
opposition.
We'll go we'll go to we'll go to
the audience anyone wishing to
speak
On house bill one seventy four
we have your votes but if you
would like to speak.
If you would raise your hand.
Okay I don't see any and right
so you have some votes but no
one to to speak so go ahead
we'll go to the we'll go to the
committee.
And at first I have
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I
think you Representative
Anderson for bringing this
legislation forward I think this
works in conjunction with our
piece of legislation that I
carry is the social security
income tax and a tax exemption
but I think this one is taking a
piece of the pie that is the
most needed and I don't really
have any questions but thank you
for continuing and good luck in
tax thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam thank you
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Yes thank you madam chair and a
good morning I want to apologize
this morning at a horrible scare
my husband did not answer the
phone all morning and thanks and
somebody over any still didn't
answer and my was shaking in the
parking lot waiting and he keeps
his okay yeah he's alive but.
It could depress thank you I'm
still I'm still set up but I
apologize because I do take
these very seriously and I want
to be there to hear everything I
think this is a great bill thank
you Representative Phelps as all
of this and that and thank you
for everything.
Thank you Representative
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews you need
to on mute.
Yes to ensure my video it the
same time and.
Is way beyond my abilities.
Here I am so I'm Representative
Anderson thank you so much for
this bill I just a couple
questions
I would say that this kind of
bill is very popular in my
district is we have a lot of
senior citizens but
to questions first of all voices
for children Bill Jordan has
advocated something like this as
an alternative to.
Sorry as an alternative to
giving an across the board at no
no taxes social security income
and I just was curious whether
or not you had worked with him
at all in terms of putting this
bill together.
Thank you representative no I've
not I have not I at the end.
Worked with nobody on this bill
I just felt that of so often in
this busy provided world we are
capable of overlooking the this
I see this as the this and I'm
glad to know that gentlemen.
Is supportive of my position so
I'll leave it there thank you.
Madam chairman Representative
Anderson thank you for that
answer I also just wanted to
clarify because there's a lot of
these kind of proposals sort of
around this isn't just social
security income this is gross
income and this is the exemption
regardless of the source of the
income and I understand it
correctly.
Yes you are it is it's all
income not just the income
derived from social security.
Right.
Representative Anderson I
appreciate you bringing this
bill and I will just be
supporting it and
thank you and madam chairman
that's all the questions I have.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
thank you madam chair
Representative Anderson I just I
was wondering.
This is for New Mexicans who are
over sixty five and we're
blinded work over sixty five or
blind.
Thank you at sixty five or
blind.
madam chair and representative
of is there a reason you
selected just people with
disabilities who are blind and
not others with disabilities
yes.
Yes there is and I appreciate
that question and that is.
I determined that in order to be
successful I had to make this as
simple as possible and sixty
five or older were blind is
existing state law.
See that is why I did not look
beyond.
The those recipients of this tax
exemption.
And madam chair representative
so this is and you said this
hasn't been changed since
ABC seven is.
That's correct.
Four years.
So I'm wondering if this should
be updated or people with
disabilities
and.
Or over sixty five would really
benefit much from this or just
leave it as those who are blind.
Madam chair I appreciate I mean
Representative I appreciate your
comments I think that of I'm
sure to help you of being a
hesitant warrior and therefore
decided I would only do this
within the.
Within existing state law and
and not.
And additional of perhaps worthy
of categories of exemption I'm
gonna let that rest for another
day I just think we need to
address the size of the
exemption and I believe the the
impact is is affordable I and
the impact the impact.
Yes where it is needed the very
most and it's not to say that
New Mexico taxpayers may not
have other ways to reduce their
tax liability through other
sections of our state tax code
which I am not an expert on but
I know this applies to those who
need it the most and that's
that's what I'm staying focused
on.
Representative.
Okay thank you madam chair
that's all.
Thank you and Representative it
looks like the FIR has it about
one point eight million
lost revenue are down to one
point six million is it's not in
the scheme of things a drop in
the bucket but meaningful to.
to those who.
Who could use us so.
and I thank you for for bringing
this Representative Thomson.
You madam chair I was sitting
here trying to decide if I was
gonna open the can of worms but
Representative Ferrary opened it
and and and Representative
Anderson this has nothing to do
with you I'm just going to make
that a political statement oh my
gosh that including in the IRS
that people who are blind get
special treatment and people who
are deaf people who have
intellectual disabilities people
who have physical disabilities
are left out and now and I I I
always often wondered where that
came about and I always just
assumed that that the blind
community at some point decades
ago had a really strong lobby
and got themselves put in the
federal as well as the state for
exemptions because as someone
who's worked with kids with
disabilities
For.
For ever I'm in a.
There are people who are blind
do amazingly well and people who
are blind caps struggles just
like every other disability and
I just find it as I said
Representative Anderson it has
nothing to do with your belt but
it just the the I'm that total
on their desktop that has always
bothered me and you know why one
disability was but that
basically place you know in the
highest level than every other
disabilities for got so it
essentially has nothing to do
with this bill but I just wanted
to get it out there that so
maybe you could start getting
under the building a Burr under
other people's battle to and
eventually will laugh will make
things a little more fair but
thank you Representative
Anderson thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
The past madam chair I would do
pass.
And the second multiple seconds
is there any objection to the do
pass.
Seeing none Representative
Anderson you have a do pass and
I think it now is attention is
the row we were just missing
Representative Terrazas.
Chairman thank you very much for
that to pass and I will if you
could when you report the bill
on the committee ask it to be
differed from taxed Reverend
priest.
Thank you.
I've got one more this morning
that said some of New Mexico
president at some point so I I
feel your pain.
okay.
So we are
trying to figure out which built
next
Representative Dow.
Is putting on another bill but I
see her name there let me see
Madam chair would you like me to
make her panelists to see if she
is available sure I think she's
putting on another bill and
hasn't
she's here
Okay.
So what go ahead maker
panelists.
For one sixty.
House bill one sixty.
Representative Dow.
Are you there thank you madam
chair.
Or all rural all juggling act to
get in another committee
sometime soon and I've got
Representative Johnson on tap as
well if you weren't ready but if
you're ready with we have we'll
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and I do have
expert witness okay who is I
expert pardon Mike Zabel okay he
is waiting as well okay I feel
like I returned home I know we
missed you I know my for I miss
health committee my freshman
year I served on health and
labor so I see new faces
Representative Montoya sometime
we're going to get to meet and
and share our passion for early
childhood.
Okay whenever Harris I think we
have
Mike is on and so.
Go ahead thank you thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee today I have what I
consider a cleanup bill and
oversight something that has
happened to one of our most
vulnerable populations that
susceptible to comment which our
pregnant women the majority of
pregnant women are in the most
at risk health cap age category
most susceptible to cut crime
that is our lineal age group and
then there are additional
factors that make that women
more susceptible to comment and
somehow within our public health
orders in declaring abortions as
the sensual which I'm not here
to dispute this is an abortion
bill but what happened in that
process is that they were left
out of any sort of protocol for
a COVID safe practices at the
facilities where abortions are
performed and so this whole is
very simple for the audience
that may or may not be able to
see it just because of how
complicated the virtual session
is this is a bill that is one
and a half pages it very simply
says that the department of
health shall establish and
require specific health and
safety protocols used at the
city's at which abortions are
performed to prevent the spread
of COVID disease these
requirement shall include the
use of P. P. P. the personal
protective equipment capacity
restrictions the enhanced
screening procedures and selfies
and self quarantine for persons
traveling into New Mexico for
from high risk areas in low risk
areas and that this requirement
shall remain in effect as long
as the public health order is a
fact pursuant to the health act
and for the purpose of
controlling the Corona virus
disease.
It's that simple and I think you
know I was listening a little
bit to the previous testimony
I'm not trying to make a
political statement but I do
think it was interesting that
representative Thompson pointed
out in the previous bill that it
referred to people over sixty
five and the blind and you know
sometimes we wonder who has a
political power who has lobbyist
that allow certain people to be
exempt from health orders and I
certainly hope that's not the
case here but some people could
say that those wanting abortion
to be available have the strong
lobbying power I hope that this
committee the health committee
and that we want health
standards applied equity to all
New Mexicans all people who are
traveling out of state to
respond to have procedures
performed in the state of New
Mexico especially a procedure
and that is this risky for the
population women in crisis and
women hoodies CDC and who show
as the most at risk and most
susceptible to the COVID virus
and with that I would just turn
it over to my experts.
Thank you madam chair can you
see me in that situation.
Yes we we see you in here you go
ahead thank you thank you madam
chair for let me speak today as
well as members of the committee
Representative Dow.
my name's Mike Seidel and the
plaintiffs medical malpractice
attorney practicing for twenty
five years here in New Mexico my
dad I grew up working in his
office he was the physician here
in town for many of the
legislators over the years and
the former head of quality
assurance New Mexico I'm
familiar with office protocols
and safety procedures in medical
offices by continuing to assist
him over a number of years and
what I see right now is a public
health crisis that is to say
that it's currently happening in
the abortion clinics whether
you're pro choice or pro pro
life it shouldn't matter to you
about this public health crisis
I what I will detail for you
today it's a couple of areas of
concern number one the CDC
statistics on pregnant women and
their vulnerability to COVID
nineteen two of Dr Scrase and
the governor's orders which show
high risk populations and the
third is specific instances of
of of clinics which are of great
concern to New Mexicans
generally first the CDC
background on pregnant women
pregnant women are at risk for
severe COVID symptoms more so
than non pregnant women but in
fact the CDC did a study that
pregnant women are five point
one times more likely to be
admitted to an ICU with COVID
symptom with serious problems
and one of the one point seven
times more likely to be put on a
ventilator if they do come down
with COVID symptoms
additionally we have to look at
according to the CDC and I have
all these documents available
where these infections are
taking place it is particularly
relevant for New Mexico because
New Mexico that's a lot of
second and third trimester
abortions that.
Second and third trimester
abortions compromise ninety
percent of the COVID infections
according to the CDC.
So it is important that these
women be tested for COVID not
only reduce Pratt but to
adequately diagnose and take
care of the patient.
So that they don't experience a
bureau or unwanted outcomes
which would require
hospitalization or ventilation.
The second area that I I want to
expound on is is the work of Dr
Scrase and the governor and the
situation.
First in October twenty twenty
press conference Dr Scrase
identified in the area of
concern that area concern with
the infection rate among certain
age groups infection rate
between the twenty and thirty
four year old age group with the
highest almost three times that
of the over sixty five age group
in New Mexico.
This is particularly concerning
because the abortion population
that it's served by these
clinics it is ninety five
percent
between the age group of twenty
to thirty four which is
according to the Guttmacher
their research arm of Planned
Parenthood in the situation
grouping about ninety five
percent of these particular
women between the ages of twenty
and thirty for our highest risk
area of spread and infections in
New Mexico the second area that
Dr Scrase actually.
Get upon was where these
infections are happening.
And in his report in October of
two thousand fourteen he showed
that health care facilities are
the number one area that
received rapid response.
investigations from the
department of health.
Almost three times that of
restaurants and bars and that is
available it is October two
thousand fourteen video this is
a concern we need to have high
COVID protections a month for
health care providers which are
simply not happening here in New
Mexico the third area that the
government the governor actually
address was travel from out of
state because she said that
people were traveling from out
of state maybe and and it is
symptomatic and may not know
transmitting the disease.
And it rightfully so that that
is a a reasonable.
restriction to put on people
however it needs to be equally
applied especially against
abortion clinics are for for for
abortion clinics because we have
a high propensity people
traveling out of state to seek
abortions in the second and
third trimester here in New
Mexico.
you can see that in a in a study
called traveling for rights by
any car and even at the best
rate.
In the fourth area concern that
the governor data I met October
conference was traveling from el
Paso because I'll pass had a
high infection rate at that time
and the clinics during that the
the heights of the pandemic in
el Paso in Santa Theresa work
clothes.
It and they were sending their
patients up to Albuquerque we at
the time had a six hundred and
seventy four K. per day average
rate which two weeks later after
after that.
All the way to a month later we
got over three thousand cases of
COVID per day one can surmise
said sending patients from
highly infected area to a lowly
infected area is increasing the
amount of risk to the general
public and to the patients
themselves.
So when we apply this to
specific clinics I'm gonna fight
to the specific clinics that I
have personal all which one is
through representing a woman who
was arrested by at the request
of a an abortion is that
women's reproductive clinic of
someone part where he would not
turn over medical records and
use its use was
that he had COVID what's in the
I see you and that is nurse
manager at passed away from
COVID and could not find the
records in the situation this is
been confirmed in writing by
attorneys in the situation
because of that.
There is a high likelihood that
there is an infection that
generated within that what that
that office of women's
reproductive clinics of support
someone parking Mexico.
rapid response team never
investigated an OSHA complaint
was filed and there was no
enforcement of it and we need to
have a systematic review
enforcement against all people
who have rested in their offices
or in their clinics in that
situation the second area of
concern is southwestern women's
options which is the second and
third trimester abortion
facility you would find find
second and third trimester is
which is the highest inspection
right against a pregnant women
many women travel from out of
state
to seek the second and third
trimester abortions in this
situation and we they they stay
in hotel rooms that outpatient
procedure during that time
period and they reduce labor and
they they they they continue to
labor in these hotel rooms for
two to three day time period not
only do I worry about
respiratory droplets in this
situation but I also worry about
what part of half pathogens in
the hotel rooms and not being
cleaned up properly so it is
important that we we enforce
these protocols equally against
all members of the healthcare
profession in this situation.
And whether you your Republican
or Democrat pro choice to pro
life.
A yes Philip a yes vote on this
bill is very important for the
public safety of New Mexico.
Number one it sends a unifying
message between the Republicans
and the Democrats that yes mass
New Mexico which is a scary
situation and we need to protect
against it and number two it
says we're not going to
selectively enforce either way
so that we we gain the
confidence of the people.
Yes.
We don't.
Vote yes on this bill.
Sending a message to the public
that we might as well take mass.
Also the way to our neighbors we
don't care about the spread of
infection is not safe it's not
compatible and it is simply
unfair for people to selectively
enforced against one industry
and not another and risk the
spread of COVID throughout the
state of New Mexico thank you
your you madam chair for every
everything you're doing up there
at the legislature and if you
have any questions or
legislators have any questions
I'd be happy to expand on any of
this or find them documents.
Thank you.
I'm Representative are you ready
for us to go to the audience.
Yes madam chair okay thank you
Gabrielle could you posed the
whole.
Those in the audience and.
Our support or opposition to
house bill one sixty.
Thank you looks like or that to
us
Okay so we have in this is gives
us a sense in the audience we
have here I in support and
sixteen in opposition
we will go first.
To those who wish to speak in
support of house bill one sixty
if you would raise your hand.
Those in the audience who wish
to speak.
in favor of house bill one
sixty.
Hi no hands raised those who
wish to speak in opposition to
house bill one sixty raise your
hands.
Madam chair I think there may
have been a delay.
In the hands being raised okay.
Well will will now that we have
these has raised will will do
this first and we're gonna
limit COVID to all two one
minute.
And the first is Ellie rush
first.
S. fourth.
had Ellie.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
I'm so sorry can you hear me yes
go ahead thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
People are E. face extreme
barriers to reproductive health
care these barriers have only
been intensified during the
public health emergency
thankfully our elected officials
to immediate measures to ensure
all forms of reproductive health
care declared essential and fall
under the public health orders.
The public health orders very
clearly apply to all health care
clinics which include healthcare
facilities that provide abortion
there is no gap there is no
admission there is no failure of
the department of health to
include abortion care providers
in the public health orders each
the one sixty of the track law
targeted regulation of abortion
providers that singles out
abortion providers for safety
protocols that are already in
place there's nothing in this
bill that is not already being
time using and respectively
claims that healthcare
facilities that provide
abortions do not follow the
public health orders are simply
incorrect the insinuation that
health standards do not apply
equitably for those seeking
abortion care is again simply
incorrect trump lost can be
wonky and complicated but what
they're meant to do is trap laws
are designed to further
stigmatize providers and here
this isn't about patient safety
or public health it's about
stigmatizing questions here for
those reasons I ask that this
committee
do not pass has helpful sixty
one thank you thank you we had a
glitch in the in the timer so I
apologize for that but thank you
LA for keeping that
short our next we will go to eve
SB.
Yes go ahead Lee thank you thank
you madam chair and committee
I'm speaking is the legislative
chair New Mexico section for the
American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists
and we do when practicing in New
Mexico for thirty years H. B.
one sixty is unnecessary law
that puts dangerous roadblocks
between patients and important
time sensitive health care
reproductive reproductive health
care clinics in New Mexico have
already adopted COVID state
practices to ensure the health
of patients staffing providers
and they are we are already
regulated just like all other
medical clinics in the state
evidence shows that this law
like other trap laws did not
benefit patients it's not about
state safety it's not
stigmatizing providers and
creating barriers to needed
women's health care thank you
for voting against this harmful
bill.
Thank you we're having trouble
with the timer and
so I'm gonna have.
Just take that down we'll keep
our comments is brief you're
doing great
and.
Gabrielle ours our system is
having trouble hearing so she's
not hearing one we're going on
or not so
and there she goes let's just
take the timer off.
And.
Our next we have Julianna Koob.
My name's Julie on a two I am
the lobbyist for and current
head of the Rocky Mountains in
New Mexico we stand in
opposition to house bill one
sixty what we know about
abortion is that it's health
care and it should be regulated
just like any other health care
we also know that abortion is
safe it's one of the safest
medical procedures a person can
have an arching tree and a multi
year study has found that there
there's no difference in
complications or safety issues
with abortion care as many other
procedures so we stand in
opposition and we appreciate
your time madam chair thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have of Franciscans
Alice.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Francis Gonzales on
from there New Mexico the stock
was part in New Mexico are
representatives from Mecca down
Houston Austin's Representative
my County I'm also representing
CD two as a student teacher
fellowship progressive caucus
and the district twenty eight
coordinator recheck Our
Democracy we oppose this bill
thank you for your care and
concern but also the public
health orders apply to all
health care concerns is built is
targeted is in a truck lan
stigmatizing abortion in a very
to women's choice and health
care and our providers were
providing the service I want to
say to please oppose this bill
do not vote for it it's just
another very year and it is just
another bill that is against
abortion thank you thank you
Francis.
Next we have Nicole Martin.
And then can you all hear me yes
go ahead.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee.
I am a community member and a co
founder of indigenous women
rising I'm also for together
action leader and I just wanted
to.
We are strongly in opposition
this legislative bill that's
being proposed.
As many people have mentioned
before you know this this isn't
about
The health care of the patient
just about stigmatizing abortion
care and the providers
right that's health care for
people
Well it is nice for you all are
for member proposed this bill to
worry about the safety concerns
of people I wish that people
were also.
Fast enough.
When there were indigenous
pregnant mothers at low was
hospital who were.
Their newborn children taken
away from them because of
mobilises basically
COVID policies so I ask you
madam chair members of the
committee to vote no on this
thank you thank you Nicole.
Our next we have Diane McAfee.
Good morning committee on people
come from the next.
Sorry about that go ahead Diane
okay so people come to New
Mexico from out of state for
various procedures and reasons
abortion care would be just one
among many medical procedures
patients from out of state might
come here to obtain our health
care providers have criteria for
safety during the pandemic and
for providing medical care for
patients the urgency and
necessity of medical care of any
kind should be done on a case by
case basis is not an issue for
legislation makes no sense to
target one medical procedure in
a piece of legislation except as
a measure for trying to find a
way to deny that care for that
particular procedure this
proposed legislation and
unnecessarily and discriminatory
targets abortion care please
vote no.
Thank you next we have John
among in Sanford.
Thank you can you hear me go
ahead yes thank you my name is
John the money and Stanford on
the director of the New Mexico
with the just coalition for
reproductive choice and we are a
member of the national network
of abortion funds and along with
the other abortion funds here in
the state we really relied on
the expertise of the medical
staff in our clinics here to
guide us to make sure that our
abortion funding clients
that we were providing the most
safe protocols for them
because the the staff here at
the the clinics are highly
professional and.
Completely so completely
compassionate about the care
that they find that they gave us
excellent advice in how to keep
our clients and what kind of
protocols to follow to keep our
abortion funding clients safe
and healthy so we're asking you
to oppose this bill it's just
another way of stigmatizing
abortion care thank you very
much.
Thank you next we have Susan
Loubet a.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Susan Loubet a with the New
Mexico women's agenda which is a
a coalition of organizations and
individuals that work on women's
issues in New Mexico and we
oppose this legislation for the
reasons already well stated
thank you.
Thank you our next we have
Alyssa.
I am madam chair this is yes
Martinez I'm and I'm just
offering my testimony in support
of HB one sixty because I
believe we should have you know
standards of enforcement one
standard especially as it
pertains to women's health we
know that women are traveling
from various parts of not only
the state but the country to
obtain abortions in New Mexico
due to the lack of limits on
abortion in fact several Clint
clinics advertised abortions
after twenty four weeks and and
that is six months up to thirty
two weeks or eight months and
beyond so many of our
surrounding states and
neighboring states and states
throughout the country have some
common sense protections there
and so it New Mexico has become
a Mecca for out of state travel
in in state travel to these
abortion clinics and we know
that Santa Theresa the clinic
there experience a COVID
outbreak in as they did not take
the take patients from Texas and
the surrounding areas are these
patients being instructed to buy
by the fourteen day quarantine
and we know this click also did
not abide by the state's COVID
reporting requirements putting
women in patients at risk I I
ask for your support in this
bill because I believe requiring
protections for health and
safety should not in any way be
conflated with political
rhetoric in terms like
stigmatizing many of these women
are diverted to local hotels in
Albuquerque where they travel
from out of state and leave the
clinic up to three to seven days
during the late term abortion
procedures these procedures are
also care covered by Medicaid as
are the travel costs so and
again we need more protections
not less and for that reason I
ask for your support for H. B.
one sixty.
Thank you Alyssa
next we have Sander Pam.
Can you hear me go ahead thank
you my name is Sandra Penniman
retired family physician traded
away in New Mexico I had a full
family practice in a white and a
portion was part of my practice
in every facility from offices
to clinics or hospitals we are
always under scrutiny all of the
time thanks Senator for abortion
services are even more absurd
this is not about safety it's
not about care this is about
continuing to creative fiction
that abortion is unsafe and
require special concerns of
questions one of the safest
surgical procedures that is
often abortion is time sensitive
a delay of weeks today's may
make it unavailable affecting a
person's life health and future
we must be vigilant when
legislators use different
tactics to make abortion
difficult to obtain it's
important that we oppose this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
And that's the last hand raised
anyone anyone else.
Hi.
And Representative did you want
to say anything else before we
go to the committee thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee you know I just I find
it ironic that a bill that would
assure women's health and safety
during a surgical procedure
would be considered a trap law
or roadblocks if code sec at
COVID standards exist they could
be viewed and reviewed by the
public I introduce this bill
because I cannot find anything
it is COVID say standards even
though you can find them for
every variety of health
behavioral health provider
schools childcare and school
time recreation programs in the
list goes on and on hotels
motels at each unique and
distinctive Health health
standards that apply to their
specific work and that are are
regulated by the department of
health so if COVID.
Spread and a death occurred
eventually I restaurant I hear
someone even at a drive through
car wash there is the fines
there would be closures in
quarantine.
I'm simply asking that patients
health care workers and the
public be just as safe have just
a couple approval application of
the health order at all
facilities especially were
surgical procedures are being
performed for women in the most
at risk category according to
CDC.
Thank you first on my list for
members of the committee is
representative Armstrong go
ahead thank you madam chair and
and thank you for everyone for
their testimony and I think you
are Representative Dow for
bringing this legislation
forward you know I kind of see
it madam chair as there's a lot
of entities that were out there
was picked in two chosen
around the state of New Mexico
and I think there's other
legislation that's going to.
Talk about that but
Representative Dow also from
what I'm understanding from your
expert witness.
Is saying is that there was not
protocols put in place
specifically for abortion
clinics or was it just protocols
in general for health care
clinics.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Armstrong I will
let my expert witness answer
that because.
Madam chair.
Representative Armstrong
specifically they were not
specific protocols put in
against the abortion clinics for
instance abortion is many times
elective we can all agree on.
Elective procedures were stated
in late November or also on
April but in late November they
were in early December they were
state but the abortion clinics
remain open for these elective
procedures and they are exempted
by the governor's orders in this
situation and Enforcement what
is it ever taken against these
these clinics to prevent
elective abortions during that
time period
which are the same as any other
elective procedure that we have
in in society I think this is
not a target trap law but rather
just enforce everything equally
it of course everything all
across the board if you can't
have an E. N. T. procedure
during that time period you
can't have an abortion during
that time period and it in
current of if we're going to to
have this because one particular
clinic in Albuquerque has had
seventeen injuries over the last
five years the need for
additional burdens on the
hospital staff over UNM for a
period of time and that is
exactly what the governor was
trying to prevent in this
situation is the the use of the
hospital setting what and over
burning over burdening of our
hospital system in case of these
are elective surgeries so I
think you I don't know why it
was exempted or where elector
questions exempted and other
elective procedures were not
allowed to occur and I think
that's what law it treats
everything fairly and equally
and since we can go all the way
up until the third trimester
abortions in this situation a
delay of six weeks is not gonna
make that big of a difference
overall in in the availability
of health care.
Madam chair and Representative
Armstrong I'll just add to that
and so I I don't see how Covid
safe practice procedure for this
particular industry would delay
anything but I can tell you
specifically from the areas
where I've been working at
during the COVID I can speak
directly to some of the non
profits that I've been insisting
the COVID say standards that
childcare was deemed essential
out of school time care was
deemed essential and recreation
programs were deemed essential
those those activities did not
stop but they certainly came
with very very specific the
COVID say practice standards for
child care centers was thirty
five pages of very specific
directives how to serve meals
how to me very specific
procedures drop off and pick up
her parents of the at the
frequency of testing and what to
do with someone tested positive
those are different than the
standards during out of school
time on at PED campus the ratios
were different the the testing
criteria was different the drop
procedures were different and as
complicated and in the third
category of recreation those
that are not licensed by ECECD
or by PED another set of
standards completely different
than the other two so working in
out of school time in the the
non profits were I volunteer
they were deemed essential they
had three different sets of
criteria for each so they're not
there's not one set the
standards for industry there are
set of standards her licensure
to per category per procedure
Tax proactivity and that same
thing can be said of behavioral
health in the nonprofit work
that I do in at volunteering in
behavioral health the behavioral
health for people who are at
risk of re of recidivism which
is different criteria than those
who are receiving your a to a
typical at therapeutic type
service some are allowed to be
face to face some must be
virtual some can be and how.
Some can be in clinic and they
vary by the type of client and
the type of service to be
received in the behavioral
health service at area so what
what what I why I brought this
bill is because we are absent
and silence on this procedure
and how to safely perform during
COVID.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative for for
elaborating on that I I find it
amazing like I said before we
could probably find a bill for
almost every entity you know
that that got closed or had Sir
specifics guidelines others
didn't have specific guidelines
and and I I agree with you on
the fact that it was it was all
over the place and it was hard
to follow and the goal post kept
moving and so I'm I'm I'm gonna
think about this and listen to
other questions but I appreciate
the answers thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dow
I think you of kind of expanded
this discussion back to
you know whether abortion is
essential or not we don't want
to go down that road we want to
focus on whether or not
this bill is necessary because
of health care and abortion as
part of women's health care and
ease of providers are already
under restrictions of COVID
nineteen just as any other
Health Care.
for medical providers and
clinics in New Mexico whether or
not they provide of abortion
here and there are many subject
to executive and public health
orders aiming to curb the spread
of COVID nineteen and there are
they're also subject to evidence
based regulations such as state
licensing requirements federal
workplace safety requirements
association requirements and
also medical ethics created to
ensure patient safety so what
compelling reason do you have
for and essential health care
service to be held to a a
different higher US standard
than other health care
providers.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Ferrary
for the question I'm not asking
for anything extra I'm
advocating for equal application
of the health order you can find
a health order for any industry
that is not exclude them from
any federal law state law
employee law in the law but
under the public health order
you can find no directive for
safety procedures for clinics
for better performing abortion
I'm advocating for equal not
extra.
madam chair and Representative
Dow
you're totally wrong because
they are already as I stated
under health care of guides in
protections and all the things
that other health care providers
they are not singled out they
are the state so thank you madam
chair I will not vote for this
bill.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so I.
Want to go back to that what was
just brought up.
So.
It looks like from what I'm
understanding that there were
elective procedures and those
were all stopped during the
COVID
except portion was allowed to
continue is that correct.
Madam chair representative ward
that's correct.
The abortion even elective
abortion was one of the
exemptions what was deemed
essential along with many other
industries.
The difference between abortion
and the other industries that
the other industries in order to
operate receive specific
guidance on COVID safe practices
whereas abortion did not.
Thank you madam chair
representative was my main
question because it seems to be
there's some confusion over
whether they are following the
protocol or they're not and I
trust you in the state you
brought four because they are
not so but I do have just a few
more questions and I do want to
say that it's unfortunate this
is become a political bill
because it's not it's just
saying that this happens to be a
facility that does acts and they
should be able to follow the
same protocols so let me ask you
madam chair representative do we
have COVID say protocols
procedures here the roundhouse
that's correct right.
I'm Madam chair representative
lord we do in fact and we could
rely on the staff and expertise
of the people at the roundhouse
to make those decisions as
someone who worked in the clinic
suggested but that's not what
the governor's done at the
roundhouse that's not what the
speaker of the house was because
they have done they have set
their own protocols in place as
has every industry except
abortion.
And is we did have where some
people were tested positive and
they were quarantined for
fourteen days and I think if we
have to follow them here and
other places are following them
I think everybody should follow
them I think that's what's fair
because that's what we're doing
here that's what we're doing as
representatives and that's what
any health care facility should
want to do they should want to
follow the procedures to keep
everybody safe because we don't
want people to get comment Ortez
pas for comment and not have to
do follow any quarantine set
excuse me college eyes and I
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I will be voting yes on
it thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair and.
I find this bill interesting to
say the least so you said every
industry has its own so can you
tell me what the procedures are
for import drugs and prosthetics
provider versus a physical
therapy clinic verses the
dentist versus the dermatologist
versus an optometrist do they
each have their own separate or
are they considered healthcare
providers so they all have the
same one.
Madam chair representative
Thompson thank you very much
that question I cannot tell you
all the specific ones for each
of those but they each do have
their own re opening plants many
many of them do I they do.
They all have the same one madam
chair and Representative Dow
because they are health care
providers there are not separate
industry as this that's been as
it has been repeatedly said
today they are health care
providers as our physical
therapy committee as our
dentists and they all have the
same qualifications they all
have the same restrictions so
you can check your head I know
what the truth is I know how
this works and so I'm just
asking you since every every
every single.
what did you industry as you
call it has its own I want to
know what they are for Oct four
orthodontics in prosthetics what
they are for physical therapy
what they are for dentists what
they are for dermatologists an
optometrist I could have gone on
those are the five tell me how
each one of those is different
from every other one Madam chair
representative Thompson I can
tell you for physical therapists
because of physical therapist
reach out to me in the physical
therapy the physical therapist
specifically opening guidance as
only medically necessary that is
still the case today so the
physical therapist and the
doctors have to work with the
patient to decide what is
medically necessary only
medically necessary they also
have to have one patient R. one
for only four people are allowed
in the facility at a time with
one physical therapist that is I
I private physical therapist
reach out to me even during this
session letting me know the
difficulty in that I can tell
you that I went and got my teeth
clean and at the dentist I I
they were there is very very
limited there is different
protective gear that was being
worn and they were not able to
wash to spray your mouth and
rents after they did the that
that the chemical that takes
that's hardly news the plaque
and they you're not able to use
the the spray and so they were
telling the specific things that
had changed that were specific
to didn't to dentistry and so
although I cannot speak on all
of them I can tell you that they
are different and unique
industry and procedure.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Lord did you have
a follow up question you did
thank you very much chair
So I do have a question because
Representative Dow brought up a
good point when I went to the
dentist myself it was like a
huge deal all my gosh it was.
They had to ask all these
questions beforehand I had to
fill out this questionnaire to
make sure have been exposed and
I had to send that back they
would see me and then they took
my temperature the count of my
temperature they asked me again
have you know all the COVID
questions you have a cough
eccentric cetera so right now
since there's no comment
protocols in place does that
mean they're not doing that at
the portion clinics are they not
taking temperatures are they not
asking people if they've been
exposed to comment I'm just
thinking along the lines of all
the other things that they
should be doing that are COVID
relevant I just want to know if
they're they're doing temps and
asking questions.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative lord for the
question the the the honest
answer is we do not know they
are not some they do not have a
COVID.
Nineteen re opening safe
practice protocol that other
industries have I hope they are
I'm sure they are but we we just
simply don't know and and I hope
that they are but why are they
exempt from the public health
order and that's what the seeks
to rectify
thank you for up front to them
thank you madam chair
Representative the reason I was
asking is I'm thinking about
this and think about you know my
husband to do Telemeds with the
VA you can even get in anymore
for him to get a procedure those
if you need somebody procedures
yes cancer that runs in this
family all of us on to cancers
parent died of cancer is yet to
go on and have as cancer checks
because they just are not
putting people in the B. A. yet
which is so unfortunate because
that is really essential for us
in our household so he's not
even getting the care that he
needs right now because of the
COVID because a COVID protocols
it's so hard to get people in so
I guess it's kind of frustrating
that we don't have that answer
because I would hope I mean it's
you know you ever it does you
have been to the dentist how
hard it is even if it's an
emergency they're still going to
grow you there's going to
questions just to fill out all
the stuff.
They want all the information to
make sure that they're safe
because our face to face and I
would just expect that if my
dentist has to do it would be a
has to do and all the other
places are doing it that the
abortion clinic should not be
exempt and they should be doing
the exact same thing so again
thank you that's all have this
morning thank you very much
chair representative thank you
representative Representative
bash.
The table bill one sixty.
All second we have a motion to
table and a second and I want to
before we take that boat I just
want to to make a statement to
to clear some things up I hope.
And that is that there is no
separate licensure
classification for abortion
clinics department of health
licensing does not have a
specific license for an abortion
clinic they are health care
facilities whether it's
hospitals clinics ambulatory
surgery centers they fall within
those and all of those licensure
classifications may do a
multitude of things besides
abortion.
And there are all of those are
considered essential health
services all are subject to the
public health orders and none of
those
different
types of services are outlined
this morning by Representative
Thompson whether you're a
dentist or physical therapist or
are in public health specific D.
O. H. guidelines they fall
within their licensure
guidelines in general
procedures for
Protection of patients and
cleanliness etcetera abortion
clinics are not exempted from
anything they are treated
exactly the same with no
specific guidance to a hospital
or to a clinic other than the
general guidelines that fall
under their licensure and the
public health order abortion is
no questions are where abortions
are performed is no different so
there is to single it out as a
single procedure within a
licensed health care entity
providing essential health
services is in my opinion not
appropriate.
thank you we'll go to the
tabling motion of a Torrez would
you call the roll.
Representative Sanderson.
Yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong no
to table.
Representative Brett made by the
house.
Yes to table.
Representative Karen bash.
Yes tabled.
Representative Stephanie Lawler
no to table.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes the table.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yesterday will.
Representative blue is that
Ossoff.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Ferrary yes.
Representative have also is six
is used as excuse me want to go
back to Representative of
Anderson right and
Representative Anderson.
I vote yes and I'd like to
explain my boat.
Thank madam chair Deborah A.
Armstrong yes to table.
Is it eight ball.
To not to M. one excuse correct
and Representative Anderson
explained your vote.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman my concern of this
legislation is of State Street
statutory protocols for work
COVID safe practices on imposing
it on to a health care.
Our provider.
When we don't know what they're
already doing or not.
It it gave me it gives me
concerned that of we may be
through a statute imposed
protocol you with other products
other protocols in place
already.
That's my point thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative.
Okay next and I'm not sure
whether we have Representative
Johnson.
available yet to hear yes on one
seventy eight yeah.
If I could introduce it for her
and get her and have her expert
witnesses take over okay one
seventy eight.
Program meet let me go back and
find expert witnesses.
Yes Dr Sylvia Andrew and
Jennifer Katie.
I.
We can provide them.
I think we have them okay so
thank you madam chair I'm and
I'm just gonna do a shout out
for from what New Mexico
Representative Johnson and I are
currently need bills so she
asked me to take this order so
it's an act relating to
professional licensure amending
a section of the counseling and
therapy practice at to update
definitions relating to the
education and experience
requirements and this is the
chairman the ex exact it is the
sunset date and with that madam
chair I will let my experts take
over.
Okay
Is there Jennifer or Sylvia
whichever one of you wants to go
first.
Unmute.
Jennifer or Sylvia.
There you go Jennifer go ahead.
Good morning thank you madam
chair
Member of the New Mexico
addiction education network
which is a group of college.
Here's working to standardize
addiction education and and
colleges and I'm a faculty
member at central New Mexico
university I mean that in a
college where we have an
addictions program we are trying
to get.
Is and we.
We're having trouble hearing you
Jennifer you might want to take
off your video.
That might help.
See is frozen so we are you able
to.
Hello I am
This Dr Robert Phillips will be
speaking instead of me okay.
And I believe he registered with
miss Lopez yesterday.
And what was what was his name
again Bob Phillips.
It is back.
Jennifer are you back.
Yes.
Okay go ahead.
We're just trying to get the
language updated to reflect that
titles of the current degrees in
the state most of the the two
programs at the associate level
are you services programs.
You're not human and family
studies so our graduates are
having trouble getting license
because there the name of their
degree is not magic let's.
Okay Bob Phillips did you wanna.
Add to that.
You very much of Madam chair in
the committee and the special
greetings to doctor Johnson for
submitting this bill again it
was admitted a couple of years
ago and special thanks to my own
Representative Mr Anderson from
Travis county thank you for for
participating and in supporting
this
as Jennifer mentioned this bill
seeks to make one simple change
in the current of licensure
legislation there is a listing
of degrees that are approved for
licensure and among those that
are enumerated are wanted is
listed as human and family
studies when that is not in fact
the name of any degree that's
offered in New Mexico that has
any relevance to addictions
counseling or behavioral health
for that matter so this bill
seeks to change the one word or
add the one word Human Services
which is the standard degree
across the state we provided
minutes of board meetings that
support this week's of I've
submitted background paper for
the committee's review about
this and this was introduced a
couple of years ago it passed
without opposition to both house
and Senate committees and we
just ran out of time before the
legislative session ended then
so that could not be voted on
but we would strongly urge that
this is just a serious roadblock
it often takes some months
before students section go to
the board for an appeal they've
always been granted licence on
appeal but it's often six months
or more before the cage then
licensed in in these days
especially any delays in the
ability to credential behavioral
health providers of any type is
certainly unfortunate and we've
been asked by others this so
yeah so we're very so we're very
hopeful that this will meet your
approval and that we can get
this bill to
to to about and just for.
The record I'm doctor Bob
Phillips and I coordinate the
program of Human Services and
addiction studies here at
eastern New Mexico university
Roswell thank you very very much
thank you doctor Phillips.
we'll go to the audience
Gabrielle are you able to put up
a poll.
She may be otherwise occupied
let's just raise hands if
there's anyone in among the
attendees who is here in
opposition of this bill would
you raise your hand.
Press the raise your hand
button.
Is there anyone in attendance
here in support of this bill
raise your hand.
Okay we have for will.
We had for hands raised if you
wish to speak you can keep your
hand up if you don't need to
speak.
Can take your hand down.
Okay for one roof took their
hand down so we will go to the
committee
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair I'm here
now of Madam chair of.
Of I'm.
Very interested in whatever we
can do that that of.
Removes obstacles from serving
New Mexicans as they seek of
health care in this case
behavioral health care
and I I hear the term expediting
licensing and the I believe have
some familiarity with
how.
Well intentioned
of individuals actually in the
course of of their work can slow
that down so I'm I'm interested
that my only question up perhaps
to Mr Phillips is of as we.
An older practitioners seeking
of acceptance in New Mexico to
practice
I think about submitting
curriculums that they took as
students.
And whether or not we're we're
still.
Open in this process to allow
their acceptance even though
their curriculums maybe describe
Courses differently from ten
years ago twenty years ago than
today it is it's a sort of an
open ended question Mr Phillips
and I apologize for it but I in
my mind just want to get
comfortable that we're not only
dealing with the most recent
graduates in the name of their
degrees and courses but we're
we're conscious that we must
remain open to the fact that
older practitioners may have.
Different credentials Sir
please.
Thank you for the question Mr
mannerisms are very much
there are procedures within the
current statutes that allow
licensure by credentialing in
another state and historically
that always requires a board
review and that process has
been.
Ereli well standardized and
accepted David hasn't created a
great deal of the lay beyond the
normal time it may take to get
before the board but there is a
current procedure in which if
one is credential in another
state there is a procedure that
the that the that the board
staff can in fact except those
credentials so there's a there's
a fair degree of social trust
that exists between our boards
of the boards of other states
the Human Services degree in
particular is a nationally
comprehensive degree across many
many states in addition to
counseling degree psychology
degree in social work degrees
that are enumerated in the
current statute
and the Human Services degrees
have been in existence in New
Mexico for nearly thirty years
on a number of campuses so this
just redress is that one is
essentially typographical if you
will a grammatical error that
this is and that is in the
statute to amend the word
services to data from studies to
services
so it does your question does
raise a number of issues that
we've addressed we The New
Mexico Dixon's education network
with the board and the the board
has made some commitments that
we will work together to do an
overview of the entire
legislative thing there several
pieces of it that are wonky and
complicated than and deserve
some more careful thought this
is just one very simple measure
to facilitate our our our New
Mexico students that entry into
the field hope that helps.
Thank you very much for that Mr
Phillips I look forward to
supporting the bill and it's a
effort to provide New Mexico
with better health care thank
you madam chairman.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the.
The testimony I I'm I have a
quick couple questions I one of
them is one three years for
it is as far as I'm concerned in
New Mexico reciprocity is a is a
major issue and so I I was
reading through the bill and I
saw that you are.
Changing it I can't remember
from what but I remember you're
changing it to three years can
you elaborate on that for
experience to get the license.
Anyone.
This is Jennifer.
That's there's not a change in
nor are we requesting a change
for that.
I'm we're just requesting a Judy
agent in the term Human Services
there the requirement for the
entry level licenses in all the
fields yes two to three years
under supervision so.
Students coming out of the
associate level remain under
supervision for
three thousand hours which is
two to three years.
Okay thank you so much for that
thank you madam chair and and Dr
I miss read that so my apologies
and then once again on the
sunset part of it it's there is
a Senate bill coming across that
extends it to twenty twenty
seven but in here you have it
you're changing it to twenty
twenty eight.
I just wonder why.
It's a miscommunication between
the.
In connection to the bills.
We're asking for twenty twenty
seven which is of course will
support whatever the board
wants.
Okay I don't know madam chair do
you see any.
Problems with you know we have a
sunset bill and then we have
another bill that changes what
the sunset is actually doing I'm
not sure how to address that but
we can talk off line about that
as well.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
thank you Representative I think
that may be something that needs
to get cleaned up all along the
way out to make sure it's in
sync otherwise I believe it's
the last bill that the governor
signs so if there's
inconsistencies you probably
should sign the sunset bill
overall sunset bill last and
then I think that takes
precedence I believe we ought to
be a checking that to clean up.
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Move to pass a budget pass on
second and the second from
Representative Ferrary is there
any objection to the do pass.
Seeing none you have a do pass
on house bill one seventy eight
and let's count up how many
people are here so we get the
votes right.
There are ten people and one
excuse okay.
All right I'm.
House bill one seventy nine
Representative Thomson did
Representative Johnson ask you
to put that one on as well no
just just the one okay.
And I'm looking to see if she's
in the attendees yeah.
We're all juggling
Representative Baldonado has
been waiting patiently the
entire time you spend getting to
enjoy thank health and Human
Services so I think we'll go on
to house bill one eighty two.
And let's see what we'll get
we'll get our a different folks
moved around here.
What exemption.
Good morning.
Recently but I'm also in health
education some doing because
without you and think you're
juggling to we're all we're all
juggling I've to put a bill on
at some point of this morning
another committee
Do you have any experts you wish
us to
And here just.
You and your Representative
Anderson are going alone today
just to stay in there okay.
for you are you ready for me to
start yes go ahead
Representative a house the one
eighty two thank you madam chair
and thank you members of the
health committee today we have
house bill one eight two which
is a not a very long bill it's
all new material it's of action
education bill it was assigned
to your committee first we
believe because of the the
impacts in the
in the world of of COVID and and
what we're trying to do madam
chair and so what we're trying
to do with this bill is place
the the authority to reopen
schools in the hands of the
local control the local school
boards so this would this would
basically
given that opportunity in in in
during the pandemic or during
the on the public health order
that we've experienced this last
year would just bring that down
to that level I do also madam
chair have an amendment that the
Taurus did have a I don't know
if you folks have been shared
with that yet but
It's
Within the committee secretaries
opposition to do one of the
committee discussed that a move
that for discussing because it's
gonna I want to talk about the
bill as a whole we can is that
the to be okay with that
amendment.
Yes to our have our analysts
have that bill have the
amendment okay yeah go ahead.
We need to move it prescription
mentor to me that yes let's all
move it for discussion second.
Chair and and and members of the
committee the the amendment is
on page three line seventeen.
And just after the after the
this is the end of the sentence
there read centers for disease
control and prevention we at the
department of health and the
public education department as
entities that school boards
would have to take on
recommendations from in terms of
wanting to make their there's
their district re open.
Okay Representative can you
point me to the page and line
number again I'm having trouble
switching back and forth and
I've I looked at the amendment
and then switch back to the bill
and can't remember what page in
line it's page three line
seventy.
Thank you.
Thank you okay.
Is there discussion on the
amendment.
Any objection to the moment.
Seeing none your bill has been
amended thank you madam chair on
it thank you members for for
allowing me to get that
amendment on there it was an
oversight in drafting and and we
did want to include those folks
but but basically the bill does
just as as described there's not
much more to it madam chair
you know my my preference would
have been to have this
conversation education
on Committee first just because
Mormon Education build and in
this but but I think it does
need to be in your committee as
well for for the fact that it
does the phone with the health
and well being of kids but
that's the goal the goal is you
know and obviously we've had
these conversations all morning
long we keep talking about the
stress of having to computers I
had to go so what my daughter's
computers like it so I consume
hearings in there and and look
at those and all that but on but
the fact that kids are not in
school is a very very difficult
situation for our families for
the mental health of our
children and you know for the
opportunity to get the economy
back open we really the you know
schools to be able to function
in some manner so that parents
can
you know do what they need to do
so with that Madam I don't have
very much more to add I know
that I I I believe they'll be on
a few folks in support of the
bill when you go to the public
comment and I guess will stand
for questions at this point.
Okay thank you
I'm and Gabrielle do we have the
poll available we'll get a sense
of our of our attendees if
you're in support or opposition
of house bill one eighty two.
Like we have
ten here in support and three in
opposition.
Hi.
We'll go to
Those in support in the
attendees if you would raise
your hand and support.
If you if you wish to speak
okay we will go first to Jim
Smith.
Welcome Representative Smith
good morning.
So thank you nice to see you
I can't see the entire committee
so I'm not sure there but
and in my entire time the
legislature I don't think I ever
justified from this committee so
this is actually yeah I don't
think you have so welcome to the
New World of.
Virtual health and Human
Services thank you madam chair I
appreciate everything you're
doing and and the committees
focus on health issues during
this pandemic at madam chair
committee members my name is Jim
Smith on the register lobbyist
for Gallup McKinley county
schools we appreciate
represented by a Baldonado is
bipartisan group of legislators
for bringing this bill forward
we certainly understand we've
been going through an
unprecedented pandemic that's
been impacting our economy and
our education system and ways we
probably could not have imagined
a year ago.
We believe that in the case of
our schools our local school
boards had the most knowledge
about the impacts of the
pandemic on our particular
students and our community.
I I'm not sure of our
representative Thompson is still
there us are a little while ago
but as Representative Thompson
understands being from Crown
Point what is going on in our
school district may look very
different and what's happening
in APS Rio Rancho Los crucis
Roswell we think that our local
board of education can respond
quickly and efficiently any time
any type of crisis occurs with
that madam chair leaders the
committee to pass H. B. one
eighty two thank you.
Your muted madam chair.
Sorry that's my fault John
Thompson.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for central
consolidated school district
madam chair central consolidated
supports this bill we support
local control and tribal
consultation along with that
Madam chairman like to think of
the sponsor and my good friend
Representative Baldonado for
bringing this forward and we
encourage you to to move this
bill on thank you madam chair.
Thank you Amanda Eragon.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is in and out of on executive
director New Mexico kids can say
identification advocacy
organization.
Into the out in person learning
for almost one full academic
year now and I would likely
heard New Mexico students are
projected to fall anywhere
between three and twelve months
behind academically you do the
impact the foreclosure.
Nine there was good reason the
clothes are getting we didn't
know much about the virus or
household impacted right
our health and education
networks have learned a lot the
centers for disease control
continued by Senator thank you
re open old with the easy part
off and I and the White House is
pushing for in person
instruction for every student
during the first one Hundred
Days of the new administration.
Moreover we have data from other
states indicating that people
can vote without adding any fat
at the end of the day we believe
every family should have the
opportunity to access
educational options that work
best for them whether that's
learning in person or online we
thank the sponsor for the
amendment to require compliance
with healthcare act guidelines
and that is all of our goal to
keep our students and families
safe while tending to their
emotional and academic team
within the part of this bill and
thank you for your time this
morning.
Thank you next we have Stan
rounds.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Stan
rounds on the executive director
for the New Mexico school
superintendents association and
we stand in strong support of
this bill we have always had as
a as a tenant to have local
decision making prominent in any
decision for students in any of
our communities in New Mexico
under this pandemic there has
been a difficulty in balancing
community health with
educational efficacy in fact we
feel that the educational
efficacy of matrix hasn't been
as well actuators a might have
been so we believe this bill
will allow that balance to be
better realized and we urge the
committee to vote in favour
thank you.
Thank you next we have a
Jennifer Trujillo.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
speaking on behalf of myself as
a parent of three young adults
in the school system I I
wholeheartedly support this bill
as we've all seen the
connectivity issues for children
the food issues for children the
the lack of social interaction
for our kids that I think is
just as important as the
educational component.
And that.
And I stand in full support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you Jennifer the next we
have Joe colon are.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jody and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
school boards association and we
stand in strong support of house
bill one eighty two.
Are we represent eighty nines
the eighty nine school boards
four hundred and fifty school
board members elected from
throughout New Mexico one of our
major guiding principles in
looking at legislation is so R.
priority for local decision
making.
We believe.
That one of the most important
elements of a successful public
school system is local control
and local decision making.
Our during our annual conference
in December our membership
adopted unanimously to positions
regarding this issue one is that
we recognize that school reentry
planning decisions should not be
one size fits all whites one
size fits all proposition
supports legislation and
flexibility to allow school
boards to make decisions about
reentry.
Secondly we believe that all
pandemic related scientific
evidence and data should be
shared with all school districts
to help strengthen our local
decision making on that line we
think this the sponsor for a
minute then for his amendment
which addresses addresses that
concern that we had so again we
stand in support we thank the
hello Representative Baldonado
for
bringing this legislation
forward.
Thank you and I apologize for
butchering your last name I need
to new glasses.
heather
Heather Bassett.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is heather
Bassett and I have
Representative Albuquerque
public schools I'm I'm here to
expressed support for H. B. one
eighty two as you've heard from
others local control is
definitely an issue if yes can
also support we believe there's
a lot of different ways to get
there and this bill creates one
Avenue but the court local
control is what's important for
us and we think Representative
Baldonado and the sponsors of
this bill for creating the
statewide bipartisan
conversation thank you.
Thank you.
Arsenio Romero.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Dr
Center meadow I am the
superintendent for lost on the
schools and I want to thank the
sponsor this bill especially
Representative Baldonado I I
definitely stand in support of
house bill one eighty two and I
want to show a new lands on on
why this is important to us as a
school district that I believe
it is really an equity issue
that local school districts and
local school boards need to have
the ability to meet the needs of
our local sub groups I'm not
specifically talking about are
at risk students are English
language learners and our
students to live with and
poverty we need to be able to
use our local resources to
provide positive outcomes for
students now in this environment
that we're in now we do see many
students to have success in this
virtual setting we shoot you see
many teachers are also showing
success in this virtual space
but there's a big but.
Many face do not have the
opportunity to have those kinds
of outcomes and what I'm
specifically talking about
students across the state with
these in apps we're talking
about our high school students
that are in credit jeopardy.
Especially R. K. three two three
students that are just learning
to read and of course our
transition grade levels are
kindergarten are six or seven
graders and ninth graders and
how important it is to be able
to have some of those face to
face opportunities so once again
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for letting
me speak this morning in support
of house bill one eighty two
thank you.
Thank you next we have have
Kerry robin under.
Senator okay good morning madam
chair can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Wonderful Good Morning madam
chair members of the committee
Kerry robin brown I am the
registered lobbyists for public
charter schools of New Mexico we
do support house bill one eighty
two we want to be very clear
that safety of our students is
always and will continue to be
our number one concern as
charter school leaders but we
also feel like there is a
delicate balance and finding a
way to safely allow our students
to return to school so that they
can have in person learning and
social emotional well being that
our schools provide we know that
following the guidance of proper
health authorities is critical
when our leaders are making
these decisions and we
appreciate the amendments are
brought forward by the sponsor
ten or that our leaders are have
Tina follow all proper guy he's
before they re entered on the
school building we we do support
this legislation we think the
sponsor for bringing the bill we
understand the delicate balance
that our state has been under in
the past year but we do believe
that our students are local
school board members and our
governing councils of charter
schools should have the ability
to make some of these decisions
moving forward thank you so much
madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you now if you are in
opposition.
To this bill if there's anyone
in opposition that wishes to
speak if you raise your hand.
Okay.
We'll go to the
we'll go to the committee.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of
madam chairman up I was going to
ask a Representative Baldonado
how many.
Remind me Sir if you could how
many school boards who we have
in New Mexico madam chairman and
Representative Anderson there
eighty nine school districts.
Thank you for that and when we
count the.
Boards we're not counting the of
other of.
Governing board statewide
charter schools is that correct.
Madam chair and and
Representative Anderson the
there are not the they're eating
and school districts and then
the the charters are are
separate of that may have been
governing bodies I think that's
interesting I believe there's
about a hundred charters or so.
Thank you Representative much my
point was they too were you
covered by this up
house bill one eighty two is
that correct that's correct miss
madam chair and and
Representative Anderson.
Well Representative Baldonado
of.
I'm I'm a bit dismayed because I
am a very staunch supporter of
local control of our.
Of our schools and that we have
to have a special bill giving
local control back to our school
boards to make these important
decisions as we step forward
trying to unlock the doors of
our schools I cannot imagine a
more knowledgeable effective of.
Authority to initiate that all
in compliance with the E. D. D.
O. H. and and CDC and.
I I just I I really appreciate
what you're doing and and I
certainly am going to be nothing
but enthusiastic in my support I
think that I listened today and
there's talk on the evening news
about we got to have federal
money in order to afford
re opening our schools we we we
sit here today looking at
funding decisions on public
school education I just cannot
imagine trying to tackle this.
Chair with the idea that only
Washington or or Santa Fe has an
idea of what you can do and
can't do in implementing the re
opening of our schools so I am
very supportive of what you're
trying to do and I very much
look forward to seeing you get
your bill into the Education
Committee where I believe a of.
These important issues will be
discussed further thank you
madam chairman.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Anderson
there are ninety nine charter
schools and about half of them
are are self governing the other
half or are governed by local
school boards just for that
information thank you madam
chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I'm done thank you
representative next I have
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair.
Can you hear me get right you
you are good right.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Baldonado for
bringing forth this bill
I was attending an interim
committee meeting during the
summer and I heard I believe
that the superintendent rounds
testify.
and he was talking about the
number of kids who have just
disappeared from school
attendance
In his part of the in his part
of the state and one of the
suggestions that was made at
that hearing was it the governor
added school superintendent to
the to the group advises her on
COVID response and I'm I never
did hear what happened as a
result of that recommendation
was there is school
superintendent added to the.
And I don't know what it is I
think as an advisory committee
or something.
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews I do not know the
answer the question I thought it
was all business people to begin
with but I've lost track of the
membership for that panel that
the governor was using Madam.
Chair Representative thank you
for your answer
and I I I think the Stan rounds.
testified just a couple minutes
ago I wonder
if maybe we could get an update
maybe you know or maybe one of
your experts knows where are we
in terms of the number of kids
that were in school before the
pandemic and now of where we're
we've essentially sort of lost a
number of children do you.
Madam chairman Representative
Matthews I don't have the the
the actual statistics here with
me in the numbers but I do know
you know even my local school
district has losses significant
much open to either whether
their home schooling kids or or
or like you mentioned earlier
madam chair and representative.
They just haven't can't find and
that and that's a scary thing to
think everybody on this panel as
probably shaking their head
thinking what we mean we can't
find can't find the parent in
the and and madam chair and and
and and Representative Matthews
there's no amount of kids that
have you know on our borders of
Texas centers on that thirteen
school and in other states
because they can get you know
into a school in the to
participants point and do all
the things that they
are are wanting and needing to
do so I'm sure that as we say
term someone might probably will
text me that information and be
helpful so sure that if I get
that information madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
that answer
It's private schools in the
state are allowed to be open and
they have been open for months
and our our.
And because they are treated not
as schools are treated as
businesses is my understanding
of the of the legal.
Distinction is being made and
I wonder if you have any
information about whether or not
the there's been COVID outbreaks
as a result of those schools
being open and those kids being
in school.
And madam chairman and
Representative Matthews I know
there have been some some across
the state that it had issues but
I think predominately they are
operating I know the two private
schools that are in Quincy
County I just drove past them
yesterday morning and up both
were operating open and and
doing what they need to do.
Madam chair representative I do
know that about what we're
seeing about four thousand kids
are the are the unaccounted for
the missing kids that number's
been cut in half basically
because at first of the bigger
number but I believe from what I
understand the CYFD is now
trying to make on visits and and
actually identify those kids and
and see if we can get them back
on back in Madam Representative
Matthews.
Chair Representative thank you
for that for that information
The
And other interim hit the
committee meeting I went to this
summer.
What was it three fifty thousand
school age children in the state
who did not have internet
connections and
I wondered if you have any more
recent information as to where
we are on being able to provide
virtual education to kids who
we're living in homes without.
In internet.
Madam chair representative I
think that heavy lift which is
thank you to the left is going
on right now in this legislative
session I think we've all we've
probably all seen at some sort
of broadband expansion bill of
some sort across our table we
had down in health education
Representative Lente brought
forward a massive bill to help
identify areas that could be
improved in in native American
lands in and that part of the
state madam chair I know on.
Once the county over on the the
east side of the of the
community we have some some very
difficult areas to reach in
terms of infrastructure and
there are a lot of kids are
without internet connection
access I know that a lot of
school boards Madam chair and
Representative have
tried the the path of of
wireless type eight hot spot
devices but anecdotally I've
heard you know the kids and in
certain areas I think it was the
and one of the native American
areas parking in front of the
library to to access their hot
spot you know and that's that's
a very difficult situation and
so you know chair and
representative as we move
hopefully move this bill forward
we begin to realize that there
are districts you know for
example Representative Gail
Armstrong you know in in
catching County very sparse in
in very small districts are
probably have a better
opportunity of opening and see
you know that the downtown
school in in Albuquerque or
wherever it may be the biggest
the bigger on classrooms and
things of that nature but but it
but broadband is is definitely a
very difficult situation very
expensive six of the state needs
not only just for this but when
we've been talking about
broadband if I had a nickel
every time Senator Padilla
talked about private entities
very wealthy individual and I'm
sure some of those bills are his
I haven't really looked and
stuff but but a mentor answer
the question thank you.
Madam chair representative
thanks for the answer and I'm we
would all be very wealthy if if
Senator Padilla would chair New
Mexico every time you mentioned
broadband.
And I'm in the process of
putting this bill together and
Did you all do any of Mexico or
gather any information as to how
many of the eighty nine school
districts in the state would of.
The opening at this point in
time.
You madam chair and and
Representative Matthews you know
in terms of your task in terms
of whether we like actually
gonna have school districts are
you ready to vote is that the
question Madam Representative.
Madam chair representative it's.
But that could be the question
it could also just be whether
you gathered any sense in
putting together the bill in
determining what the what the
desire of the local school
boards and local people were as
to how many would like to be in
a position to make that
decision.
and if because my next question
is going to be could you sort of
walk us through under this bill
how the school board would
determine.
Whether or not it should it
should open so I just kind of go
both of those at first of all
what's happening on the ground
in terms of the desire to vote
and then secondly how are they
going to make the decision using
the bill that you are assuming
this bill passed thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Matthews you know it's it's it's
vastly different across the
entire state on as to which
school districts are are even
getting close to being ready you
know a couple weeks ago or three
weeks ago and I guess the
governor made her announcement
regarding school districts and I
think a lot of the districts
around the state were shocked
that that even came up so
quickly they thought well we're
not we're not ready I know that
here in in we heard from from Dr
Romero the the new
superintendent of closeness
public schools
his his board didn't didn't go
for his plan they they they
passed on it they they they've
pushed it down a little bit
because there's some concerns
there still and so that's but
that's the beauty of the local
control piece you know I think a
lot of the surrounds
around our our teachers and our
staff you know you know moving
around the buildings and whether
or not you know they can be
vaccinated I think that's a big
piece of it as well and as the
as the vaccine roll out and and
starts to reach on those folks
but right now I mean we're we're
still seriously focusing on on
the older populations and not
many of our teachers are are
sixty five and and and over by
then the most of my retired so
you're not getting a lot of
vaccines into the into the
teachers just yet but hopefully
that's on the horizon
but to answer that question you
know I think every single
district I mean you have on I
know that former representative
and now superintendent or has
been superintendent Dennis Ross
over in in Logan schools has a
very small school district in he
said I mean hearing this
conversation with him in the
summer that you could have
opened back then and an honor to
six point.
So distancing guidelines because
they have so much you know so
many big spaces and and so the
kids and so at that point you
you you the basic question is
could Logan schools have been
you know open an hybrid or or
some sort of in person learning
this entire time but yet we we
we put the you know the one size
fits all on the Mandy you know
from the governor's directives
and and long behold all schools
have been closed basically in
that regard so
you know just as they go madam
chair and and Representative
Matthews implementation of
actually going back and school
is going to be a case by case
issue of course we with the
amendment that that the
committee adopted a minute ago
we've we've added in that that
they would speak to you and and
and work with PED and work with
the O. H. as well as calling the
centers for disease control
guidelines
thanks important that safety's
you know the first thing we
worry about I know we we we can
do the masks and all those sorts
of things but you know you have
to and you have to teach the
kids right I mean obviously the
the little guys I mean when this
whole thing started rolling out
how the heck are you going to
keep a mask on a you know seven
year old kids it's just you know
almost impossible but.
What will be will be holding.
The little guys you know two
three years old with a mask on
this you know doing the thing so
you know I think at some point
you will see that you know
participate in hopelessness New
the next vaccine the Johnson
Johnson I guess is coming along
online at some point in and as
we get our population vaccinated
hopefully we can get these
things open and chair.
Well.
Share Representative Eli.
To route what's happening and
getting feedback
And then
Probably this is my last
question special needs kids.
I know that I I've received a
lot of contact with parents very
very concerned about their
special needs children not being
in of of positions where they
can get the services they need
and it is under your bill is
there enough flexibility for a
school district to one facing
and bringing kids back doing it
by age during it by focusing on
kids who have special needs or
other special concerns
how much flexibility is a school
board given in designing how it
would re open it schools.
Under your bill thank you madam
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Matthews for
that question if we don't
specify we don't put a lot of
parameters around that for that
specific reason so that the
board can have that flexibility
obviously those the input from
those three entities in terms of
in the safety of it that's going
to be a critical piece of it but
I I would I would want to say in
my I want everyone to know
that's watching this madam chair
that that the point of this bill
is to is to give the boards you
know a lot of flexibility in how
they approach the rangy part of
of of kids back in school.
And I do have at nine chair
Representative I have one more
question if for some reason
there was concern that a local
school board was not properly
considering health care
information safety information
from the CDC from PED from the
O. H. is there any of is there
any remedy is there anything
that can be done if there's a
sense that that's not what we're
evidence I don't wanna say sense
if there's evidence that the
school board was simply ignoring
all the safety concerns and
plunging it.
You madam chair and and and
Representative MATZIE that's a
really good question you know on
the seat in our school boards
are or their elected folks just
like we are and they do things
sometimes that make you scratch
your head I know that you know
over the the years that I spent
on the house Education Committee
been a handful of incidents
where the PED has had to step in
and and basically take over or
on the it happened that believe
this deal or up north somewhere
just fairly recently in last
year's and so madam chair and
and and Representative it's like
anything you know when when you
have an elected body you know
folks don't know what we're
gonna do half the time right and
so we are in we we surprise
people sometimes and so
with the board that that may be
recklessly went and and ignored
protocols that the CDC's and PED
are giving I would I would guess
that that the PED in the
Secretary Stewart on secretary
Ryan Stewart would be able to
reprimand you know through
through any sort of action a
letter or or even further taking
over reported if that was the
case that need to happen so
that's where that control would
would would lie Madam chair.
Chair representative thank you
for your answers and and
Justin this really isn't a
question of you know in early
days when COVID hit
nobody knew for sure what to do
and I might my questions are I'm
not being
disrespectful of the governor or
not supportive of the decisions
have been made it's just that we
are no longer early days where
you're down the road and
So I
I appreciate you bringing this
bill I think it's time that we
have this discussion and that we
think very hard about where some
of these decisions should be so
long as we have.
Health care standards that are
going to be used in making these
decisions and a possibility of
if if those health care
standards are ignored that the
state can still step in and if
if I'm understanding your
answers correctly you were
telling me that those two things
uses exist in your and and are
supported by your bill.
Madam chair representative they
they exist already yes I'm on
that point on that point it and
I I apologize for stepping in
but it is on that point and I'm
going to have to leave shortly
to go
at present a bill and other
committee.
I'm I'm not clear that.
That that's true in in looking
at yours statute it it your bill
it says
the means and methods of re
opening shall be based on the
recommendations of federal
centers of disease disease
control and prevention and
department of health.
I think it would have been
clearer if it said must comply
with but it this seems to me.
That there is potential for a
difference between what CDC says
globally across the the country
and what specifics are in the
state from D. O. H. and the so
then who they follow and do they
have to follow or are we setting
up ninety nine school boards to
make their own decisions about
health care and pandemic so
I I worry that this does not
mean that they have to that they
have to follow.
the current public health orders
and so I I just raise that and I
don't I don't think it's strong
enough to say that they would
have to be in compliance with
with public health orders it is
leaving open to a non health
board.
To make decisions about
the safety health safety of
reopening and that's no comment
about the local club controller
the need for kids to get back in
school I'm just worried that
we're going to set up just a lot
of political conflict and
conflict between those who
aren't trained in health care
and and the the state or CDC
that is because it doesn't say
they have to comply with just.
So and there could be
differences in the house so they
could pick to pick and choose so
I I do worry about that and that
that's just my my only point
that I want to raise on that
question thank you
next we have Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative Baldonado my
concerns were along the same
line
You in your amendment you
mentioned the CDC DO H. and what
was the third one that you added
with it HSD they had more
Representative Ferrary it's the
public of the PED
Asian department okay well Madam
chair representative
I attended of our school board
of last week where they brought
in the superintendent Karen
Trujillo and they were having a
good conversation about the
different
Expectations taking into
consideration the teachers and
some not wanting to go back and
some that do and then also
students whose parents wanted
them to go back and some who
didn't so they were working
already together to make those
important decisions and our
superintendent
offered that she would come up
with a plan and presented to the
board and then next week you
know from the discussion that
they had and also to talk to
every school principal to see
what their own community school
community wanted to do so it's
really important it's already
there your bill is unnecessary I
don't know why maybe it's
because the governor made these
provisions available at the
beginning of February starting
February eighth and maybe you
already had your bill but I do
see that this bill is
unnecessary it's already
happening at the local school
level the that
school boards and
superintendents already working
for what is good for their area
and their schools
it to follow the COVID
procedures
are already in place that take
into consideration CDC and D. O.
H. and all of the Public
education department is behind
this and and helping schools
implement so I'm sorry I just
don't see your bill is being
needed or effective thank you
madam chair and a leader the
turn out is that correct chair
is it I'm not I'm not a still
there apparently still long
winded and the other committee
the bill before mine so I'm
still here your and and
Representative Ferrary of the
bill is necessary because the
governor.
to change her mind next week and
and and and take away what she
gave to us on on her speech that
day and so it is unnecessary
chair.
So madam chair and
Representative Baldonado if.
Under these emergency actions
something happened that the
governor would have to change it
we are going to do legislation
to make it so that we could make
it so we didn't follow urgency
actions and of and so supersede
what needs to be done.
Madam chair and and
Representative Ferrary that's
not what we're trying to do what
we're trying to give the school
or the local control we're
trying to give Karen down and in
Los crucis public schools the
opportunity to assess the needs
of her district personals I mean
Madam chair and representative
could be a situation where a
bigger district that has some
rural schools and some you know
city schools maybe they decide
to open up the rural schools not
they're not they're the schools
are it would give them that
flexibility madam chair and I
think throughout this pandemic
and and I don't know what the
what the what the will of the
legislature right now but there
are many of us as members of
felt completely left out of
these these health orders and
the decisions that have been
made I know that the governor's
having to do what she's gotta do
not taking that away from what's
been decided on madam chair but
in the same reguards there are a
lot of people that have been
very upset that we just don't
have the scenes and so there are
bills working through that might
even change some of those
controls and powers that exist
for any governor so madam chair
I eight I do think this bill is
is necessary I think it's
critical for for the small
school districts around the
state to be able to make these
decisions welcome.
Madam chair and representative
it this school the
superintendents aren't the
experts on this and we we do
rely on the governor and the
secretaries of health and it out
education as well as Human
Services to guide and make those
decisions and if we insert those
of that thirty and decision
making at the state level as
legislators we're not the
authorities on it we need to
have that flexibility so thank
you madam chair that's all.
Thank you thank you next I have
representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill I I I to sign on to this
bill I just want to to to ask a
couple questions and then make a
short statement have you
Representative Baldonado have
you done any polling of the
public about this.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Armstrong there
were there was a poll that was
conducted a few weeks back
the statewide poll and it was
done by research and pulling out
of the Albuquerque area so it's
you know the the guys that do
all of our you know a lot of our
pulling for us throughout the
state and then they came up with
the with the numbers that
sixteen percent of parents and
guardians statewide once our
kids back in school
seventy six percent are worried
about emotional health and
depression things with their
children seventy seven percent
feel that the they're worried
that their children have that
pollen way behind and
And fifty eight percent to
thirty percent believe that the
local school boards should
control decisions and not
necessarily the top down so you
know when you look at all those
numbers it was conducted and in
January
you know it it it's not and
we're not talking about you know
all come didn't call just
Republicans with fifty five
percent Democrats that responded
thirty four percent Republicans
eleven percent declined to say
folks and so it's it's a pretty
broad you know
base of of of excitement for
trying to get these kids back in
to where they need to be and and
like we continue to save chair
of Armstrong this is not this is
not gonna be for every school
district not coming you know the
bigger ones may not get one you
know in a timely fashion or
whatever it may be but it's it's
about those you know miss
Caroline Rowley and Jalen all
these little tiny you know
sounds that we passed through to
get to some other place that
that they could pull this off
and and be safe and and still
follow those guidelines that are
that are set forth in and and to
you know Representative for this
point madam chair know that the
superintendents are not the
experts but they are the experts
in in running their schools and
they know how they can they can
reopen safely so thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair and
representative for those answers
so as everyone knows I have ten
grandchildren eight
are now that are in school six
of those eight are being home
schooled and two were being
driven forty five minutes one
way to be to take to a school
that is open that school that is
vote is in doubt all New Mexico
go that'll coyotes that's my
alumni.
And there's nine students there.
And so for a school to have to
close that was the last mandate
by the governor Stewart was
closed right after Christmas I
believe is right after Christmas
anyway they couldn't they they
were mandatorily closed and and
my opinion the school board and
the local superintendents local
school boards have a.
Our duty to the community to
service those children and to
make the decision on whether or
their school should be closed or
not they you know I I'd bet a
lot of you don't know that madam
chair that there's such a thing
as a micro district and so three
PED there was a debt there was
different CDC guidelines for
micro districts than what their
work for regular districts
reserve New Mexico is a micro
district and so they were one of
the first ones opened and it's
you know and then I go all the
way to pull in high school so
from berry States very small to
very very large very diverse
areas I sat on the school board
for over fifteen years in
Magdalene.
And
There's they open hybrid they
and most of the time people were
doing it online are you exactly
what Representative Baldonado
said we had kids wind up in
Alamo Navajo that go to school
and Magdalena at the little
convenience store trying to get
wifi.
Sitting outside.
So between the wifi problems
of poverty
transportation.
Everything that you can imagine
we I totally believe in local
control and and adding that
provision in there that you did
Representative Baldonado madam
chair about in conjunction with
the CDC and the PED the PED Dr
Stewart has been great trying to
work with the districts and
trying to do is passed and I
would not want to be here or the
governor in this time because
this is a real it's a real
health emergency and you've got
people on all from all aspects
of it and so but but local
control is one of the things
that we could given districts
and communities in the state of
New Mexico to help mitigate this
problem and our.
I to believe that.
that we do have experts in the
state and we also but we also
have experts in the state that
don't know what happens in my
backyard.
So thank you Mr chairman Madam
chairman and take you
Representative fall.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Thomson
thank you madam chair so first
off I want to say I doubt there
are very many people in the
state who don't want schools on
so polling is is doesn't need a
lot we all want schools open but
we all have different views on
what is to say I'm so you know
I've gotten quite a few emails
around this and and I think
that's disturbing to me yes some
of them saying that COVID is it
real this this this virus was
politicized from day one masks
were politicized from day one
and there have been.
Localities all just leave it at
that who have voted to ignore
the public health warnings so
that concerns me that if we need
to listen to the experts I will
and and and I worked in schools
for many years school boards
have their expertise in general
it is not public health
superintendents do not have
expertise to public health I
would feel better about this
bill if it wasn't mandated that
this school districts could have
local control is not not just
kind of I in conjunction with
CDC and department of health but
where where it was mandatory I
can see some school districts
who don't believe in the virus
who don't like the governor who
don't like whatever just think
we're gonna open up because
we're thumbing our noses at at
people I'm and that really is
scary to me you know people talk
about madam chair kids being
depressed I can't imagine
anything that would be more
depressing for a child then
going back to school and having
a beloved teacher or educational
assistant or principal contract
virus and die or or worse yet
that a child goes to school and
and they are they admittedly
they are not a high risk group
but they can be carriers bring
it home and kill a a grandparent
who's raising their
grandchildren I mean that to me
that is a psychological scar
that will never heal to to have
to feel like you were
responsible or even partly
responsible as a child for the
death of someone that was
important to you I'm and and
madam chair you know there was
talk about what if what if the
school board ignores the public
health
just the public health requests
and and the answer was well you
know that they could be taken
over how many inspections would
there be and how many deaths.
Would there be in the time that
that happened I wish the schools
were open I wish this we didn't
have this pandemic but we can't
cover our eyes and ears and say.
I can't hear you and and open
the schools because we want to
we yes I everyone here knows
that I am a champion of kids
with disabilities and I don't
know how my son would have done
without having school to go to
but I also know and this is an
unprecedented time I'm this is a
every hundred years our pandemic
let's hope it stays that way
although I'm fearful that it
will not that we this is
something that we're gonna be
looking at
me see and I keep hearing you
know that rural areas are
different and and let me first
say I want to combine high
school I understand rural I
actually my first grade year was
in a Representative one room
school house with my dad is a
teacher so I'm I know about
rural but.
The virus doesn't know about
rural yes there are fewer people
there are fewer cases but
because you are rural does not
mean you are safe from the virus
I wish there was a way that I
could feel comfortable with this
bill but it scares me to death
that it will become politicized
and and school districts that
don't like the governor or
school districts that have
members that don't believe in
COVID I'm with we will have a
bad outcome so I can't support
this bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you
Representative Matthews did you
have a follow up question is
your hand just still up.
Madam chair I.
I did have a follow up question.
okay go ahead thank you
Mr my video again.
There we go I'm yes I I I think
your point was Madam chair
representative I to let and
madam chairs point about the
word comply was a good one
and I wondered if Representative
if there would be
if you would be amenable to
changing that word in the
statute the answer in the bill
that you're offering.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Matthews
I haven't I haven't really
processed that yet I I I
understand what what what at
least three members now of your
committee or are are expressing
I'm curious if if if this bill
is not going to get out of this
committee if that amendment
would potentially get get us
through the next stop
I don't know that I do want to
talk to a few folks that are
that are co sponsors and things
of that nature as well before
going amend the bill further and
chair.
Representative madam chair
representative thank you for
that answer
And the only other thing.
I would say is that we've lived
through a nightmare for year we
finally have a president who
treat this as a national crisis
in the national problem that it
is.
With his priorities is also to
open schools
and I just it you know I I I
think that's where we are in
this process but I again I just
want to emphasize it needs to be
done in a way that is consistent
with public safety so thank you.
Thank you.
I'm next we have Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I do have a
question so I'm all for giving
counties back control and I
don't think that anyone would
not take this seriously
wouldn't if they opened up.
When they still fall under COVID
are sorry and thank the right
word the COVID restrictions that
we have in place that they would
have to take it seriously people
would be wearing masks socially
distancing and gene is not
correct.
Madam chair and and
Representative Lord that's
correct I mean that the ideas
that that you you follow what
we've been doing for the last
ten months or whatever it's been
and and if we look at that
manager is as we have progressed
through this through this virus
more more people bought into
that idea of wearing them us and
staying distant and I think I
think is is as we go in this
country were we enjoy our
freedoms completely and but I
think at some point you know a
lot of folks decided well I'm
gonna I'm gonna go along with
wearing the mask for whatever
and and and and I think that
doing that in the schools long
as you've got a good plan you
should be able to accomplish the
same sort of of what protocols
that we've been following for so
is it people don't know what
they are ready already been
ingrained into us all thank you.
Yes thank you Representative
thank you madam chair pursue
your answer that question
because.
There's some emails and there's
some topics that would have this
session that are hot topics
right I'm gonna bills it
worsened bills coming up some
marijuana bill and is also
opening up New Mexico that's the
the and I get all those emails.
Want.
The schools open they want our
state open people are frustrated
and that's not that they're not
believing COVID that's not the
case.
They just add a point where
we're destroying our economy and
the kids are depressed and I
want to back in school and I
just wanna share one story with
you I got the most heartbreaking
phone call from a mother and LFC
donis she told me please can you
open up the school my child they
have had to go get emergency
therapy because he is disabled
and he can't go to school and he
suicide now he wants to go to
school so badly this is
literally killing him and it
broke my heart having to listen
to that story and I'm saying you
know what if we can do this
safely and same lady get things
in the right direction I totally
support this so thank you for
bringing this forward everyone
yes on this thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you what's the pleasure
the committee madam
madam chair alternatives to the
table.
The tabling motion takes
precedence
Torrez you want to call the roll
on it motion to table.
House bill one eighty two.
Senator Phelps Anderson it.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
No and I didn't hear a second.
Madam chair I seconded.
It.
Representative Ferrary seconded
okay thank you
Representative but maybe about a
half.
Representative Karen bash.
The table.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Table and I'd like to make a
comment after.
Representative Marian Matthews
will hope to table.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes to table.
Representative Louis.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Jr vice chair
role Representative Ferrary
sorry yes to table.
I'm going back to
Representative Britney but I.
Yes to table sorry about that
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong
yes the table.
So there are table.
Not to table and one excuse.
Okay and
Representative Armstrong and was
there someone else who wanted to
make a statement Representative
Armstrong did you yes please
yeah and that was me too thank
you okay thank you.
Go ahead Representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
I just wanted to say that you
know it's unfortunate that we
will give this bill I do pass
and let education decide and
have a conversation and
Education Committee about how
this could work in the process
we pass bills out of this
committee all the time that need
work I realize that this might
need work but I really would
have appreciated to let the
Education Committee make the
decision on this I just like we
don't take into consideration
appropriations
we should have let education
decide whether this should have
a due pass thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Lohr.
Thank you madam chair I just
exactly one expressed exact same
things that Representative
Armstrong I I think they should
have been given a chance I don't
think it was fair that this bill
got tabled and I think it should
have been given a vote and then
sent education I think that
would've been the fair thing to
do for the people thank you.
Thank you and it was sent to
health first because of the
health issues around COVID and
so I think that's what we
address and voted on thank you
everyone for
that in Representative Thomson
are we going to put on of one
seventy nine for Representative
Johnson yes I am and her experts
are Eric within a Sanchez and if
that in regained.
And Representative sorry I'm
gonna have you take over as
chair while I go put on my bill
in the tax committee thank you
thank you thank you everyone.
Representative do you want to go
ahead and present yes your okay
good because it's obviously not
my bill so this I'm this is
house bill one seventy nine it's
relating to vital records and it
eliminates the fees for
certified birth certificates for
homeless individuals eliminates
restrictions on access to vital
records for homeless children
are you and on the company you
and with that madam chair I will
let my experts explain the bill.
Are you ready.
Can you and yourself.
Miss Americans.
It she's your expert right.
Yes madam chair.
And just just a note for
freshman this is what happens we
are we cover for each other when
we are in expected to be in four
places at one time.
Madam chair members of the
committee since missed and wreak
as I don't know she's having
technical difficulties in that
but I can our.
Okay get us started.
Yes I have asked for her to I
need herself
and she is a panelists so
hopefully she'll be able to join
us in.
Hey I'm not sure who is speaking
but if you'd like to go ahead if
you're the other expert.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Erica Sanchez I and director of
policy and advocacy at New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care juvenile
justice and are homelessness and
we partner with them to improve
their transition to adulthood.
I'm that New Mexico's public
education's departments
education of home right
education homeless children and
youth committee consists of
educators service providers and
community members from across
the state the committee met
regularly over the past year to
consider policy reforms to
support children and youth
experiencing homelessness in the
state and house bill one seventy
nine as the result of that work
house bill one seventy nine will
help ensure that the lack of a
birth certificate does not
prevent children and youth from
accessing education employment
health or housing services and I
can say that and and and cans
work we see that accessing
identification documents is an
issue that most of the young
people we work with struggle the
lack of a birth certificate and
their access to their for access
to an IDA prevents them from
securing employment or social
security benefits housing
banking and the rest goes on and
on so they're stuck in this kind
of catch twenty two where it
cycle of instability in so we
need to remove barriers to
access and the ten dollar fee is
a barrier to someone in this
position.
So well it's a negligible
revenue lost for the state
obtaining upper certificate can
be issued staff steps on the
path to obtain employment at
such that for these young people
stand for questions.
Madam chair representative
Johnson is back so I am going to
one.
Give her back her bill.
Welcome Representative Johnson
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Liz Thompson
for helping me with the previous
bill and this bill and thank you
for putting House Bill at one
seventy nine on the agenda today
and of my expert witness
explained the bill excellently
and I think that in each of our
communities we encourage our
young people to attain an
education and make a life for
themselves we're always telling
them you know improve your
quality of life do for yourself
and contribute to society and I
think this bill will help in
that process for our home yes
are homeless you and our our our
youth who are in foster care so
with that and madam chair thank
you.
Thank you Representative now
we'll go to a poll for the
audience since we have that
available.
Okay we'll give them just
another second it looks like
overwhelming of four people all
right
let's if you want to
Raise your hand if you of those
who are in opposition well there
was no opposition but there
might be in the audience there
anyone in opposition to this
bill in the audience like to
speak.
Okay no one is raising their
hands those in support of this
bill if you would raise your
hand and we'll get you in order.
To speak.
Okay.
We have so far two people are
pretty Patricia Julien L..
If you would like to and mute
and say a few words.
Yes thank you madam chair and
representative my name is
Patricia Julien L. from
schoolhouse connection I was one
of the members of the PED
committee that is Sanchez
referenced earlier involved in
devising this policy and I
strongly support it thank you
thank you next we have Hillary
Lipton.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Hilary left and I am the
director of transition age youth
with children youth and families
department and we strong Stanley
and strong stand strongly in
support of this bill
and I appreciate the work that
the members of the committee and
our partners at in can have done
on behalf of the older youth in
New Mexico while the department
is obligated to provide young
people with these kinds of
documents when they leave care
it is often the case as I'm sure
all of you can relate to when
you were young adults that they
often don't have other folks who
can hold these documents safely
and so we really appreciate this
bill and again stand strongly in
support of it thank you.
Thank you or anyone else.
Okay.
Okay there's no one else in the
audience did you want to say
anything else our Representative
Johnson before we go to the
committee.
Thank you madam chair I do see
if that kids can range.
Would you like to make a
comment.
Yes if I may madam chair I just
wanted to speak up on behalf of
support of the the bill one
seventy nine I work for the
homeless youth education program
in Los crucis public schools and
I have worked as part of that
part of the committee on
identifying barriers that are
homeless youth base and we've
been working for about eighteen
months on different areas
we've looked at specific policy
barriers and things that could
be amended possibly to help our
students and our families and
that's why we came to consensus
that H. B. one seventy nine
would eliminate a few simple
barriers youth and parents that
are experiencing homelessness
need the first tickets for their
basic rights you know health
care jobs school X. Sentara
this fees make it very difficult
for them to access sometimes we
have families that are running
from domestic violence or
different situations and all
they have is what they have on
their back once they get
established it's hard for them
to choose paying for birth
certificates.
Paying for gas in the car paying
for food and
I just I I just see that it's
such a big deal and also
enrolling children in school
Legisla- McKinney mental lot
they don't need him to enroll
but they eventually need anyway
especially like the young adults
I wanted to talk about the the
use who want to get into college
they want to get a job to start
supporting themselves and their
families are able to give them
the documents are they won't
give them the documents that
they need and I just feel like
it would be very beneficial for
our community to help the
families get these documents so
they can get on their feet again
get their care get their jobs
and help the students get into
college and in the end I think
it'll really help our economy
and our communities so for these
reasons I strongly support this
bill thank you for having me and
listening to me today thank you.
We're glad we could get to the
root that we're going to pass.
Are there any objections to a do
pass.
No ma'am but I'd like to to to
make a statement afterwards.
is there is I'm sorry I
misunderstood you are against no
ma'am I'm not against it I would
second the motion.
Make a statement afterwards.
Okay there's in our native Brady
pass in the second
And
I'm not sure how many people are
here dealers can.
Representative Phelps Anderson I
know I'm sorry to ours we we
don't have any objections and we
have a due pass
But we were saying who was here.
Okay let's go ahead and do that
Representative folks understand.
Chairman I vote yes.
Representative Gail Armstrong
yes Representative Britney but.
Representative Karen BOBACK yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes I'm.
Representative Roger Montoya
yes.
Representative Louis that offer
us.
Representative Liz Thompson yes.
Representative vice chair Joanne
Ferrari yes.
Representative but this is madam
chair is excused Representative
Brittney bought a half.
Bills for thank you yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes thank you.
Nine yes and to our excuse okay
thank you
Representative Johnson you have
a do pass of nine two zero and
Our Representative Armstrong to
explain.
I thank you madam chair I yes I
totally believe that this is
something that so needed and
miss seeing you Sanchez at the
roundhouse and
M. all for it and it's amazing
how you need people are to get
the person to get to get an ID
to do so many things that are
prudent in life to have it but
we still don't have
a license you're still have to
show a license to vote so thank
you madam chair.
Okay
thank you everyone this I think
we went through all the bills
and for today
thank you for good morning and
we will see you Friday that we
will meet again Saturday so.
We are we meeting on Saturday
At.
Good question.
Thirty.
Thank you okay thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I would just like to thank you
in the committee members thank
you.
Four two passed thank you.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward that's great okay thank
you everyone.
Have a great day.
And thank you for the attendees.
