Representative international.
Here.
Representative.
Join us today.
Finally madam chair I am here.
I'm here I believe Ferrari is
about to join and just to
confirm Anderson an.
Matthews Montoya and better
address are not present is that
correct.
You know if you were.
Okay so do we have a quorum
Emily and we have six which I
believe is yes important have
seven estimates from reason okay
okay what we're gonna do a
little switching around today.
One of my experts has another
meeting so we're gonna let
representative Garcia go first.
You're on I believe.
So whenever
Thank you madam chair go ahead.
Madam chair before I at present
the the bill I would like to
propose an amendment.
Okay I will move the amendment
for discussion okay and madam
chair
I didn't the.
Last night as I was getting
ready to go to bed I said you
know I better look over the FY
are on house bill one twelve.
And I noticed that it was
making a point regarding an
amendment to our bill it's a one
word amendment on page two nine
two what we're doing is we're
changing general to consumer
settlement so that whole
sentence should read any
unexpended or unencumbered
balance remaining at the end of
fiscal year two twenty twenty
four shall revert to the
consumer settlement fund
instead of the general fund
because this bill is funded by
the AG's consumer settlement
fund manager that's the
amendment.
Thank you is there any
discussion on the amendment.
Okay can I get a motion to adopt
the amendment so moved madam
chair thank you get a second is
there any opposition.
Okay Representative you happen
amended L. so go ahead thank you
madam chair thank you committee
and we.
They are madam chair.
Where we continue to continue
discussion and then I read the
amendment just to ensure I wrote
it down correctly yes please I'm
so on page.
To the general fund is changed
to to be consumer settlement.
Correct thank you very much.
Thank you Emily go ahead
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
members
house bill one twelve makes an
appropriation of nine hundred
seventeen thousand eight hundred
dollars to the local government
division of the department of
finance and administration to
fund the improvement and
renovation of an existing
facility for the expansion of
integrated substance use
disorder programs and clinics.
Madam chair
For the last two years I have
coordinated with the attorney
general's office.
Legislative initiatives
initiatives and identifying
quality substance use projects
for funding from the AG's
consumer settlement fund which
is starting to be enraged by
settlement monies from opioid
manufacturers for their over
prescription of opioids
oxycontin Federal etcetera this
over prescription has led to
thousands of overdose deaths
throughout the US.
Madam chair the AG is applying
these opioid settlement.
substance these are these opioid
settlement monies to substance
use and opioid treatment
abatement and prevention
initiatives in our state.
The project identified in house
bill one twelfth is exactly
that.
Madam chair I would like to
yield to one of my expert
witnesses.
Procs and he's listed under Matt
procs in the attendee section as
last name is P. R. O. B. E. S.
T..
And Matt madam chair is a New
Mexico treasure.
bringing quality health services
to our traditional Spanish
communities especially in that
northern northwestern portion of
our state so madam chair I yield
to map probes the lab right on.
This initiative and the
significance of this initiative.
Matt.
Thank you representative Garcia.
Distinguished legislators and
members of this committee that
that I cherish so much.
Thank you for having me here
today I'm glad to see those you
I was able to see this summer
that we're here in Las Vegas I
wish we could be in person but
none the less we are where we
are still and and moving
forward.
Representative Garcia you said
it very well you know as a good
teacher as a good lesson on
south remember when you're
telling a story there's got to
be a beginning a middle and an
end and you know that beginning
is up the history of this battle
against addiction is one that we
all know all too well
it's the pain of losing so many
New Mexicans too so.
And in their memory our mission
has always been saving lives.
Are you decades into this are
you know developing better
strategies prevention and
treatment strategies has given
us a fighting chance.
But today too many are still
dying.
In recent years we showed
progress against opioid use
disorder then along comes
fentanyl and then.
And then I'll comment and now in
twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty I know we discuss this
summer we see the alarming
frightening.
Heartbreaking overdose death
rates rising again.
But there is hope.
And that hope is in you
prevention and treatment
strategies.
The most promising promising of
those strategies is rooted in
the simplest of things
relationships.
And also providing trauma
informed care which we spoke
about this summer I know you all
know very well trauma informed
care and implementing trauma
informed practices and
strategies with a team of
support not just medical
providers but behavioral health
providers your support
specialists care coordinators
community members family members
all of us building that support
system around the patient and
the individual in struggle that
is showing really good outcomes
and so with that also moving
upstream moving upstream to
primary prevention with our
youth and those strategies to
and adverse childhood
experiences and address those
earlier in life.
I will direct our future now
it's been all about surviving
and unfortunately that's still
where we are today but I still
dream and see that vision of the
future for a thriving New
Mexico.
Thanks to a Samson grant to
fight your sons to grant
programming is now enhancing and
expanding access to care but
square footage to house our new
staff has become our property
graph gap in as I read limited
right now.
House bill one twelve.
We'll build the facility to
house a hub for our integrated
substance use deport a disorder
Department.
And it will add five hundred
patients to the thousand
patients we treat annually now.
And so with that this system is
is the integrated system of
support it is awful cross R.
seven counties are seven
counties of northern New Mexico
and central family health
service area the facility itself
is in San Miguel County are are
our main clinic at the old
hospital there's one week left
that hasn't been renovated yet
when we first.
Wrote this I'm so grant you know
we thought we had the space but
along comes COVID anybody's been
to Las Vegas for COVID yes you
see our our our old hospital or
clinic now also houses.
Comment vaccine clinic and and
respiratory lab for its for for
those fighting for for testing
and so with that we are we
outgrown the space locally
there's one
we left that could be renovated
and can help us to move forward
for this whole facility for
adding staff.
With that representative Garcia
give it back to you.
Thank you Matt Dunn and Matt
again you are.
Give us the title of your
professional title and.
And your role with the central
family health.
Yes Representative I'm so I I
need act two familiar with you
all I am not the probe's
physician assistant and medical
director and chief quality
officer for it central family
health which is a federally
qualified health center serving
seven counties in northeastern
New Mexico.
Thank you brother madam chair we
also have a another witness and
that's a the ana Paula Attorney
General Hector fund that us and
he's under the attendees as
after.
Emily will bring bring him up
and one or two seconds thank you
Emelie.
Good morning.
It good morning.
Yes.
Madam R. madam chair it's always
a an honor to say hello to you
and and thank you for your your
leadership and I want to thank
this committee.
Of this is for the topics in the
challenging issues that you
discuss and I deal with every
day and one one of the.
Right mornings today I get the
opportunity to really have some
optimism on a very dark topic
such as addiction and opioid.
Of the opioid epidemic and also
I just want to commend all of
you they're going to have to be
dealing with criminal justice
reform.
And and really making those
tough decisions this session and
so with that I I want to express
my gratitude just to share a few
words with you this year all my
colleagues and I want to commend
the sponsor and Matt for also
the frontline work they're doing
on this important issue if I may
just take two minutes of your
time
I'd like to address the first
minute madam chair on more of an
update and a call to action of
from the members of this
committee and then also been the
second minute of talking a
little bit about how to build
ties in and before I jump into
the merits of the bill I I want
to give you just an update
About six years ago I soon
fifteen opioid companies and
we are one of the first states
in the nation to sue the entire
supply chain which basically
means we're not just in the
Walgreens of the pharmaceutical
distributors but we went all the
way to the top to the
manufacturers and you know a lot
of times politicians pursue
ideas and we're never sure if
they're going to work and be
executed correctly one I'm
pleased to report to this
committee.
That for New Mexico we recently
sued and signed on to four
settlements of the fifteen and
we still are one of the most
aggressive AG offices in the
nation we have eleven companies
that we're still going to take
to trial this coming year.
But this for our company Madam
is very innovative and it's
going to call leadership on the
legislative body.
And your local community is very
rare that I would engage in a
settlement where we would split
the proceeds so from
Representative bash to
Representative Anderson
we believe that if all the local
governments San Miguel city Las
Vegas ros will if we sign up a
hundred percent of our local
communities.
Fifty five percent of these
dollars will directly go into
the local government communities
like San Miguel like the city of
Las Vegas.
The other half were so if we get
full participation will come
back to the legislature so you
all can begin to reinvest those
dollars.
Into our communities and it
could be anywhere from a hundred
fifty million to a hundred and
eighty million.
The reason that's important in
terms of the planning.
Is that
we'll need all of you as leaders
to decide which abatement
programs this money should go to
another words this Madam is we
get our money because they
harmed our state but these
dollars have to go directly into
support services for treatment
intervention and saving lives.
The reason I support
Representative Garcia is that
he's not waiting he's kind of
jumping ahead in terms of also
some other opioid settlement
litigation we've been successful
on and I welcome that I think
that all lawmakers
need to take a little bit more
you have a strong voice you know
better than anyone what's going
on in your respective towns and
villages and communities so
rather than the traditional way
of just appropriating money
letting them the LFC and the
finance committees drive
investment this is not roads
This Is opiates and saving lives
and so that half the money is
going directly to your local
elected and you all should take
credit.
For that money coming in and and
also make sure that those
dollars are only going to
treatment and provider care the
other half is coming back to the
legislature and
the money is not completely here
yet on the for companies but we
anticipate that millions of
dollars will start flowing in
and we cannot use it on
You know we can't by trucks for
the DOT we can't you know by
investing some of the other
infrastructure projects but it
has to go to treatment and
provider care so with that we
stand in support of the concept
that if.
Our honorable Miguel Garcia
wants to invest in Centro and
then let me get let me let me.
Finally go to the risk of why we
support the bill obviously as
long as it it goes to help our
communities we are not going to
question
the the investment it we we
think it's a good smart approach
in our Madam framework as you
all know.
When I say that I have the money
will go to local governments and
half the money will come back to
the legislature I'm worried.
That even in that
construct.
We Bernalillo county Los crucis
in Santa Fe that corridor.
Is gonna have a lot more
resources to the population and
they're going to be able to
regional allies and leverage our
dollars there is a group of
rural counties in the southeast
northeast and probably down by
Deming Lordsburg that I'm very
concerned that those dollars are
not going to stretch of very
well and so I think make it
Representative Garcia choosing
to invest in some of the poorer.
Regions of the state is a smart
use as well and so we with that
madam chair we stand and support
there are a lot of other
financial questions that need to
be answered but we can work
through those it but I don't see
with it why we wish that would
support this bill at this time
thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair with that
done we stand for questions.
Thank you so we will do a poll
first so Emily will put that up
in the please show your support
or lack of support.
Give you a few more seconds.
Okay it looks pretty stable okay
it's fourteen out of fourteen
are in now in favor so with that
I will ask if you are I'm.
Listening in and you are in
opposition and you want to speak
please raise your hand.
Okay I don't see anyone in
opposition okay in support if
you'd like to speak please raise
your hand.
Okay and we will start with
Karen with a lot.
And reminder there's some you
get one minute thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Karen would
walk with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
in strong support of this
legislation we also like the
funding mechanism that the
representative and the twenty
general have chosen to use for
this it does not come from the
general fund and it directly is
applicable the funding is
directly applicable to the
program we really appreciate the
sponsor continuing to support
this legislation and it is so
important that we get evidence
based practice in order to treat
the substance use disorder per
at the substance use disorder
any I and we wanna
Anyway thank you have a good
day.
Thank you next is Dorothy feet.
Good morning madam chair and
representative good morning
representative Garcia this is
Dorothy seat number retired army
major I'm speaking today for the
veterans and military families
caucus I'm also a formerly
licensed chemical dependency
counselor so I know this topic.
One of the goals of our caucuses
to help stand up veterans court
services around the state and
this bill
this bill helps that nicely
and as a former councillor I can
I can just reinforce the saving
of lives and the and the
providing of services in rural
areas is critical thank you
madam chair.
Thank you next we have Joseph
Cruz.
Good morning madam chair
representative Garcia fellow
legislature's I'm in support of
this bill I am a certified peer
support worker to sector family
health yeah I work with all the
substance abuse individuals my
experienced a substance abuse
myself on a combat veteran in
came back overseas and how to
self medicate myself and also I
live the experience that the
these individuals do I believe
that we do need the its own
department work with individuals
some of the gaps is the lack of
consistency screens through them
and I believe that we really
need to support this so we get
them the good quality proper
care that they need.
I approach for New Mexico to
rural communities that we really
need to focus on rural
communities and get this
identified to give good quality
care I'm a very support of this
bill.
Thank you to the right styles.
Is the right are you there.
Yes hello can you hear me yes we
can hear you okay thank you so
much good morning to the madam
chair to the committee and
introduced myself really
quickly.
No my name is Desiree who
dollars currently work as a peer
support specialist at a one.
And then the New Mexico area the
opioid addiction has you know
affected no rest of the family
is that in all walks of life and
we can recovery can be difficult
but they're approved in the
active treatment it.
And the most successful option
very very is providers to
provide me know eradication
program.
Representative myself I don't
and there is overcome problems
of those just maybe needing a
patient right now very Ince's.
And you know there there could
be a lot of the issue the levy
aided by the expansion of this
department.
I think
you very scheduled appointment
who would have more addict is
based on information and you
know discuss station care Mar
open be.
You know I'm in support of this
bill and I want to thank the
committee for your time and for
your support thank you.
Thank you next we have to Kota
Simmons.
And I have been at it for a
little over six years I've been
recovering for about two April
first it'll be two years I've
been with all federal throughout
that time I.
Was going through a rough patch
and was trying to look for
recovery program and was unable
to find any because I wasn't
using but I still needed that
help and central was able to
help me with that and.
I think they.
Could help a lot more people is.
They had that actual program to
do it instead of.
Just group here in just groups
there and I need to groups a
week and I've done it twice
already I think a lot more
people could benefit from it if
they had the options of their.
First Street recovery.
Thank you Dakota next we have
Paul Gibson.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy before auction and
I moved to New Mexico I was a
health consultant in the bay
area and in that context my firm
work with the city of San
Francisco to develop drug courts
and in fact it was the March
second largest drug court in the
country in the nineties
and I got to see first hand the
impact of intervening when
people are vulnerable and
helping them get to treatment
right now we're seeing a
legislature that that's being
pushed heavily come up with all
kinds of additional penalties
and stuff for crime instead of
getting at the root causes I
think that using the the money
from this Madam to develop drug
courts or other means of
intervening and offering people
treatment would be far better
than revoking bail thank you
very much for your service.
Thank you Paul we rise so.
Morning madam chair and
committee members I am from
Gallup New Mexico McKinley
County.
Well the one twelve will benefit
the rural areas real good and.
Okay some from we got people
come that comes in from all over
the reservation and.
As a diverse community and.
This will help a lot thank you
very much thank you thank you
the right and that's all I have
for public comment so we will go
to the committee Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman I
just wanted to ask a couple of
quick questions to sponsor
I congratulate him on his up
bringing this bill forward and
To my knowledge it's the first
time I've seen of funding coming
out of consumer settlement there
may be another but I missed him
up but I don't think there could
be a more worthy one then this
house bill one twelve.
Compasses having said that I
wanted to ask the sponsor when
we talk about the potential in
the current opioid settlement
building in a range of fifty one
fifty to one eighty hundred mil
one hundred eighty million.
When
let's just pick a number the one
hundred fifty million and when I
hear fifty percent to local
governments fifty percent two of
perhaps future legislative
appropriations out of the fund
but it yeah my looking at one
hundred and fifty divided by two
or am I looking at one hundred
and fifty local governments one
hundred and fifty state
legislate can you can you answer
that or maybe the Attorney
General can or somebody thank
you Madam chair representative
on.
Hello you want to R. A. need to
collaborate on that question.
Are you still there.
Madam
Madam chair can you hear me.
never mind.
I'm sure I don't see the the
aging coming on.
But that was not what the AG
stated that whatever settlement
monies come in to the consumer
settlement fund from these
opioid manufacturers.
Will be split in half.
With half going to local
governments have going to the
legislature for appropriation of
initiatives other yes about us.
Was there a question
Representative sorry.
Representative Anderson could
you at at
the state your question again
for the AG.
Representative.
Madam chair he he just came to
me and said he understands that
and he supports the bill B. as
it has no further questions okay
thank you.
Senator Armstrong index.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative Garcia for
bringing this bill forward I was
curious of the Attorney General
answered some of the questions I
had about how that money would
work and I was going to ask why
are you doing this to the
capital outlay process one of
the questions that I do have is
who owns the building now.
M. chairperson of Armstrong
Matt can you respond to that.
And and
Also how
that center is kind integrated
with.
With the the site.
Matt are you there yes I'm here
Representative Garcia madam
chair.
Representative Armstrong the
it's the old Las Vegas hospital
and it's only by the Las Vegas
health trust and so we're a
tenant of that facility was
originally designed as a
or the concept was to be a
health comments and along
different times you know it's
housed oh gosh you know
different things big brothers
big sisters and and other
agencies and central the need
for health care medical dental
and behavioral health care in
the area has grown so much that
little by little we we really
the only tenant there now and
there is one winning
and that has not been renovated
of the facility so you know
integrated substance use
disorder is is medical
behavioral health for sure
dental is important to and so we
already have this licensed
facility and there's a space
that can the square footage that
can house the hub
Department if you will the staff
being forward this this up
program it really expands all
seven counts but yes so we are a
tenant of that facility we've
spoken with San Miguel County as
well in terms of you know how
things work in terms of our I'm
nonprofit building and for the
funding in order for funding to
be able to flow through able to
renovate facilities.
Thank you thank you Mr props and
thank you.
Representative might my question
is you know the maintenance of
the building who are are the
entities of the health trust I
mean I don't want to get in the
business of funding private
entities with state dollars
that I'm all for the project but
it's just it's concerning to me
that it's not a county owned
facility and they and or through
the department of health or you
know another entities so I'm I'm
a little bit concerned about
who's going to maintain it.
What is the cost of the
utilities who's paying those and
I'm sure Attorney General there
just might have some answers to
that thank you madam chair.
And I can if I may madam chair
so so yeah again we've been in
that facility now for fourteen
years and so this that's already
you know how it's set up as a
federally qualified health
center in terms of you know now
you know in grand containing
utilities and you know in terms
of maintenance those pieces and
so again this is just adding
square footage to what we're
already doing just to you should
be clear.
Thank thank you madam chair I it
still I mean I'm for the project
I'd still concerned about the
way how the money is flowing to
a private entity
so I I I will vote for it
because I if this goes to
appropriations next to the house
all that out I'm not sure where
it goes next can you tell me
where it goes next
Representative Garcia it goes
appropriation madam chair
representative.
Thank you so much I have no more
questions.
Thank you I don't see any more
yes they do wait I'm not I got
to pay more attention I'm.
Let's see Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair I just put
my hand up quickly
and I will take it down now so I
don't forget.
And
Thank you Attorney General filed
Harris this is wonderful that
you were able to be part of that
Litigation to bring back funding
to our state and just like our
tobacco settlement
funds that I know you're working
hard on to continue that for our
tobacco
Vention programs and cessation I
know that this opioid of funding
will also be put to good use and
thank you Representative Garcia
for bringing this forward so
that we can get that head start
so I.
Appreciate it thank you thank
you.
I see that the attorney
general's hand is raised Mr
Chairman.
Mr Attorney General did you have
something else you wanted to say
madam chair yeah I don't want to
belabor the progress I just I
did want to address a couple of
the representatives comments if
you if you'll allow me just ten
seconds please yeah I think
I think there are there are
compliance issues both the
federal settlement agreement
that we entered into and then
the current on going Madam.
Negotiations between us the
local governments
I believe are going to have to
still cross the compliance ridge
so to speak and there will be
time and I want to to
Sure the representative who has
concerns she should that we're
going to have to work with DFA
and then there and then what I'm
inviting what I was about
earlier is lawmakers will have
to come up with an overall
statewide treatment an abatement
plan but I I do think at this
point.
getting out in front and putting
San Miguel up kind of leading
the pack.
Will it will not side step those
compliance issues so we have a
lot of work to do in the area of
compliance to make sure that
that these funds meet all the
settlement compliance
agreements.
Okay Representative Armstrong
did you have another question I
just want to reiterate thank you
Attorney General for those
comments maybe this is something
that needs to be on the health
and Human Services interim
committee so that we could
possibly get ahead of it if this
money is coming in so we have a
plan going into the next session
because sixty day session all of
this can be dealt with so
hopefully
I would just suggest talking
about in the interim thank you
madam chair thank you our
attorneys thank you
representative Armstrong that's
that's a good point I've been if
people want to start keeping a
list of things that they want to
have them LHS look at I I will
send it at an email to
To this Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
and Andreae.
And I am I will take a motion.
I'm in the past madam chair.
Okay.
Representative Armstrong with
the motion and Representative
bash with the second Emily can
you go ahead with the roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative March yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Brevard.
Yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative.
Representative.
More.
Representative tackle.
Yes.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Madam chair is not pregnant.
Madam chair yes.
Thank you eight zero yes so you
have to do pass on your bill
representative Garcia thank you
Matt and Mr Turney General for
joining us.
Committee members you all thank
you.
Money expert witness is still
not back so we're going to go on
to House memorial for.
Fourth trimester Care day and
Representative Ortez has been
promoted Representative Ortez do
you have experts that you would
like us to promote.
Thank you at.
and comments from committee was.
We can't we can't hear you.
Okay shoot.
Now that's a little better you
were just a little
Thank you madam chair.
As
the body
language.
Now it can is there any way you
can get a little closer or it's
a little choppy do you at.
This committee from their
computer
But we Representative Ortez we
can't we can't hear we can hear
faintly but we can't understand
what you're saying.
I'll be right back okay we will
we will chat amongst ourselves.
Madam chair Representative
Anderson here yes Representative
I can get a message flashing
across my screen saying my
internet connection is unstable
I was curious whether any other
committee members are
experiencing the same message.
I am not is anybody else.
You're the lucky winner today
Representative well thank you I
I'm I'm on a backup machine and
I'm gonna try to switch over to
a my primary but I so I think
it's on my end thank you okay
and and if you if you it helps
to keep to stay with your video
off we can understand that that
yeah we're all dealing with
check issue so I see that
Work has I think it's back
Representative are you backed.
Maybe she is.
Madam chair my my machine sold
it doesn't have video so it's
not it's not.
Wow okay so I'm trying to find
Representative Ortez again I
just noticed her thank you thank
you thank you.
Okay we can hear you now go
ahead.
I'm sorry did you have experts
thank you madam chair thank you
so much her name is Melinda
Montoya okay Emily can you
promote her.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee I
deeply apologize I'm I'm on
government right now and I have
a state computer and sadly it
just is not up to snuff us thank
you madam chair members of the
committee those who are
listening I I'm here to present
house memorial for which is the
which is for the a promoting
fourth trimester Care my name is
Christina Ortez I'm the
representative from counts my
expert witness one monthly will
will say a few words and in a
second I'm really excited to
introduce this memorial
alongside my Republican
colleagues representative Kelly
Fajardo who I don't believe is
here on the zoom with us today
I'm I do have a met an amendment
madam chair did your committee
received that would you like me
to go through that now yeah we
did we receive the amendment.
Let me double check.
I had to to to number madam
chair.
Okay yes.
Share drive okay okay so we've
got so I will move the amendment
for discussion so go ahead with
your men.
At the amendment just simply
changes the date madam chair
up from September to February
fourteenth for fourth trimester
Care day and it directs the
legislature to to do that and
not the government of chair.
Thank you is there any
discussion on the amendment.
Can I get a motion to just
accept the amendment.
Make some Madam chair
representative Armstrong in the
second.
Okay Representative Ferrary is
there any opposition.
Okay seeing then you have been
amended memorial so go ahead.
You madam chair members of the
committee what house memorial
for does is it really it it
helps us all understand what
mothers go through right after
birth I am a mother of two
children and after each year for
for the mothers on this
committee investissement we know
the challenges we know the
fiscal challenges the
psychological and emotional
challenges that that childbirth
can bring and so what this
memorial does is is it educates
our legislative body the public
our physical therapists who are
doing so much work to to help us
get back into shape you know I I
want to point out how important
it is that that for folks to
know that what is good for the
baby thank you sentence have a
lot of follow up and check ups
after birth but that the mom's
not so much right so what's good
for the baby is also good for
the mother and yeah I won it
this bill this memorial
highlights the importance of
physical therapist and what they
need to do to help mothers get
back on track our physical
therapists do a lot of work they
screened for postpartum
depression
they help with public floor
therapy they you know they they
helped me figure out how I can
feed my child that's something
that we don't really talk about
very much and it's it's not very
easy to do so I'm really excited
to since this memorial I'd like
for my excellent as Melinda
months right to act any further
detail thank you Melinda thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you Representative Ortiz
and good morning madam chair and
health and Human Services
Committee it is an honor to be
here today to talk on behalf of
this memorial I have been a
physical therapist for nearly a
decade practicing primarily in
the federal sector with the
Navajo reservation on Indian
Health I recently moved back to
New Mexico to practice I am a
certified hello that we have
practitioner and I've been
fortunate to not only provide
this service with the help of
program development to increase
access for the service for at
risk populations I'm excited
talk a little bit about fourth
trimester Care because it places
focused on the physical mental
social support and access to
therapies for new mothers
through the course of my
practice I've treated many women
some of them in the later stages
of their life that are trying to
course correct from the quote
unquote norms says Hauser
incontinence prolapse chronic
back pain chronic pelvic pain
from a child that they had
decades ago because they thought
I had a baby this is what
happens now this is actually not
the norm yes it's COVID but it's
not normal childbirth is a risk
factor for multiple pelvic floor
dysfunction and musculoskeletal
problems an example is that
urinary incontinence and pelvic
girdle pain occur commonly
during pregnancy with up to
seventy seven percent of
pregnant women reporting
symptoms with question.
Urinary incontinence continues
to affect eighteen to sixty
percent of women and back pain
continues to affect four to
ninety percent of women and I
can go on and on about the
research that out in the
literature with postpartum
dysfunction.
The importance of women being
able to have more frequent and
assessable Care not only
improves the health of the unit
mom and child but it also has a
direct impact on the health of
the community with less people
accessing care for chronic
issues much like Representative
Ortiz described physical therapy
in the fourth trimester will
treat the whole woman
Bernalillo pre six weeks
postpartum care could look like
Postrel assessments.
Care for back pain breastfeeding
support releases Jerry and Karen
pressure management and self
care management for sleeping
other holistic needs after six
weeks and through the lifespan
of a are women we will continue
to address more specific public
for dysfunction as it presents
such as urinary incontinence
prolapse pelvic pain or sexual
dysfunction so they can return
to their prior level of function
I have personally seen that this
service wrongly empowers women
through the education of how her
body functions and how to help
your realistic means thank you
for your time today and and love
to answer any questions.
Thank you Representative Ortez
did you do are you ready for
questions.
Okay we will first do a poll
with the audience so Emily if
you could put the whole lot and
and folks who are tuning in
please vote in favor or
opposition.
Okay few more seconds.
Okay we look pretty stable so it
fifteen out of fifteen a hundred
percent are in support.
So I'm now we will just in case
we will go to the audience
If there's anyone who would like
to speak in opposition first
I'm.
First I I assume there will not
be any but just in case now if
you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
And I see my PT peeps out there
that we will go to list lease
Kristofferson.
Hi good morning thank you so
much madam chair Thompson and
members of the committee on the
volunteer for Planned Parenthood
and I stand in strong support of
this bill house memorial for the
first three months of motherhood
the the fourth trimester is this
transitional period between
birth and twelve weeks
postpartum during which the
babies adjusting to the world
and as the folks have spoken
about the mother is adjusting to
her and her body and to their
baby the fourth trimester is
this time physically mentally
and psychologically emotionally
right of that this taxing time
for for the mother is definitely
a major developmental period of
developmental change for the
baby so it can take weeks or
even months for the mother's
baby to our body the feel
totally normal again you know
healing the mental health
sleeping patterns so it's
important I think for our state
to recognize the importance of
this time for mother with her
body in her new board and
declared a fourth trimester Care
Daschle I urge you and the
committee to support house
memorial for thank you so very
much that's my public comment
thank thank you next we have
Karen was zero.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I am a physical
therapist who works with babies
and I recognize the importance
of care for the mom it's so
important for the child's
development that the more they
get the care she needs and is
able to function fully in order
to support her child so thank
you.
Thank you Karen it's great to
hear from you.
Karen was a clinical instructor
of mine she's been a PT even
longer than me M. all PTA's
don't die we just keep on going.
Next is a list of Barnes.
Good morning and thank you for
hearing this critical issue my
name is a list of the Barnes and
I've Burke to children after my
first my postpartum care
consisted of one follow up
appointment six weeks and
instructions to start doing
cables.
Because I did not receive the
care that was needed directly
after my first pregnancy my
second pregnancy destroyed me
six weeks after giving birth to
my second I couldn't stand for
thirty minutes without feeling
like my mid section in public
for ripping apart it took months
of work with my PTA to get to a
place where I could do what are
considered daily activities like
walking my story is
unfortunately not unique I've
spoken to many others what the
same or work experience as
public for physical therapy
should be part of all postpartum
care and I stand in strong
support of this memorial
contrary to popular belief we
don't have to pee when we sneeze
thank you for your time this
morning.
Thank you for the
The poignant reminder for us
next we have doctor Kim Parker
Guerrero go ahead Kim.
Kim are you there.
I'm.
Can you hear me now yes we can
hear you okay sorry I don't know
why it if needed hi so thank you
madam chair in this committee my
name is Dr Kim Parker Guerrero I
in the rehab director at eastern
New Mexico Medical Center in
Roswell New Mexico and my
interest in this memorial is
that I am also a public for
physical therapist and on the
national level on the director
practice for the academy of
public health physical therapy
and there is a as you read the
news there's a big focus on
decreasing the total that list
of by increasing and improving
maternal health and the focus
has always been on prenatal care
I strongly suggest that the
fourth trimester care is just as
important as prenatal care and
for us to follow the perfect
patient through out and after
her delivery
so I speak and in favor like I
save we do all kinds of things
that I know amount of time sorry
about that.
Okay camp it's great to hear
from you to is that a shout out
to him she she was the chair of
the New Mexico chapter of the
American physical therapy
association in care and has been
on the legislative committee for
forever so I want to give them
There do they they work hard and
I will go to the committee are
there any questions.
Okay I don't I don't see any
questions but I do have one so
how I'm particularly for the
PT's how how is this working
with insurance are you having to
two eight with health insurers
to cover this story kind of
The standard.
I will speak for this it's
pretty standard I think it
depends on the referral source
and how they're referring
it can be for postpartum care or
it can be for low back pain it
can be for breastfeeding support
so it's really depending on how
that physicians and providers
are spending of our rural to us
so we've been able to support
this population talking to the
midwives the OBGYN to get them
in and RT PTP pre planning for
the post partum state expressly
since we have an access issue It
public there teach in New Mexico
there's not as many of us as I
would like there to be so the
wait times can sometimes be a
bit of a bird and so things like
this memorial and having more
awareness that there is a need
to better care for women will
maybe also bring more public for
therapists to that built and
maybe help with some of our
orthopedic therapist to look at
our women a little differently
in the postpartum States.
Thank you we'll just a
recalcitrant know how many there
are certified in New Mexico.
I want to stay on the top of my
head here in Albuquerque we
probably have at least twenty
five that are maybe not board
certified but they are
practicing public for therapist
and I mean it's just taking the
additional education outside of
our current baseline physical
therapy education to be able to
see this population and then
just one more question is this
now being taught in in deep in
the DPT schools yes there's a
whole semester of public floor
therapy and I I don't know if
they're keep continuing to keep
it as women's health but we're
just recognizing that need for
health care across the spectrum.
That's good news thank you I'm
at I am open for motion.
Madam chair could I.
Sorry Representative okay I
didn't see your hand go ahead
okay I put it up at the last
minute so it's it's not your
fault thank you so much thank
you representative for bringing
this story this is an incredible
and supportive and thank you to
all the teams out there who do
this good work I just wanted to
share how important it is to me
personally and I think that so
many women who have had children
my daughter just turned three is
that I know that the X..
Just got out of it not your
recently echo but I wish I had
been offered this option I don't
ever remember it being something
that was told to me I had after
an emergency C. section just
so if you more severe postpartum
depression for a really long
time and
I think a lot of what
contributed to that was all the
things we now in just that
disconnection to your body and
not even knowing how to get it
back on track so I'm just so
thrilled that we're getting more
and more legislation that
supports things like this and to
bring awareness for New Mexico
because it really is about
education it is about the data
it is about resources and I'm
just so appreciative of all of
you thank you.
Thank you Representative I will
entertain a motion.
Do pass okay.
Second.
Okay so we have a motion from
Representative bash a second
Representative Bocaue
and go ahead go ahead and take
the role.
Representative Anderson are you
there.
Well yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative.
All.
Representative earned.
Bill one another committee.
Representative more yes.
President Representative Montoya
is not present.
International.
Chair is more prevalent madam
chair yes.
Thank you
for your own.
Representative Ortez N. P. teeth
you have
to pass on your memorial and the
thank you so much for bringing
this I'm it it can change lives
thank you so much thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I would cry or laugh a
little bit but I'm afraid of
what might happen.
Thank you PED's.
Okay so we will go back to to
the beginning of our agenda
on house bill ninety five and
that is actually my bill and
since I don't have a vice chair
and.
We sure are Representative bash
are you comfortable taking over
as chair.
Yes okay so I am no longer chair
so madam chair I'm gonna present
to you house bill ninety five it
is called the easy enrollment
act and what it does is it
allows the reporting from the
tax department to so when you
file your state taxes you can
check a box that says me or
someone in my household our
family doesn't have health
insurance and the information
will be sent to Human Services
and they will look at at at the
income and and figure out if
that person could qualify for
Medicaid or for the exchange and
then assist them in getting
getting enrolled in that and
that the main purpose of this
bill is to just get more New
Mexicans to have health care
coverage how health insurance a
cost us all you know people say
I don't want to support other
people's insurance but you are
one way or another and either
through higher rates and I have
three amazing experts with me I
have Colin bio and it's hard for
me not to say with Health Action
New Mexico but he is now with
the office of superintendent of
insurance Gabby Rivera who's
with Health Action New Nicole
Comeaux who's our Medicaid
director so Colin or or Gabby
whoever wants to go first and
fell in Philly and then the.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair are you
able to hear me.
Okay.
Okay now now you're muted.
I am having some audio issues at
take the headphones out of my
your real quick I think and I'm
using two different audio
sources right now but I should
be able to present this bill
present to wave your hands if
you need to stop of madam chair
members the committee my name's
called bio with the office and
superintendent of insurance and
the superintendent did hope to
be here this morning but he is
serving as his role on the New
Mexico health insurance exchange
board of directors in it isn't
able to be here this morning so
it so you'll be stuck with me
it's I would like to thank
Representative Thomson for
reintroducing this legislation
and you may remember that a
version of this bill had strong
support in both chambers last
year it came pretty close to
passage of it didn't quite make
it over the finish line so it's
great to see that it's being
reconsidered again and aside
does recognize that there's a
great deal of work to do to
ensure that every New Mexican
has access to healthcare when
they needed and wired system
basically a lot of challenges
that this committee it is all
too aware of
many people still are struggling
to access care and we know that
health insurance even with its
flaws is the access point to the
system for a lot of people and
really is the primary way that
people are able to get the
services that they need and
while a lot of progress has been
made on getting more people
signed up for coverage in recent
years we still have over two
hundred thousand New Mexicans
who don't have health insurance
internet global pandemic we all
know that this is such an
important time to have access to
services when they're needed now
more than half of those people
who are uninsured do qualify for
some form of financial
assistance for their coverage
either no cost coverage through
Medicaid or.
Or low cost coverage through the
market place if they make too
much to qualify for Medicaid and
so reaching these individuals
has proven to be a major
challenge there are a lot of
different agencies and
organizations working to do that
but we need to take seriously
the the challenge that there are
hard to reach populations that
we haven't been able to connect
with that and we need to find
innovative ways to reach these
individuals across the state and
what we really need is a better
initial entry point for people
to get into health coverage and
the easy enrollment act
leverages the state's income tax
system to meet people where they
are instead of keeping the
burden on them to seek out
information about coverage
programs debate may not know
about is under this bill
taxpayers can voluntarily
consent to share their
information on that's relevant
to assessing or eligibility from
state income tax forms to help
them get signed up for coverage
and by giving New Mexicans this
option we're connecting them
with services that we now have
long term positive social and
economic benefits while
respecting the privacy of New
Mexicos by requiring affirmative
consents to opt into the program
of Maryland Virginia and our our
neighbors with lower quality a
green chili in Colorado have
adopted legislation to set up
this type of program and this is
our chance to make sure we're at
the forefront along with our
partners states in in getting
this new way for people to
connect with coverage and so
that I'm gonna hand it over to
Gabby Rivera Health Action New
Mexico to talk about some of the
nuts and bolts.
Thank you for calling in thank
you madam chair committee
members for having me I'll just
briefly add that this bill
relies completely on informed
affirmative consent to just
empower taxpayers to use this
program to their own benefit and
we know there'll be very clear
language on the tax form that
explains exactly what will be
shared to whom or what progress
and I'm making it very clear
that participation is completely
voluntary even after they check
the box and they get their
eligibility assessment no one's
under any obligation to enroll
at any point.
So this bill is really in this
bill is really meant to give New
Mexicans informed choice in
their health coverage and that's
a choice that money can't make
right now at all because they
simply don't know where to
start.
and as you said a representative
Thompson making sure that run
our state as access to insurance
is just something we only care
about and not just from an
ethical standpoint as you said
there's consequences when people
are not insured and there are a
lot of benefits when people are
insured more people enrolled we
know means larger risk pools
lower premiums and less on
compensated care and as COVID
and we know from other states
that this is an effective
program already SO Health Action
OCI and all the others here in
sports they know that will be a
great success New Mexico and a
very needed change I thank you
madam chair committee members
sent to and pass a technical.
And madam chair at
representative Thompson
remembers the committee
representative Thompson did you
edit site coming off mute so to
make sure you an opportunity
actually I have an amendment but
to go ahead and then after you
talk okay thank you
Representative and madam chair
members the committee it's great
to be with you all I'm sorry I'm
under the weather excuse my
voice.
It's good to see you all.
Not just you all as much at this
session so I'm I wanted to say a
couple of things around still I
agencies in strong support of
this legislation and not only
for the reasons raised but you
hear a state time and again in a
state like New Mexico
was that time Medicaid
enrollment we really feel that
responsibility for market share
perspective so this helps us
continue to ensure that
providers are actually seeing
New Mexicans that are covered so
there's payment for the services
that they are rendered so this
will allow an easier pathway for
New Mexicans I like was already
stated I'll be able to check
that box and have data flow
through to us and then pass on
through at W. well New Mexico if
folks are potentially eligible
for coverage there.
What was previously stated as
well we've seen success in other
states based on the
implementation we've seen we'd
expect to see between ten and
twenty thousand individuals
application come through us per
month following a tax filing
season that's really fantastic
success.
We did want to highlight that we
beat re submitting our fiscal
impact reports there was a
miscalculation around those
numbers that you hear that would
really create a lot of
opportunity but that that would
be an ongoing volume we expect
to see not million in the
initial months going tax season
and evaluate reduced in the
months that followed our
calculation accounted for
staffing needs are or annualized
so for an entire year.
So we've updated that to reflect
the shorter time period and
calculated as over time instead
of need for full time employees
just trying to make sure
research what responsible as
possible with the asks for
general fund so you'll see that
reduced to about two hundred
thousand in general fund need
and then there is an I. T. cost
to implement this we'll be
working with our partners at TRD
the pass that data to Medicaid
where we can then process that
will run those folks your
eligibility if they're eligible
for coverage with us we'd and
inform them of that and let them
make that decision if they're
not eligible for coverage on
Medicaid but instead eligible
for coverage and be well New
Mexico health insurance exchange
we already have an existing
infrastructure with them we pass
those individuals with their
consent their information over
to the exchange where they could
then rules that was their choice
so we have to do I. T. work
between TRD I'm and Medicaid and
that comes in at about four
hundred thousand at in G. R. T.
in general fund sorry.
I'm looking at a G. R. T. bill
this morning so I'm you'll see
your advised FIR come through
today and with the total cost of
about six hundred thousand
general fund it's worth noting
that if the executive
recommendation but supports
additional staffing in income
support division becomes the
rack you wouldn't need that two
hundred thousand so and you see
it basically in need here from
us between four hundred and six
hundred thousand I'm in the
final FIR so anyway through a
bunch of numbers that you I just
want to say it one more time so
it's clear there was originally
a two hundred are sorry to
million dollar general fund ask
it will not be reduced to six
hundred thousand.
To support staffing in nineteen
needs I'm so again we're really
excited about this bill we
really hope that at it makes its
way through and really help
support New Mexicans on it with
already challenging lives and
busy lives as you all know I
have an easier pathway to
enrollment.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Thank you and
I'd like to move the amendment
for discussion.
And madam chair representative
Thompson has been booted off of
here because she's joining thank
you.
Yes.
I'm so sorry and my back on.
Yes.
Okay I'm gonna have to do it
from my phone so excuse the.
That craziness I'm.
So I'm not exactly sure where we
are.
The amendment for discussions.
Okay all right thank you so it's
very simple on page six line
twenty after Department in
search with the exchange and
essentially what that does is
just make it perfectly clear
what what's going to happen with
the information that submitted
so I'm.
Except.
Second.
a motion to adopt the amendment
and the second.
Is there any opposition to that.
Hearing none we have an amended
bill.
Thank thank you madam chair and
it did it did Nicole get to
finish I'm so sorry I don't my
computer just was gone and it
won't reconnect so did Nicole
get back to finish.
Madam chair they may.
Representative I did and I
clarified to the committee that
the two million dollar general
fund us the fire's been revised
and resubmitted to six hundred
thousand and we apologize for
the confusion in the
calculation.
Thank thank you Nicole I'm so I
guess with that madam chair
we're ready for questions.
Yes Representative public
comment and can we have a poll.
All right those in favor and
those opposed can vote.
Their conscience.
Madam chair we have twenty five
in the first year.
Twenty five in favor if there
are any opposed to wish to make
public comment
Raise your hand.
All those in favor who wish to
make public comment raise your
hand.
All right we have.
Several participants.
Madam chair would you like me to
call me Sir would you like to
use.
If you would call names that
would be great okay more.
Stephanie Schardin Clarke.
The.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this is
definition Clark and the
secretary of the taxation and
revenue department here to
support strongly house bill
ninety five I think it
represents Austin because apple
of good government inaction this
bill will allow tax years
insured individual in their
household to have just the
choice to check a box on the
personal income tax return form
that will give consent for taxed
Representative to share a
limited amount of their data
with HSD just for the purposes
of determining eligibility in
Medicaid another low cost cost
health insurance programs and we
stand ready to implement this
bill are costs are very minimal
and we can accomplish this with
existing resources and staff on
our side and I just want to
emphasize that this bill is such
an innovative way for state
agencies to work together to
improve the quality of life of
New Mexicans and thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you Mr Brent Miller.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Roy
Moore and registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and a have stands in favor
of this bill they have is in
favor of everyone getting the
health coverage that they need
in this bill is a pathway to
ensure more health insurance
coverage for folks in it we're
happy to stand in support of
thank you very much.
Thank you Karen Kennedy would
lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter.
And we stand strong support of
this legislation.
We like and all of the above
approach to leading New Mexicans
know that they are eligible for
health care coverage we also
appreciate the fact that only
limited information will be
provided to the department to
determine eligibility we want to
thank the sponsor CMS in OSI for
continually working to provide
access to health care for all
New Mexicans thank you.
Jack.
Good morning madam chair it's
very nice to be back in your
committee and see everyone my
name is Jackie Cooper and I'm a
volunteer registered lobbyists
for a a RP New Mexico I want to
thank representative Thompson
for bringing this bill forward
access to health care for all
New Mexicans is absolutely
essential to a healthy workforce
that helps protect all of us and
contributes to the welfare of
for families A. R. P. supported
this bill in twenty twenty one
and we again stand in support of
HB ninety five thank you.
Thank you Alex Williams.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Alex
and I'm I'll care policy
advocate Mexico Center online
poverty we have center stand in
support of HB ninety five every
New Mexicans should be able to
access qualify affordable health
coverage and yet over half the
two hundred thousand uninsured
New Mexicans qualify for
Medicaid or federal premium
assistance for the exchange but
many are unaware that they
qualify for these programs
indeed over the past several
years the federal government is
cut outreach efforts to educate
Americans about their
eligibility for these programs.
HB ninety five is a cost
effective way for the state to
take an active role in helping
these New Mexicans get the
coverage they need and deserve
and following the COVID nineteen
pandemic we have learned that we
are all healthier is community
when each individual has access
to health care.
This bill is a win for everyone
more patients get access to
coverage which includes health
for everyone providers get more
compensation for their services
which lowers healthcare costs
for everyone and the state
brings in federal dollars that
currently we are leaving on the
table thank you and we are to do
past for H. B. ninety five.
Thank you Barbara Webber.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Webber executive
director Health Action New
Mexico and we stand in strong
support of this bill when we
started working on it three
years ago there was no pandemic
and it has made it even clearer
the need for everyone to get
access to health care coverage
one of the things that we're
excited about when you look at
the data from other states
particularly in Maryland it's
had a couple of years is that
young adults signed up
in numbers X. twice as many as
have signed up for Medicaid
previously and for the health
exchange the other important
thing is that we're going to
have eighty five thousand people
moving off of Medicaid at the
end of the public health
emergency and this again will
find another safety net to catch
people and let them know that
they can have health care
coverage so we strongly urge
your support to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you Kerry robin Brander.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee Kerry rob and
brown Jr registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico Medical
Society we supported this bill
last year and continue to do so
we think that adding these
questions to our income tax
returns it's a great way to
capture as many people as
possible get them enrolled in
appropriate insurance whether
that is through a private
insurance on that in the in the
insurance exchange or Medicaid
so that when they need to make
an appointment when they need
access to care all of those
things are already taken care of
and we can provide them with the
great quality care that we know
our physicians and our other
limitations in the state provide
to our patients thank you so
much madam chair and we urge you
to vote yes on this legislation.
Thank you my hash see that.
Yes.
So madam chair members members
of the committee my name is when
I see the I'm with the American
heart association you know the
American heart association you
know strongly supports this bill
because it makes it easy for
more eligibility Mexicans to
enroll in Medicaid or other okay
a low cost insurance policies
and receive receive preventive
care and other medical services
when they need and in a timely
fashion and this can help you
know to prevent long term and
costly chronic diseases you know
such as heart disease
hypertension and and save more
lives so we we we thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
and and we urge this committee
to support this thank you madam
chair members of.
Thank you yes she.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is deficient with New Mexico
voices for children in support
of house bill ninety five I
first want to thank the sponsors
for their time and commitment to
dispel in New Mexico over twenty
five thousand children do not
have health insurance coverage
these children are less likely
to receive a well child visits
and are more likely to deal with
chronic conditions and untreated
developmental delays.
Every child deserves to have
health insurance to help address
any issues that may endanger
their health and well being this
is especially true for families
that are uninsured but in fact
eligible for coverage which is
the case for more than half of
the uninsured individuals in New
Mexico.
House bill ninety five makes it
easier for these families to get
no or low cost health coverage
which will give their children
better access to the health care
they need to promote their
healthy growth and learning we
strongly urge your support for
house bill ninety five thank
you.
Thank you Karen the Cerro.
Thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I also want to thank
representative Thompson for
bringing this forward I think
this is very important to our
public health I am the director
of an early intervention program
so part of our responsibility is
working with young families with
very young children to help them
find health insurance and I
think this is a beautiful way to
make it much easier to apply and
help them see their access and
their eligibility so thank you
very much I stand in support of
this bill.
Thank.
Right.
Good morning my name is Kim
right correct thank I'm a
registered nurse and a graduate
student New Mexico State
University and public health I
speak from direct personal
experience I also represent the
New Mexico Public Health
Association as a member and a
former intern New Mexico Public
Health Association and I
strongly supported B. ninety
five.
Affordable health coverage is
more important now than ever
approximately a hundred and
thirteen thousand New Mexicans
are eligible for Medicaid or tax
credits for the portable health
coverage yet they're not rules.
Your son Roman include language
barriers literacy barriers and
time constraints.
Many uninsured rely on
healthcare delivery workforce
for assistance with health
coverage.
Health care systems are already
overburdened with the comment
pandemic this this bill will
allow health care workers to
better meet the social physical
and mental health needs of
clients and improve overall
health outcomes for communities.
Adding income tax returns as an
entry point to access health
care it just makes good sense.
Thank you.
More like Scholes.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee.
Polishes registered lobbyists
for Blue Cross blue shield of
New Mexico we stand in support
of house bill ninety five for
all the reasons previously
stated we would also like to
thank the sponsors the
administration and Health Action
New Mexico for keeping the
health plans involved in the
development of this legislation
over the past several years
thank.
You.
Thank you.
Times.
Can you hear me now.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair yes
here you.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Hi I'm speaking on behalf of the
disability coalition we
represent the interests of
persons with disabilities of all
types and we stand in support of
this bill there are many people
in New Mexico who are eligible
for low cost or no cost health
insurance who don't realize it
or don't know how to navigate
the system in order to get rules
and this bill will help them
achieve that and having health
insurance is only one factor in
health but it is an important
factor and we believe that this
bill will make it easier for
uninsured New Mexicans to get
the coverage that they need that
will help them and will also
help the providers who will then
get paid for the services they
provide rather than having to be
on compensated thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Rachel Biggs.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Rachel Biggs that Albuquerque
health care for the homeless
federally qualified health
center serving people without
homes and Bernalillo county lack
of access to affordable health
care as a structural
consequences we support H. B.
ninety five to improve access to
health care coverage in our
state we thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward in
your your support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Scott Scanlon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee happy
snow day in Santa Fe my name is
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for New Mexico
government affairs representing
economic chair and they are
manufacturing company who's very
interested in in in health care
coverage for all New Mexicans
they stand in strong support of
this bill they supported this
bill last year they see it as a
way working through the the
exchange and other
vehicles to get New Mexicans the
health insurance that they need
and that they deserve we
supported the bill again last
year we do this year thank you
representative Thompson for
being a champion on this bill we
urge your support of health
still ninety five thank you.
Thank you.
In March.
I'm sorry I think was cited
muted.
Here are needed now okay thank
you madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cynthia I
Worsham a strong supporter and
have been involved with Planned
Parenthood and I'm also a member
of indivisible sos Santa Fe
a women's-only indivisible group
I stand in support of HB ninety
five having worked in the
insurance industry and in
Medicaid for most of my
professional career I know that
when they're barriers to
enrollment even ones that we
might not perceive would that we
might perceive as small people
did not enroll in health care
services for people with lower
incomes this is particularly
true we also know that when
people lack insurance they
differ Care and end up with
greater health care burdens this
will bill would make it much
more simple to enroll it would
reduce barriers to enrollment
and offer greater access to care
which ultimately reduce the
costs for providers the state in
individuals I urge you to
support the bill thank you very
much.
Thank you and M. P. H. J..
Thank you so much this is Shelly
Man Lev I'm the president of the
New Mexico Public Health
Association I thank very much
the Sanchez and so many partners
have worked on this important
piece of legislation
persistently I want to address
in addition to the other points
that were named that this is a
health equity issue the people
who are uninsured it is rates
amongst our indigenous native
American communities are
particularly our Spanish
speaking communities and that by
reducing the barriers right the
barriers to transportation to
having to take the initiative
that we will in fact improve
health equity part of the
mission of the New Mexico Public
Health Association so we stand
strong support and thank the
committee and the LESC.
Thank you for the ride Ezzell.
Good morning committee madam
chair and committee members.
I am with the four together
action then I'm from McKinley
County.
We support XP ninety five.
this bill will eliminate a lot
of running around and paper work
especially in rural areas where
people have access to vehicles
to get to the office and here
and there.
So how the bills thank you very
much.
Thank you Sarah Maez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Sir
Maez director of the New Mexico
coalition for affordable
prescriptions are we stand
support of HB ninety five
because of many of the New
Mexicans who tell us the stories
of their difficulty accessing
your prescription medications
are uninsured and we know that
if we could help those who are
eligible for
coverage to get that coverage
that we would increase their
access to their prescriptions we
stand support energy to pass
thank you.
Thank you Linda Siegel.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
nurses association of nurses and
nurse practitioners and nurse
midwives and we strongly support
this bill it's so important for
people to have access for health
care and unfortunately if you
don't have insurance you don't
have consistent access so for
all of our providers throughout
the state who want to care for.
Everyone who lives here we
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Jim Jackson.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Jim Jackson
registered lobbyists for
disability rights New Mexico.
Of access to affordable health
care coverage is a really
important issue for people with
disabilities help to maintain of
their health and participating
community life and for all of
the great reasons that have been
in the indicated by previous
speakers we encourage the
committee to support the bill
and we think of the
representative Thompson for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you Laura Keller.
Thank you madam chair committee
this is Laurie Keller represent
the American diabetes
association we want to thank you
for supporting this bill people
with diabetes need access to
affordable and adequate health
insurance and that includes
insulin so it's super important
that this bill passes because
there's many people in New
Mexico who cannot afford their
insulin because they are without
insurance thank you so much and
we urge you to pass this bill
and thank you to representative
Thompson for sponsoring and.
Thank you I believe there was
one more person who just lowered
their hand I want to give them a
moment in case that lacked
restraint again.
Yeah our.
Are you there.
Anthony yes you have permission
to speak.
But now can you hear me.
Yes okay are at the with.
Representative the pueblo Santo
and a member of the Hey miss I
will try but I wanted to
enforced and remind people of
the rhetoric that has been
presented by the different
entities in support of this bill
however there still is a lot of
work that needs to be done in a
rural communities as well as
some of the more important
things such as health literacy
such as navigating the system
such as some of the
misinformation that is still
going out in some of our areas
and to make sure that this will
allow them to at least check off
on their income taxes in case
there's a need for them to be
short thank you.
Thank you madam chair that
includes public yes.
All right we'll go to the
committee and I see
Representative Armstrong was
hand raised.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for The presentation I'm
glad to hear madam chair that
the FIR was incorrect
it.
I did I couldn't print yesterday
for some strange reason so I'm
glad I went look at it again
this morning glad to see of the
process one of the things that
I want to say is I think this is
a grand idea I think that this
would be a way to make sure and
give our New Mexicans an
opportunity to our.
An easier way to access health
insurance
Nicole's always been so good
about trying to educate us
legislators on the Medicaid
process and chair and all of the
different entities that we have
here in the state of New Mexico
so I I'm really all for this I
would just really like to think
of Representative Liz Tommy
Thompson and Britney but asked
for bringing this legislation
forward this is this is the kind
of work that needs to be done in
New Mexico to fill those gaps
and I'm hoping that there's
security measures put in place
and I have full confidence that
taxed Rav instead of secretary
stepped Schardin Clarke we'll
take all the measures necessary
to keep people's information
secure and I just want to cheer
you all on and hope that this
gets implemented in past thank
you madam chair.
Is there anyone else on the
committee who wishes to speak.
All right I would.
Armstrong had her hand right she
just spoke of.
I would entertain a motion.
I move the past madam chair as
amended.
second.
Right is there any opposition to
this bill.
I see none.
You have a do pass.
As amended.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee am I
still am unable to get on on my
laptop I don't know what's going
on
but we will go ahead and thank
you Representative bash support
for taking over that's that's
what we do we're we we play team
ball whoever has to step up to
do it and and I can not see
whether Representative Matthews
has joined us has she.
I.
Do not see her.
No.
X. because I'm doing this on my
phone so and if you're trying to
text me text another member of
the committee please.
So I think with that
is Representative Roybal
Caballero on.
I do not see and okay well then
I guess go ahead and with with
house memorial eighteen so
Representative bash can you take
over again.
Yes.
Okay thank you go ahead.
Okay.
Excuse me is that house memorial
eighteen.
Yes.
Okay
Would you like to.
Present that.
Yeah I have to experts I have
Rachel Biggs and Teague and I
can't remember cheeks last name
but hopefully there's not too
many teachers on their.
So I will just quickly
Start this and then let them
take over once I find my bill
So essentially this is it
actually it's a memorial to
request the Human Services
department to report on the
supplemental security income
legal advocacy project data and
with that I will let either
Rachel or T. at takeover.
Thank you madam chair.
Well eighteen will ensure the
legislature hears about in New
Mexico Human Services Department
pilot program that provides one
hundred fifty New Mexicans with
legal assistance to help them
transition from the state funded
general assistance need a
program to the federally funded
disability program known as
supplemental security income.
General assistance is a state
cash assistance program for
adults living with disabilities.
General assistance is used to
provide income to people who are
waiting for their SSI claim to
be approved and it's entirely
funded through general fund
dollars it provides two hundred
and forty five dollars a month.
Federal disability known as SSI
is the federally funded
disability program that more
than triples I need a
participants income from two
hundred and forty five dollars a
month to eight hundred forty one
dollars a month.
New Mexico automatically
recruits any and all GA dollars
provided to an adult who wins
their SSI claim.
You can be very difficult to get
federal disability benefits as
many of you all on the committee
probably now if you don't have
an attorney or some sort of
legal assistance the larger
share of SSI cases are won on
appeal making legal services
essential to winning and SSI
claim.
Only thirty one percent of SSI
applications are approved on an
initial application for benefits
but over sixty two percent of
these claims are approved at
later stages of appeal.
This is why other states have
invested up front in legal
advocacy to help create
participants excess federal
disability benefits.
Other models hello have
completely eliminated the need
for state funding to support
general assistance programs
because the funding for GA
become self sustaining as the
state recruits more of it share
of cost from SSI.
This model of SSI advocacy has
the potential to completely
eliminate the need for general
fund dollars to fund the state
cash assistance program the more
SSI claims the state helps when
the more reimbursement to the
general fund.
The HSD pilot is just the first
step in New Mexico to ensure
more New Mexicans get the help
they need.
The HSD already reports on the
right basically I reimbursement
in its need a program on a
monthly basis this memorial
simply asks HSD to report on a
subset of reimbursements
associated with individuals who
received legal assistance
through this already launched
pilot.
New Mexico expands over seven
million dollars in general fund
dollars on general assistance
collects just over two million
dollars from SSI recruit
recruitment.
Over time the scaling up of the
project by hiring additional
legal services attorneys the
state will be able to recoup the
entire cost of its state need a
cash assistance program and
funded entirely with federal
dollars from the SSI
reimbursement.
This memorial make sure that the
legislature hears about the
outcomes of the pilot and learns
about the opportunities to save
even more general fund dollars
in the future by scaling up the
project.
That is the overview of the
memorial and madam chair I pass
on to Rachel Biggs.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rachel
Biggs and the chief strategy
officer Albuquerque health care
for the homeless we're really
thrilled to have the opportunity
to promote this innovative and
exciting as as I am legal
advocacy pilot that HSD is
carrying out increasing income
for people experiencing
homelessness is one of our top
priorities as it's an important
element of ending homelessness
and this ensures individuals can
quickly access the disability
benefits they're entitled to
this memorial provides an Avenue
to further the advocacy and
educate legislators about the
exciting HSD pilot and ensure it
gets the attention it deserves
an item around so the success
can be highlighted it will be
important for the interim
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee to hear how
effective the pilot as at
recouping general fund dollars
and increasing income for adults
with disabilities.
We hope to continue to build on
the success of the pilot and
will use the reporting in the
interim to partner with HSD to
continue to grow this program
thank you and we stand for
questions.
Thank you madam chair what we're
we're ready for questions.
Let's put up a poll.
To see who's in favor in his
opposed.
The poll and lunch.
But.
We have
no.
We're still.
Thirteen.
Respondents in thirteen in favor
for a hundred percent.
All right and we'll go to.
The
We'll go to the public for
comment if you have a comment in
the opposition.
You can raise your hand.
And if you have a comment in
favor.
Please raise your hand.
Okay.
Martinez.
Hi can the committee hearing.
Yes great thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kirk Miller Tina Stein the
director income support division
with the Human Services
Department
well I am here only to provide
technical assistance and not to
speak in opposition or support
of the memorial we will say that
we are glad that New Mexico
Center on covering the street in
Dallas did presented this
opportunity to us and we are
currently engaged and A. R. P.
process which we will department
to expand and exercise this
project so activate and letting
you know that I am on the line
for any technical support or
questions that she writes thank
you for your time today and have
a great day.
Thank you Karen Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee can we lock with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in support of this
memorial any more data that we
can get to help us to help us
with evidence based practice or
develop evidence based practice
I should say we we believe is a
good idea thanks to the
sponsors.
Thank you.
Gary how spin.
Good morning madam chair
representative Thompson and
Representative and members of
the committee.
My name is Gary asset M. C. O.
disability rights New Mexico in
on behalf of our organization
and representation of
individuals with disabilities we
are in support of this this
memorial.
I would share with you that
previously as an executive
director of a legal services
program in Tennessee we had the
benefit of of having a program
like this started off as a pilot
in expanded and I can tell you
the significant impact that it's
had on individuals with
disabilities.
Of living in poverty and living
in poverty with disabilities
life can be hard in providing
the legal expertise to the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
to provide assistance to in
seeking these benefits is
critical these cases are not
have not easy they require legal
expertise and we are supportive
of this program thank you.
Thank you Ellen.
Thank you madam chair.
Once again speaking on behalf of
the disability coalition.
Having legal assistance has been
shown to be an effective way of
helping people get the benefits
that they're entitled to so the
coalition support steps like
this memorial that will move us
in the direction of providing
that support to applicants for
supplemental security income I
do want to just comment very
quickly to make sure that
there's not a misconception
about this the SSI benefit is
significantly higher than the
state general assistance benefit
but it is still a below poverty
level amount it's about roughly
seventy five percent of the
poverty level so it's it's not
an adequate support but it's
much better than general systems
so we support this memorial as a
way of helping people to get
those benefits that they're
entitled to thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and madam chair that
includes public next month.
All right we will go to the
committee madam chair one more
person just traces hand and Jim
Jackson.
Thank you madam chair Jim
Jackson also for disability
rights New Mexico as our CEO of
the Strauss B. and has indicated
this is a program that's been
well established in other
jurisdictions it presents the
opportunity for providing a much
better as a source of support
and I'll also add for medical
care coverage for people with
disabilities they're much better
off on SSI than all the general
assistance program and it will
save the state funding as well
so we do strongly support the
measure encouraged to do the
committee to support it and
thank the sponsor again for
bringing it thank you.
Thank you and madam chair that
concludes the past nine.
All right we'll go to the
committee and Representative
Anderson has his stand up.
Representative Anderson are you
there.
Okay is there anyone else on the
committee that wishes to speak.
Go back to Representative
Anderson.
Your muted.
Okay.
We will go ahead.
And
I would entertain a motion.
Madam chair I will let you pass
on the memorial as amended if we
start now do we.
Never mind have do passed.
Yes is there a second.
Okay.
We have a motion and the second
are there any opposed.
From the committee.
A list.
Therefore we have a to pass on
this memorial HM eighteen.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I guess
I will take back over I I see
that Representative Roybal
Caballero is in that but I Emily
I've lost my my magic wand so
I'm not able people are doing it
those things and what we're
promoting and I want to thank my
expert witnesses T. good
knowledge and Rachel Biggs on
this and I also want to thank
Representative Ferraris
Committee assistant rob Crilly
who came in and rescued me and
got my computer going again I
thought I was going to have to
drag it home to my husband to
fix so thank you rob so much I'm
and so we are going through what
house memorial twenty two with
Representative Roybal Caballero
so go ahead whenever you're I do
need to have experts you need
promoted.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
I'm I'm having some issues.
I'm it looks I'm.
Three laptops right now no I did
not I heard you I I do not okay
go ahead thank you so pardon the
background one minute I had my
legislative background now I'm
showing my office home office
background so it's not that
official but anyway I'm here
officially thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
here to present house memorial
twenty two and thank you so much
for having us having today House
memorial twenty two is
requesting the Human Services
department in the workforce
solutions Department to convene
a task force to study the impact
and make recommendations for the
implementation of the new mac
New Mexico basic income for low
income Mexicans I know that
madam chair that we are have
heard over and over again in our
incomes the last couple of years
especially how the pandemic has
revealed I even more so all of
the not only the social and
economic but the health issues
related to not having
basic income not having
sufficient income and also
pointing to the extreme poverty
that has substantially increased
due to the conditions and I
point madam chair to I just a
couple of points to the memorial
that that solidified the US and
that is that according to the
work and I'm sorry.
In twenty
that.
At twenty two the workforce
solutions department as of June
twenty twenty one New Mexico has
a low labor force participation
rate of fifty seven and two
tenths percent also forty four
percent of New Mexico residents
were enrolled in Medicaid and I
also want to point madam chair
members of the committee that it
in my research on and I began my
research a few years ago I just
to see.
How the topic nationally with
universal basic income how that
would.
It and I got overwhelmed madam
chair with the reserves amount
of research
pointing to more and more the
nation loan towards and states
move towards instituting a basic
income and so it seemed on
timely that during this
particular time madam chair of
are experiencing
and hopefully for the next.
Ten years or more will continue
to experience our increase in
revenue base I thought it would
be appropriate for our to
departments and others
especially our Oregon community
communities are organizing
around the state and have been
organizing to find ways to lift
our populations out of poverty I
thought it important for us to
begin to really solidify the
research data the studies and
put in place what's important I
want to quote just a few things
madam chair
in my research I I actually
we're not really close to the
beach or statements that have
been thrown out cash is the best
thing you can do to improve
health outcomes education
outcomes and let people out of
poverty and I may madam chair I
in my research I uncovered
something that I had was not
aware of and that is in nineteen
sixty seven.
Martin Luther king junior in a
speech he gave said those the
lowest economic level the poor
white and Negro the aged and
chronically ill are
traditionally unorganized and
therefore have little ability to
force the necessary growth in
their income they stagnate or
become even poorer in relation
to the larger society he went on
to say he is now if he was
convinced that the a guaranteed
income in nineteen sixty seven
this is what he said he made the
statement that he was convinced
that guaranteed basic income
what actually be the most
substantive.
Policy.
And action that we could take
and addressing.
communities out of poverty and
into cycles of of opportunity so
With that madam chair I would
I would stand for questions.
Okay we will go to a poll.
Please indicate if you're in
favor or in opposition to this
memorial.
We'll give you a few more
seconds.
Okay it looks like we have six
out of six are in favor with no
opposed and so what I'll go to
the public for comments but hold
on a second it did it if there's
anyone who is opposed please
raise your hand.
I'm not seeing anybody anyone
in.
In favor of this bill who would
like to speak okay I'm we will
go to Barbara Webber.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and to the bill's
sponsor I think there's one
important point to be made last
year we at the federal level
expanded the child credit
So that for one year we had
thirty percent of people working
families and children in New
Mexico were lifted out of
poverty think about that for one
year we lifted thirty thousand
we've that we listed thirty
percent of our population out of
poverty then we didn't extend
so we dropped them back into the
property they were so I think it
just shows that poverty is a
social policy and not an
economic issue thank you.
Thank you next we have Karen
Witt lock.
Excuse me madam chair members of
the committee we stand Care but
like with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter we stand in
strong support of this memorial
this basic income for those with
note low and no income has been
very successful in other states
where it's been implemented
people use this additional
income to pay their basic
obligations many people have
reported that having this
additional income to pay miss
pay for necessities has reduce
their stress levels
significantly and has increased
their quality of life as always
thanks to the sponsor for your
continuing support for all New
Mexicans.
Thank you next we have Paul
Gibson.
Thank you madam chair.
Committee members mentors or
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy I think that given the
failure of the federal
government to extend the low
income family tax credit points
to the critical importance of
doing something like this in New
Mexico it's increasingly upon
the states to do with this
federal government can do and I
would just point to last session
and furious debate about the low
rate of predatory lending our
act we're we're trying to reduce
the the limit cap cap limited
thirty six percent these are
desperate people out here return
to the these predators because
they don't make enough money and
this would be a systemic way to
address it and be far superior
to capping rates all of that
would be good as well but I
strongly support this.
Thank you all
being no more hands we will go
to the committee and I see
Representative Anderson has his
handout I'm not sure if that's
not from before when we didn't
hear from him Representative
Anderson are you on.
Okay I'm gonna lower his hand
and is there anyone else on the
committee who has questions or
wants to speak.
Okay seeing none I am open to a
motion.
Madam chair I'm not certain
whether we still have a quorum
and give me a moment to count
yes.
I believe Representative that
was.
Going to.
I'm.
Joining us I've been texting
with her.
Let me.
Okay we just gained a couple
you're at the counter.
So are we okay now.
And I'm sorry we are still.
Okay and.
So we're missing Representative
Anders Representative.
Representative Matthews
Representative Ferrary are you
on.
Yes madam chair okay.
That.
Thank you for that clarification
I also have a very small
relative to.
We're not muted if you could
please you.
Okay.
Representative Matthews is
joined.
I believe that gets a score okay
all right so I'm Representative
Representative Anderson are you
there for question.
Okay seeing no questions I'm
open for a
Motion.
To pass do I have a second.
Second okay I'm sorry
Representative Ferrary you know
you're you're double or triple
booking so Emily if you could go
ahead and called.
Call the roll.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson are you
there.
Yes yes.
Representative Armstrong is not
present she's has technical
difficulties thank you
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative more.
Representative more and more.
And Representative Matthews.
What we what are my voting on
the right hand and left.
Representative Madam.
Of house memorial twenty two.
Representative Matthews are you
speaking your muted.
That's.
You're on mute Matthews.
Right
can you just tell me what the
thank the title is that what's
the subject matter of the but
I'm going on.
It's a basic low income.
A basic income for low income
people out okay yes yes you said
I'm sorry I just remember the
number I vote yes.
Representative one twenty at one
Representative about us.
More president and vice chair is
not present madam chair yes.
Thank you thank.
Europe yes okay we
were coming out thank you and
you have a two passed we are
down to our last agenda item
which is and I'm sorry
Representative Matthews by told
you the wrong number before I
know I'm is that house memorial
fifteen so I know you haven't
experts named Laura Keller and
now.
Emily if you could promote Laura
Keller.
Mr Heller has been.
Thank you Emily go ahead
Representative Matthews.
Thank you.
Thank you
Madam chair and members of the
committee
this is a memorial relating
which is
proposed by and backed by the
restaurant association and in
response to trying to improve
the health of our children
and essentially what it does is
encourage restaurants to offer
nine sure very.
Thanks would can email meals and
substituting healthy drinks that
would accompany the the child
meals
instead of having of so it is or
other kinds of things that add
to the problems of obesity and
diabetes and so forth and with
that I would defer to miss
Keller to.
By a little bit more
statistical and information
thank you.
Madam chair committee on behalf
of the over eight hundred and
forty thousand people impacted
by diabetes and pre diabetes in
New Mexico the American diabetes
association would like to thank
you and our sponsor
Representative Matthews for this
important memorial my name is R.
Keller I do represent the
American diabetes association
this memorial will help to
reduce obesity and diabetes for
the help the future of New
Mexico thirty two percent of
teens in New Mexico were
overweight in twenty eighteen to
and due to the pandemic those
rates are rising Mexico has the
highest rate of teens with
overweight and obesity in
America encouraging healthy
drinks to children through
restaurants is critical in
fighting obesity and diabetes we
know that twelve point three
percent of the population is
impacted by diabetes.
We also know that sugary drink
consumption has serious health
consequences including wanted to
cans of sugary drink a day just
wanted to can increase their
chances of developing type two
diabetes in their lifetime by
twenty six percent so the
American diabetes association is
excited to support this
initiative is an important
public health initiative we're
excited to work with The New
Mexico restaurant association
American heart association The
New Mexico childcare education
association the Moscow Larroca
Apache tribe through our New
Mexico diabetes prevention
coalition to improve the lives
of people with diabetes and
particularly kids so we know
that if we make that the fall
average encourage restaurants to
do that a healthy option like
water juice milk that parents
and families and kids are more
likely to choose that and if we
can help promote that that will
make a significant impact in the
lives of our kids and preventing
diabetes and obesity in the
future.
I thank you for and urge you to
support this house bill House
memorial number fifteen.
Thank you Representative
Matthews did you have anything
else before we go to comment I'm
no
Yes I'm just checking my mute
button sorry.
Of no I think I think that or
did a great job presenting it
and I hope that we will have
your support thank you we will
go with the poll now.
So please vote in favor or in
opposition.
Okay
it looks like seven in favor or
eighty eight percent and one
opposed so we will go to the
public for comment so if you are
in opposition and would like to
I'm.
I would like to use that speak
please raise your hand.
Okay I don't see anyone in
opposition in support please
raise your hand.
Okay we will go with my hash the
task go ahead match.
Madam chair.
Can you hear me I'm sorry to.
We can get back to Iraq.
And madam chair members of the
committee just let you know that
was a keep dropping I'm sorry.
Okay
I'm I'm sorry yes Representative
turned office we're we're we're
all experiencing some
difficulties I maybe it's
telling us it's Friday go home
but go ahead my hash.
You madam chair a and and
members of the committee and you
know my name is my highest seed
with the American heart
association this this this is an
important policy for us and we
we think the sponsor for
bringing this up.
I think every child deserves to
grow up healthy which means
promoting healthy drinks like
water or plain milk freshly
squeezed juice on average kids
read more than thirty gallons of
sugary drinks per year that's
enough to fill a bat.
You know consuming sugary drinks
sets up children for a lifetime
of health challenges like type
two diabetes to the K. R.
disease so this memorial like
you know promotes L. B. a
lifestyle for kids and you know
most of the you know national
chains and also for this policy
and you know that this is not
you know the Big Brother telling
you know the parents how to
raise their kids I mean this is
just an option for them and if
they still deserve to you know
You know ask for top ranked
restaurants with their kids they
they can certainly do it and we
understand this is a memorial
and I guess moving forward would
like to work with sponsors.
On on some kind of a legislation
that would mandate you know this
for all restaurants and school
thank you madam chair and we
think the Sanchez again.
Thank you I'm Allison Smith.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm the
registered lobbyist with The New
Mexico restaurant association
when I think Representative
Matthews for bringing this
forward and we're proud to
partner with the diabetes
association on this important
initiative we do feel this
memorial will go a long way
towards helping us educate our
restaurants in the state on a
healthy options for young
children so thank you so much
for your time and thank you for
your support.
Thank you Allison I'm and I
promise someday I'm gonna learn
how to say this name.
Did did yes chair of I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
Yes you my name correctly it's
to be assured of dear madam
chair a good morning madam chair
members of the committee as I
said my name is to be a ship
with New Mexico voices for
children in support of house
memorial fifteen in New Mexico
the rate of overweight and obese
children exceeds the national
rate with higher rates for our
state's children of color it's
important that all children have
access to healthy beverage
options to improve their overall
health and well being we thank
the sponsors for the time and
commitment to this issue and we
stand in support of house
memorial fifteen thank you.
Thank you and that's that's all
the comments I see from the
public so we will go back to to
the committee and representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I can't
show my video because I'm having
major technical difficulties and
a popping on and off of the
zoom.
thank you for your presentation
and and I just
want to ask.
Really just a couple of
questions
I I personally believe that it's
up to parents to be making this
choice and so when they're given
I don't know a restaurant that
doesn't offer water first of all
as an option and so we're
apparently parents must not be
making healthy choices so how do
we
improve parental guidance and
education instead of.
It was stated earlier in public
comment mandating restaurants to
do this thank you madam chair.
With that chairs permission may
I address that question please
great more calories American
ninety's Association so what
this does and in working with
the New Mexico restaurant
association is it is a choice
for restaurants it's encouraging
it's an education program so
that they learn as restaurants
why it's also important that
kids make these healthy choices
and we prevent diabetes but it's
not a mandate the way the
memorial is written on that and
the reason why we want to have
them and encourage them to pull
water or milk or juice as the
default as their traditional
first option is that most kids
and families will just
automatically select that and
they're very happy with it but
it does give families the
absolute ability to make the
choice and get this so that if
they would like to there's
nothing prohibiting them from
doing that in our campaign and
we're excited to work with The
New Mexico restaurant
association to educate people as
well as the diabetes prevention
program in the state to just
educate the community about
making healthy choices that's a
big part of this but this is not
in anyway in the end date the
way it is written but it's a
great first step in that public
education process.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you this Keller for that I I
just really believe I know it's
just a memorial.
And people say that all the time
it's just a memorial but I've
seen so many memorials turned
into legislation that mandates
and so I I have issues of course
we want to educate parents and I
think we we do a fairly good job
of that through HST and other
entities across the state that
are that home visiting the
school system and so
I'm I'm a little concerned that
I I realize it's not a mandate
right now but
as you all heard in at.
That's the way this some of the
people would like it to go is to
be a mandate and I do know there
was legislation or it may be a
city ordinance trying to be
passed here in this the Santa Fe
to our taxes sugary drinks and
so on and so forth so I just I
think most people understand
that water is a.
An option and
Anyway thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Anderson.
Madam chair this is
Representative Anderson I
believe Representative Armstrong
continues to have technical
difficulties.
I
think that the this is just one
of those days so here we I'm
ready to make a motion when
you're ready to take one okay
I'm ready.
I move to pass okay to have a
second.
A second okay Representative
boom.
Emily will you call the roll.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Is not present.
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative Montoya is more.
Representative drive.
He's also been having connection
issues so.
One moment.
Madam chair would you like me to
continue to wait Representative.
Also ahead okay.
Madam vice chair is not present
madam chair yes.
Thank you.
Thanks.
One.
OK Representative Matthews do
you have a do pass on house
memorial fifteen and that
concludes our agenda for today I
have to apologize to our members
and the committee and I mean and
and the public there were
definitely tech issues going on
today I'm not Friday the
thirteenth I don't know what's
going on but thank you all for
being patient and thank you
members four for hanging in
there and we'll see you on
Monday at eight thirty thank you
we are in recess.
