Representative N Chavez here.
Representative Ferrari.
Present. Representative Jones.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez
here.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
I'm here. You have a corn. OK.
Thank you. Um, so, um, the
sponsor for 589 is not here yet,
so we will go to 166, um.
Senate Bill 166.
Oh
He's not here either. Um
And we started la OK.
Senator Hickey, you're the first
one.
Are you ready?
Or we could just call it off for
the day.
Yeah, we can roll it till next
Monday.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
I am subbing for senator
Steinborn, and I really want to
make that point because
Uh, he, he has been the heavy
lifter on this all the way
through.
And this started uh
It was a memorial and well
actually a couple of years ago,
I put it, uh, when we had grow
money, I put some into the
university to study psilocybin
as it began to get a lot more
press on its effectiveness and
in multiple conditions where no
other where where other drugs
were otherwise failing and uh
that's PTSD, uh, refractive
depression, uh, end of life.
And
now, addiction.
And uh interesting the, uh, I
got to go home on Saturday and
Sunday night, my wife and I
watched the movie Fantastic
Fungi, um, which was on Netflix,
which talks about how fungi is
kind of mycelium is all over the
world, but has this incredible
properties that builds networks
even more complicated than the
brain among themselves.
And
much as penicillin, which is a
fungi, which blew in on a petri
dish through a window in a
researcher's lab full of um
pneumococcal pneumonia and the
space started to open up, and
that really brought forth the
idea that psilocybin, uh, or not
so I been but uh fungi
definitely take care of
themselves and have these
anti-inflammatory properties,
but we also
Finding because of their ability
to
Uh, grow in multiple networks,
uh, become involved in the human
brain through uh neuroplasticity
and in that it has an impact on
these conditions that we can't
fully explain yet, but it
literally rewires the brain, and
what we're trying to do with
this bill and these 4 conditions
that have been studied
extensively and uh Berkeley,
Johnson.
Tompkins and numerous other
places, including UNM.
is
They are applied in the clinical
setting, some people confuse it
with just an entertainment drug
and it certainly was that back
in the days of Woodstock, but,
uh, since then, the some
original research which was
moving in that direction, um,
from before, uh.
Uh, was people started to study
it again, and long story short,
when given in a clinical
setting.
In which an individual takes the
drug, it's usually in a tea or
can't be in the capsule, that is
from the mushroom, uh, the
active ingredient of psilocyin
can be distilled out into a
certain number of grams given to
an individual and then for a 4
to 5 hour journey with a guide,
with a guide who essentially has
been certified in doing this,
usually people from backgrounds
of psychology.
ology psychiatry, social work,
but have worked with this, uh,
helps the individual revisit the
issues in the past, particularly
trauma what have you, and
they're able to, instead of
fearing it and running from it
and having it overlay their
whole lives, they're able to see
it and accept it, and see that
they can live with it. It
doesn't have the harm currently
that it did at the moment of
trauma.
addiction or what have you, or
reduction of anxiety at end of
life. And they come out of it
with a whole new perspective,
again, through a lot of
rewiring. The next day is spent
in an integrative session in
which people usually do this in
a group, even though it's an
individual experience with a
guide and the integrative
session provides a lot of
Deep background for them to see
that others are experiencing
this, the demons that they have
don't do the harm that they have
been doing and then there's
usually another day and
sometimes a 3rd day, again with
these integrative sessions, and
after that, um, their lives are
changed and, and the other
committees in the Senate, it was
just startling to hear
individuals who'd been in Iraq
who totally traumatized, came
home, had family,
wanting to commit suicide just
depressed all the time and after
this session, um, I don't want
to call it a miracle drug, but
their whole outlook on life
changed, and so, um, we are
bringing this bill forward to
follow Oregon and Colorado and
my knowledge comes from friends
of mine who have worked with
this in Colorado, um, and in
Oregon, 9000 people have been
through these programs with
virtual.
no, no deaths and very, very few
negative side effects. And so we
want to position New Mexico
given our high ACE penetration,
and there are now studies with
14 to 18 year olds that are
showing promise, who have had
significant and
Um, so that we will establish a
board, uh, I won't go through
the details of it, but it's a
board to set down the parameters
in a primarily uses the grown
mushroom because you can't
transport thing across the
state, but it does give the
clearance, um, federally, uh,
and also through research and
through Larry Lehman, who's an
expert, um, to work with this,
the first program would not take
place with patients.
Until, uh, after January 21st,
2028. So there's a lot of time
to work this out. So we're
bringing this bill to you given
New Mexico's uh huge prevalence
of the highest in the country
alcoholic-related mortality, um,
highest consumption per capita
of alcohol.
Uh, the trauma and this is also
proved to be incredibly
effective for firemen and
policemen, a third of whom do
get PTSD, uh, through their
work. So it has such a wide
range as I have said in another
present presentations, um, this
is a, is profound a
discovery, although it's always
kind of been there as penicillin
was in applying it, and so with
that, Madam Chair, we bring you
this bill, and I stand.
for questions. OK, first we'll
go to the audience, um, on Zoom,
if you are in opposition, raise
your hand, and I'll come back to
you in the room in opposition.
OK, seeing none either place on
Zoom, if you're in support,
raise your hand and I'll take
the 1st 5 in the room and
support.
I will take 5 if you want to
speak. It's not necessary, but
if you would like to speak,
please come to the mic.
Honorable representatives, thank
you so much. My name is Amy Wong
Hope and I'm a clinical social
worker and educator in the
psychedelic therapy space.
I am asking for your support of
the medical psilocybin Act
because I believe it is a safe
responsible implementation of
psychedelic assisted therapy for
New Mexicans who are suffering
from these diagnoses.
As a clinical social worker, I
see, and I'm, I am a trauma
expert. I see that it takes a
minimum of 3 to 5 years to heal
most people from severe trauma
cases usually longer than that
if they're lucky, and that's
with very dedicated clients that
come every single week in a very
well trained um psychotherapist,
um, because psilocybin has the
opportunity to, um, really
change the neuroplasty and the
learning within the brains of
these folks and they're.
default mode network, which is
their brain structures are stuck
in these diagnosis causing them
to suffer from the loops in the
in the symptomology that they
experience depression, PTSD
symptoms and inability to really
um
leaders with their, um, in their
families and communities. Thank
you so much.
Morning. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak. My name is
Sherry Burns. I'm an end of life
doula here in Santa Fe. I have a
private practice where I provide
all of my services pro bono. I
also volunteer at Scott's House
Community Hospice, and I
volunteer with End of Life
Options New Mexico or I also
serve on the board of directors.
I'm really happy today to be
able to say that the board met
this last week and we
wholeheartedly, um, endorse this
bill.
A lot of the conversation this
morning has been about PTSD and
I'd like to take just a moment
to talk about um terminal
agitation. I see a lot of it.
I've been practicing in Santa Fe
since 2021 and have had the
privilege of serving over 40
clients, um, in the Santa Fe
area.
Many, many of them suffer from
um terminal agitation and to
just give you a sense of what
that's like, and if any of you
have um lost loved ones
recently, I apologize if my
testimony is triggering, um, but
I've had clients, I've had a
couple of clients who during
this terminal agitation stage
actually became somewhat
violent.
They struck out at family
members, they struck out at
their caregivers. They didn't
mean to, they were just so
agitated that this is how they
acted out. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Denali
Wilson. I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU and the ACLU stands in
strong support of SB 219 as the
sponsor of the bill outlined,
psilocybin has demonstrated
significant therapeutic
potentials for treating a range
of mental health conditions,
including depression, PTSD and
substance use disorder, along
with end of life, um, grief as,
as the previous speaker
mentioned, research from leading
institutions has shown that
psilocybin assisted treatment
can provide long-term.
relief for individuals who have
not responded to conventional
conventional treatments,
offering hope to many who
struggle with severe treatment
resistant conditions by creating
a structured, regulated program
for psilocybin treatment. This
bill ensures that patients in
New Mexico can safely and
legally access the miraculous
benefits under medical
supervision. Thank you so much.
esteemed chair people. My name
is Victoria Satanovich. I'm a
lawyer here in Santa Fe, and I'm
here in my personal capacity as
a lawyer and a human being that
is alive today because of access
to psychedelic medicine therapy.
I started out my career as a
narcotics prosecutor. I believed
every negative stereotype about
those who used substances and
believed that I could grin and
bear it through anything that
happened to me.
I was in an accident. I lost my
mobility. It took me 5 years to
be able to stand before you
today. I nearly lost my law
practice, my career, my
marriage, and my life at the age
of 29 because of psychedelic
assisted therapy. I was able to
rebuild a career, the ability to
walk, the ability to stand here
and speak to you today. After my
experiences, I came to
understand that I was wrong
about psychedelic.
Assisted therapy. I was wrong
about psychedelics and I was
wrong about drug policy in
America. I'm proud to be wrong,
and today I'm an attorney
specializing in psychedelic
medicine, who is proud to
endorse this bill.
My name is Molly Forgard. I was
staff here at the house for 3
years and I've had treatment
resistant depression my entire
life. I started seeing a
psychiatrist in 2nd grade. By
the time I was in college, my
psychiatrist had run out of
medications for me to try and
started having me try more
intrusive and invasive
treatments, including
electroconvulsive therapy,
ketamine and transcranial
magnetic stimulation, which
still barely helped. I was on
and off suicidal for many years,
but then last year.
when I was 30, my psychiatrist
had me try psilocybin assisted
therapy. My depression is now
completely cured and my life has
been saved, so I ask you to
please support this bill. Thank
you. Thank you all. Um, next we
will go to Zoom. I have
Catherine Warnock.
Catherine, please unmute
yourself.
Go ahead, Catherine.
OK, Catherine, I don't know if
it's on your end or our end, but
I'm gonna skip you and I'll come
back to you. So, Madam Chair,
Debbie Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I'm here
today as um chairman of the uh
chairwoman of the board of New
Mexico, uh, end of life options
New Mexico, um, and we have
endorsed this bill. Um, I won't
repeat all of the uh testimony
that you heard from, um, from my
um from my colleague, um, on the
board, uh, about terminal
agitation, but I also wanted to
let you know that
Um, having worked on, um, the
medical cannabis program for,
uh, for many years, um, uh,
what's that legislation and
improving that, this is
different. This is not something
you're gonna get a, a
recommendation for and go to the
local retail, um, to get and,
uh, and try and figure out the
right dosage for you. This is
supervised um with a, um, with
a, a trained clinician, someone
who the advisory board
has um
As uh uh certified and that's,
that's will be the work of this
advisory board is to make sure
uh what is required of the
practitioner as well as um what
kind of diagnoses are
appropriate for um for this
therapy. Um, you've heard great
testimony on how effective it
is. Um, and we see um uh need in
the end of life, um, a
population as well, um, and as
board, we've talked to um other
states and other, and
practitioners um who have
thanks, um, we have Leanne.
Dear Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Leanne
Meadows. As a survivor of
generational trauma, I was first
suicidal at age 9.
I have struggled most of my life
with complex PTSD and repetitive
intrusive thoughts, such as he's
going to kill me.
The current options for
pharmaceutical management for
mental health often take a long
time to work, have many side
effects, and did nothing to heal
my trauma.
I chose to live in a substandard
state rather than experience the
side effects of emotional
numbness, double vision, and
sexual dysfunction.
Conversely, treatment with
psilocybin in conjunction with
therapy, freed me from those
intrusive thoughts, and I now
enjoy a much higher quality of
life.
I urge you to support Senate
Bill 219, so New Mexicans have
an additional options for mental
health treatment.
Thank you. Thank you, Leanne.
Nick, we'll go to Chris.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee.
I appreciate you listening to me
speak. I'm a Marine Corps
veteran who served in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and I found a lot
of healing through the use of
psychedelics.
And my story is not unique.
There are thousands of veterans
and first responders who have
been able to find that same
healing through, um, psychedelic
assisted therapy, but um,
It's not limited to that. People
from all walks of life can
benefit from these medicines.
People from all walks of life
are struggling with depression
and post-traumatic stress. I
urge you to please support
Senate Bill 219.
Thank you, Chris, and Randy's
iPhone. Thank you, madam chair,
members of the committee. My
name is James Brown, and I am a
registered pharmacist, I am a
Former military uh combat
veteran.
That served in the war, uh,
My, my big thing about this is
that we support veterans, we
support New Mexicans. This is a
way to have.
Not alternative medication more
holistic medications. We need
things to
Open up in New Mexico, um, this
will allow us to research this
for the next 2 years. I'm
heavily in support of this. I'm
asking this committee to support
this bill as well. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you. Do you have any wrap
up? Are you ready for um
questions?
that can make a brief statement,
madam chair, real brief.
So
As you've heard, Madam Chair,
uh, psilocybin medicine can be
very effective for a variety of
traditions. The more you talk
about it, the more people you
learn that have been literally
had their lives changed, uh, by
this. The state of Oregon, I
think it's important to note,
has a program they, that's been
in effect a few years. They've
had uh over 9000 patients with a
90 8.9% safety record. Um, so
it's incredibly safe. There
haven't been any thank God fatal
adverse experiences. I mean,
it can be intense medicine, um,
and that, that can be the
prescription for the situation
of trauma or whatever uh
diagnosis that they're dealing
with. But, um, and they find
that it has longer standing
effects. So it's, um, you know,
that people are, are doing much
better, 6 months later, longer
term. So that's been amazing,
and, uh, you know, I'm doing
this, Madam Chair, just because
I think if we have
A medicine that can help so many
people struggling with so many
serious
Life threatening sometimes
behavioral health conditions. We
owe it to them to give them this
option. And so, I hope that we
do with that, Madam Chair, I
know the Department of Health is
here who we developed this with,
um, very carefully and uh they
can answer any questions about
the rule-making process and how
this would work, but of course
this program wouldn't start
until December 31st, 2027. So
this will go through a very
methodical, slow, thoughtful
rulemaking process on everything
from dosage to qualified.
producers, providers.
Um, patient setting, etc.
Without stand for questions.
Thank you. OK, committee
questions, representative Senna
Cortez.
Martinez Jones.
And Chavez, E Chavez.
Anybody on this side?
OK. So we will start with
Representative Senator Cortez.
lovely green blazer.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, um, I have several
questions. Um, my first question
is, so who's growing psilocybin
and wear for this particular
program.
So ma'am representative,
great question. In this program,
in this bill.
The Department of Health would
be the one to determine
qualified producers of this
medicine.
And so they would go through a
rulemaking process of basically
licensing producers, and then
also um determining the correct
dosage. So I think it will be an
interestingly enough, because
it's a Schedule one outside of
New Mexico if we pass this, this
will be grown in New Mexico.
This will not be coming in from
outside of New Mexico because of
the legal ramifications of other
states, um, so this will be
produced in New Mexico, but it
will be under very managed
supervised license circumstances
as
We want it to be to ensure the
quality.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator. So can psilocybin be
sold across state lines. No,
Madam Chair, that would be
illegal, and, uh,
representative, yeah, that would
fall outside of the bounds of
this and, and, and that is legal
and would remain legal.
So Madam Chair, Senator, if
someone took their prescription
psilocybin across state lines,
and they were found with it.
What would be the implications.
Yeah, I'm sure that is an
excellent question, and I'm
gonna phone a friend on that one
because that's kind of
interesting. It's kind of
covered that with can see here.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and thank you to
the sponsors. Um, because of the
way this would be administered.
Oh, I'm sorry. Thank you, Madam
Chair. My apologies. I'm Doctor
Dominic Serlo from the
Department of Health. And
because this medication would be
administered within clinics,
that sort of a situation would
not be one that would arise
because individual patients
wouldn't be having it, to be
able to transport it across
borders.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and expert. So my next
question is, what products
containing psilocybin are out in
the market that will be exempted
from this particular act.
I'm sorry. Thank you, ma'am
Chair, uh, representative, there
are really no products out on
the market that would be exempt
from this act. However, this
bill has an exemption for FDA
approved products once they are
approved. There currently are no
FDA approved products. There
are, there is one that's kind of
a mid-stage clinical trials, um,
but we exempt that from this
act.
So this act deals with primarily
what they consider the whole
mushroom, which is the natural
mushroom product. This is the
definition of psilocybin in this
bill speaks to the natural
occurring compound that exists
in a variety of mushrooms. Um,
it excludes what they call
synthetics and things like that
and FDA products because then
you get into a realm of
And a manufactured, uh,
derivative type of products and
really that's not the state's
expertise, and when it comes to
the FDA, that is their expertise
for doing extensive trials, and
we don't believe that we're, uh,
it's appropriate for us to be
regulating those products or
You know, all the factors of
production, etc.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
and expert. So do producers and
clinicians have different
federal rules to abide by as
compared to new state laws.
And if so, which one is more
stringent. And just a reminder,
don't ever touch the mic if it's
on
It gets very angry, Madam Chair
representative, that was really
for me
I do it all the time.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, and I'll try
not to touch the mic at it at
all anymore.
Um,
but yeah, and I won't make eye
contact with the mic either. Um.
Just in case. Um, but
representative, so currently,
um, the, the FDA, any psilocybin
product, according to the FDA
currently is on schedule one.
And so this bill would only
allow forests to use natural or
whole mushroom products here in
New Mexico on it. The synthetic
products, some of which are
actually going through FDA
trials right now would actually
not be included in this bill,
unless the FDA approved it, and
then the FDA regulations
would actually follow for any of
those products. But the FDA does
not have any regulations with
regard to the whole or natural
mushroom, and so we would
actually be developing those
particular restrictions,
regulations, and ensuring that
they're used in the safest and
most efficacious manner.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. So
what are the metrics for the
effectiveness and success for
this.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's a part of what we're
going to be developing as we go
through the rulemaking process,
but the biggest metric on it we
can really see is something that
has happened in Oregon. And I
believe Senator Hickey actually
mentioned this earlier, with the
9000 patients that have gone
through the program without
having any serious side effects
and have had increases in their
ability to live their lives in a
uh an improved their quality of
life. And that really
our biggest aspect of this. And
what we want to ensure
everything is done in a safe,
regulated manner to help improve
the quality of lives of some of
those individuals who need it
the most, especially our
veterans, people at end of life,
substance use disorder and
experiencing depression.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator and expert. So will the
committee be receiving an annual
report on this?
Madam Chair and Representative,
there will be reports that we do
on a regular basis in order to
ensure that the, the program is
succeeding, and we definitely
will be able to provide that to,
uh, the legislature, if this
bill passes.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and expert, so
you mentioned that DOH was here.
Do you think that they would be
exposed to any type of liability
with this program.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, at this point in time, as
far as from a liability, that
liability would actually fall on
the providers because that it
will be part of their practice.
So this would not fall onto the
Department of Health.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
and expert. I know that we all
know that there's a severe
shortage for mental health
professionals in New Mexico. Um,
I know you talked about some
research conducted in this. Has
there been extensive peer
reviewed studies about the long
term mental health impacts of
psilocybin use in people.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, that was a part of uh some
of that research has been done,
and we do have that as a part of
the white paper that was
presented after Senate Memorial
12 from last year. And so we are
able to provide some of that.
But the long-term effects that
we have seen so far has been an
improved, uh, improvement in the
condition for many of the
patients, including
The patients just don't being
able to continue their lives,
and several of the witness
witnesses today have actually
expressed.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and expert. Um, do you
have a medical doctor that could
explain why it wouldn't compound
mental health problems in the
patient long term, and I don't
want to have any jerk reaction
to this. It's a, it's a new
phenomenon for me, so I'm
working really hard to
understand Madam Chair, Senator
and expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, um, I
myself have not conducted these
studies per se, uh, but I, uh,
don't personally know, but I
know of and have read a lot of
the literature, um, the, the
research, uh, was originally
back in the 50s conducted by a
physicians from Harvard, um,
then, uh, when things kind of
went underground with
The reaction to Woodstock and
what have you, and there wasn't
much research, uh, Johns
Hopkins, uh, began to review
some of that work and uh
basically those are
psychiatrists, physicians who've
been working on it and doing the
studies and doing them in a uh
very scientific manner.
Madam Chair, I represent, I do
wanna add though, because it's a
really good question. There are
contraindications, there are
conditions in which are known
through these programs through
the research that has been done,
that you do not want to
administer um psilocybin to
people that are on certain
medication, have certain
conditions. So there are
contraindications that are
known.
And
You, you, you know, that safety
will be in, in an important
feature of our program.
Putting safety first. So thank
you so much for saying that,
Madam Chair, Senator, and
expert, and that's what I was
reading this morning is that
when it mixed with with other
type of prescription medications
that could have some really
adverse impacts. Um, so you've
talked to me about the benefits
of psilocybin, can you share
with me, Madam Chair, Senator,
and expert, what are some of the
adverse risks of taking it.
Because there are those.
Um, there are very, very few
risks. That's what's, uh,
Remarkable about this drug, uh,
the risk may be in, in 5% plus
or minus, uh, there is no
impact, and it's just not having
an impact in the way of, of
reducing the, uh, the, the
trauma and the repeated the
trauma in the mind. Um, there
can be some nausea, vomiting
while taking uh the medication.
But again, the
that it's being administered,
you do have a certified guide
who is usually from a behavioral
health background there with the
individual and sometimes during
the journey, um, some very
uncomfortable places that that
led to the negativity in the
mind get revisited, but again,
there is an individual there to
help them through.
And
I was just gonna add madam chair
representative because that's
another important question as
well. Um, you, I, I would go
back and look at what happened
in Oregon with the 9000
patients, and they had, I think,
11 adverse events. So, and no
one died from it, thank God,
right? It was not been ever
overdosed in a clinical setting.
So, uh, you know, it's a, it's a
medicine of the mind in a way
that has physical manifestations
and I'm um sure it can be
intense and people, some very,
very small amount of people
could need extra.
said the escalation or whatever
from the experience, um, but by
and large, the outcome is very,
very safe outside of the short
term.
Physical feelings you may be
having while you're taking it.
So, thank you so much for that
response, Madam Chair, senator,
and experts, and thank you for
indulging me in my questions. I,
I'm working really hard to
understand this. Um, so, Madam
Chair, Senator, and expert, so
the very small percentage that
had an adverse impact. What I
read this morning, it was like
fear and agitation and confusion
and delirium and psychosis and
syndromes resembling
schizophrenia and side effects
like vomiting and nausea and
severe agitation.
hallucinations. So Madam Chair,
senator and expert, is that what
percentage of people would have
that type of adverse impact.
Madam, that sounded like a
pharmaceutical ad.
Yeah
Point made.
It's, it's a, yeah, in terms of
percentage, we know that
percentages I quoted from Oregon
and perhaps Senator Doctor
Hickey knows more.
Rare.
And Madam Chair, Senator, and
expert with the patients be
notified of potential adverse
effects like these before taking
it.
Yes.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and experts. And so we
all know that there's different
tensions between the federal
government and states that
contradict federal law, right?
So Madam Chair, senator and
expert, are you worried about
legalizing a federally scheduled
narcotic for medical use would
put federal funding in jeopardy
like for Medicaid or Medicare.
Ma'am, Chair representative,
good question. No, no, because
the, the schedule, the federal
substance abuse Act or whatever
allows, doesn't have complete
primacy. It allows states to
adjust their schedules, which
which mimic the federal
schedules. Um, we have Oregon in
this case, it started a program,
there's been no federal
intervention. Same is now true
in Colorado. So, we kind of went
through this a little bit with
cannabis and, and I think
We're gonna be fine.
Based upon other experiences
based upon federal law.
OK, Madam Cher, 2 more questions
and I promise I'm ending Madam
Chair, Senator, and expert, how
many psilocybin treatments does
a person require within one
year's time.
Uh,
Madam Chair and Senator very
often a single.
Treatment, single day.
Um, this is not like in a pill
form where you go to the
pharmacy and get it and do it
over and over again, uh, the
probably the most promising
standard is to do a call it a
retreat if you like, where you
have these integrated days in
between where you're having 2 to
3 um times and, and then it's
done. It's, um, some people may
go back after some years, um,
perhaps, but essentially it's,
it's.
say a one and done.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and expert, um, two
components to my last question
is, is that if it's not covered
by insurance, will patients be
required to pay out of pocket
and then the second component is
what treatment guidelines would
be used.
Uh, Madam Chair, well, on the
first question, you're right,
it's not covered by insurance or
Medicaid, and so when these
treatments come online, people
would have to pay for them out
of pocket.
I think a cool thing we've done
in this law, that if we pass
this, we'll have to fund as
we've created an equity fund to
be able to provide a fund where
qualified patients who can't
afford this treatment could get
it still from a qualified
provider and it would be
determined by the Department of
Health as funds are available.
So, I think at some point in
time, especially with FDA
products possibly coming online.
I think the feeling is at some
point it probably will be
covered by insurance or, you
know, Medicaid or whatever, uh,
it just depends what form.
it is, uh, maybe the synthetics
that are first, but that's the
situation on that. And as far as
prescribed treatment protocol.
Dosage, all of those things are
determined by the Department of
Health and rulemaking, and that
is all in the bill that the
department would determine
dosage and
All the kind of medical
protocols, Madam Chair Senator
expert, where does that money
come from that you just talked
about?
Uh, ma'am chair, all of the
money would come from
Well, the money to run the
program for the Department of
Health would come from the state
of New Mexico. This is a state
of New Mexico program through
the Department of Health that we
are standing up and the money is
in the budget right now to do
so, to start this program for
next year.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Senator, and experts at that
concludes my marks.
Excuse me, uh, thank you, we
have minority whip.
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I
think this is a, a another great
idea.
The, the details.
I have questions on.
Uh, first of all, why is this
not going through UNM instead of
When a government agency, UNM is
a.
Teaching and research hospital.
It seems like this would be the
perfect fit for them.
Uh, if I may, Madam Chair, and
Senator, uh, the Department of
Health is pulling together.
Many different uh experts or
people who have experience with
this from different walks of
life, some of the VA clinician,
what have you. The University of
New Mexico is one of the
national leaders in researching
the use of this drug and the
University of New Mexico will be
doing some research based upon
what is set up through uh the
council, uh, that's being
developed. So they will be very
involved, and again, um, we're
We're fortunate that it in kind
of a brown break groundbreaking
area, UNM is one of the leading
researchers and some they will
be involved.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
I think they would be the
perfect fit, especially because
of their
Uh, partnership with the VA
hospital. Um, uh, uh, I wanna go
to page 7.
Uh, another advisory board.
This one has 9 members.
Um
Member of the Indian nation.
Uh, mental or behavioral health
equity advocate, can you tell me
what that what that is.
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, yeah, that is
just a person who ensures that
Uh, these treatments are kind of
equitably distributed and maybe
looking at the data of where
treatments were distributed and
who's the income level. It's
just somebody who is being
mindful about making sure that
it is equitably this opportunity
is adequate adequate equitably
available to New Mexicans.
OK, and then a veteran of the
United States Armed Forces, and
that leaves 6 other members
were.
Or those other 6 members coming
from the Department of Health?
Well, Madam Chair, Senator or
representative, they're all,
they're all appointed by the
Secretary of Health, the
Secretary of Health is the one
that gets to make these
appointments.
In the last committee in the
Senate, we did also add a
behavioral health provider to
this list of um advisory
committee members. And then, of
course, the first criterion is
they all have to be
knowledgeable about medical use
of psilocybin.
And then meet one of these other
criteria. But yeah, they'll all
be recommended by uh
The Department of Health.
In Mount Cher.
Senator, and there's a $2
million appropriation on this.
Well, Madam Chair, it started
off with a $2 million
appropriation in uh, in House
Bill 2. Then when it, you know,
we worked on it in the Senate,
it became a $1.5 million dollar
appropriation with a half a
million going to UNM for
research because that's gonna be
super important in developing
the rulemaking and, and
continuing research on
modalities and things like that.
Uh, we're still waiting to see
what the final number is,
frankly, for the number.
going to DOH, but it's, it's
scalable. It's, we would like
1.5, I mean, 1 would get us
there, although that would be
kind of a shoe strap, but the,
the program doesn't start until
December 31st, 2027. And so,
If we don't get quite as much as
we like this year, Dominic and
the folks at DOH has said they
can.
They're gonna work with it, and
we're gonna get it going if this
is passed in the law.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, so.
The 1 million or so dedicated to
the program, aside from the.
Money going to UNM.
That's gonna pay for what?
Madam Chair and Representative,
that would pay for the staffing
for the program because we will
need to be stepping up the
rules, the regulations, doing
public hearings, making sure
that everything, all the
policies, the protocols are
actually appropriate and as safe
as possible. In addition to
that, once the program uh gets
started, there also will have to
be the process to permit the
various locations to ensure that
the clinical settings are
appropriate, that this is being
done in the appropriate.
manner to be able to do site
visits, things like that, and
that also will include the, the
growing itself of the
psilocybin. And so the, the
majority of that funding would
actually be to pay for salaries
in order to be able to
accomplish all of these things
to ensure it is a safe and
effective program.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator and Doctor So majority
of that million dollars is gonna
go to pay for salaries.
Are they, are these, um,
Staff members not on staff at
Department of Health.
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator and Doctor.
You're gonna be hiring new
people to staff this.
Madam Chair and representative,
that's correct. We would be
hiring individuals who have
expertise in the area, and who
would be able to help stand up
the program.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
and doctor, so I noticed that
you're requiring um
This advisory board to meet at
least twice a year.
I'm hoping that that's an
absolute bare minimum.
Madam Chair, and, uh,
representative, um, that is the
bare minimum, and part of the
reason why that is included is
as the program does get stood
up. We want to ensure that there
is that continual advisory board
oversight, but in the initial
stages, it will be meeting much
more often and much more
frequently. In the past, when
we've had other advisory boards
or similar projects, what we
have ended up doing is they're
often meeting, sometimes as, as
frequently as every 2 weeks or
every month,
programs are established.
Thank you and Representative, it
also says in the bill, madam
Chair, at least 2 times a year.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Center and Doctor, um.
Yeah, that's what I keyed on.
I just want to make sure that uh
Program this innovative and this
important.
It's not gonna be handled with 2
meetings.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
If this bill passes and if I
have anything to do with it, I
will make sure that that does
not occur, that the advisory
board is meeting on a regular
basis, so that we can actually
establish the appropriate uh
protocols and make sure that the
um that the program has stood
up, the way that it should be.
The biggest
goal for this is to ensure the
safety of the patients and to
make sure that this is a program
possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senators and Doctor, I, I agree
with you, um.
And uh after we meet, I'm gonna
get your cell number so I could
follow up and make sure that uh
There's more than 2 meetings a
year.
Um
My, my last question is how
many, how many patients are you
hoping to serve?
Um, in the initial clinical
trial.
Well, Madam Chair, wouldn't
necessarily call them clinical
trials.
Um, because the research is
gonna go on at UNM is, is, uh,
there will involve patients for
sure, but they're looking more
at like group settings there's a
lot of discussion right now
about is it more efficacious to
treat someone in a group setting
as opposed to an individual
setting, they're looking,
they're already funded to do
certain amounts of work. I think
they're working with veterans
right now. I think with this
funding that we're trying to get
them now, they can do some work
with PTSD and some other
conditions. I think it really is
more modality and the
efficaciousness as well.
but I just, uh, I don't know. I
think they're smaller groups. I
could be wrong. I've heard
Doctor Lehman talk about groups
of 30 people at a time, but I, I
don't, wouldn't want to quote
how many people will be involved
in that.
To
Madam Chair, Senator Senators
and Doctor.
Um, I, I mean, I understand
you're standing up the program,
that's what the bill calls for.
I'm more concerned about how
many people are gonna
be able to go through that you
have any idea.
How many people are gonna be
able to
Go through the program once it's
stood up.
Uh
Madam Chair and, and senator,
uh, we are doing this very
carefully because this is a new
To us anyway, uh, uh, approach
to these devastating conditions
as we learn more and more about
it as other states become more
and more involved in it. I
would, I believe it will become
a standardized therapy, again,
in a particular setting, I hate
to use this analogy, but it
right now with refractive
depression, we have, uh,
Uh, electroshock therapy, it's
done in a setting and so forth,
and in hospitals, not the
greatest thing in the world that
does benefit some people, but I
think we're gonna get to a point
where we organize this through
some type of formal accredited
institution and do it in such a
way that we can reach as many
people as possible. I can tell
you from a former, uh, health
plan executive point of view,
the impact.
of behavioral health.
On chronic disease, the most
expensive part of health care,
um, if we, if a number, if a
large number of these folks, and
there are large numbers. Um,
we're able to get this therapy.
Um, it would, uh, I'm just
speaking economically now, not
only would it bring relief to so
many families, reduced ACEs,
etc. etc. It would also have a
dramatic financial impact on the
cost of care because the chronic
diseases would not be there to
be exacerb.
And I'm gonna ask folks to be
briefer. We still have 2 more
bills and theoretically the
floor starts at 10:30, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
and thanks for the offer to
become a senator, but I'm
I'm happy here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
you'll be glad to know that most
of my questions have been asked
and answered. I just want to
address, um, just one aspect of
this, this initiative here and
that is the, the public per
perception.
Um, and, and I first want to
thank you for bringing this
forward, Senator's expert, um,
I think the public is concerned
that this is kind of like
marijuana, you know, and that
this is just um the precursor to
having recreational psilocybin,
uh, available, and, and so, um,
I'd like to clarify some of the
laws surrounding it, psilocybin
use right now. Currently, is it,
is it legal for an individual to
grow psilocybin mushrooms.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, currently it is
not legal. That's part of the
point behind this bill to be
able to be able to produce
psilocybin, uh, for the program
itself.
Very good. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, experts, um.
So, um,
Honestly, I've never heard of
anybody growing mushrooms. I, I
don't know that that's a thing,
but, but I, I do think it's
important, Madam Chair, uh,
senators that we did go over
that this is not something
that's used recreationally, it's
under very um strict conditions
only given maybe once, maybe
twice, and not
A daily event, not a drug that
you get in a, in a prescription
bottle that you take every day
at all. So I'm glad that we
established that.
Madam Chair, senator's expert, I
think that's all I have. Thank
you so much for bringing this
forward. I'm, I'm supportive.
You don't have to convince me of
the um how beneficial this could
be to a lot of people. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Nicole Chavis.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator and expert,
um, most of the representatives
asked the question around the
legalization and the process and
the funding, so I guess um the
only ones left are questions
based on um
So there doesn't seem to be a
lot of
Horrible side effects.
As you stated, my question is
for for PTSD or trauma or um
people that have addiction
issues, um, this seems like it
would help and it's something
that they won't have to take for
a prolonged period of time
instead of um.
Other medications. I know when
my son was murdered, um, my
doctor gave me a prescription
and said take this if you know.
Something horrible that day
happens, which happens probably.
Horrible days often. So, and,
and I didn't take any
medication. I, I didn't go to
any mental health treatment,
nothing, but I took one pill one
day. I remember and it was the
strangest feeling. I felt like I
was outside of myself, it made
me sick. I didn't like it. I
threw it away after that, never
wanted to take it again.
Um, so with this treatment help
those individuals that don't
want to take medication or I
know other um.
Victims or I should say
survivors of traumatic events
that
Feel like they need to take
those prescriptions every single
day, and I know how awful I felt
even though maybe it helped kind
of make you feel outside of
yourself. I don't know. I didn't
like the feeling, but with this
help that so that they no longer
have to take those medications.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thanks, uh, Representative as
always for sharing your story
and um.
You know, I don't, right now,
this legislation has 4
qualifying conditions, and it is
major depressive disorders,
substance abuse disorder, PTSD,
and end of life anxiety. Um, I
don't, I don't, shouldn't talk
about it as, you know, as a
secret bullet for all
conditions, this will be
something that, uh, the research
is there on and we're sticking
within the research proven
medically efficacious lanes. So
I think that's a good question.
I mean, if you deal a serious
trauma like that that can
definitely create behavioral
health conditions that can be
long lasting, often or, well,
Just depends on the person,
probably, but um, it may very
well be beneficial, but I
wouldn't want to just say yes or
no. No.
Unless Dominic sounds like he
wants to that. Madam Chair and
Representative and
Thank you and my condolences to
you. Um,
One of the things that the bill
does include is the ability as
research progresses to add
additional conditions. And so if
the research showed that those
periods of intense grief or
other circumstances that can
also trigger PTSD and severe
depression are found to also be
beneficial to be able to use
psilocybin for them. They can
actually be petitioned to the
board for recommendation as an
added condition. And the main
reason for that is so that
We can actually modify what,
what conditions are allowed
based upon the additional
research over the years.
OK. Thank you. Um.
I think those are all the
questions that I that I have.
Thank you, Representative
Eleanor Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
questions have also been
answered. I, I, one of the
questions I had was was related
to access and, and you answered
that already. I remember this um
during the interim uh
presentation was made. I think
it was when we were in Silver
City, um, incredibly impressed
by what this can do, but I also
remember there was a
conversation about, um.
People who suffered from trauma,
generational trauma.
Um, it doesn't sound like that's
in the schedule of
Um, diagnosis that, that you're,
um, that are gonna be um
considered for the first run
anyway.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Senator Chavez,
very important question, and as
I mentioned earlier, uh, the
question of ACEs in the family
as a current generation to
generation that is now being
explored in various research
settings, ages 14 to 18, as I
understand. So TBD but the logic
is there. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
all I have.
Thank you. I will entertain
emotion, Madam Chair, I'd like
to move a do pass. I'll second.
So we have a motion for a due
pass by Representative Anaya,
um, on Senate, um, committee
substitute for Senate Bill 219
as amended, and a second by
Representative Ferrari. Is there
any opposition? OK, take the
role, please.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez, yes.
Representative in Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair, yes. 8 to 1 by 8 to
1, you have a due pass.
Thank you.
And next, since I see Senator
Maestas sitting here will go to
him.
Where's the
And Senator Hickey, you are in
the house. We are not senators.
You keep saying senator.
Just to give you a hard time.
I'm sorry to insult you, Madam
Chair.
You said that just right.
Whenever you're ready, senator.
And if I call you
Representative, sorry that's
that's legit. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Did you want to allow us
to discuss the amendment as
well. It is an amendment or a
sub?
OK, so, um, so we'll get the
amendment passed out and I need
a motion to um discuss the
amendment.
Some.
In the opposition.
OK, go, go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Honorable members,
this, uh, this bill, Senate Bill
166 is deals with definitions.
And so what you have before you
is the definition sections of
two articles of law, the mental
health and Development
disabilities Act, which is 43-11
and
Not necessarily more
importantly, but, but more
discussed is the assisted
outpatient treatment Act of
43-1B1, known as uh AOT. We're,
we, we want to change these
definitions, Madam Chair, uh, to
make it more clear to, to
persons, to families, to law
enforcement as to who is
eligible for these services. We,
uh, we have a Senate Bill 3
which passed into law, which
will allocate
hundreds of millions of dollars
in behavioral health services,
but we need, we wanna, uh, we
need pa, we don't need, but we
have many, many patients for
these services. We want to make
it clear in the law as to who is
eligible. So if I could ask the
committee, Madam Chair, to look
on page 5,
on page 5.
There's two definitions, harm to
others and harm to self. Let me
do the harm to self first.
Uh, the amendment
Uh, section one of the amendment
essentially puts back into the
bill language currently, uh,
which is, uh,
You know, subparagraph and, and
then, uh, and then we have a
clear definition where it's
where it's lacks the capacity.
And we'll result in mental
debilitation, those are the
magic words we want to put into
into law and that it, that there
is a uh more likely than not,
the person will suffer serious
physical debilitation as it
relates to harm to others, Madam
Chair.
We want to, we want to deal with
facts. We don't wanna, we don't
wanna, we won't, we don't want
people to predict or go into
court arguing predictions we
want to deal with facts, so we
changed the definition of harm
to others to, uh, within the
recent past, comma,
the person has.
Uh, done this or that, and so,
uh, with that, I'm with the
general counsel for the
governor's office.
Um, Miss Holly
Agajanian, uh,
To say a few words. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives. Uh, thanks for
hearing us today.
This bill
Uh, as Senator Maestta said,
updates the language related to
harm to self and others. It
hasn't been updated in a couple
decades at least. Um, it does
not.
Take New Mexico to an extreme,
um, in terms of what other
states do, it's very much sort
of in the middle of what other
states do, uh, some states just
to back up briefly, the United
States Supreme Court has said
the standard that applies here
is danger to self and others.
The United States Supreme Court
specifically does not define
what that means, they leave it
up to the states to do that
themselves.
Um, some states just say danger
to self and others and leave it.
Um, we have sort of our older
definition of danger to self and
others, which gets us very close
to in substance homicidal or
suicidal.
This
Bill adjusts that language, um,
to
To be more inclusive and to give
more specifics about what we are
trying to talk about for folks
who are um
Through a as a result of the
mental illness, unable to do
these certain things that are
delineated in the bill. Um, as I
said, so, so this definition
that we have here aligns quite a
bit with, for example, with what
Michigan does, um, other states,
uh, Nevada, for example, has
something that's, I would argue
even more broad where they talk
about the person, um.
Uh, that they lack the capacity
to exercise self-control,
judgment and discretion in the
conduct of the person's affairs
and social relations, um, as you
can see that is.
Even more broad and probably
subjects us all to a lot of
jokes, um, as lawyers in terms
of who they might want to apply
this to, but um, in any event,
that's, that is what this bill
does. It applies this definition
applies to both folks that are
candidates for civil involuntary
commitment as well as assisted
outpatient treatment. Thank you.
And lastly, Madam Chair, there's
uh
Reasonable concern when persons
are ordered. When persons are
ordered to assisted outpatient
treatment, that uh threshold is
the same. The threshold is the
same. It's clear and convincing
evidence, and I think, uh, you
know, a loved one or officer or
whomever has to prove 8
different things the
Uh, likelihood of harm to sell
for others is merely one of the
8, so we're just making the
definition clear, but we're not
changing the threshold or the
legal hurdle, so to speak, uh,
to put a person into a, to order
a person into treatment. Thank
you.
OK, we will go to the audience
first to opposition if you are
an opposition, right, whoa.
Raise your hand on Zoom, raise
your hand if you're, so I will
take the 1st 5 at the center, if
you would like to speak.
Um, good morning, Chair and
committee. I'm Diane McCash and
I stand in opposition in spite
of the changes. When I read the
definition of harm to self, I
fear for the woman who has lived
decades on the street in my
neighborhood, and for people who
are considered a chronic
nuisance, but not dangerous.
Peoples whose very existence
makes us uncomfortable, who we
still interfere with our
businesses and our tourist
industry. What say will they
have and whether or not they are
deemed by others to meet the
definitions in the bill. What
say will they have if we
them incompetent as to whether
or not they're subject to civil
commitment. I'm afraid that the
definition of harm to self in
this bill has the potential to
open up the door to further harm
to some individuals, even as it
may provide um a lifeline for
others. By our failure to
provide equitable access to the
things communities need to
thrive over generations and
decades, we have played a huge
part in creating the suffering
you see today. We need to
understand that the long term
solutions will be found in
sustained commitment to our
communities and to our people.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Daniel Williams. I'm
speaking to you as an individual
person of faith, the Christian
faith calls us to be companions
to the triune God by breaking
down dividing walls that exile
us from one another and
celebrating the gift of
community for all people. And
this we followed the example of
our sibling and savior, Jesus
Christ, who crossed social
boundaries to reach out and heal
those in need of healing.
In Divinity school, I learned
that scholars of the New
Testament distinguished between
curing and healing. Curing is
the elimination of a disease and
disorder. Healing may include
that, but it also includes
restoration to community. New
Mexicans with serious mental
illness deserve healing and
involuntary commitment doesn't
provide that. It can do just the
opposite. Involuntary
commitment, fractures our
communities and risks
traumatizing the people who
experience it. SB 160.
6 drastically increases the
number of New Mexicans who may
be subject to involuntary
commitment, but it doesn't offer
healing and wholeness to our
neighbors with serious mental
illness. I urge you to impose.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
Coalition, um, time allowing,
I'd like to make a couple of
points about this bill.
These statutes, the Mental
Health DD code and the assisted
outpatient Treatment Act, um,
deal with serious deprivations
of personal liberty, and
therefore, this is a serious
matter and a serious bill. Um,
the first point I would like to
make is that the sponsor said in
his opening remarks, and this
was stressed on the Senate floor
during the debate that this
would change the approach to
determining dangerousness, um,
dangerousness is required as a
constitutional standard in order
to
involuntary treatment on people
and dangerousness is simply
shorthand for likelihood of harm
to self or others. The sponsor
says this is a clearer
definition or these are clearer
definitions cause they focus on
past actions which are provable
and not on future likelihood,
because the future is hard to
predict, but the constitutional
standard requires you to predict
the future.
Greetings chair and committee.
My name is Alicia Carrie,
lobbyist for NM need to vote and
a community organizer in
Albuquerque. We respectfully
oppose SB 166 as this bill
dangerously expands the
definition of harm yourself in a
way that could force treatment
on individuals simply for
experiencing poverty or
homelessness, lack of food,
shelter, hygiene, or medical
care is not a justification for
stripping someone's rights. We
need policies that address the
root causes of these crises with
ary and accessible support.
Furthermore, the language around
this definition risks sweeping
in nonviolent individuals,
raises serious civil liberty
concerns. I urge you to oppose
this bill and invest in engaging
with on the ground behavioral
health professionals, grassroots
organizations, and those that
are working with the community
and that assists our unsheltered
relatives and not threaten to
impose involuntary confinement
for nonviolent existence. We
respectfully ask that you please
oppose SB 166. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Biggs with
Albuquerque Health Care for the
Homeless, and we stand in
respectful opposition to SB 166.
I believe we all have the shared
value of wanting to live in a
state where no one is forced to
live on the streets without
access to housing or life saving
care and services. We have the
solutions, we know with decades
of data evidence and experience
that expanding access to
services that people want and
can access immediately along
with robust investments in
housing work.
I can tell you that most people
on the streets when asked, want
housing and services. We just
haven't brought these solutions
to scale. We are making great
strides in improving both the
session, and we should first
wait to see the impact this has
before going down the slippery
slope of taking away New
Mexicans, precious civil
liberties. Thank you.
Thank you, and we'll go to Zoom,
um, Doctor Bronwyn Neeser.
Hi, can you hear me? Yes, go
ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee and sponsors. My name
is Doctor Bronwy Easter. I'm a
forensic psychologist and I'm
speaking on behalf of Nami New
Mexico and opposition of SB 166.
The sponsors have said the
definition of harm to self and
others has not been changed in
years, is antiquated and needs
updating. While it is true that
these definitions have not been
updated. It does not mean that
they are antiquated. The current
definition for harm to self and
others is adequate and
appropriate for the seriousness
of the process of civil
commitment.
The sponsors may also say this
amended language clarifies what
is being measured and harm to
solve in others. I would caution
that while strong amendments
were made in the Senate
Judiciary, the language is still
broad and vague, such as
relevant past. Removing civil
liberties deserves a high bar.
The American Psychological
Association model statute
language and years of case law
have also recommended these
definitions be consistent and
clear for the courts. Other
states have broadened their
definitions for civil
commitment, and for example,
Washington state saw their
inpatient census double. This
bill pushes back on
all the hard work you have
already accomplished this
session and fighting for
community investment and
statewide infrastructure that
specifically addresses the
issues. New Mexicans are
battling in a way that is
sustainable.
Monette or Monet, I'm not sure.
Go ahead.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Monee
Silva and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition to End Homelessness,
and we stand in opposition to SB
166 today. The expanded use of
the civil and voluntary
treatment and commitment process
against the unhoused persons
with mental health disabilities
raises several legal, ethical
and social concerns and
contributes to the
criminalization of homelessness.
This approach often exasperates
systemic inequalities and may
lead to more harm than good.
Rather than expanding
involuntary commitment and
criminalization. Policymakers
should prioritize housing first
approaches by providing stable
permanent housing without
preconditions and voluntary
accessible mental health
services by expanding outpatient
services, mobile crisis teams,
and peer support programs. SP
166 paired with HB8 will have a
devastating impact on our
unhoused neighbors. We urge the
committee vote, do not pass on
SB 166. Thank you.
next. Oh, that's it. OK, we will
go if you are on support in
Zoom, raise your hand on Zoom,
raise your hand in support in
the room.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center and again 5
on each place and watch the
clock because I will cut you
off.
I'm always under always.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington, speaking on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce that
supports Senate Bill 166, you
know, a big part of your efforts
during this session. You're here
to improve public safety and to
help rebuild the behavioral
health system. This bill seeks
to define the definition of what
constitutes a threat to others
and a threat.
to oneself, making these
definitions more clear will help
judges determine the proper
course of mandated treatment
when successful, treatment not
only betters the lives of those
with addiction issues, but it
also betters the lives of their
families in our community, and
the greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce urges you to pass
this bill.
Boarding chairs of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, standing in strong
support of this legislation.
Right now, too many individuals
in crisis fall through the
cracks because our definitions
of harm to self and harm to
others are too narrow. So this
legislation looks to broaden
these definitions to reflect
real world risks.
This bill is not about
criminalizing mental illness.
It's about restoring competency,
providing life saving treatment
and closing the revolving door
that keeps people cycling
through homelessness, emergency
rooms, and jails. By clarifying
standards, we expand access to
care, protect public safety, and
give families a chance to help
their loved ones.
Any bill that addresses New
Mexico's behavioral health
crisis is a step forward,
promoting economic development
and future growth for our state,
so I urge you to vote yes. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Troy
we are chief Mexico State
Police. We support SB 166
because it updates the
definitions in New Mexico's
mental health laws, ensuring
more individuals in crisis
receive the care they need.
Currently, many people who need
urgent mental health
intervention fall through the
cracks because the law's
definitions are too narrow. This
bill allows earlier intervention
before individuals harm
themselves or others. SB 166
improves public safety by
helping law enforcement and
healthcare providers identify
and assist at-risk individuals
before they enter.
The criminal justice system.
Like giving first responders and
social services the tools to
direct individuals toward
treatment SB 166 reduces repeat
crises, improves community
safety and eases pressure on
hospitals and jails. This bill
is a fair and balanced approach
to mental health care
prioritizing safety treatment
and prevention. It allows us to
better help those who may not be
able to help themselves.
I heard your full support and
passage of SB 166. And to have a
few seconds left, I will say
anecdotally, uh, we worked.
Several weeks, uh, with ACS last
year. And just for an example,
we've heard a lot today about
just needs to be more services.
I'll give you an example. What
we saw was about 1 out of 100
people who were offered services
to be fair. Thank you.
But
00, you just
I was I grab the mic, uh, Paul
Joy, chief of police and police
department, uh, try to be quick
and won't be redundant, uh, here
in Santa Fe, we have an
alternative response unit that's
a partner unit with police,
fire, and community services and
caseworkers, and what they can
do is they see our call screen
and they can respond to calls
for service where either it's an
obvious uh issue where it
appears to be behavioral mental
health or the call is criminal,
but it's more likely when they
read the call that the
underlying issue is, is
behavioral mental health or.
Some in increases. Uh, this is
an important uh definition here,
definition change, language is
important, words are important
to you guys know better than
most, uh, to help give them
better tools to intervene before
criminalization happens, or
hopefully in some situations
instead of criminalization, and
so I would, uh, urge you to uh
vote yes.
OK, we will go to Jay's story.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jeremy Store. I'm the
police chief for the Las Cruces
Police Department. I urge you to
support this bill. I'll give you
just a quick anecdote since
everyone else kind of gave broad
overview, but I have a a female
woman who's emailed me over 200
times left over 350 voicemails.
Um, she has a history of
A lot of mental illness. I've
tried everything we can, uh, to
help our fire department's
mobile integrated healthcare,
our crisis intervention team at
the police department has
offered every service we can,
and she refuses them.
Unfortunately, she's escalated
to threats towards citizens,
myself, former congresswoman
Torra Small, and we still have
not been able to take that
definition and truly help her,
and we basically been forced to
resort to the criminal justice
system to try to deal with this,
and we all know that that is not
going to change anything for
her. And so, this definition
changed would have made it a lot
easier to help her much earlier
in the process before it got to
the point where criminal charges
are the only thing we have to
help her. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the
Right.
Thank you. Do you have any wrap
up? or are you ready for
questions?
Um, yeah, I may save us some
time. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Rosanna Thompson. The um
Oh, I appreciate the rhetoric
and, and the concerns of, of the
opponents. I think they, they
create, create in their mind
the, the worst case scenario
and, and, and highlight that.
Uh, but the threshold is the
same uh for assisted outpatient
treatment, and that's clear and
convincing evidence of that
person. We have a problem. We
have a serious, serious problem
in New Mexico, particularly in
Albuquerque, to be specific,
East Central from San Mateo to
tramway, we have to deal with
that problem in a respectful,
modern, compassionate way.
Or else that situation is going
to be dealt with, uh.
In another way, if, if, if you
don't like uh
Uh
You know, someone to be ordered
to assisted outpatient
treatment, I would hope that you
would hate someone being ordered
to a year in the county jail.
Thank you.
Thank you committee.
Representative Jones.
Um, Eleanor Chavez, Martinez.
Ferrari, Anaya.
OK, so we'll start with
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
I had the
Um, experience of about a year
or so, you're maybe 2 years ago
to go out with the homeless
outreach in Albuquerque on
Central.
And I have to say from a nursing
perspective.
I was shocked.
At
Allowing people who are unable
to
Even follow through with a a a a
realistic thought process.
Create a sentence that made
sense.
We're allowed to stay on the
street.
And and it wasn't because the
people in the outreach were
didn't, I wanted them there.
It was more that they were
unable.
To to
To use this, what would this
would allow this bill would
allow to help these people.
I saw
Individuals with shredded
clothing.
Um
Filthy, unable to care for
themselves, unable to even know
what they needed next.
To stay on street, even in um.
And the weather that would be
perhaps deadly.
Because we didn't want to
interfere with their
independent.
With, you know, their
constitutional right to be out
there, and, and I think that's
inhumane, um, from a nursing
perspective.
I, I know there is, they're the
outside, they are the extremes,
there's always the possibility.
Sorry, I'm not going to we are
running out of time,
so please questions OK,
well.
I've seen people make long
lengthy minutes long statements
and this I think this is very
important, so I'll try to be
short, but, but thank you, Madam
Chair, and Senator.
I just feel that this is
necessary in spite of the
possibility that I mean the very
outside possibility of abuse,
which happens with nearly every
law we pass.
Um, that we need a way to help
people. We need a way to treat
people and we've made a lot of
progress, I believe. So what do,
I will ask a question, Madam
Chair, Senator, what is your
response to um
This bill.
Um
Interfering with the
constitutional standard, which
requires us to predict the
future.
I didn't say that right, Madam
Chair. I heard someone say that
the constitutional standard does
require us to predict the
future, and that this bill
doesn't allow for that. What is
your response to that?
Before I turned over to Miss
Holly, this, the Constitutional
standards are the same.
Um, we do, there is a predicting
of the future. Will this person
harm themselves in the future?
Will this person harm others in
the future, but that should be
based on
Backs on the ground, realities
on the ground, and that's why,
uh, that's why that we use the
words within the recent past,
comma, on page 5 lines 11 and
12. So you're arguing in the
future, but you're using facts
on the ground instead of just
kind of an amorphous
predictability.
And this hobby.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, I
would also add, as the senator
said, you're looking at recent
behavior, which then goes to a
future, almost the the predictor
to the extent that you can't.
It's recent behavior makes it
more likely than not that in the
near future something will
happen. So those are that that
metric is being considered.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, an expert.
So in the situations that I saw,
uh, the way I see that, you
know, the way it was playing
itself on the ground, you see an
individual who has no clothing
on, hasn't eaten in who knows
when.
And, and that person doesn't
even know where they are, and
yet in the future, like the near
future, at night when the
temperature drops to 25 degrees,
that person's gonna freeze to
death, but they don't know it,
so, so that, that's, I mean, I
see that playing itself out this
way, like, how do we
How do we see the the reality of
people being a harm to
themselves and not even knowing
that they are in, in a mental
health perspective. So I'm, I'm
excited we've made some progress
toward
Services for the ability to help
people, and I think this is an
important part of a piece of
that picture, and I thank you
for bringing it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Next, we
have Representative Eleanor
Chavez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, there are many things in
this bill that concern me.
Um, I'm not gonna make a
statement. I will ask some
questions though. Um, so you
talk about your basically um
clarifying the definition, but
What I see is in terms of the
kinds of services that folks who
are living on the street. It
sounds like that's who the
target is here.
Um, we have not been able to
provide the kinds of services
that they really need housing,
behavioral health.
So where in your bill does it
speak about the provision of
those services.
Madam Chair Representative, the
services that you're describing,
a candidate, if, if somebody
says I want those services so
that they they get an outreach,
um, housing.
Yes, I would like housing.
This bill doesn't apply to them.
Because they do have the
capacity and they do want it.
This bill, if somebody comes in
and offers them um other sorts
of treatment, and they say, yes,
I want it, even if that
treatment isn't available.
They say, yes, I want it, but
even if it's not there, then
that's not the person that this
bill is applying to.
Um, Representative Madam Chair,
this bill applies to the person
where it is being offered to
them, and it's there and it will
save their life and they still
lack the capacity to avail
themselves of it.
Um, I'm just trying not to hit
the table because people will
start texting me, why are they
banging on the table.
Uh, Madam, Madam Chair, Senator.
So if someone says they want
services.
I mean, the reality is.
that there aren't any services.
So you're saying if they want
services then they're fine. But
if they don't want services,
then it sounds like.
They're going to be arrested.
Or if they're not going to be
arrested, then where are you
gonna take them?
Madam, Madam Chair Robson of
Chavez exactly, exactly, that's
exactly my point. There is a
push.
In my hometown to arrest these
persons.
Big push to arrest these persons
and
Every homeless person, it's
pretty much an arrestable
offense, just
By having a police contact, we
don't want those police
contacts. We don't want people
arrested for homeless crimes.
This is not a criminal statute.
This is a civil.
This is, uh, uh, this would give
family members, loved ones, and
officers.
The opportunity to petition for
uh uh involuntary treatment.
It's, it's a tough call, but,
um, but I have a a niece who's
in this exact same situation. We
were lucky to find her, uh, by
going to some pretty shady
places. We got her in the UNMH 3
days later, the, the, the clouds
were clearing, she was back on
the street being manipulated and
suffering from drug use. We got
her back in the UNMH 3 days
later, we had hope, boom.
He's back on the street, um.
Families are are really at their
wits' end, uh, because the only
other option.
I arrest, conviction, and
incarceration.
Madam Chair, Senator, I would
disagree with that. I think that
the other option is.
Impatient
Um, long term care for or
treatment for substance abuse
users if they want it. It's
pretty hard to force somebody to
to get well if they're not
interested in that kind of
treatment.
So I, I, I just have some real
issues, um, I think that there's
some problems in terms of the
definition, um, you know, who
makes the decision one to pick
somebody up. The other piece is
we don't have the resources.
Um, that we need. It's my
understanding that there's
actually a couple of Senate
bills that address this issue in
terms of building up behavioral
health. We know that's been an
issue for a very long time.
The other piece that I have a
problem with is, is predicting
the future.
That's pretty difficult. um, to
do, and I don't know that we
want to get in the position of
doing that. I, I, I don't.
I guess one of the other
questions that I have is in
terms of, um, you know,
involuntary commitment or
evaluation. We know that there's
been a problem. I'll use the um
the state hospital as an
example. Have you all talked
with them about their capacity
to be able to see some of these
folks and also their capacity to
be able to treat and do any kind
of follow up.
Um, in the communities because
most of those folks are are not
from Las Vegas, they're from
other areas like, like
Albuquerque. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Chavez, let me ask, let me
answer you.
Previous question, and I'll turn
it over to Ms. Holly for your
second question. But the, but
the predictability standard is
current law, and, and we're,
we're making the point that
we're not changing current law.
We're just allowing the
factfinder to delve into the
recent past, but with regards to
behavioral health at our last
hearing, and these were tough
hearings. They were tough
hearings in the Senate, tough
conversations on the Senate
floor. We appreciate the
conversation today, but the
director of Behavioral Health
Institute in Las Vegas was one
of our experts, uh, but could
you answer that question with
regards to server availability?
of services. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. Um,
and it is true, so the current
standard does have a more likely
than not in the near future
that's already in the existing
standard, um, if you look at the
strike through on letter I on
page 11 at the top, it's already
there, that's, that's in current
law.
Um
Yes, uh, Tim Shields, Madam
Chair Representative from BHI
was at our last hearing, I
think, uh, a component of this
that, that gets overlooked is
that there are beds statewide.
Not everybody here is going to
go to BHI, um, there are about
800 beds statewide in different
facilities, uh, different
hospitals, um, that can hold
people for various amounts of
time. As of, I checked with the
healthcare authority about a
week and a half ago of the 800
beds there were on that day
there were 100 that were
available.
I think the other part that we
need to remember is everybody
who's uh who who this might
apply to everyone's not going in
at once, so it wouldn't be that
on day one, everyone is going to
come um to the doors uh and need
services. I would also point
out, Madam Chair Representative,
that a great deal of these folks
would be uh assisted outpatient
treatment candidates and not
necessarily inpatient treatment
candidates, and this would apply
to them as well. Thank you.
It was tapping again.
Uh, Madam Chair, senator, I, I
don't, I'm not so sure that.
Outpatient treatment is going to
work, number one, folks don't
have usually access to a phone.
You don't have access sometimes
to transportation in terms of,
you know, where that outpatient
service might be located. It
seems to me that what we need to
do is build up housing.
So that people are in a stable
environment and able to get food
on a daily basis, and I think
that we are, that's where we
need to put our focus. I don't
think that we need to put our
focus in this kind of a, a piece
of legislation that uh for
whatever reason, mandates people
who refuse the kinds of things
that that you're saying they
need, um, sends them to jail.
We're just gonna fill up our
jails. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator, that's all my question.
Thank you, um, minority Whip
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Going to say all my questions
have been answered, but another
one has been raised.
This bill
Are you doing mass if this
passes, are you doing mass
arrests and putting them in
jail. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, ribs and Martinez.
No, no, people are not arrested
under this act. This is a civil
remedy. This is a civil law. The
point I made earlier, Madam
Chairs Martinez, is that we want
to avoid people being arrested.
We want to avoid people going to
jail.
Um, I, I just kind of maybe got
a little ahead of myself by
suggesting that at some point.
There may become policy to make
arrests and to and to make,
make, uh, jail jail sentences
out of this. We merely want,
we're not changing the legal
standard, this is current law.
We're not, this isn't, we're not
inventing this act. It's been
around since the 60s. We're
merely taking a strong look at
the uh definition of harm to
self and harm to others. If
you'll notice, Madam Cherry
Remsen and Martinez, it's, it
was a 0.3 committee substitute,
the, the, uh
The amendment that we're
proposing is friendly was
brought to us by our friends at
the ACLU, um, the, the person
who spoke was not representing
the ACLU today.
Um, we're, we're listening to
all interested parties to come
up with the best definition we
can to avoid what I believe may
come down the road, which is
Arrest and incarceration, but
this is an antithesis to.
Arresting people and putting
them in jail, we want, we want
them to get either inpatient or
outpatient treatment. Many
people simply are not.
Don't have the capacity to
realize that's in their best
interests, families are losing,
pulling their hair out because
they cannot get their loved ones
into treatment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
I, I appreciate that.
I thought I was reading the
wrong bill.
Um
We need to do everything we can
to help these people.
Um, it, it's not.
I, I don't think it's, it's
A bad thing to
tighten up.
A bill that's been on the books
for a while.
A new definitions or clarified
definitions, because these
people need help.
I don't think it's, it's.
Uh
A great comment on on our
society that we would rather
leave these people living on the
streets.
Then
Doing something that's gonna
help these people.
Get
The treatment that they need.
A lot of times they've been out
there so long that
Where they are mentally.
They don't understand that this
would be the best thing for
them.
I know people who are on the
streets by choice, and that's
where they're happy and that's
That's the choice that they can
make.
Then let them be out there.
But this is for people who are
suffering.
And leaving them on the streets
is not uh I don't see it as
being compassionate.
And I for one fully support
this.
Um, and I, I hope that
We can use this to to
Help these people. I, I have one
last question. How I, I couldn't
find it in the bill.
Um, how is this gonna be
enforced?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Martinez, and
it's not in the bill because the
bill, the four corners of the
bill is merely the definition
section of these two areas of
law, but the the way it's
enforced or determined rather is
is settled law, it's settled
law, we're dealing with the
mental health and developmental
disabilities Act and the
assisted Outpatient Treatment
Act, we're not changing the
criteria for determining uh uh
treatment.
Uh, we're just, you know, we're
just, uh, taking a look at a 50
year old definition and
And, and, and making it, uh,
making it clear for all parties
as to what.
What elements need to be shown,
uh, to get someone into
treatment.
The amount of cherish and
senator, um.
Appreciate. Thank you, uh,
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator and your expert. I'm not
sure where to start. Um,
You mentioned expert um man of
chair expert, um, that there's
plenty of beds around the state,
but I think that we've in.
Our interim committee have
realized that there are plenty
of beds, but not enough
caregivers to really offer the
full potential of those beds
being filled.
Do
Recognize the difference.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
I recognize the difference, um.
I'll stop there if you'd like me
to it. There's, there's a but,
but um, but yes, I do recognize
the difference.
So Madame Tier ex maam expert,
um, how many beds do you think
are really available with the um
caregivers that we have
available.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
that's a tougher question to
answer, and here's why, and I've
had extensive conversations with
Secretary de Blasi about this as
well. There are a lot of people
who are actually in beds, um,
who are, who are in those beds
because they would actually be
better served in a different,
uh, service mechanism, um, but,
but those other service
mechanisms aren't available to
them, so they end up in one of
the beds, so, um, from my
conversations with the uh
secretary of the Department of
Health, um, by considering all
of
all of those different elements
and making sure that people are
getting uh the targeted services
that they need where they are
instead of just putting them in
a bed, um, that there's not a
concern I can represent to you
from her part that we're not
going to have the beds, but
again, what I would, but I would
also really like to, to stress
is that um so number one, the
courts when they're doing this,
as the senator was saying, the
process that's in place, the
eight-part process, the judge
always has to make a
determination that what they
are.
recommending or what they are
ordering the person to do is
satisfying what's called the
least restrictive means
analysis. So the judge is
always, always considering
whether what they are going to
have the person do is the least
restrictive way to do it. So, so
putting somebody in an
involuntary hold inpatient is
the absolute, absolute last
resort.
Um, Madam Chair and senator and
expert, um,
That leads me to.
Why when we have such a shortage
of behavioral health care for
the people who want it and need
it the most, why would we go to
Um, incarcerating cause um
Senator Madam Chair, Senator,
you said these people are just
under civil, but they, if
they're arrest, they have to be
arrested to go to court. They
don't, OK. They could just be
referred, Madam Chair
Representative, yes, uh, family
members at this point are also
are able to make a referral with
the processes they actually go
to a district attorney and say
we have a family member that we,
we need this for and we want
this for the district attorney
then reviews it and
72 hours to make a determination
about whether to file a civil
action.
Madam Chair expert, it could be
a criminal.
Madam Chair Representative, it
could be a criminal in House
Bill 8, the, the bill, the
omnibus bill that just passed
for folks that are in undergoing
a criminal competency
evaluation, which is sort of the
criminal side, um, some of those
folks as well will also at that
time undergo a civil or an exam
related to this about whether
there should be any civil
remedies. So if somebody wants,
for example, and I actually
asked the secretary this this
morning, Madam Chair
Representative, if there's a
candidate without a criminal
issue here.
Who, um, a judge would normally
order.
Um, inpatient treatment. If
there is not a bed available for
that person, that person is not
incarcerated. That person is
basically put into intensive
outpatient treatment. So we
aren't just gonna lock somebody
up if there isn't a bed for
them. That's not how it's gonna
work.
Um, well, madam chair, um.
I'm afraid that making someone
eligible for civil commitment,
um, on the grounds of their
inability to provide a home or,
you know, shelter, um, could
capture a lot of um unhouse
people simply because they're
homeless, and if there's a
recession and there's a lot of
people homeless, and we're all
going to be.
Um, subject to this, and um I
don't believe that things that
someone has done in the past,
um, should predict what their
future, what if they've gotten
treatment and they're fine, but
they still decide to be homeless
and they could still be put back
in and they will lose faith in
having treatment because of
this. So, Madam Chair, I've
done. Thank you.
Representativenaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. Um, you know, I've
been listening to a lot of the
debate and also, um, I know as
we were working on competency,
it was always a matter of taking
a step back and thinking, OK,
are we talking about criminal?
Are we talking about civil here?
And they do overlap in many
different ways, um, there are a
couple of things that.
As I was listening to the
conversation unfold, I was
going, OK, we need to get, um,
we need to get clear on this
really quickly. So, um, Madam
Char and Senator, um, can you
just remind me right now who can
petition for civil commitment.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Resovannaya. Let me look at the
act here.
I think it is um
I think it is
Law enforcement for sure, and
Close family members. I'm trying
to find the definition of family
members, but I believe it's
parents, children, or siblings.
Um, but let me take a quick
moment.
I, I believe it's law
enforcement and close family
members, and petition, so I
don't think a neighbor could
petition and, and with regards
to the concerns of uh
Of past. That's why we've worked
on this definition so hard man
I'm sure were on line 11, it
says within the recent past and
on line 1516 will be repeated in
the near future, so.
We, uh, we're very cognizant of
those.
Um, I appreciate that, Madam
Chair and Senator, um, the
reason I ask this as well is
because if I'm not mistaken and
I feel like the beginning of the
session was like 10 years ago.
So I feel like I'm also
refreshing my own memory, but if
I'm not mistaken, Madam Chan
Senator, I believe healthcare
providers can also petition for
civil commitment.
Um, if there are cute settings,
is that correct? Madam Chair of
an eye,
you're correct. OK. Thank you.
Um, and the reason I ask this
question, Madam Chair and
Senator, apologies, is that um
my understanding was when folks
are being referred to civil
commitment.
That
The issue is not necessarily
that, um,
That the system itself right now
isn't working. It's that we
literally don't have places to
put people. And so I know that
it's been a concern, um,
especially on the medical
provider side is that folks can
just be sitting in hospital
beds, not
beds that they should be in, but
just in everyday hospital beds,
not getting any sort of.
Treatment or competency
restoration, if we're talking
about the criminal side. Um, and
so that it's not necessarily.
The
Number of people that we can't
encompass, it's where we get
those people when they are
encompassed. And so Madame Chair
and Senator, I bring this up
because
Once again, trying not to
conflate criminal with civil,
but knowing that they very much
overlap. Um, it seems as if
they're actually just a small
amount of people in this pool
anyway, and they're stuck,
they're stuck in a cycle, so
it's not necessarily that we
need to encompass more people in
this. It's actually that we have
a smaller amount of people that
are stuck in a cycle. And so
Madam Chair and Senator, um, I
bring this up because we
actually have
A lot of
We opened up a lot of language
when we were working on
competency to say who can
petition? How can we make the
petition petitioning process a
little bit easier and with that,
we made sure that folks on the
competency side, on the criminal
side, had this expanded
evaluation that families can use
on, on the civil side, right?
The point there was to try to
get thank you
chair, Senator, um,
I don't know if there is quite a
question to this, Madam Chair.
I will just end with this then.
I don't believe that we need to
encompass more people in this
process. I believe there's a
small amount of people that we
need to get treatment, we need
to get beds. And so, Madam Chair
and said, I wish I had more time
to expand on this because I
don't believe that opening up
the definition to get more
people in is the answer.
That's what I'm saying. I
believe we have the amount of
people that we need and we need
to get them the right treatment.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, uh, Madam Chair presenters,
I, I first ask the attorney for
the governor's office. One of
the things that you stated in
your opening, um,
Remarks was that if you offered
someone some some service and
they refused it. You define that
as having the lack of capacity.
And what if they just want to
stay, I mean, those were your
words, and so what would you
How do you make that
determination what they just
want to stay on the street.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question,
cause, cause I actually have
been
Ruminating on that because I, I
wasn't careful with my words.
What I was trying to um explain,
Madam Chair Representative, was
the idea that somebody who it
was to
To clarify the concept that
somebody who wants services.
But cannot avail themselves of
them because they don't exist is
not someone who's going to be um
Under this bill, somebody who's
deemed to lack capacity. They
have the capacity and they want
the services, they're just not
What you're saying. Somebody
who, um, it's not just a
foregone conclusion that um.
somebody who doesn't want the
services, therefore it means
they lack capacity, which is I
sort of I think what you're
saying. There are plenty of
people um out there and I I
think maybe somebody was
speaking about that earlier,
Madam Chair Res representative,
where somebody might absolutely
have the capacity to decide I do
or I don't want this, um, and in
that case, that is what the
doctor is evaluating about
whether or not they have the
capacity to make the decision.
If they have the capacity to
make the decision and they still
don't want it, that's up to
them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that explanation. I just
want to go to something else
that you both described um you
described how do you get someone
put into one of these
facilities, and you said one of
the, one of the answers was you
go to the district attorney, and
that caused, that raised a
concern for me. District
attorneys only deal with
criminal matters. So tell me why
someone would go to a district
attorney. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. That's in the
statute now, um, that somebody
has to be the
Commissioner for the court, and
even though this is a civil
matter that is actually within
the purview of a district
attorney.
Uh, Madam Chair,
representatives, that would be
something I would amend out. So
now, Madam Chair and district
and uh presenters, my last
question is when someone is
committed, how do they get out?
Madam Chair Representative,
again, it would depend on um.
On, on, on the how it depends on
what the illness and what the
treatment is to begin with, but
typically speaking, after people
are treated to for the bare
minimum of time again because
least restrictive means is
always going to be the analysis.
So as soon as somebody has, has
been clinically stabilized
enough in an inpatient setting,
um, for all the reasons that
we've talked about, it's better
for the person and it's better
for everybody else to move them
into um more an outpatient
setting, there's a notification
provision as well where you want
to give somebody, um.
People aren't just aren't just
let out without without a plan,
they're given a, a service plan
and a treatment plan um for once
they are, um,
Released.
And if I may, um, Madam Chair
Representative Hernan, the uh
the hearings, it's pretty, we
should have probably did a flow
chart of the hearings and the
standards, but even though it's
a civil matter, the respondent
shall be represented by council
through all stages of the
proceeding. There's various
hearings, you know, within 3 to
7 days and then month out
several months out, and the only
persons that can petition.
And uh 43-1B-4 are the roommate
of the person, the parent or
spouse of the person, the
sibling or an adult child of the
person or as mentioned, a
director of a hospital where the
person is or the uh director of
a program that the person's
participating in or a uh a
treatment provider. Madam Chair,
Representatives.
You said that the person is
represented by counsel, but
who's on the other side?
Madam Chair, Representative
Hernan, the petitioner, the,
the, the family member.
So, um, let me just ask you both
this last question, Madam Chair,
and representatives. As we
listen to the conversations
today, those who were in favor
of it were, who were opposed to
this uh legislation that you're
bringing before us. We're
members of the community, people
who serve the community, people
who deal with these individuals
on a regular basis. The people
who are in support for law
enforcement.
I mean, that causes a little bit
of concern. Other than that, I'm
also looking at the fact of what
was brought before this group,
there is a concern about mental
health facilities being
available for people who don't
are not forced into commitment.
How are you going to get them
services when we don't even have
them when they're not when
they're not being forced into
commitment. So those are some
issues that are really a big
concern, and I'm not sure you've
answered those, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Hernan. No,
that's great. This is, this is
just changing the definition.
This is one part of, of the, the
precipice of this session which
is behavioral health services.
The priority in the Senate was
Senate Bill 3, which was signed
into law recently which
dedicated a billion dollar trust
for behavioral health services,
so there is, there is a Marshall
Plan for behavioral health
services and hopefully we can
build out that system as quickly
as humanly possible. So you're
correct, if there's no service
to send somebody, then obviously
this bill wouldn't apply, um,
but we're merely tweaking the
definitions of harm to self and
harm to others.
given the new realities on the
ground with regards to people
suffering from debilitating drug
addictions, being manipulated by
other people to the point of
human trafficking. It's a new
reality in 2025 than it was in
1977 or for family members who
are in need of treatment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for. I have a few um
questions and statements, so I,
I, I'm, I'm not a big fan of um
forced treatment. And here's an
article called The Effectiveness
of Compulsory Drug Treatment, a
systematic review, and it's from
the um
International Journal on Drug
Policy and what it states is 3
studies that there aren't a lot
of studies, but 3 studies, 33%
reported no significant impacts
of compuls compulsory treatment
compared with control
interventions.
Two studies, 22%, found
equivocal equivocal results but
did not compare against a
control condition to studies,
22%, observed negative impacts
of compulsory treatment on
criminal recidivism. So that
starts out with mm, and then um
Uh, I, I, there's a lot of terms
in there that are um like near
future, recent past, recent
behavior. I mean, what's recent
to someone who's 22 is very
different than what's recent to
someone who's 65. My husband
always says, the other day I
say, Leo, that was 3 years ago.
Um, and I know people have those
kinds of folks in their lives,
so those are just way too broad.
I mean, to some people recent
could be 5 years. Um, so I
really, I think those are way
too broad, um, and
Senator, do you know this, this,
the legislative Health and Human
Services Committee had a report
from the social workers at an
interim committee. Do you know
how many people who are actively
seeking behavioral health can
actually get it in the state.
I, Madam Chair, uh, Rosanne
Thompson, let me have my.
Expert, I will tell you it's
26.1%. And those are people who
are, it takes an average of 10
phone calls to get an
appointment for behavioral
health. So that proves that our
system is not.
Work is not enough for the folks
that want treatment, much less
forcing folks in, um, and then
I'm also concerned that the
things that, that show that
you're um lacking capacity is
medical care, neglect of
probably everyone in this room
hasn't done all the medical
things they need to do because
again we don't have providers,
so theoretically, you know, if
you're behind on your Pap smear,
you could be determined
incompetent because you aren't
taking care of your.
health.
Um
So that that's really
concerning, um.
Let's see.
And then lack of housing. I
mean, we, we all hear stories of
people, you know, retirees who,
who, you know, they have a huge
medical debt and they lose their
house or they lose their
apartment or the rents just get
too high and then they become
unhoused. It's not that they
made that choice. It's that
Society has made that choice for
them for lack of a better way to
say it. So, so I think those
are, let's see, um, I think
that's all I have, so, um, I
will entertain emotion.d.
So we, we have a motion from
Senator,
I mean,
representatives
representative Senator Cortez
and a second Madam Chair
substitute motion to table.
OK, so we have the substitute
motion to table, which takes
precedence, though Karen, can
you take the role?
Anaya.
Yes to table and explain my
vote.
Representative Kates.
Representative E. Chavez. Yes,
and to explain my vote.
Representative N Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones? No.
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative Senator Cortez,
not a table.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair. Yes.
5 to 4, 55 to 55 to 4, this bill
has been tabled.
Thank you, members.
OK, and finally, we will go, oh,
I'm sorry, I, I wrote it down.
Representative Naya and then
Eleanor Chavez and don't yet to
explain your vote.
No, man, I, I will just go ahead
and say, I'm, I'm looking at
589. It looks like it's going to
require significant discussion.
We have responsibilities on the
floor, I would ask that we roll
that to
do justice to the bill.
Representative, we have been
excused, so we will start.
Pamela.
so representative um Herndon is
the presenter. Uh, we, we need
to get started on this, um,
yeah, if, go ahead,
Representative Naya. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
I do think we should have
ongoing discussions about this.
My thought on this is that we
have opened up the process so
much when it comes to uh the
competency piece and allowing
folks to petition for AOT, um,
that I'd like to see how that
plays out, and I'm more than
happy to keep.
Having this conversation. Thank
you.
Eleanor thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, um, a lot of the
concerns, a lot of my concerns
were expressed in the
conversation.
But it, it seems to me that the
current law that we have now in
terms of um civil commitment is
working. I didn't hear any
examples that it wasn't working.
Um, if there's other things that
that you all have in mind, I
would also be happy to discuss
it, but for now, um, I just was
not comfortable voting for it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, we will go on, um.
Thank you, members. Thank you to
House Bill 589, um, and we have
a committee sub.
Yeah. And we do maintain our
quorum with, although I
frequently forget the member who
was presenting, and I don't
count them and say, oh, we don't
have a quorum and they're right
in front of me. So whenever
you're ready, senator and uh
representative.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we do have a
substitute. Would you please,
has it been passed out? Um, I
don't believe so. It's
Oh, the sub is in our handbook,
OK.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair, will you please
move to uh
Provide discussion on the time
you can make
the motion, uh, Madam Chair, I
move that we, uh, for, I move
that the um substitute for
health and human Services
Committee for House Bill 589 uh
be moved for discussion.
OK.
They know
Um
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and Madam Chair, members
of the, of the committee.
The health uh health Health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 589
requires the healthcare
authority to ensure that a
proportional number of Medicaid
recipients are balanced among
the managed care organizations
contracted with the state to
provide medical assistance to
Medicaid recipients, including
managed care organizations that
are newly contracted to the
state. And Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I want you to
understand that currently almost
90% of Medicaid managed care
enrollees in New Mexico are
enrolled in two of our 4 MCO's
serving the program. Nothing has
been done to rebalance the
enrollment more evenly across
our 4 MCOs. The Medicaid
enrollment is unfairly weighted
across the four managed care
organizations with approximately
345,000 sitting with the largest
plan, 254 with the.
2nd largest and only about
38,000 with the other two MCOs
and let me just put this in
perspective for you. If you are
looking for assistance, medical
assistance, and they are 344
people, 344,000 people ahead of
you. Where do you fall in line
with the telephone and with
getting assistance, you fall
behind. If there are 38,000,
you're more likely to get
assistance faster, but I am
saying to you also, if you're on
a, if you're
on a crowded train headed to
Santa Fe. Would you like to go
at 6 o'clock when everybody's
gonna be there? Would you like
to go at 8 o'clock when you can
actually sit down. So you want
to make sure that we're making
medical care available to
everybody equally. So what we're
doing is we're not saying that
oh we're gonna remove people
from any MCO if they're already
there, they stay there. If they,
if they point out that they want
to stay in a particular uh MCO
they will stay there. We're not
gonna
Remove families, families will
stay together with a particular
MCO want to make sure you know
that is that when people don't
make a decision about which MCL
they want, then we don't keep
prioritizing sending them
somewhere where we already are
overburdening the system. With
that, Madam Chair, I would like
to introduce you to my, uh,
experts. Would you please
introduce yourself?
Martin Hickey from the Senate.
Kim Ross, Kimball Public Affairs
in Austin, Texas, national
consultant.
Would you like to make a
statement? Oh sure,
I would only point out I work in
many states across the country
and these kinds of circumstances
and a lot of the times we're
dealing with policy implications
and downstream uh adverse events
that happen when you have
monopolies or monopolies or
oligopolies that control way too
many patients in one place.
These usually end up having to
be responded to in some fashion.
There's at least 12 to 13 states
across the country right now
that do some kind of a
rebalancing to restore balance
in these situations. It's a
fairly benign way of minimizing.
The potential adverse effects of
concentrating too much power and
too much control of patient
populations that are, have
adverse consequences both to
providers and to patients.
Madam Chair, uh, I just
introduced myself. The reason
that I'm here is that um having
been in a health plan in the eye
back, uh, that, uh, was a
newcomer, uh, but hardly got any
assignments even though uh the
plan was demonstrably much less
expensive than than the other
plans. Um, and the lesson we
learned from that and the lesson
here is that
If you can't get
A large number of people into a
new entrant, they're not going
to remain in the market.
Basically, it comes down to the
actual actuarial laws that
essentially say the larger the
number, the much lower the risk
and the ability to balance the
risk, the lower the number, the
much higher the risk and the
inability of the plan to be able
to survive financially, so my
concern is that there are 2 new
plans here in the state.
And uh if they are not able
through one mechanism or another
to be able to gain more
patience, and in this case,
through the assignment of people
who do not choose, um, and only
through who do not choose, um,
being balanced to get the larger
numbers, um, we're gonna have a
state with only 2 health plans
and 2 health plans in Medicaid,
just is not enough competition.
in its very easy to get, um,
Uh, not be, I mean, competition
keeps you on your toes and keeps
you doing good things and
providing better services when
you're pretty much just assured
you're gonna get it, so that's
the rationale for at least 3, if
not 4 plans is to continue that
competition through services
quality of care, and so forth.
There is a quality mechanism
that I think is getting put into
place to assign people who don't
choose, but really what we want
to do here is
To
uh balance and so that the
plants spread the risk evenly
and have a chance to financially
survive. Thank you.
OK, we will go to the audience.
If you are in opposition on
Zoom, raise your hand if you are
an opposition in the room, raise
your hand.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Elana Dances, the
chief medical officer from the
Medicaid program. I'm here, uh,
on behalf of the healthcare
authority, we respectfully
oppose this bill. We think it
will impact member choice when
you require someone to go into a
certain plan, that plan may not
take the provider that you need
anymore. Uh, we are concerned
about the legality because
member choice is required in
CFR, uh, and we also are moving
towards an auto assignment based
on quality.
So that we would be moving
members to the plan that has the
highest performance measures, so
this would disrupt that. This
will also require us to open up
our 11:15 waiver, which will
open up negotiations with the
federal government right now, so
we also don't want to be doing
that. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marlahos registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross Blue
Shield of New Mexico. We also
stand in opposition to this
legislation for many of the
reasons described by the
department. We do believe that
this is a, uh, goes against the
federal law to allow for patient
choice. Uh, we also believe that
House Bill 589, um, is, uh,
Sorry about that undermines the
continuity of care, um, we
believe there will be a lot of
disruption with families, uh,
lastly, we, uh, Blue Cross has
been involved with the Medicaid
managed care for 17 years. We
spend a lot of time, uh, working
with our members and cultivating
that relationship. We think this
is a disincentive for those that
are just given those lives
without having to actually work
and protect them. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh Jim Jackson for
disability rights in New Mexico.
I have to say it feels a little
odd to be in uh in sympathy and
support with both the healthcare
authority and the insurance
industry, but I, uh, speak on
behalf of consumers who want to
choose which uh HMO uh uh MCO,
they wanna, they wanna utilize
and as I'm reading this bill, it
doesn't even just get to, oh,
the assignment of people who
haven't chosen. It just says.
The healthcare authority has to
figure out a way to balance
this, and it's their
responsibility to make sure that
there's balance, so, um, uh,
from a consumer's point of view,
we're also troubled by this
limitation. People ought to be
able to choose the uh uh the uh
MCO and the healthcare system
that they want, uh, that's what
most of us do, and I think that
uh uh this is gonna be
problematic from the consumer
point of view. Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee, Ellen
Pines representing the
Disability Coalition and uh
unlike Mr. Jackson, I'm thrilled
that the opportunity to stand up
in alignment with HCA and the
insurance companies because it
doesn't happen very often, Madam
Chair. Um, as Mr. Jackson said,
we're concerned about the
limitation on consumer choice
right now, um.
Individuals in Medicaid can
choose their own MCO from the
array offered this bill would
take away that right and um as
Mr. Jackson said, the bill is
clear that HCA is to assure that
balance distribution. It's and I
don't see anything in the bill
saying, oh well, if you like
your MCO, you can stay with it.
So we're very concerned about
that limitation on consumer
choice. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Larry Horan,
registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian Health Plan. I just
didn't want to miss the
opportunity to be on the same
side as Jim and Ellen. I don't
think that has ever happened.
But I think the two important
points are healthcare authority
already has a plan to deal with
this issue and what this
committee as we deal as I've
been before you many times,
patient choice, not just with
providers, but also also with
your health plans, so I think
those are the two key important
pieces. Healthcare authority can
already do it, and we should
maintain the choice of our
patients. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you. So we will go to
support if you are on Zoom in
support and would like to speak,
raise your hand in the room and
support.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center.
Uh, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Marco Gonzalez and I
represent Molina Healthcare. And
so I would like to just begin by
saying that, uh,
rebalancing protects member
choice um through open
enrollment, um, and it's
consistent with federal law. So
the way it works now is that if
you're an open enrollment, you
get to choose your plan, and if
you want to choose your plan and
stay with the plan you have, you
stay with your plan and there's
nobody's gonna take you away
from it. So it protects member
choice. Uh, the bill does not
say irrespective of member
choice.
And so HEA could say after open
enrollment, when you have been
moved, that if you would like to
stay, you're being reassigned,
but if you'd like to stay with
the plan, you, you, you have,
you can. So there's multiple
ways that member choice are
protected. Other states
including Ohio, Mississippi,
Nevada, Iowa, Georgia, Delaware,
Kentucky, New England, all, uh,
have rebounds enrollment
consistent with federal law, it
can be done, um, rebalancing
doesn't cost money and the MMIS
system and the uh Aspen system
are perfectly capable of, of
achieving.
this. Um, so for those reasons,
we all uh thank the chair, I
mean, thank the members for
bringing it forward and asking
you to support the bill.
OK, thank you. Um, do you have
any follow-up? Are you ready for
questions?
Madam Chair, we stand for
questions. OK, so I have um
representative Ferrari,
Representative Nicole Chavez,
Representative Kate,
Representative Martinez,
Representative Jones, and
Representative Eleanor Travis.
OK, so representative Ferrari,
you're first. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, um,
representative and senator and
expert, um, because we all have
the concern of, you know, choice
of, you know, what policy the
person wants to continue with,
so they have continuity with
their doctors, the providers,
and um also maybe with their
family to all be, you know, on
under one plan. Um, can you
point to me in the bill where it
says that that choice continues.
And it's not just for new um.
Or people who didn't ask for a
choice.
As a practical matter, uh, when
you only have two choices, there
are no choices. It is not a free
market, it's an oxymoron like
being educated in Oklahoma, and,
and because you don't have
market entry,
part of my cheap shot
politically incorrect
and being an example of that, of
the, the fundamental problem is
is that when you only have those
two choices, the, the market
entry is so limited, there
aren't incentives to come in and
therefore there's not
competition or anything other
than market share. The
competition does not evolve over
however well we need to.
That's not my question. My
question is, where in the bill
does it say that people continue
to have the choice.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the, uh, the bill
itself was written broad enough
to say that the HCA has the
responsibility to balance. And
so it doesn't say, but it also
doesn't say that you're going to
lose your choice if you've made
it. So I, I give that to you to
look at also. So the way the
bill is written, it's written
broad enough so that people will
stay where they are, uh, ATA
won't be moving them around at
all, and it also doesn't.
say that they're gonna take you
away, so I, I present that to
you to also consider.
And Madam Chair and
representative, it seems like
this is already being taken care
of by HCA, so we don't really
need this bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Next, I have
Representative Nicole Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Senator, before I
start my questions, I just want
to read a part of the RFP that
all MCOs signed up for when
creating the bids to be a health
carrier. It says as provided in
section 4.2.1 on the model
contract. The contractor is not
entitled to an equal share or
number of members of auto
assigned members, HCA will not.
Consider a different rate
structure for new MCOs. So the
carriers that wanted to add
themselves to the bid to be
considered for an MCO knew that
there would not be an auto
assignment based on the criteria
and the contract. So there was
no promises made that it would
evenly be distributed.
My 2nd
Comment is two of the carriers,
the ones that seem like they're
having complaints because they
have a majority of the
membership.
I've almost been here for 20
years. One being the only New
Mexico, the New Mexico health
plan in the state, um, which is
probably why they have a
majority of patients that don't
want to move. So is it my
understanding that enrollees in
Medicare now have a choice among
the MCOs and with this bill
remove enrollees from their
current MCO and prohibit them.
From enrolling in an MCO each
year when they recertify.
And and my question to this and
let me just comment with that.
If they are on the 2 MCOs that
you're gonna try to remove them
from that they've had for.
15 years, um, and you're
rebalancing, are they not gonna
get the choice now to go back?
And what is their choice?
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Chavez, if someone has signed up
for a particular MCO, they will
not be removed from that. At the
time that it, that you read uh.
You re-enroll every year, they
still have the opportunity to
make their own choice, but we're
looking at is what happens with
those individuals who haven't
made a choice, so instead of
continuing to allocate to a, the
larger groups that already have
a majority allocate them to the
people who don't, uh, to the
MCOs who don't have the large
numbers. You never, never gonna
take away a person's choice that
they've made it. They will stay
there and if the choice ends up
where we are, then that's where
it ends up.
But we do have a number of
people who don't make that
choice at all. And so we're
saying the reallocation, the
reassignment, then comes with
respect to those in those two
entities that have not been
dedicated and Madam Chair,
members, uh, uh, Representative
Chalis. The other thing that
ACA, the um
Healthcare Authority also has a
responsibility to make sure that
they, that the all of the MCOs
that are available are well
known. So we want to also
encourage the HCA to make sure
that they're fulfilling the
obligation in that regard, could
I just jump in here real quick.
So I don't see where it says
it's a proportional number are
balanced. It doesn't say
anything about whether you're
already with what you're saying
is not what the bill is saying.
Thank you. Thank you. And
um, thank you, Representative
Chair Thompson, it doesn't say
that, and so to me it looks like
you would try to be moving over
200,000 individuals across the
state that are currently
enrolled in the 2 primary
carriers that have a majority
onto something else. And is it
not correct that there was a
very large rollout, one being
because this was the first time
we changed carriers from other
carriers than Team.
left the market, and 2 being
that we now call it turquoise
care. So there was a huge
rollout for a number of months,
um, radio, TV, um, each company
has representatives across the
state. There's about 30
meetings, I believe across the
state for people to come to
different tables from the
organizations in the MCOs for
you to choose, um, was there not
an open enrollment period for 2
months and then after the open
enrollment period, if they.
Still were not happy with their
carrier. I think there was
another 6 months that they could
have changed to a different
plan. Is that correct?
of Madame Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, you're absolutely correct.
There was a rollout, but the
question is, how many people
have access to a television. How
many people have access to all
of the entities that were used
for rollout. So with respect to
every single person who's uh
eligible for Medicaid. You have
to look at the cultural
differences that are available
and how are you absolutely
really reaching out of those
cultures and Madam Chair,
members of the committee and
Representative Chaver also ask
you to look carefully at the
term rebalancing.
And, and thinking about the
definition that I have provided
to you. If someone has made a
selection with respect to the
MCO that they want, they'll keep
that, but what if they haven't
made a selection, the
rebalancing then goes to those
who haven't made the selection
that those uh MCOs that have the
fewer people in them. That's
where the rebalancing will also
occur. So I asked you to look at
this term. It's not in a very
narrow space. It's, it seems to
be uh determined here, but
Think of it in a broader sense,
Madam Chair, Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, I
completely understand that, and
I believe that's why the HCA has
what's called an auto assignment
for future enrollees, um, so
there are already doing that
going forward for anybody that
is selecting turquoise care for
the first time. Um, my question
to you is if and and because
this bill doesn't state future,
it doesn't state they're going
to continue.
having the health plan they
have, so looking at this bill to
me, it's we're just going to
change them altogether, um,
meaning those 261,000 people
will be moving um providers for
MCOs. My question is a majority
of the time for our members on
turquoise care across the state,
I believe a lot of them have
care coordinators and those care
coordinators are employed by the
MCO that they are enrolled on.
So what would happen if we're
moving those members and and
what they have to get a new care
coordinator, new referrals, new
prior authorizations on the
carrier that they are moving to.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Chavez, um, they're not being
moved. I just want to emphasize
that if someone has made a
selection, they will stay with
the selection that they've
chosen. So no one is gonna move
them. Again, we're looking at
the reassignments. So right now,
the reassignments, the way they
go. It doesn't go to just um the
people, the MCOs where there are
the fewer number of people, they
will be looking at all 4 of
them. What we're asking is that
when there has not been an
assignment in order to
look at the rebalancing, make
sure that we are the rebalancing
with the priority first goes to
those with a fewer number of
people. So that's what's really
important for you to understand.
The other, the other thing I
just want to point out, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Representative Chavez, most
people, if they're choosing a
name recognition, not
necessarily because it's always
the best, is what people will
choose. I mean, uh, the other
two healthcare providers provide
excellent service.
They haven't been here as long,
so they don't have the name
recognition, and that is
probably why they're not being
selected. That's why it's
important for the healthcare
authority to make sure that
they're raising the uh
livelihood and the availability
of others. So I just present
that to you. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I'm glad you
brought that up because uh they
do select.
Their carrier based on many
different things, um, and I know
that there are employees at
those MCOs that are located at
different parts of our state. I
know in the contract they even
have to have representatives
from tribal and native American
areas that are located there, so
I, I know that there were people
at every different part of the
locations I know packets get
sent out that are in paper, so
they don't have to have radio or
Internet or TV, um, because they
were mailed this information and
um you stating that they
wouldn't be reassigned, so, so
is it my understanding then that
in order to catch up with almost
270,000 members. You're just
gonna block out the two larger
carriers for however many years
it takes to rebalance that. Is
that my understanding, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Representative Chavez, know that
it's not. So if we were to look
for example, if we were to look
at how many people are in place
right now, who would be on
Medicaid, and I present to you,
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, that that number is
going to grow based upon what's
happening now with the huge
number of layoffs and people
needing access to medical care,
but if 500 other people, uh, if
there are 1000 5 600 of them are
already with Blue Cross, for
example, then we have the other
400 with Blue Cross.
with Presbyterian, and then we
have the other 400. What I say
to you is that we then balance
the other 400 with the 2
remaining um MCOs as more and
more people come, then you
continue to do the rebalancing
if there has not been a
selection. So if we get another
600 who come in, then we're
going to rebalance them to those
where there are fewer people so
that they are, uh, there is
actually a rebalancing and
actually of an alignment with
the statute. So that
That's what I'm talking about,
Blue Cross, Presbyterian would
never ever be blocked out as
long as people are selecting
them, they will stay there, but
in the rebalancing where there
can be other people, uh, other
MCOs that can be utilized. I'm
suggesting to you that we
utilize them. If you are trying
to reach an organization or help
where there is already an
overcrowded number of people.
You're not likely to get this,
the attention and, and success
that you need if you were to
go someplace else where you
could actually get through,
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, the way you could if
there were fewer people in line.
So Madam Chair Representative,
um.
And let me back up. I know you
said that the two carriers that
are new, people may not be
familiar, so they probably
didn't choose him as a choice. I
believe United Healthcare and
Molina were um an MCO before the
last RFP for several years, if
not for more than a decade, so
they are very familiar. There
were hundreds of thousands of
members enrolled with both of
those carriers. They're not new
to the market in general,
they're just new to be a carrier
for.
turquoise care, so it wasn't
like an unknown like enten was
prior, a lot of people didn't
know who that was, but, um,
Molina and United, if, if I
remember correctly, were were
carriers. I, I think I actually
worked for United at the time
and then Loveless before that
when they lost the bid, um,
which was, um, very alarming. So
I guess my question for you is,
what about the people that are
maybe on Medicare.
And they then
Happen to or finally got
disability awarded to them. Um,
right now, the, the Medicaid is
supposed to follow the DSEP
plan, dual special needs
product, and they're supposed to
follow each other, um.
So what happens then if they're
on a Blue Cross Blue Shield dual
special needs product or a
Presbyterian, we're now gonna
Move them to the Medicaid and
then would that then have to
change their dual special needs
product on the Medicare side if
we are no longer choosing those
two until it balances out what
would happen to the deer
population.
It's common in these situations
in other states that you carve
out populations to protect their
original choice that in other
words, they don't get churned
that's part of the reason for
all this, uh, it, it is my
understanding, I think in a
letter I saw on the file that
HCA was going to cap that is
also a common strategy in some
other states where they do this
kind of reallocation,
rebalancing uh is that being
achieved or going to be achieved
in terms of saying that you can
be too big. In other words, so
when you begin to have that
overflow of choices because it's
already because you're
reached that camp, and those can
be reallocated. Is that have
occurred or do you know what
the, what the, what's going on
in that? I, I do not believe the
cap occurred, but that did not
at all answer my questions about
the dual special needs members.
Well, I'm sorry, I, because I,
I'm not familiar with with the
uh New Mexico circumstances
except to say that I believe
that is, is up to the agency to
determine whether or not you
want to move any of whole
populations around and it's
quite common not to let those
move around. First choice is
first choice. Is that your
understanding of that as well
and just to reminder to go
through the chair, please. Oh, I
beg your pardon, yeah, I'm sorry
I'm sorry, witness, where were
you from again? Your company?
What are you representing today?
I, I represent a number of
national.
healthcare firms and they asked
me to come in basically listen
in on this. We're very
interested, given what's going
to be happening, you know, Madam
Chair, I beg your pardon again,
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, I, uh, my interest in this
is, is that we're looking at how
this is going to adapt state by
state with a number of my
national clients, particularly
since we don't know yet what's
going to happen coming down from
the do you represent? I, I, we
didn't get that. You just said
your name.
Oh, Kimba Ross, Kimball Public
Affairs. I'm gonna ask, I beg
your pardon. Thank you so much,
um, I guess that still doesn't
answer my questions about the
dual special needs product, so
there's dual special needs,
those are
Those are members with Medicaid
and Medicare, and if they have a
Medicare product right now based
on Blue Cross Blue Shield or
Presbyterian, um, and then they
get dis disability awarded, then
they would qualify for a dual
special needs product.
Right now, the dual special
needs product is supposed to
align their Medicare and
Medicaid. But if you're taking
then Blue Cross Blue Shield and
Presbyterian out.
Until we get balanced, what
would happen to those members
that have Medicare on Blue Cross
Blue Shield or Pre Presbyterian,
but they would have to then
change their Medicare product as
well.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, you know, they need to be in
the same product. So if they're
already in one, they should be
assigned by the HCA to the same
one, that you, you don't, in
the, the sniff as you noted, you
do not want to split that at
all. So that would not occur
under the, I, I know it doesn't
explicitly state it, but it
should not occur under the bill.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative Senator,
expert witness, it just seems
like there's going to be such a
huge.
disruption, um, these
individuals already had their
choice. Um, it was a very
Deliberate rollout, um, I
remember counterparts on the
Medicaid side that we're
traveling the state for 6
months, um, and then they had a
6 month rollout like I stated
after that, so if people weren't
happy with who they chose, they
could have been rebalanced then.
Um, if the HCA is not in favor
of it because it does take a
huge amount of workforce to
re-educate, um, and then not.
Even including, I looked at the
FIR and it, it's pretty high,
but not even including. You're
gonna have to re-educate, you're
gonna have to go staff on
re-rollouts for all the MCOs for
um the healthcare authority
you're gonna have to send out
packets all over again, resend
out letters again, that just
seems like a lot of money that
everybody on all counts are
going to be spending on this.
Um, I guess those, those are all
the questions I have think and
just, it seems like uh
Going down a path where you're
saying, um, Madam Vice Chair,
that it's only new enrollees,
but can you show me in the bill
where it says that.
So Madam Chair.
The, the bill talks about
balancing, and that's all it
talks about. So in terms of
balancing, if people make a
choice, their choice will be
honored. Nothing's gonna happen
with that, but, but
representative, that's not in
the bill, but it says balancing,
and so that's what I'm saying,
you the what the committee seems
to be looking at is a very
narrow definition of balancing,
and so we are looking at the
numbers of people, there are
still a large number of people
who don't make a selection.
And so when the right now the
way the process is set up for uh
automated assignment, it will
still go out to all 4. We're
saying that when you come to
automatic assignment, you only,
you look at those where there
wasn't a choice made, but you
send it to those two MCOs or
those MCOs that don't have that
high number of people in them so
that we are balancing. That's
what we're saying, Madam Chair.
Madam Vice Chair.
If it doesn't say they can't do
it in the bill, then they can.
Me, we will amend the bill. How
about that? So you can see that,
but that, that is the intent,
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, it's not to take away
anybody's choice ever
Again, I think the whole
committee, uh mostly is really
concerned because it, it leaves
it wide open. Someone could come
along someday and say, well,
this means that we're just gonna
Count up the people on Medicaid
and divide them in quarters and
everybody gets a quarter. It
doesn't say it can't in the
bill, so it says it can.
Thank you. And, and there has
been a suggestion to roll the
bill and make that amendment.
Madam Chair, I think that's a
very wise, uh, insight, uh,
because of the lack of that
clarity, uh, I've joined in this
bill simply from the point of
view of actuarial science, just
if you balance the numbers, you,
the, the ability of the, the low
number of people to survive in
the marketplace gets stronger
and you have then good continued
competition on quality and
service. So, but I think your
suggestion is a very good one,
and given
That we're all probably being
called the flu as I am, um, that
may be a, a great way to
proceed. And, and also, I mean
this feels kind of like we
always talk about choosing
winners and losers. We are
trying to choose winners and
losers with this, uh, trying to,
I, I, I am concerned about
restraint of trade, actually, I
mean, I'm not a lawyer. I don't
understand any of that, but this
to me sounds like we're
guaranteeing and representative
um Nicole Chavez.
talked about what you signed
when you sign on as an MCO. So
Representative Anaya and Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
on the effort of rolling the
bill. I was actually really
encouraged to hear, uh, Miss
Dances talk about the fact that
there could be a competitive
piece of this if we were talking
about, um, patient outcomes,
successful care coordination,
affordability, and provider
reimbursement. So if you are
going to roll this bill, I would
imagine that that would
incentivize in the right way,
um.
The
uh, redistribution of folks who
haven't chosen in a way that
actually makes sense with
patient care.
Thank you Madam Representative
Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing this. I
do understand uh the importance
of uh spreading the risk in a
balanced way. I, I do understand
the theory of it. It is not in
the bill, so I'm glad that
rolling it up to make it very
clarify, especially leaving the
bill in its currencies, leaving
it to the interpretation of the
HCA who already is telling you
they don't support it. I don't
feel they're going to follow
your intent unless you write.
specifically what it is. Um, uh,
Madam Chair Representative I, I
also would like that you had
said that it's the HCA's um duty
to uh make sure that everyone is
informed of choice. I will tell
you in previous RFPs, the
obviously the our our long term
providers are people who they're
familiar with, and that's who
they're automatically choosing.
And I think that's fine, OK, so,
so I'm gonna cut it off. I'm
gonna ask for something to be
part of the that
that I'm getting there.
Um,
I, I, I.
OK, so we will roll this bill
until Wednesday.
Thank you, Madam Chair. May I
say something, please? Yes, I'm
disappointed that we're allowing
derogatory comments about the
educational status of other
states, especially since uh
Oklahoma is ranked forty-ninth
and the New Mexico is ranked
51st. I don't think we have any
right to be laughing at them.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, I'm educated in Oklahoma. I
was, was a self-democratic humor
and I apologize to them.
Thank you. OK, we are adjourned.
Thank you, Representatives.
