Representative August
Representative focused
she is, uh, traffic. Okay.
representative, Ferrari
President representative for a
meal here,
Representative Jones.
Rep. Representative Lord
Representatives Panofsky Yeah,
representative of Instant
Ice cream. Here she is in a, um,
BSC hearing. She's excuse me.
Okay? Representative was just
walked in.
Um Madam Chair here, and we we
do not have a quorum. So
representative Matthews go ahead
with HB 11.
Thanks.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Don't move your mind with turned
on. If you want to move it, Turn
it off.
There's last night I got I got
it. Yes, talking to me about
that. Ah remembers of the
community. Thank you. So much
for meeting with us and the
opportunities present, Um HB 11
Wednesday three. You heard her
testimony regarding H B six,
There's last night. I got I got
it. Yes, talking to me about
that. Ah remembers of the
community. Thank you So much for
meeting with us and the
opportunities present. Um HB 11,
Wednesday three. You heard her
testimony regarding H B 6% d
Family medical program in New
Mexico.
11 also established paid family
medical program in New Mexico
and certainly
the second president diversity
of inclusion at the health
sciences spinner.
we have we have gremlins. God,
Yeah,
okay, very, very briefly.
Ah, the reason that we have two
different bills, but not totally
different is that there was
disagreement. How bad creative
programming family holy programs
that is sustainable,
responsible effectively delivers
the promises benefits to
recipients of benefits and as
that without producing
others understand how important
policy
You know?
This is about our lives or
something.
Um, but, yeah, I apologize.
representative before but you
know how do you here we we We
We do what we have to do so if
it comes back, just right. Ah,
um I think Can we get I t? Okay?
All right, And we'll just keep
trying. Okay. Thank you.
Manager. Yes, I've been here
long enough to know that there
are gremlins many places. Um, so
this morning, um, that would be
the most useful is somebody keep
differences in the
Bills.
And the policy reasons for the
differences and one of the
things that personally quite
frankly, I personally think it's
about people who hears that was
a chance to have a real policy
discussion about how best to
deliver this program Mexicans
and I think doesn't matter.
People discussion major program
like this, um helps explain
those differences in the
rational for them. Experts
problem Black
My left with the executive
director of the New Mexico
Chamber conference, making
Lubrano who is sitting to my
right who is the executive
director, Mexico's Association
for Home and Hospital. Compare
we have on American couple cat
the Family medical program in
Connecticut, who helped put it
together and implement it, and a
number of us went to a House
workshop in Nashville, November.
Which one was incredibly
valuable experience. At least I
found it was perhaps
black also found it really
helpful and there was
representative representative
Chandler representatives around
all were. There are women. Um
There was a good group there
and what we do have to do is not
only the background about it the
importance of having bonding
bonding time with the child, but
we also got to hear from a
number of individuals and stage
either considering of programs
are or have already done it and
could share with us.
This work. This didn't work
experience and learning best
practices, learning how best to
do this and one of the programs.
We were very impressed, but I
was doing in Connecticut and
with that, I'm gonna turn this
over to. Hopefully we're we've
got to tackle all ready to go,
Erin, go can't too.
Just shared so much information
with us about how they put
together and I felt that that
would be incredibly useful to
do all of us as we go down this
path, so
I'm sorry, Erin.
Marijuana
Thank you, sir.
We're having a few technical
difficulties. Hold on. Oh, I'm
hearing it Might be you or your
system, Not you. Um
um
by
saying that I am fine. I don't
know. Very different over
getting from you. Is your voice
covered standing? We can't
really make out what you're
saying.
Totally sure what tissues? Um
It's still not working here in
Totally sure. What tissues? Um
It's still not working. Erin.
Yeah. Um,
let me try. You
We can't understand you. I'm not
sure
Okay?
So funny, Um, still bad. Yeah,
Yeah,
Men, Cherry. We're waiting to
get the video work. Um, we just
passed out
now. I'm actually here. We
didn't pass out. Um, some she
provided written testimony and
we thought we were going to
represent on Wednesday
passed that out. I just want to
be sure that everybody was that
they don't
Made it the
average is gonna help ensure
that everybody has that. Okay,
so Erin
I don't know if you were trying
to do video. Um, if you were
maybe if you could just try
audio. We'll try one more time
And then we'll have to move on
short. Um, I'm not trying to do
We still can't understand you,
um
I don't know what to tell you.
My It's not working out. Oh, I'm
sorry. We we and we have a long
agenda. We do have your written
comments so we will move on and
go back to your representative
Matthews. I apologize for the
tech, but I have
No. No knowledge or control over
text. Go ahead. Representative
Matthews again. I'm sorry, Erin.
Madam chair. Thank you. I wonder
if perhaps attack people could
continue. We proceed, but the
tech people might
And
See if we could fix that. And we
put her on a little later. Okay.
Okay. That's fine. If if, if the
tech folks could, uh
Okay, So, um, yeah, we'll just
we'll just go on.
It is.
Um
So madam chair and members of
the committee.
Um
As I noted that there are some
several major differences
between HB six and HB 11, and so
we're going to be focusing, as I
said.
On what those differences are
and trying to explain the policy
reasons and the thoughts as to
why, uh, there was merit in, um
In some of the ideas that we had
Um and I want to say is the
beginning that
Uh, I don't question the, um
What the good intentions of any
of the, uh proponents of HB six.
It is a policy.
Difference, not a personal one.
And but we ought to be able to
have those discussions without
your feelings, feelings or being
disagreeable, and I certainly
I'm going to try to have that be
the situation. Um, so one of the
major differences is in order to
pay for the benefits and
operating expenses of the
program. HB six, imposes a
payroll tax on both employers
and on employees.
HB 11, in contrast, imposes
payroll taxes on employees only.
Um
Second major difference is the
length of benefit in HB six. It
is 12 weeks a year.
And the length of benefit in HB
11 is six weeks a year.
And then the third major.
Um
Difference.
Is the administration of the
program, HB six, relies
primarily on the Department of
Workforce Solutions.
In contrast, HB 11 creates a
board to oversee the operation
and creates an authority to
actually run the program, which
is administratively attached to
Department of Workforce
Solutions.
And I'm unfortunately, Aaron
could really talk to
What their experience was using
a structure like this and why it
had led to some of the best
customer service in a government
program that quite frankly, I've
ever heard of responding to
telephone calls. For example,
the wait time was
30 seconds or less. It's just
amazing.
Anyway, Um so will address the
first difference first, and with
that What I'd like to do is ask
Megan.
To describe what the caretaker
community and by caretaker
community that's sort of a broad
term for the people.
Who provide, uh, services
student developmentally
disabled to childcare to, uh all
sort of in all those programs
that are designed to help people
who need help to function in
their daily lives.
Representative Matthews, I'm
gonna We can go ahead with this,
but I'm going to ask you to just
talk about your bill. We heard
the other bill two days ago.
And so rather than going through
that again, let's just stick
with your bill. Okay? Sure.
Thank you. And, um
So, uh, what would be Megan is
going to talk about? Um, let's
see. Hang on one second here. I
lost my place.
Um, describe what did Caretaker
community is the impact of
unfunded mandates on caretakers
and the effect of an employer
payroll tax would have on
services to the clients that she
and others serve.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Megan Lorino, and I am
the executive director of the
New Mexico Association for Home
and Hospice Care.
Our association represents home
care, hospice and personal care
service providers at almost 150
locations across the state who
provide care to 56,000 new
Mexicans and their home each
year.
My providers by and large, are
either reimbursed by Medicare or
Medicaid, which is important to
note because we are great
takers. We are not rate setters.
Based on the age and health
status of the patient, sir by my
providers, we support the oldest
and some of the most vulnerable,
vulnerable new Mexicans and our
state.
And you likely already know that
New Mexico is trending to have
the second highest population of
adults, 65 and older by 2030.
If you've cared for, or love
someone 65 or older, you might
know that they also 90% of them
prefer to stay in their home and
receive care in their home for
as long as possible.
For the purpose of my comments
today. I'm going to focus
primarily on our personal care
service providers that we
represent and the more than
24,000 new Mexicans that they
serve each year.
These providers are fully funded
by Medicaid.
And they provide activities of
daily living like bathing,
toilet teen and meal preparation
for our state's most vulnerable
who, without these services
would be eligible for a nursing
facility level of care.
And just to make sure you all
are aware and on average, a
nursing home facility placement
is about $99,000 a month while
our services are on average
about $3500 a month.
So we really represent a patient
preferred and cost effective
care.
And we are a part of the state
safety net and we are in crisis.
Nationwide. 95% of agencies are
experiencing moderate to severe
staffing shortages.
And in New Mexico. This crisis
is driven in large part by a
series of UN and underfunded
mandates over the past five
years.
As a prime example. Since 2019
you likely know the New Mexico
minimum wage has increased from
$7.50 an hour to today. It's $12
an hour, which is a 60%
increase.
However, reimbursement rates
which are set by this by through
the state, have only recognize
the cost of that increased
minimum wage. They have not
recognize the corresponding
increases in costs, such as FICA
Social Security, unemployment,
taxes, workers comp, not to
mention corresponding, increased
overhead costs.
While minimum wage rose by $4.50
an hour based on our
association's internal rate
Study, costs that were driven by
the state increased for our
providers during that same time
by more than $7.54 an hour.
So, yes, we are sure, almost $3
an hour for every hour. We
provide care in the home.
The only reason why we still
have providers right now is
thanks to the arbor recovery
dollars and those are running
out this year.
Once those federal relief
dollars are gone without any
further action. I'm afraid we
will see personal care service
providers closing their door
doors unable to continue to
serve their clients.
And this is just this minimum
wage increase is just one of
many examples of AnAnd
underfunded mandates. They also
include electronic visit
verification, destination based
gross receipt taxes and paid six
leave.
In spite of these on and
underfunded mandates are
providers are doing their very
best to keep worker wages
competitive, developed family
friendly policies and create a
work environment that attracts
and retains of very critical
workforce.
But time and time again, our
providers are forgotten and our
costs are not fully recognized.
Each legislative session and
during the interim, we try to
work with the state, and we also
come to you here at the
legislator to bring to light the
challenges these unfunded
mandates posed to our industry.
However, the process by which to
understand and impact rates for
our providers has been in my
experience opaque and today have
largely fallen on deaf ears.
Last legislative session, Our
association founded champion and
representative Matthews, She
took the time to understand the
current concerns of Medicaid
providers.
And she took the time to
understand that when Legislature
makes laws that impact wages or
increases statutory benefits
like paid family medical leave,
they create an unfunded mandate
for Medicaid providers who
provide the state safety net
services.
Representative Matthews has met
with our members and even our
clients to to serve to better
address these concerns of around
unfunded mandates.
And that's really what I'm here
to talk about. HB 11 addresses
the biggest concerns our
industry has with creating a
paid family medical leave. It
does not add that cost to the
employers in the end cost and
the cost to the employees is the
same as the alternative bill.
Meaning it is not more expensive
for our employees, either,
whereas HB six created yet
another mandate for our
industry, where we will have to
wait and see if they are fully
offended at all by Medicaid.
We fully recognize the need to
have competitive wages to have
family friendly benefits.
And most importantly, the
critical importance of caring
for people in their home.
However, we are already
inadequately funded.
The state cannot add wages or in
this, you Mr Chair members of
the Senate Education Committee.
It's a pleasure to be here.
Secretary Greg Genske with the
early childhood education and
care Department, I want to thank
Kelly clamp the LFC and Senator
Hemphill for bringing forward
this bill to increase the
distribution from the early
childhood Trust fund. In case
you, Governor John Grisham
Creek We're giving me
in our second year in her office
and just trust fund has produced
such great results.
Committed and families in
between. As Senator Hemphill
talked about all the program
statement, but I think we have a
lot to be proud of here in New
Mexico because of the wise
decisions. You all made to
create the department to create
the trust fund back to continue
with the passage of the
constitutional amendment that
70% of voters also agreed with,
We should spend more on early
childhood.
I am so happy to report that we
have 89% of our pre K slots
enrolled that we funded and
that's a huge accomplishment
since we had $100 million basket
Silence,
Childcare is growing 7000
Children are receiving
assistance in high quality
spaces where, uh,
early intervention number one in
the nation for, um I don't find
Children birth up to age three.
Need, Um you know who have
We're excited to be here and
again grateful for all of your
support.
Senate Bill 153.
Okay, Go ahead. I hope that was
my
I'm finished with my comments.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Mhm.
And I would just remind people
to stay. What's in the bill? Not
about the bigger problems that
we have as a state because we
could all be here the rest of
our lives to discuss those
Well, Madam chair. I appreciate
that. But the point of having a
paid family medical leave is to
help.
Resolve some problems, and I
think understanding the context
of that is important. So, with
all due respect
I'm getting signs from further
back that they can't hear you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, uh,
maybe we should go back to when
we are just sat in the room and
stood up and talked really loud.
You may have something there.
Um, what I was saying, Madam
Cherries. I think it's very
important to understand that the
context in which this bill is
presented and what impact these
decisions, for example on an
employer
Payroll tax has on
Thousands of new Mexicans who
services will be reduced.
If the bill is passed with an
employer payroll tax, because
the policy decision that we made
in our bill
Was to attempt to find a balance
between
Providing a new benefit, Good
benefit and doing it at the same
time that we do not harm
The is it the all the folks who
are getting home and healthcare
developmental, disability
services and all other hosts of
things because that will be a
consequence of a payroll tax on
employers. But representative I
understand that, but we we can
see it in a more succinct way,
as opposed to talking about
history, and I mean
Believe me, I'm 100% there, but
we we have so many bills, and we
only get 30 days and so I'm
trying to get this bill.
Heard and so we can go through
the rest of them. So if we can
just keep it to the bill and
consequences, you can discuss
consequences. But as I said,
let's not go into what what I
mean. I'm the first one to say
we have underpaid those folks
forever. But that's not exactly
this bill.
Oh, man, I'm sure With all due
respect, I disagree. This is why
a key There's a key difference,
But I appreciate that. Okay. I'm
just saying keep it brief.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um
It comes up in the context of
skin in the game.
And what is the role of the
employer in providing this
service in terms of the
finances?
And
Um
Heart of what the employer deals
with under the bill is having to
cover the cost of replacing the
employee for the period of time.
that, uh, the worker takes paid
family medical leave.
And depending obviously, that
depends some on the industry and
so forth, but just to provide
some
Information a nursing home, for
example.
Ah!
Mhm will pay the difference
between a regular nurse's salary
is something 29 to $34 an hour
and in contrast when they have
to go to the agencies or
traveling nurses to cover the
vacancies, it's in the range of
$64 an hour or maybe more than
100, so there's a substantial
financial commitment by
employers, even if they're not
in the healthcare field.
Two.
Uh huh.
Uh, to to to, uh, help be a
financial part of this program.
Um
And the other
Well, I'll wait on that.
Let's see.
The
Give me just one second.
And, uh,
Madam share our, uh or other
expert Rob black. We'll talk a
little bit more about the bill
and how it relates to this
issue.
I'm sure it's a It's a pleasure
to be here, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with the
committee today. Um and I was as
I mentioned on Wednesday, I was
very honored that the speaker
asked me to represent
The state as part of his
delegation to Vanderbilt
University for a three day
conference around paid family
medical leave with a variety of
the representatives who are
involved in this issue. Um and
as a representative mentioned,
we learned a lot at that at that
hearing or that that conference,
um in particular, we learned
about the idea of really leaning
in as an important component of
a successful plan.
Is building a plan that works
for both employers and
employees. Um, so as we looked
at it, we saw
Some of the challenges that we
have seen over the last several
years from the business.
community side is making sure
that a plan is fiscally solvent
so that it ensures that benefits
can be paid, but also that it
doesn't create more harm or
unintended harm as the
representative and and Megan has
discussed this morning
Ah, when we looked at the
Connecticut model, we saw a
model that really represented a
approach that was done in a
frankly a democratic state with
a Democratic governor, House and
legislature that is created of
solvent plan that provides
efficient benefits. Um, what we
wanted to do and and looking at
the design of a plan.
Was also set up set it so that
we have an opportunity to start
frankly at a modest level, and
when and if the the fund is
sufficient and financially
viable to ensure benefits are
being paid that there is
potential to grow that benefit
over time.
So starting conservatively and
then allowing for growth was the
model that we wanted to take to
ensure that we were able to
ensure benefits being paid for
what is in a very important
benefit for workers and and,
frankly for businesses, because
I think there is a real role
there as a representative, said
there are substantial costs
whether it's
Replacement costs overtime costs
carrying of insurance, so the
bill HB 11 will require the
employer to carry benefits and
paid continue to pay benefits
while the employees on leave
They guarantee the position for
the employee when they come back
to work.
Um, so there is a variety of
ways that the employer has is
investing in this process to
ensure that that Bennett that
the the employees taking care
of, um and that their job is
retained so that they can come
back to work soon. We believe
that their employer very much is
involved in supporting this
program, even though they are
not getting it in a separate
tax.
But with that, because of the
scope, and that's another reason
rationale again for starting at
six weeks versus 12 in the
research that has been done that
has been the baseline for
starting these plans. Six weeks
is when you can start getting
state subsidies for child
services, childcare services, So
it aligns with our state
programs and funding.
So that was the rationale for
starting at a lower rate benefit
again with the opportunity to
grow and with that, and with the
ammunition of the chair in mind,
I will pause there and
Be available for the for any
further comments.
Thank you, Uh, Madam chair. Um,
the other the other thing that
we would mention at that point
is in terms of the employer tax
or the employee tax is that um,
and a number of the states that
have
I want a history of having paid
family medical leave, including
state like California has done
so with employee e funded
Ah program and not both An
employee and employer funded
program.
And, uh, none of the states.
I think this is accurate. And
please correct me If I'm
incorrect, none of the states
That
Are using employee employer
funding Do payroll tax.
Um
You are currently playing paying
benefits. Some are getting ready
to pay benefits and the
exception to that would be
Washington and Oregon and the
history of what's happened with
them is really instructive in
terms of what is the best
practices in this area.
So I guess, uh,
Mr Black to talk about that just
for a second.
So I I do one slight correction.
There are some states the vast
majority of states started so
California, New Jersey, Rhode
Island all were 100 100%
employee funded, but there's
subsequent states that have
split types of insurance plans.
So I parental leave plan and a
family leave plan where the
parental leave plan maybe 100%
employee funded
And the family leave plan may
have a split with the employers
so every state is different. I
think that is one thing that
that that is important to
articulate.
But and this is again a reason
why we thought the Connecticut
model was really strong.
Um, Washington State has been
paying this benefit for the last
four years.
Every year that they've had to
pay benefits they've had to
raise taxes.
In 2022 that Washington state
Legislature set aside $350
million to ensure solvency of
their plan.
There currently.
They have had to grow their
workforce in the state of
Washington.
There and in 2023. They had 388
employees administering this
benefit that have now requested
an additional 49 so they'll have
437 employees minister their
plan this coming year.
They based on the Connecticut
model where you have a separate
authority with the ability to
contract out for services.
They've had a higher between 38
and 40 employees to run their
program in the state of
Connecticut.
State of Washington's
Average time for response from
an application to starting to
pay benefits is five weeks.
In Connecticut. It's five days.
The response time for cues in
the state of Washington for a
phone call to get services.
It's 30 minutes and 3230.
30 minutes. Um
32 seconds.
87% of all responses in the
state of Connecticut happened
within 30 seconds.
So we believe that that is a
much better service model than
than what has previously been
proposed here in the state. And
so those are some of the
challenges that we've seen with
some of the existing models out
there. They'd become very
bureaucratic, inefficient for
delivery of services and are
costing more, and it's forcing.
Business businesses employees to
pay higher taxes I was this week
I was at a conference with a
colleague of mine who runs the
equivalent of the State Chamber
of Commerce in Oregon.
Oregon started paying benefits.
September October this year.
There are already discussing the
need to reduce benefits in
Oregon because they're not going
to be solvent.
So those are the concerns we
have, and that's part of the
reason again that the design
around HB 11 is such that it
starts. Small is conservative.
It helps provide an important
benefit for our employees and
our new Mexicans, but it does in
a way that's very responsible,
and that's been the kind of
Touchstone of what, how we've
tried to design this program is
being financially responsible
for those underserved in our
community Reliant on Social
safety net.
But also to those employees who
deserve a benefit and and
deserve to get paid efficiently
and effectively.
Thank you. Madam Chair. Arbil
also is designed to allow the
growth of the program and we
have specifically put in
provisions that based on
actuarial studies that the
benefits can be increased that,
um, that as long as we have a
structure that assures that
we're watching the solvency, and
if we start to run into
problems, we can react quickly.
So that we don't have to
interrupt delivery of benefits
to the people who have been
promised benefits.
Um, we're trying to make this
something that won't turn into a
G. We made you a lot of
promises, but like the medical
fragile, fragile program that we
have in the state, we can't
deliver them.
Um
I would like to, um
True, and is Madame Cherries.
Um, sorry to
Now they're on the zoom.
Actually she is, do you, uh,
Madam. Um I almost called you
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary.
If you can raise your hand Did
you have a representative
Matthews did you what her for to
be available for questions, Or
did you want her to make have
you made arrangements for her to
make a statement? No, Madam
chair. We I just We was going to
talk a little bit more about
this structure that we
suggested, and I because it
affects her agency.
I just was
Wondering if she was there She
is. She is there and she texted
me that she is available for
questions. If if they come up,
okay?
So the way that uh H B six
It's essentially turns over the
administration of the program
Workforce Solutions.
Our approach has been somewhat
different.
Ah, we believe it's absolutely
essential that the program be
administratively attached to or
four solutions, and our bill
provides for that. The reason is
because of the databases that
are there because of the
unemployment systems and all the
other labor kinds of things that
that agency deals with and
having access to that data.
Is an important tie in terms of
administrating a program as
complex as this
Um, But in addition to that
There's some question and I had.
I just want to say I have the
greatest respect for Siri to
here, but the agency has had a
history of very high vacancy
rates, and I think it's may
still be in the range of 25 to
35%.
Um the agency. Uh, during Covid.
Um, which was
Certainly not all of secretary
nine years time. Uh, 200. This
is from the lfc $220 million of
fraudulent claims were paid and
there has been no recovery of
those.
So we're talking about a program
general. That's going to be
paying out lots and lots of
money. We need to have a agency
that is capable of managing it
effectively.
So what we created
For a couple of reasons. First
of all, it's going to be a lot
of rulemaking under our bill,
and also under as HB six. And so
the question is, who's going to
make the rules and
Our plan is to create a state
board paid family medical leave
insurance.
And that will be the governing
body for this program, Moving
forward complex program.
Uh, under either Bill
And so that board the majority
of the members of that would be
appointed by the governor.
And then there would be
representatives of various
What affected organ affected
groups. For example, people who
are
Familiar with the needs of
seniors. People who are familiar
with the needs of childcare, and
I think it's interesting that
when you look at
Uh huh.
The people who had impact into
impact who had been put in the H
B six
They had an advisory committee
and their advisory committees
essentially going to come over
here and make the rules under HB
six.
Missing from that was anybody
who represented healthcare
healthcare provider Anybody who
represented a childcare provider
people who are working in rural
New Mexico who need to
Yeah, you know, in order to make
this program work, um it's just
not having those people with the
table. Think made it real
difference in how this Bill HB
six was drafted HB 11. We want
those people at the table. We
want to be sure that they their
voices are heard as the rules
are developed.
And so we provide a very
different model for that.
Um
That board would then create
I authority or the law would
create an authority and I
realize that we need to do some
work on the technical
requirements and that in our
bill, but that can be done.
That authority would actually
run the program so different
Department of Workforce
Solutions would not directly run
the program, even though there
was a administrative attachment
and the secretary of Workforce
Solutions would certainly be on
the board.
Uh, that I just described as the
as being the oversight of the of
the program.
Um
The authority would do the
actual day to day administration
and would be empowered to enter
into programs. I'm sorry to be
in the contracts with third
party providers who have the
expertise to manage a program
like this and in the state of
Connecticut.
They used a model like this.
They put the administration of
the program, the payment of the
benefits and so forth out to a
served part. They did an RFP and
so bids three companies bid on
it.
The one they chose to run. It
was AFLAC.
This is essentially a short term
disability insurance policy that
is with this program is
Is to provide benefits on a
relatively short term to people
who have
Um, there were is interrupted by
illness or by pregnancy or
whatever.
A flecked for $1.5 million.
Structured, got the structure to
the point.
In 280 days where the
Connecticut could go ahead and
implement the program.
I mean,
And
Once and then was hired to
actually be the administrator.
payout benefits and so forth.
Um, they do that for a dollar 24
per covered employee.
For months.
It is.
Turned out not to be without
totally without some problems.
It is an insurance company, but
the point of it is to
Mhm, not give them a financial
benefit to turning down claims,
And so it's important that in
devising the contracts with
their party vendors, that we be
sure that no insurance company
has a financial motivation to
turn down claims that they do
it.
That any claim process is
honest.
And we want people to get the
benefits they're entitled to.
And you can do that by writing a
good contract, And in fact,
AFLAC turned out too many claims
at the beginning, and they paid
the state $670 million or
something
closer to three and happening at
3.5 million, so it is possible
to use the expertise of a
private insurance company.
On this and at the same time get
the benefit of their expertise
and their their
Uh, skill in doing these kinds
of things, And as we pointed out
earlier, the they're very fast
and turning around decisions,
and they're very capable of
being sure that benefits are
being delivered to people as
quickly as possible.
And
The the only other thing I would
say about that is
By using that kind of a system
to deliver the benefit.
Um
You still have oversight by the
state. You have the appeals
process with probably be handled
by Department of Workforce
Solutions, so that would be up
to the authority.
Um and so you have the best of a
private public partnership.
delivering a great benefit.
And the advantage, of course, is
if it works well, that's good
for the employer, and that's
good for the employee.
Um
Programs that don't deliver are
not good for employers or
they're not good for employees.
Just a moment.
Um Madam Chair. So with that
that's an overview of how our
program works, and I would
somewhat how it's different and
key ways from H B six, which I
think is irrelevant Question.
To understand why and how we
came to where we got to. And
with that was Stanford
questions.
Okay, we will go to the
audience. First. Those in
opposition raise your hands.
Okay. And we we will hear Hear
10 people, one minute comments
and I have a list of people who
have signed up and then we will
go to zoom for 55. People with
one minute comments if there are
five
So we'll start with I'll give
you the and if you can hear
supposed to have mix in the
ceiling, but if you could come
to the center aisle, um Lance,
and uh and Gilbert, Doctor
Mingma Sherpa Doctor Destiny,
Marquez, John Lip chips. Tatiana
Prieto, Alicia Ortega,
Alexandria Taylor. Charles. Good
marker, Reverend Erica Ferguson,
Alma Castro.
Castro.
Those are the ones uh, in in
person, so whenever you're ready
land
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Lance, Son
of policy director for the
Center. Pacific Policy. Stage
four. Cancer Patient. Great.
Stop you for one second.
Medicare. I'm just wondering how
do people know ahead of time
that they have to sign up on the
Medicare. I'm just wondering how
do people know ahead of time
that they have to sign up on a
list to to speak for public
comment?
The advocates have arranged it.
So is this something that was
put out on the website so that
the public knows that
I don't know. Okay, I appreciate
finding that out. Okay. Thank
you. Thank you.
Go ahead. Let's start over.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Lansana,
policy director for the Center
Pacific Policy and Stage four
cancer patient and it is great
to be here.
Start by extending my
appreciation to the sponsor of
HB six because in the many years
of discussing paid family
medical leave, they met with
opposition and even make
concessions to concerns.
However, the sponsor of this
bill made no effort even when I
personally extended an
invitation to my last
chemotherapy session, a
privilege not even my own
husband or family got to partake
in.
And now that I have stopped
treatment, and the cancer
continues to spread, I am at the
point of buying time this
Monday. I will have surgery in
removing a tumor from my lung
and again graciously extend an
invitation to the sponsor and
anyone in support of this bill
to join me in recovery at the
hospital to highlight the
humanity or perhaps lack there
of on the matter. This bill not
only does not give sufficient
times for families facing
cancer, it places administrative
burdens and doesn't allow
parents to grieve when their
child has died from cancer.
On top of this. It seeks to
criminalize families and
felonies. Those that are in the
most difficult time. I urge you
to vote No on HBO. Thank you.
and just to remind her we're
going to be civil and not not
question anyone's motives or,
um, anything else.
Good morning. My name is Anne
Gilbert Gomez. And I'm a family
nurse practitioner. I have a
private practice in Rio Rancho.
I employ seven people who rely
on me. Not only do you pay them
but to provide them benefits I
as a small business owner. I do
not support HB 11 providing a
benefit. That's a shared
expense.
By both me and my employees
seems to be more of a benefit.
Then a burden to my staff, and
my practice relies very heavily
on each and every one of my
seven staff members and if one
of them was out for any period
of time, it would really be a
significant loss to my practice.
HB 11 does not provide a shared
benefit to the employees, and I
feel that a cost to the employee
is not equitable or benefit.
It's just an extra expense to my
staff.
As a health care provider. I'm
also very concerned that six
weeks is not an adequate amount
of time for anyone to recover
from a major medical condition,
surgery procedure or treatment
and as a business owner. I want
the ability to be able to share
the costs of my employees. So I
can truly say I'm giving him a
benefit and not an additional
burden. Thank you. Thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dr Sherpa
and I am an A B G Y and in
training in New Mexico as a no,
B, I take care of pregnant and
postpartum patients and when I
see patients in their six week
visit, I know that six weeks of
paid time off is not enough.
Not specifically, you'll need
your pregnancy but other
healthcare issues as well as a
provider assault, unfortunately,
deal with insurance companies
and adding paid family medical
leave approval and denial to
insurance companies is going to
be hard continuing to limit
patient care, based on insurance
approval and denial continues to
add to the moral injury that we
as providers face, which adds to
more provider burnout.
Last week as many of us as
providers. Many of us do not get
the amount of lead that we
recommend for our patients.
Mexico has a significant
shortage of providers and if we
want to attract and retain
providers, we need at least 12
weeks of leave, and we need
employers to contribute to the
paid time off as well. Thank you
so much for your time.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dr
Friedman. I'm speaking on behalf
of Dr Marquez. Um
I am also in a obstetrician
gynecologist and training here
in New Mexico, and I urge you to
oppose house Bill 11. The
legislation just is not enough
to support our working patients
and parents, um and our
healthcare providers.
Six weeks of the family medical
leave just isn't sufficient time
for patients to heal. Um
FMLA affords people 12 weeks for
a reason, and the American
College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists recognizes up to a
year in the postpartum period as
a really essential time that
supported Medicaid expansion and
the 1st 12 weeks are a super
critical time in that in that
first year, postpartum
For people to bond with their
Children. Not everybody is able
to come home with their babies.
Some people have Children who
are you need higher levels of
care in the NICU. It's a
supercritical, um, time and then
I agree with Dr Sherpa that as
we're thinking about retaining
physicians in the state of New
Mexico having robust paid family
medical leave will also help
support position physicians
because it supports our
patients.
Um and that's really what we
need as clinicians in order to
be successful, caring for the
people of New Mexico. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor and
I'm, the executive director of
the New Mexico Coalition of
Sexual Assault programs. We
oppose HB 11 because it leaves
out critically important safely
for survivors of sexual and
domestic violence. Survivors
need paid safely in order to
maintain economic security leave
their abusive partners.
And seek safety and healing for
their families. A lack of paid
safely also harms businesses and
the economy to reduce
productivity and the cost of
increased turnover. A recent
study estimated that workers Ms
741 million days of work over
their lifetimes because of
domestic violence, sexual
assault and stalking.
In order to support all workers
who are survivors. Safe leave
must be paid support all type of
workers provide job protection
and bar employer retaliation.
Lastly, a strong FML policy is
an evidence based solution in
the primary prevention of sexual
assault, according to the CDC.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Tatiana Santo and I'm, a
community engagement specialist
with the American Civil
Liberties Union of New Mexico.
We strongly oppose this bill
because the outline penalties
including misdemeanor and felony
charges, could potentially lead
to wrongful criminalization of
those seeking eligibility and
would be more harmful than
beneficial. The language in this
bill would include penalties for
innocent air by an employer
filing paperwork. Foreign
employees necessary leave.
Criminal charges, even minor
ones can cause significant harm
to families, including time and
money wrapped up in court dates,
fees and time spent away from
loved ones when they most need
to be together, paid family and
medical leave should be about
supporting our families and
communities when they most need
it. Not about punishing people
well, they are trying to support
each other while dealing with
significant life events while we
strongly support the other
version of paid family and
medical leave that already
passed this committee, we are
not in support of this approach.
HB 11.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair members of
the committee. I'm Charles. Good
marker. Speaking to you today on
behalf of the came in and
lymphoma society, we strongly
opposed HB 11 because leukemia
society patients and caregivers
need 12 Weeks of paid leave, not
six as proposed here beyond that
huge difference. HB 11 is full
of holes that undermine the
intended purpose of paid family
medical leave.
From the attorney general. The
fund created in this bill will
soon be insolvent tax rate is
capped, even if an actuarial
study determines that a payroll
tax set at or below that
percentage would be inadequate
fund obligations so there could
be a deficit.
HBs 11 has noted, does not
present provides safely for
employees and their families who
are victims of domestic
violence. These victims require
for health care but are not
covered.
From the H S D Human Services
division.
HB 11 does not specify how
contributions will be collected.
11 does not address whether an
employee is allowed to utilize
their own accrued leave in
conjunction with their claim for
leave compensation under the
paid family medical effect.
Looking mandolin, farmer society
patients and their caregivers
need you to vote No on HB 11.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair members,
the committee John Lipsky. It's
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. We represent nearly
40,000 working people all across
the state. I want to start by
actually thanking the sponsor
for acknowledging that there is
a need for paid family medical
leave. That is something that
seems to be clear the board
Unfortunately, we cannot support
this measure, as is for a number
of reasons. The one that I will
focus on today is the fact that
it is, in fact, 100% employee
funded. Um, quite honestly, we
have seen measures like this. In
the past that puts so much
burden on our workers and a
measure like this is about as
much of a slap in the face to
workers as we could possibly
imagine.
We are, in essence telling our
employers that workers are
commodity and that in order for
them to take necessary leave
that they must pay extra to do
so. And that is just something
that we cannot stand for. So for
that reason we have to oppose
this measure. Thank you.
We'll be asking the single Tamuz
Good morning with respect, Madam
Chair Thompson, members of the
committee. My name's Alicia
Ortega and I'm here today on
behalf of them native vote as
well as a small business owner
in Section two under definitions
line 15 letter O.
Indian tribe is defined and then
never mentioned again.
Throughout the entire bill, as
you reminder tribes are
sovereign nations and their
health care systems and the
federal fiduciary
responsibilities tied to them
are important to understand.
And as we have 23 pueblos,
tribes and nations within the
state of New Mexico is
absolutely critical to ensure
that tribal input is included in
legislation as important as this
within the 11 positions on the
insurance board. There's no
appointment that is held for any
tribal representation and as
missing, murdered indigenous
women and relatives as a full
blown epidemic in tribal
communities with New Mexico in
the lead.
Safe leave is critical for those
who are in these situations, and
it is also not covered in this
bill are tribal communities
deserve to be included in the
actual bill. Beyond just a
random definition. Thank you for
your time.
More than Madame care. And
ladies and gentlemen of the
committee. My name is Chris
LeRoi. I am the public policy
officer for our New Mexico. We
represent people with
intellectual developmental
disabilities throughout the
state.
And I was initially appointed to
the task force for a family
medical leave two years ago
Prior business small business
owner in the state of Colorado
as well as the state of
Michigan, I was somewhat
skeptical when I was initially
appointed, but two years ago
this hit me Square or actually,
four years ago, the sent me
squarely in the face. My late
wife was diagnosed with stage
two breast cancer in 2020.
Ah, and that was at the
beginning of the pandemic. She
passed away in May of 2022 from
stage four breast cancer and the
Loveless Hospital downtown
Albuquerque. Those last few
months, I was not able to be by
her side because of the lacking
of paid family medical leave.
She was hospitalized throughout
the month of April and month of
May.
Still eats me up that I was able
to be by your side those last
two months because she was
with all the job. It was
necessitated the I continue
working to support the family
would ask that this committee
adopt some form of paid family
medical leave whether a House
Bill 11 Hospital six That's been
privacy introduced. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Reverend Erica Ferguson.
And I am the director of
narrative change for New Mexico
Religious Coalition for
reproductive choice. We oppose
this bill.
Our maternity care system fails
to provide equitable,
respectful, culturally centered,
safe, effective and affordable
care. It's pretend
spectacularly fails. Communities
address by structural racism and
other forms of inequity,
including black, indigenous and
other people of color.
I'd like to just take the last
second to ask us all to take a
deep, gentle breath.
And
And a gentle breath exhaling.
That breath is a reminder that
we're talking about people that
need our care. Thank you.
Thank you for that. It was a
good reminder for all of us. I
have a friend who texted me
frequently breathe.
Okay. We will now go to zoom and
we will have
Because Sandra then Nick, Megan,
Jacob and Diane
Good morning. This is Diane and
my screen asked me to a mute, so
perhaps an accidentally first.
Go ahead. Diane Ricks. Okay,
Thank you. I'm good morning. I
respectfully ask you to vote No
on HB 11, for all the reasons so
well articulated by the previous
speakers, and I ask you also to
support H B six.
As it goes to its next committee
and hopefully to the floor. Um,
thank you so much.
My name is Cassandra Gomez and
I'm a senior staff attorney at a
better balance and National
organization working on paid
leave for over a decade, helping
to draft nearly all of the paid
leave lost throughout the
country, all of which have
remained steady. Insolvent.
We're also proud to present any
paid leave conference in
Nashville this past November,
where a number of you and your
colleagues were present. While
we're glad to see momentum
behind paid leave, we are just
committee to vote against HB 11,
letting them much stronger. HB
six continue as a sole paid
leave bill in the Legislature.
11 falls short in many regards
the most concerning being that
it would only provide up to six
weeks of leave far below the
national baseline.
12 weeks and it would be solely
funded through employee
contributions, whereas nearly
all programs enacted this
century split costs between
employers and employees. HB 11
also raises major structural and
administrative concerns is that
diverges from how most
successful programs throughout
the country is structured and
run running a major risk of
failing to meet the needs of new
Mexican workers? Data has shown
that this structure results in
higher denial rates higher
administrative costs for
application and the needs for
fines levied against the
administration company. We
employ the committee to oppose
HB 11. Thank you and I would
advise you to to become an
auction.
A year. Wow.
Yeah,
Luckily, we had something to
read you go fast, but I
appreciate it for time's sake.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Jacob V. Hill. I'm
deputy policy director in New
Mexico. Voices for Children. We
respectfully oppose this bill
for, among other reasons,
because of its lack of paid safe
leave for those experiencing
domestic violence and intimate
partner partner violence and
sexual assault. Ah, my
colleague, Ms Taylor's already
articulated why that is so
important for new Mexicans and
for businesses in terms of lost
hours, But
But also like to highlight from
a child safety and child
advocacy standpoint, it's a
crucial benefits as we know that
safe leave is proven to help
reduce violence against
Children. Kids are most
susceptible to maltreatment in
their earliest years, and that's
when most parents will take
leaves. So for those reasons,
and all those stated by my
colleagues who have already
spoken, we respectfully opposed.
HB 11. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Nicholas Cordoba for the
New Mexico Central on poverty.
We oppose House Bill 11 because
it keeps out too many low wage
workers excludes workers who are
already barely making ends meet
by setting a minimum income to
be eligible for the people
leave.
It also Rex barriers that
discourage workers from even
applying to the program barriers
like having to notify their
employer before applying,
putting them at risk of
retaliation. It also excludes
many people working retail food
service and hospitality because
it requires workers to have been
with their employer for so long
before being able to take leave,
and these industries have
industries have high turnover,
often just turning through
workers. And for these reasons
we oppose house Bill 11. Thank
you.
And finally, Madam chair. Thank
you, Megan. Sorry. Total eager.
Okay. I'm Adam Sharon Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak. I'm Megan Greene,
president of CW, 7076 and a
state employee.
I'm here on behalf of my
brothers and sisters across the
state to voice their opposition
to HB 11.
While we fully support paid
family and medical leave, it has
to be the right policy for our
state.
HB 11 does not call for employer
contributions to the fund.
An equitable paid family and
medical leave program includes
contributions from both the
employee and the employer,
because this program will
benefit both parties. We need to
ensure the fund remains solvent
and as a union that represents
public workers and state
agencies. We are opposed to the
privatization of paid FMLA as
outlined in HB 11 when it comes
to health care.
Services should not be driven by
profit paid FML able create jobs
and we need to ensure they are
good union jobs. Please do not
pass each HB 11. This is the
wrong bill for New Mexico's
working families.
Thank you all that's that's all.
we have time for. Um so we will
now go to the in support of HB
11 if you could raise your
hands.
Okay. And then the the 1st 10
people to get in line. No
pushing, And this isn't a sale
at anywhere, so let's be let's
be sane.
Although I many of us up here.
Maybe not after yesterday.
Go ahead, Madam chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole, president, CEO of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce stand in support of
HB 11 in the form it is
presented today and urged the
committee to resist any
amendments that would damage the
carefully crafted symmetry in
the bill. We support HB 11 for
four reasons.
First believe is reduced from 12
to 6 weeks, second latest
granted only for specific to
findable events, childbirth,
adoption of a child or serious
illness. Third, there is no new
tax on business for businesses
are given a role in planning for
leave absences. This bill is
responsive to business concerns
We supported for that fact, we
urge your support on HB 11.
Thank you very much.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Bill Lee, president, CEO
of the Yellow McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce, and we
stand in support of HB 11. It is
a far more sensible bill that
addresses the P M F l issues in
our state. It eliminates the
creation are rather, it
eliminates the creation of
another large state bureaucracy
and increases the efficiencies
not only when it comes to costs
of operation.
But also in terms of
expeditiously distributing
benefits. Language in the bill
has clearly defined eligibility
requirements and officer offers
a practical leave amount of six
weeks without massive disruption
to business and further it
lessons and eliminates the
potential for fraud. We support
HB
1111 and ask that you do the
same. Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Jim Copeland, executive director
of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities,
Community Providers.
When you're trying to do the
right thing, and you have a
choice that seemingly eliminates
the greatest point of
contention.
Provides adequate time to
develop New Mexico's proof of
concept provides a significantly
similar benefit allows time to
develop and implement an
effective answer to the Medicaid
contractors issue.
Hopefully provides a potential
opportunity for bipartisan
support and protection. You
Mexicans with intellectual and
developmental disabilities and
their families and their
providers house Bill 11 is the
choice. Thank you for your time
and attention.
Good job, Jim. I know you were
worried You didn't have two
minutes. Good timing engine,
Madam Chair members of the
committee. Patsy Romero,
President, CEO of Content, Maria
Almeida thought and intermediate
care facility for adults with
intellectual disabilities, an
important benefit for New Mexico
is paid family medical lead is a
wonderful way for us to move
forward in our state, but
ensuring that we understand
The consequence both negative
and positive is a fiduciary
responsibility that all of us
must consider. We believe HB 11
does that
The bill allows us to
strategically integrate this
program with a baseline of six
weeks, paid family leave and
still consider the full 12.
Weeks of F M l E. It doesn't
deny the 12 weeks. I believe
that's a smart way to to begin
the process and creating the
state board model is included in
this bill is also an excellent
approach to ensure that we
develop a sustainable
Bottle with the community voices
that are critical in ensuring
that a paid family leave.
Benefit for new Mexicans is
responsibly implemented. Thank
you, madam Chair members of the
committee.
Good morning, Madam Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Michelle Frost Maynard
on behalf of New Mexico
categories in New Mexico World
Wars horse in Rope Wars, has
seen no evidence that supports
legislation to require paid
family medical leave on New
Mexico ranches with that said,
We support hospital 11. It is
the superior alternative.
For example, in Section two T.
It recognizes that our employees
compensation now it's not all
mullet. Monetary wages would be
excluded Houses, utilities track
fuel beef, all of which we
routinely provide.
Hospital. 11 recognizes how
unworkable it would be to our
operations for an employee to be
gone for up to 12 weeks during
the year that's basically
missing all the spring or fall
works when we gather Rand
vaccinate and ship
Section seven. C. Acknowledges
that if an employee can
unilaterally declared that he or
she will take leave in a
minutely throughout the year, it
will be impossible for us to
look for a replacement hill.
Thank you Support hospital 11.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Carol
White. I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico Restaurant Association.
We are committed to fostering a
thriving restaurant industry
that supports both our employees
and our local economies by
exploring alternative solutions
that prioritize employees will
We are committed to fostering a
thriving restaurant industry
that supports both our employees
and our local economies by
exploring alternative solutions
that prioritize employees, well
being well, considering the
small business unique needs, we
can strike a balance that
ensures paid family medical
leave and local restaurants,
long term system sustainability.
Let us work together to create a
win win situation that benefits
our employees and industry, the
New Mexico Restaurant
Association board voted to
support House Bill 11. It was a
difficult vote.
Because on principle, our board
and members are mostly against
unfunded mandates on businesses.
However, we made the difficult
decision to support House Bill
11.
Which is less impactful on small
business, but gives employees
paid leave at the same cost as
house Bill. Six. Thank you very
much. We urge
You to move this on in committee
and continue to talk about it in
the Legislature. Thank you.
Madam Sharon Committee. My name
is Bridget Dixon, president, CEO
of the Santa Fe Chamber of
Commerce. We represent over 700
member businesses. We stand by
HB 11.
Unlike H B six and SP three, HB
11 takes a business friendly
approach with reduced leave.
Time is six weeks for
significant events requirements
and no new business taxes. It
offers a streamlined solution
that addresses concerns about
fiscal sustainability. We
encourage your support for HB 11
a balanced approach that
benefits both businesses and
employees. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Kathy Como on the CEO
for the New Mexico Hospitality
Association and I'm here today,
representing hundreds of small
businesses in the hospitality
and tourism arena in every
county in New Mexico, and we are
urging you to move this bill
forward.
For two significant reason There
are a number of them, but I'll
focus on two today. One is that
we all know it is easier to
build a program than to go
forward and have to take
benefits away at some point in
time, and we believe that house
Bill 11 sets the standard and
sets a baseline from which we
can continue to work together to
build successful programs that
benefit both employees and
employers across the state.
And also the six weeks, six
weeks period called for in House
Bill 11 meets the needs of most
users of this type of program
and also reduces the impact on
small businesses, especially
those in rural communities who
are going to be forced to try
and find labor resources that
they don't normally have access
to Thank you or to pay overtime.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera. With
New Mexico Farming Livestock
Bureau. We stand in support of
HB 11 and really want to thank
representative Matthews for
taking the time to meet with our
labor committee. During the
interim, she has taken into
account many of the concerns
that we have brought up and that
were mentioned by my colleague,
Michelle. Um
We believe that HB 11 provides a
much more stable and predictable
approach to a paid family
medical leave program than in
efforts previously discussed
agriculture not only in New
Mexico but across the country
continues to face multiple
challenges, especially when it
comes to accessing and securing
reliable labor sources,
particularly in our rural
communities.
The nature of our sector
requires careful planning and
execution due to the parish
ability of our products and food
safety centers that we must
account for growth for you
provides us, uh, stable and
reliable alternative and we
request that you support this
effort. Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair.
Members of the committee, Jason
Weeks registered lobbyist on
behalf of the Albuquerque
Hispanic Chamber of Commerce. We
stand in support of this bill.
Thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
Um, we support the bill from any
of the reasons, echoed
Albuquerque, Hispanic Chamber
specifically focuses on
fostering and helping small
businesses grow and develop in
New Mexico. This bill takes into
consideration the unique needs
of those businesses and create a
family medically benefit. It
will be easier for those small
businesses to implement as those
businesses grow, um, and
continue to add to the
diversified diversification of
the New Mexico economy.
For the reasons stated support
this bill. Thank you.
Now we'll go too soon.
So the first five people who
have raised their hands on it,
and please reminder to, um
Silence your phones. We heard
some lullaby music over here,
and we don't We don't need
anything to make us sleepy.
So, um, let's Andrew
I believe your hand was raised
in opposition. Are you in
opposition or support? Well,
I'll tell you what I'm in
support of in this bill.
Um
A restaurant owner.
And
Putting it a payroll tax on the
employer.
It's the employees money they're
earning that it's just hidden
way. I don't think it honors
employees work if I have to pay
a percentage.
I've been employees labor hours.
Two attacks and might as well be
paying that employee.
It's the same budget category
for me.
Um, there are things I like
about this bill. That's one of
them. I like the
The separate organization to
administer it. I think that's an
excellent idea.
Um
Maybe there's some hybrid that
can come out of this.
The other. Um, both bills have
some problems.
For the restaurant industry, but
that's the main thing I like
about this.
It doesn't hide the taxes
employ. Most of you don't know
that we pay seven something
percent for Social security.
They say That's the employer's
contribution. That's your money.
I should just be paying you that
7%.
See what I'm saying. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Andrew And, um, who
Okay, if you are on zoom and
would like to speak in support.
Please raise your hand. There's
um, space for four more. And I'm
sorry. I didn't announce that
before and give you some time.
So we'll wait a couple of
seconds and see if anyone raises
their hands. Okay? There seems
to be no one else so we will go
to the committee. Um
Vincent Jones cakes and some
pants in that order.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative for bringing
this forward had a couple of
questions and if you would in
the bill turned over to Page
two, and it's going to be, uh,
line 16
Subsection F
Undercovered employee. I have a
few questions under that. So, uh
Wood covered employee include
part time employees, or maybe
even employees. That, uh,
Are not eligible for benefits.
Madam chair.
Um, I'm sure I'm going to let Mr
Black respond to that. Thank you
Must save time. Just whoever is
gonna jump in just jump in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Representative Vincent, the
recovered employees. It has two
requirements. One is that the
person
Has been there for six months
during unemployment Within the
past 12 months, I've had
employment and that, um, they've
earned $2325 in a quarter, so
that is designed to create that
two step test. A part time
employee could certainly make
$2325 and a quarter of the year.
So it would attached as winning
her time employee would
Qualify under that covered
employee if they meet both of
those tests.
Thank you, Madam Chair and that
was my That was my question is
where did you come up with 2300
and $25 that well, we did. We've
talked a lot about the
Connecticut model today.
representative. That was the
model that was the language that
they use in their bill and we
felt it created a
Ah!
We wanted to know if you leave
it too low. Um, you've created
an added burden onto the
administration of the program
for the state.
If you
So that was part of what we
wanted to have some sort of
financial criteria so that you
don't have somebody who's just
works like 10 hours and then
drops out and and you start
having to track that.
But by having it's structured in
this way you have with that two
part test. You have someone
who's been in the business or
been working for six months
within the last 12 months and
has, um, met that financial
criteria, and it was based off
of the Connecticut model.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representatives so
The next question I had was
It was actually kind of offer.
The last zoom call we just had
in heard from some restaurants.
And does the total wages
including tips.
As we all know, tips are often
not or under reported. Is this
gonna be? Is this going to
affect
The employee.
Madam chair.
So
Madam Chair representative of
the The Wages are based off of
what the the employees reporting
and employers reporting so tips
wages are required to be
reported so that would be
considered income.
Okay, Madam Chair. Thank you.
And I just You know anybody
that's a waitress. I you know,
I'm just asking that question,
mainly for them because
sometimes tips are under
reported.
And it could adversely affect
them.
Okay, Um
So the goal of this fund is to
be self sustaining. What is what
if this cannot be done within
the parameters of the bill?
Madam share representative, Um
We built in a number of
actuarial requirements so that
we're constantly constantly
yearly monitoring exactly where
this is, and then we have a
whole set of standards in the
bill that
A lot. Allow us to figure out
we're starting to get into
trouble. And when we do that,
then we can take knowing and
knowing that you're getting into
trouble. Well enough in advance
is how you avoid getting into
trouble.
Because you're able to come in
and make adjustments and figure
out what you need to do.
One of the adjustments would
would be to, uh, within certain
ranges increase. Uh, the payroll
tax. Another would be to
decrease payments or benefits.
Um, it would depend on the
actuarial study.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative. And the
reason I asked that question is
because
We have lots of fun summer. Some
do really good, and some don't
do as well.
And
Just a fun fact for you two for
anybody that wants to look this
up.
I was sent a text and Colorado
had enacted a bill like this The
1st 24 days.
20,000 payouts.
And that's alarming to me in 24
days.
So I just want to throw that out
there because we want what's
best for our employees. But we
also want what's best for our
employers. Would you walk me
through how how will him an
employee's contribution be
collected?
Madam chair. The um employer's
contribution would
Would be how we collected by the
employer and then quarterly the
employer would pay those, um
Into the fund. So this is gonna
be on the employer to take all
this out. Correct.
Madam share, uh, during during
the representative, if the
person is on leave
On paid leave. Then the
authority would pay that would
take the money out of the
benefits to pay the taxes. But
if the employer I'm sorry if the
employee is simply
Earning the money and hasn't
taken isn't on leave, then? Yes,
the employer would do so just as
they do with Social Security and
the others. Thank you.
Thank you, madam. Madam Chair,
One other piece to that is the
bill does provide for on a
voluntary basis, a self employed
individual
To participate in the program.
If they do so they would be
responsible to pay that in on a
quarterly basis, so I just
wanted to make sure that we were
clear on that. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative.
So one thing that I get out of
the bill is
For people that do work for
organizations that have an HR
department.
Why have we taken HR out of the
mix, and they go straight to
workforce solutions.
Instead of going through their,
um, their respective HR
departments.
Madam chair.
Madam Chair representative. The
bill actually does require a 30
day notice to employers for
parental leave, where there's an
emergency situation where
someone needs a benefit, but
it's not.
Um, is not able to take that
leave.
Okay?
With a 30 day notice. Period.
Your Your mom gets cancer and
you need to go help. You know
something like that, Um, the
notice requirement to your
employer is as soon as practical
so there is a requirement for
notification to the employer.
Um, there's also a requirement
within the bill that allows for
the employee and the employer to
negotiate intermittent leave.
So the employee always has the
ability to take the full leave
straight.
But it may be a situation where
an employer employee wants to
take one day off a week for
several months because they have
the opportunities they need to
do chemo treatments. This bill
allows the employer wants them
to stay on. They'd rather not
lose them for the full six
weeks, so it allows you to
create a part time environment.
That employee that works well
for both the employer and
employee. So we believe that the
approach that HB 11 takes really
actually does recenter that
conversation between the
employer and the employee so
that they can work out the best
for both of them?
Um, just to remove a request to
try and keep your questions and
answers brief. We still have
five bills to get through. So,
um, just let's stick to the
points. Thank you.
And I'm sorry for that. But a 30
Day session just doesn't give us
enough time to
Do anything as well as we would
like to.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
always try to respect what the
chairs request is, but I have a
whole lot of constituents that
they chew me out up there, so I
had to get chewed out here. I
get chewed out there, so I'm
trying to find the balance.
Um
Madam chair.
So how soon would compensation
be provided once the claims
approved?
Madam chair.
Um, Madam share represented. I
believe it's January. 1st 2027.
I'm sorry. I just I had that I
looked at that last night. And
I've just forgotten it. Uh, let
me check.
And I'm sure representative Are
you asking for the timeline from
application to payment or when
the benefits would start paying
application of payment? And I
would also like to know when,
when the person would get
compensated.
Because employees what I'm
trying to trying to paint a
picture is the procedure. You
know, if you if you do go and
you you apply for this
Everybody is worried about their
paychecks when they're gonna get
their paycheck.
Is it going to be the same
paycheck? It's it's going to be
95% from what I read.
Madam chair.
My representative. I believe
it's a 10 day requirement to be
responsive. A Okay, That'll
work. Thank you.
And also I was reading under the
Safe Leave act, and it doesn't
require a police report or I
didn't see it in there.
Madam Chair, representative HB
11 does not have safe leave.
Okay, so it
It would not require. Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have.
Thank you, representative Jones,
followed by Cates and Penske.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews. Um
For
Trying to bring a bill that was
maybe a little bit more
tolerable to business and in
other ways as well, I really
appreciate that. Thank you.
Presenters for all your input.
And listening to, um
The last over an hour of
Of opinions and going back and
forth. HB six HB 11. I have to
admit this is
Really can be confusing.
Um I as a new legislator, I have
to say that when we talk about
the startup costs and let me ask
you, what would the startup
costs be for this? Um, Madam
Chair Representative Matthews
for this particular
Bill if it went into
Of course. What would that be?
representative of the model
again that we're looking to as
Connecticut, Connecticut when
they did their startup?
They required a five They got a
$5.1 million startup initial
infusion of funds.
And then they got bonding
authority for $50 million.
They used. I believe 12.1
million for that bonding
authority. So those were the two
combined.
Aspects of what were the startup
costs for the program
Connecticut that was, you know,
three or four years ago, so you
have inflation, so I would
imagine that you know you're
going to see six or $7 million
for your initial investments.
and then, um, additional bonding
costs or other types of funding,
depending on how the Legislature
chose to fund that.
For I t set up and those sort of
structures and that was what the
bonding funds were used for in
Connecticut was all of the kind
of technical infrastructure
needed to administer the
program. Thank you, Madam chair
and so can you. Can you narrow
that down to? It's going to cost
that X amount for me. The I
believe it's around. It's
probably I would say around the
$25 million startup cost.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
have someone has
Offered some other information,
saying that
76.2 million over three years.
Non recurring.
Is is one of the estimates,
which I guess if you
Narrowed that down to one year.
I don't know that that would
actually make sense. But Madam
Chair representative, Um then I
think that it comes from your
lfc or if I are, um and that is
over three years.
Um what the model again that
we're in and again. This is, for
example, your purposes only, but
it it is relevant to the
discussion.
Um, in the state of Connecticut.
They count count. There's two
main cost drivers. One is the
administration of the benefits
and then the the that that they
farmed out to Aflac.
That charge. They charged a
dollar 24 per life per month. We
have about 87 to 8200 or sorry,
9,698,000 employees likely
participating.
So if you break that out, you're
gonna get about $12 million a
year in New Mexico based on that
number of administrative costs
to administer the benefit. And
then whatever the cost the
The authority would be expensing
at in Connecticut again. That's
a $15 million cost annualized.
But we're also talking about a
population in a LG employment
base. That's twice as large as
New Mexico's. So while we
wouldn't necessarily see a 50%
drop from the cost in
Connecticut, we think you know
that it's going to be less than
what theirs is. So we anticipate
that that 25 million
Is a is probably a high end on
what the administrative burden
would be going forward, not just
the start up costs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, So it
seems to me that
I don't think I've heard anybody
asked this question and maybe,
like I said, as a new
legislator.
I'm not desensitized. These
massive amounts of money that we
just spend on this that
And the other which could be you
know, I I understand her.
Are
Our needs. You know, people have
needs I get that, But But where
does that money come from? So
eventually that money, Madam
chair representative that that
money comes from the program
itself are the The idea is for
that The fees collected the
taxes collected would fund the
operations of the of the program
as well as paying out potential
benefits.
So, Madam Chair and presenter,
would you say you said that the
fees collected the taxes
collected and are you referring
to the employee tax and I
appreciate you calling it a tax
because anything that's
mandatory.
It's not a It's not an
insurance. This is not an
insurance. It is not a premium.
It's not an opt in thing. It's
this is going to be mandatory.
My correct with that for
representative that is correct.
And and you're correct that that
is the tax or fee that I am
just referencing is that 0.5%?
Of the employee's income up to
the Social Security cap, which
is this year at $168,000. So
Any employee would be required
to pay that 0.5% of their income
up to 100 and $68,000.
Thank you, Madam. Chair.
presenter. Um So you're saying
that that 0.5
Tax on the employees is going to
fund the administration of this
program.
Madam Chair representative.
That's correct. And if you you
know, looking at the F I r the
predictions are very strong
considered, you know, especially
vis a vis HB six. The solvency
of this fund.
There are questions that if we
look at a worst case or highest
use scenario, I wouldn't say
worst case. But the highest use
scenario that in the out years
you do start to run into some
solvency issues. But as the F I
R states, those are in the out
years and because of
representative Matthews,
including the requirements for
third party actuarial
And those extra area was being
done by people actually do this
for a living for other states.
It will give us the ability to
adjust the program to ensure
solvency.
Just to remind her to try and
keep your answers brief for, um,
we are supposed to be on the
floor in 43 minutes. So, Madam
chair. I don't have the numbers
right in front of me. But I
would like to point out that in
the rule book, it says that we
can't limit debate and I really
do need to understand this.
So I would appreciate him. I
that to me cutting your
questions. I'm just saying.
Feel the fewer words the better
because if we have to go to the
floor, we're not going to be
able to vote on this much less.
The other bills. I'm just trying
to keep us moving forward, So
try and keep your answers and
questions brief, Please. Thank
you, Madam chair and I just want
to say that I agree with you
that you know we have a lot to
do in 30 days.
Um, but if we don't understand
the bills were passing, and I
don't think we should be passing
them. So that's just my my input
there. Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, so administrative costs were
supposed to be
Covered by
The employee's tax. Correct that
that's what we've established.
That is correct. And when do we
evaluate whether or not this
program is solvent?
Madam Chair representative on a
yearly basis direction to a
third party, actually.
So would you say that the other
states that are involved in with
and have a program like this?
That paid leave program similar
to yours? Um
Representative Matthews. Would
you say that that they are more
affluent than New Mexico?
Yeah.
Well, Certainly, Connecticut is
more affluent as last high
poverty levels in New Mexico.
Um and I'm not off the top of my
head sure that there's any other
state
With his higher poverty rates,
as we have
That, uh, would be is providing
the kind of benefited that like
12,000
I'm sorry, not 12,012 weeks.
Year.
I'm sure representative of the
states that are currently paying
benefits. We would be by far the
lowest income per capita state
of those states.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I'm not
finished yet, though.
I have to say I'm getting texts
from business owners.
In my district and I would like
to address one of those
Um
She says, Uh
So if we have to abide by the
mandate of six weeks, in
addition to the 64
Of mandated sick leave and the
200 hours of general leave like
vacation.
This would leave a position that
would not have the money to fill
while a particular employees out
and still getting paid, causing
stress on other employees to
fill the gap.
So back killing positions,
especially skilled positions
are, I would say are still an
issue with this HB 11. Would you
agree?
Madam Chair, Representative
Jones. I would I do that is a
very valid concern, and that is
a real costs on employers, So I
think that is a legitimate
thing. Um, but I'll paraphrase
from representative Chandler on
Wednesday Paid family medical
Leave. Plan doesn't make you
pregnant and it won't make you
sick.
But it helps you build managed
for it. And so what
Representative Matthews has done
is to try to help.
With a plan that will actually
work say solvent.
But it is you've. You're the
person who text you absolutely
is voicing a very real expense
and a very real concern.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate that answer, and
especially in healthcare and
this particular person is
employees healthcare licensed
people that are very difficult
to even find, much less replaced
at this point.
Um
So I appreciate your answer on
that.
I see that it's it's just a
How do we? I don't know. I don't
even know how to address that
We're workforce is an issue, so
we'll leave that and move on. Um
Hmm.
I'll just cut to my chase here,
and I think I'm seeing this from
the big picture. I have to say
that as a very estate that has
down light in the poverty level,
like you mentioned.
Why aren't we
Why isn't our goal creating a
business friendly environment?
That helps businesses to thrive.
And
Became able to, um, um, treat
their employees like they
should because I as I mentioned
on Wednesday
I definitely understand the need
for leave after
Uh, raising seven Children, um,
caring for my late husband
walking through life's
difficulties with my cancer
patients. I know we need we need
to leave. How do we pay for?
that is the issue without
suffering in the future.
What would happen, Madam Chair
and representative presenters.
What would happen if we
discovered that this
Program is insolvent. What do we
do then?
Uh,
Name chair, representative
Jones.
First of all, we tried very hard
to be sure that we never get it
to the point where it would
become insolvent because once
that happens, your options are
very, very narrow and
essentially, probably would
have, you would have to do at
that point is cut benefits or in
the program that we don't want
to do that which is why we have
taken a much more.
Uh um, why we want to start at a
level that we can be sure we're
getting it right before we get
in trouble.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Matthews. I
appreciate your addressing that,
um
I
Thank you very much.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you. We will now go to
Representative Cates. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you very
much for your presentation. And
thank you for bringing this bill
forward. Um
Um, just I have friends and
colleagues on both sides of this
issue, and, um and I do
appreciate this healthy debate.
Um, I wanted to ask you a few
questions, and then I'll have
some
Concerns does this bill address
and employee that has two jobs?
two jobs that qualify or are
both paying into the paid F M L.
A.
Hmm.
Madam here.
Sorry, Chair, representative
Cade's. Did I get it? Right?
Finally, Um uh, An employee, uh,
can combine jobs and and if more
than more than one more than two
However many employees employees
they had I'm sorry employers.
They have, uh, in which they
meet the basic requirements
would would be part of their
Ah!
Would be covered being not. I'm
so sorry to interrupt, like
representative, I'm I want to
be, uh, succinct here, so I
don't think you understand. I
don't think I've clearly explain
my question. If I'm an employee,
and I'm paying, and to
Paid family leave at
Um which do I get 24? Weeks Do
what is it addresses in this
bill that if I'm paying into
both, is it like, um ah, such as
our health insurance where one
becomes the primary. The other
becomes the secretary. If I'm
working for a developmental
disability community provider
and have a job at night at a
convenience store.
What it is in this bill, Does it
have this the address is such a
thing or that which employer
which Bank of time am I, uh
Accessing, Hmm.
Representatives. Uh, Madam Chair
representative. The benefit that
that the employees paying into
from one employer or both
Employers is the employees
benefit They're eligible to take
that benefit one time per per
year.
Um, you would calculate the
amount of their eligible benefit
paid by the state back to that
individual based on the
combined, uh
Revenue or salary that they have
They have accumulated up to that
up to their cap. Right. Thank
you, Mr Black. Thank you, Mr
Chair and and presenters. Um, I
just wanted to bring you know I
have. I appreciate. Um, I would
like to know if you would be
minimal to an amendment. That
would, um
That would allow workforce
solutions to be an administrator
and authority.
Over the operations of an answer
to the RFP.
Madam Chair represents. Would
you mind repeating that last
part of the question I didn't
understand. Of course. Thank
you, Madam Chair and presenters
currently in your bill, you have
administratively the workforce
solutions, and then they send
out an RFP and, uh,
And insurance company.
Not C P A. S not a tax company,
An insurance company answers
that RFP.
Correct.
Madam Chair representative. It
depends on how what RFP is
asking for what one New York
current bill, you're asking in
your modeling it on the
Connecticut Great. I'm sorry,
madam Chair.
Madam share representative. We
we saw how Connecticut did it,
but, um
New Mexico. I mean, it doesn't
require that we hire an
insurance company. It simply
allows us to seek a third party
administrator.
Who has the, um assuming we
don't have the RFP, obviously
yet, but who has the experience
and the capacity to run this
program at a high level of
customer service? Thank you so
much, and thank you, Madam chair
and I do appreciate that, and I
can absolutely see the benefit
of that. My concern is that that
for profit
Company that answered the RFP
has the authority. I'm asking
for a modification that if you
are seeing the benefits of
having administrative that
workforce solutions that has the
data that in what you need to
also has the authority and that
the operations goes to the RFP.
And you don't need to answer
that right now. I just want to
make sure that we know that. Um
I will say HB 11 was kind enough
to answer another concern I had
in that.
Phil.
Regarding people companies with
state contracts. They're going
to be working on a bill as well.
I just wanted to make a
statement that I am
Island. Uh, concerned and
disappointed that, um
individuals who have such a
strong argument for this paid
family leave, like choose to use
the word tax when they want what
they want. But yet I heard in
here.
Skin of the game. Um you call it
an employee benefit, but is it a
benefit of the employees paying
for it?
Um, that you've said that it was
a short term disability
insurance and on one time and
then another time it's attacks.
I think that, um it's very
confusing. Um, on how your are
presenting, Uh, what paid family
medical leave is I have run
companies that have abide by the
federal law for paid family
league. So currently
It's an entry level employee.
Is working for a company that is
following the law. The federal
law for the, uh, Family Leave
Act.
And, uh,
Their mother is dying of cancer,
and they need to be able to be
at home for six weeks or however
long
Um be they would be either.
Taking time off and accessing
their earned sick and paid
leave.
Which means the company would be
paying them when they are not
there.
Or they would be finding a way
to be able to leave their jobs
and collect unemployment, which
means the company is still
paying premium employment
insurance.
So the paid Family leave Act is
actually paying the employee,
The employer is not paying the
employee
And be able to use their salary.
Two.
Uh, pay a temp worker or provide
some other kind of workforce
management. So I'm not really
understanding the argument of
what the major cost is, except
for the matched premium, which
is we don't refer unemployment
match premium as attacks and we
do not refer to Workman's comp.
Matched premium as attacks.
Thank you, Madam Chair
represented case. I apologize
for
If if, if use of terms got
confusing, and I was certainly
try to be more precise. Um, but
no answer to your question.
Um
I got you. I got focused on your
question about the language, but
I think you were asking if you
could just ask the question real
quickly again.
It. I I will be glad to talk to
you, Um, outside a committee to
see whether or not we can
revise the structure of who
runs uh, the page family medical
leave. I think that you have
some great ideas there.
But I would like to
Not give authority to a private
insurance company. Oh, okay.
Madam. Share represent case. I'm
sorry. I'm sorry. I kind of
spaced out on that. Um, the the
the authority is, uh,
Uh, hired by the board, and it's
simply
Uh, and state employees.
And
All we're doing is authorizing
the board.
Which again is a point of
Largely by the governor and by
political leaders.
Two.
Um, authorize, uh, seeking
Um, bids on the for the services
that are going to be needed. It
is our inquired. They
Except those bids they may
decide to hire workforce
solutions to do it if they think
that that's the best way to do
it. In fact, I would think on
the appeals. Quite frankly, it
probably would be workforce
solutions, but again that would
be up to the authority. So
there's no requirement that you
hire a private company.
But you're just looking for
options.
Thank you. Representatives of
Penske.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Representative.
I had some questions on
But little more technical nature
is the intention of your
Legislation to
Ah, create a mandatory
participation requirement for
employees and employers.
Madam chair. Uh,
Yeah, other than those there's a
definition of covered employees.
So, for example, um
Big big. I mean, we have a
large part of the state is is
is, uh, native American, and we
don't attempt to apply to them
unless they would like to be.
Have this applied to them. But
in general
In terms of, uh and obviously,
we can't require that federal
employees, for example, have to
be covered by this so the
definition of covered employee
is essentially other than
certain little categories.
Federal employees
Certain Native American
employees in on the on the
reservations. Yes, it was. This
would apply. Uh,
Two.
Ah!
All the workers in the state who
are working enough hours.
Uh um, the six month requirement
and so forth. Regular workers,
uh, would apply to all of them
were not excluding, uh,
employers who have fire less
Employees like the other bill
does.
I think then, um, you have some
technical issues in the bill.
Ah, and I think in part
We've spoken a lot about
Connecticut today.
However.
The bill. I spent some time
comparing this legislation to
Connecticut law.
And the bill differs pretty
significantly in a way that I
think, and it sounds like
inadvertently
This bill does not require any
employer or employee to
participate in this program.
Part of that is because of your
definition of covered employee.
Part of that is because of the
language on Page nine.
Um
Regarding
Where it states on lines three
and four, where it states each
covered employee.
And self employed individual who
has enrolled in the paid family
and medical leave program. So
what this bill is creating is an
opt in program for employees
that are interested in receiving
this benefit. Um, however, that
is something that is available
on the private market today.
And I don't really understand
why we would create all of this
administrative process.
To allow employees to access
something.
That they could go out and
purchase now.
Uh, you know, in part of this is
that this then sets up a system
that sort of takes us back to
what is reminiscent of pre a C a
days of pre affordable care act
days where
Ah!
Insurance companies could deny
coverage based on preexisting
conditions. This I don't think
would allow for that, but
there's no protection in here
for differential rates setting
based on health status. So if
you had an employee who was of
childbearing age, for example,
or who was Ah,
Maybe pre diagnosed with cancer
and employee was aware employer
was aware of that.
Um there's no protection in here
for, uh, not allowing for any
type of health assessment before
the enrollment and I understand
if your intention is to actually
create this as a mandatory
program, then this bill needs
some serious amendment.
Um, given this the
It's so so for me. I'm looking
at the bill as it exists right
now.
And, um I think in part it is
because of the significant
differences in eligible employee
definition employer definition,
and there's no applicability
section in this bill.
Ah, that would
Require employers or employees
to participate, so I think there
that is a technical issue. Um
And I'd be happy. You know,
after the committee to sit with
you and and walk through
What I am seeing here.
Um, I think I just also wanted
to briefly add. Um you know, I
am very familiar with six weeks
of partial paid leave, because
that is what I had, uh, after
the birth of my first child
What that equated to my employer
offered a short term disability
program that I had paid into,
and I believe they had paid into
as well.
Um
However, I'm not sure if folks
if you madam chair and
representative and
And the folks listening,
understand how difficult it is
to find infant care and Santa Fe
and as much as we are working on
it, we've made great strides on
that. Um, at the time that I
took maternity leave, there were
only two infant care providers
in the entire city.
One of which had a waiting list
for you know, over a year I I
had, you know, not planned
ahead. I guess a year in
advance, not knowing you know
that I was going to the time
that I was going to have a child
and so, uh, you know for me, I
had six weeks of partially paid
leave. Believe was, I think
about 55% pay.
Um I then.
Chose to take another six weeks
unpaid because I wanted that
time to ensure that and you
know, folks talk about bonding
time, but honestly, it's It's
really growing a humid you're
really caring for a human. There
is bonding involved, but a lot
of it is just, you know. How do
you keep this little person
alive? Um and so
I was. I wanted another six
weeks to make sure that that
little one was very sturdy. Uh,
then, during that time I saw it.
Infant care. I saw it. Infant
care could not find infant care.
Um
Granted, I had been with my
employer at that point for about
five years, so I was a valuable
employee. They really wanted me
to come back.
Um So then I took me another
month before I found someone
that I felt comfortable, uh,
leaving my child with so all in
all, I ended up with four months
off.
Over the time of that. Leave it
probably I got the equivalent of
about
35% of my pay. For that time. I
also been exhausted All of the
leave that I had earned.
Which then left me returning to
work with no leave available for
when the child needed to When my
son needed to go to the doctor,
etcetera, which that this is a
very long story, But the point
is, I ended up having to go back
part time. So my employer who
was counting on me to come back
full time who was relying on me
to
I take a certain amount of
leave, I just family situation
could not comply could not rise
to that went back part time.
And I don't think you know when
you look at the differences
between
Connecticut, New Mexico
significant differences in terms
of income significant
differences in terms of wealth.
Um, and significant differences
in terms of
The way that we well, I don't
want to speak for Connecticut.
But what I see in New Mexico
that we really value Children,
families and caring for each
other.
And I just don't see that
reflected in this system the way
that I would have liked, um, in
this bill.
So you know, I think
Madam chair and representative,
There are significant technical
issues with the bill.
In that this is setting up an
optional opt in program.
Um, that I don't think will lead
to fund solvency, one of the
ways that insurance companies
pre affordable care act ensured
that they could manage the risk
was, by differential premium
rates setting, so if you had a
preexisting condition, you would
charge someone more. Um, they
would also deny
People with preexisting
conditions, and that was their
way of controlling costs so that
the folks that were opting in to
get insurance
Uh, that they were paying
adequate premium to pay the
costs so
I think this system is going to
be insolvent due to the
voluntary nature and I just
don't think it reflects
The values of what I would like
to see setup for employers and
employees. So, um, Madam Chair I
just wanted to share that and
and and thank you for your
indulgence. Thank you,
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
I really don't have a question,
but I did want to make a
statement.
Um, we have, um, last year.
During the regular session and
during the interim committee
talked a lot about child neglect
and abuse in this state.
Um, figuring out or wanting to
figure out ways to support
families to support moms to
support dads in raising their
Children.
I think that six weeks is not a
sufficient time to be able to
bond with your baby.
I've had four kids.
Each of those times I had the
opportunity to spend 8 to 12
weeks with my kids before I had
to go back to work.
Um and I had some of the same
experiences that as reps.
Passkey just said it's difficult
to find
Um, infant care, and you don't
want to put your baby in someone
else's home at six weeks. That's
not what you want to do.
We know that and I'm gonna read
off of of affect sheet that the
American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists
um circulated
Um, we know that
Paid family and medical leave
programs decreased infant and
child mortality.
Decreased rehospitalization for
the infant and the birthing
parent.
And this, I think is something
that's really very important
Decreases, postpartum
depression, depression and
intimate partner violence.
The other piece is really super
important is that it improves
the infinite attachment and
infant and child development and
that is really important. That's
very important, especially in
those first few months of life.
Um and then approved
breastfeeding and the
continuation of breastfeeding.
So six weeks. Um, doesn't sit
well with me. 12 weeks is much
better and at some point in
time, I hope that we as a
country get, um to the point
where we can allow a year's
leave.
Um for families because those
first like I said, months of a
child's life are so very
important. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, representative
Ferrari.
Madam Chair like to move to
table on house Bill 11.
Do I have a second?
Manicure. I second that motion.
Jennifer, will you call the
roll?
Representative Cates Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative, Harem Eo.
No.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord
Representatives. Karpinski yes
to table
Representative Vincent Yes.
Represented. Um Madam Vice
chair. Yes. And I wish to
explain my vote.
Okay?
And share a Madam Chair. Yes.
By a vote of 7 to 1 House Bill
11 has been tabled and
representative, Um
Who was exposed Herndon. Sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
presenters, one of the things
that's important for us to
realize is that family leave
paid them that even some form is
important for the state of New
Mexico. With this bill being
tabled today, this still gives
an opportunity for these two
groups. House Bill six and House
Bill 11 to continue to work
together and hopefully we'll
come to some resolution where we
will have a viable B.
Well, that will work for every
single new Mexican, so I hope
and look forward to you all
being at the table and working
together because it is important
and thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And I would also
offer or encourage more talks
around this. Thank you for your
time. And so we will now go to
Did I hit the gavel?
Oh, yeah.
Okay. We will now go to house
Bill 50. We're gonna try and
move along quickly and get
through part of our agenda
because or else we will be here
Sunday
Percent. Yeah.
And if you could please take
your conversations out of the
room so we can continue with our
Agenda.
Please be quiet in here and take
your conversations out of the
room. Thank you.
Thank you.
Oh, I think it's not supposed to
do this supposed You're supposed
to ask the chair. It's okay.
It's okay. But I don't want to
get in trouble. So the
attendant No. Okay the chair and
then I'm like, Okay, Okay. Okay
To keep the captions on up here.
Yes. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Thank you.
So
Representative Castano. No.
Sanchez. Okay, So go ahead.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. Um, I'm here
to present House Bill 50, a
pivotal place of legislation
designed
To confront and address the
pressing challenges. Can you
maybe move your computer over a
little and pull your mic a
little closer before I started
to loud can't hear you.
Okay. Is that better?
Pressing challenges within our
health care system with a
particular focus on opioid
crisis, devastating northern New
Mexico.
I would be remiss if I did not
acknowledge my co sponsors Rib
Sanchez and Senator Pete Campos,
who represent a large fortune
northeastern New Mexico. I know
that in the last last 60 Day
session, House, Bill 29 was
passed unanimously out of this
committee house. Bill 50 is has
the same intent.
House Bill 50.
Appropriate 2.5 million from the
operate Crisis Recovery fund to
the local government division of
Department of Finance and
Administration for Substance Use
Disorder programs in San Miguel
County for expenditure and
fiscal years 2025 and 2026 Madam
chair
And I'd like to introduce my
when experts Madam chair
If I may.
Yes. Thank you. Right to my left
or my right on. The far right is
Sheriff Chris Lopez to my India,
right is Matt Probst and to the
left of me is county manager,
Joy and easily, Madam chair.
Thank you.
You. Are you ready to stand for
questions or do you guys want to
give a little brief? If you guys
want to brief over? You guys
already heard this bill last
year. It's up to you, Madam
Chair. What's your pleasure? I
prefer if we keep moving forward
since our first bill took over
two hours, So, um it's a
straightforward bill. So let's
go to the audience. Anyone here
in opposition or on Zoom if
you're an opposition, raise your
hand.
Okay. I see No one in the room.
Is there anyone in Zoom that's
an opposition, okay?
We don't
Oh, well.
Okay, We're gonna go on to
support anyone in the in the
room in support.
Okay. If you want to speak,
please come forward If you don't
we, we registered that you are
in support. So does anyone want
to speak?
Uh, I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Taylor Bowie Bath, the
attorney general in full support
of HB 50 as a very important and
necessary to address opioid
abuse disorder within our
communities. We think
representative Christiano
Sanchez and senator for bringing
this forward and for the
committee for taking the time.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the board. My name is
Harold Garcia de San Miguel
County Commission chair and, as
noted, we are in full support on
behalf of the Seminole County
Commission.
Of this effort, um, so much
needed service in the
northeastern part of
Of New Mexico and we would be
Already if you would support us,
Thank you.
Now.
Thank you. I stand in support.
Thank you. Now, This is my kind
of bill, you know, get through
our agenda, which these so we
will go to the committee for
questions. Representative
Vincent. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. And,
uh, experts
So on this bill here, I just
wanted to make started reading
this and at the very top, it
says substance use disorder.
And then as I get into the bill,
it says
Opioid crisis recovery fun and
not for sure. Madam Chair. Can
you co mingle those and does
does your
Does your bourbons in here Need
to state opioid based only or
can it be any substance? Madam
Chair, Representative Vincent,
This is going next to
appropriations in finance, and
they take care of the real. I
mean, they can answer the
question, but in terms of how it
fits in the budget and all you
know whether it's it's legal or
whatever will be
We kind of count on
appropriations because they're
the experts were dealing with
the health care part of it. And
Madam chair. The only reason I
asked that is because I don't I
don't want this bill to get to
the next place without that.
Burbage being in there, just in
case it doesn't go through
because I know that substance
abuse is a problem. And if I
may, madam chair mat can give a
little brief history of of that
real fast.
Incident. Madam Chair
representative Vincent So thank
you for the question so of from
the clinical contents context, I
can say that, um, opioid use
disorder and more and more in
literature were saying opioid
use disorder slash substance use
disorder because just as the
body is made up of many parts
diseases and and and, um, uh,
illicit substances
Or often intermixed and so
beyond that, in addition to that
is, there is a very important
component of treating mental
health disorders when you're
shooting, treating opioid use
disorders and substance use
disorders, so I can also, um uh
say with confidence that in
working with our attorney
general's office we've
Got full assurance that this
bill matches the language of the
opioid settlement funding if Mr
Bowie needed to speak more to
that he could
Thank you very much. And Madame
Cheron representatives, an
expert witnesses. Will these
programs require additional
funding going forward and will
the state be expected to pay for
this?
Madam Chair, representative
Vincent So, uh, clinical
services expanding clinical
services, The most difficult
component of that is always
start up costs for the
programmatic piece, which is
what this bill supports. And so,
um, this bill supports the
startup costs but definitely
building Medicaid billing and
specific is the sustainability
for this bill. There are many
other components that we can
seek, but you know, straight up
delivering the necessary
Medical services that our
patients need to survive will
create the sustainability.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Uh, representative and
experts and you just answered my
next question. So thank you for
Bill bringing this bill forward
and I know it's a need. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for bringing this
bill forward.
As I look at the at the
Focus on the on the bill. Are
you coordinating this treatment
center?
It. Talks about the region in
San Miguel County. Is it only
the county that is putting forth
this program? Could you please
explain if this includes the
city, the county and the state?
Madam Chair representative
Herndon over the course of the
last decade of of creating this
program, and and this facility,
we have a major combined effort
and in on behalf of this bill,
uh, not only as you've heard
from the commission chair
Garcia. We also have resolutions
passed by the city of Las Vegas
and the counties of Maura and
Guadalupe.
We also look to serve the
broader region, the rural area
of of our state and have
partnerships that have extended
beyond to the other counties
that have no inpatient services.
uh, in our region, So thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you, Mr
Presenter, so with respect to
the application, uh, you talked
about a residential
rehabilitation facility. And
you? Are you looking at long
term midterm care and then a
shorter outpatient care process
Also
Madam Chair, representative
Herndon all of it because
comprehensive is the key and
integrated as well. And so for
this bill specific, we're
looking at the programmatic for
you know our first phase, which
is, uh, shorter term treatment
Right now. There are no
inpatient treatment services in
our region. Um, however, in the
longer term vision that was
always linked to a long term
residential treatment facility
that we would hope in future
phases and in collaboration with
other efforts.
Loading the legislation that
you're bringing forward.
Um, representative Herndon that
that will come to fruition. Uh,
I want to say one other thing
about this bill, as you all have
supported my efforts. Our
efforts for expanding school
based health centers, you'd say,
Well, what does this have to do
with that? Well, primary
prevention way upstream. And so
I want to also just thank you
all for your support for that
expansion has led to a school
based house center in every
school in our region. Thank you
And Madame chair. Just one more
comment, So thank you for
For the bigger picture that yes,
there is something
That we're trying to do in a
coordinated basis and to know
that San Miguel County has this
plan in place that could go in
line with the State County and
the city facility is absolutely
awesome. With respect to this
with respect to the school, the
school based health centers I
want to present something to you
quickly. So yesterday we had 100
and 40 students here at this
roundhouse and one of the one of
the things that was tops on
their list was the fact that
they were concerned about
students being
Exposed to some sort of
addiction or some sort of drug.
So what they've asked for is one
a class that has an advisory
space where they can talk to
each other once a week and
helped lift each other up. So
I'd like for you to consider
that the other aspect of that
they talked about the need for
having mental health and
wellness rooms that are staffed
by people who can help them
whenever they have an issue. So
if you think about that is
you're carrying out your work.
We have such a great way to help
our kids.
Through schools and throughout
the state. And thank you, Madam
Chair. I appreciate it.
Thank you. I will entertain a
motion.
I So move we do pass on house
Bill 50.
Okay. Is there any opposition?
Saying none. You have a do pass
9 to 0.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee real quick. I
just want to also think or I
will. Tourists are a G for
supporting this bill. I know
it's a crisis that is affecting
our area, and I just want to
thank you guys for your support
as well and represented Herndon.
We will take that to the public
school health and hopefully we
can get something going in our
district. Thank you. Next, we
will move on to HB 93.
Medicaid, home modification,
gross receipts and just to
remind you to the committee. We
did hear this bill last year,
and we had extensive discussions
on this program. Um, on
Wednesday, so let's try and keep
this movement pass. Okay. Thank
you, madam Chair.
I will start right away. Thank
you Last year, uh, this
committee passed HB 220. This is
the same bill. It did get
through both tax passages. Uh,
packages last year but was line
item vetoed as all the G R T
modifications were last year
were British sending it to you
again? Just a quick. Uh,
overview is that home
modifications are
Um, for individuals with
disabilities who qualify to have
the grab bars, wheelchair ramps,
Um, currently, um, they cannot
ask these funds and less They
get a home health aide to write
a letter saying that they need
those that goes to the insurance
company before improved. Our
point of view is that sounds
like a prescription, even though
who's writing? The letter is not
a doctor in the New Mexico. We
do not attacks prescriptions.
So currently the actual
equipment is not subject to a G
R T but the licensed and
registered and pre approved
installers are having to pay G R
T on their labor. This is
already meager budget and we
don't want our clients to have
to make choices about their
accessibility and availability.
And I have, um, um, my expert
witness, but on time we're not
going to make a statement. We're
just going to be available for
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. First, we're gonna go to
zoom in the audience for
opposition.
So if you are one zoom and
opposition, please raise your
hand. We're going to move
quickly.
Okay. I don't see anybody okay
in support in the room, Okay. If
you want to speak, come on up.
01 2nd. And if you're on No, you
know, just if you're on zoom and
you're in support, please raise
your hand and we'll come to you
when we're finished in the room.
Thank you.
Madam Chair. Oh,
Madam Chair members of the
committee I'm Art Hall on behalf
of home modification systems.
These are the same families
where we have reduced their
benefit over the last 10 years
from 12,500 over five years to
$6000 over five years.
The G R T on that is a very
small amount.
But might help allow us to add
another grab bar or two and
their bathroom.
And falls are incredibly
expensive on the medically
fragile, disabled community. So
we think this very small amount
of grt while it definitely would
reduce with the local
government, God G R T
It would it would help with the
overall cost of dealing with the
elderly folks keeping them in
their home safely, as opposed to
having to go to assisted living
facilities or nursing homes. So
we think the cost
Benefit greatly outweighs the
cost.
Thank you now.
Thank you. My name is nap. Dean.
That's my name. Sign. I stand in
support of this bill. Thank you.
Morning Chairman. Ladies and
gentlemen of the committee Chris
LeRoi, Uh, public policy officer
for the Ark in New Mexico,
representing people with
disabilities throughout the
state. We first like to thank
the representative for carrying
this bill. She's always a
champion for the disability
community, and she is very much
appreciated, as is the chair and
others and committee who always
stand for people with
disabilities.
We stand in full support of the
US and we just like to thank the
representative carrying this.
Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone on
Zoom? Okay, We will go to the
committee. Any questions?
Representative Vincent?
Thank you, madam Chair.
So, um
G R T
Did you? Did you contact any
cities and municipalities or
counties and asked what they
thought about this bill, Madam
chair.
Uh, Madam Chair representative?
No, I did not. Thank you,
Vincent. Let's stay on the bill.
Madam Chair. It's a G r t
reduction. It's going to impact
my local county and
municipalities. So I think
that's very relevant Question,
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
And madam chair and
representative this bill, as
pointed out in the F I, R.
narrows the tax base. How will
this population choose for a
special deduction?
As compared to the rest of new
Mexicans. Elderly, um,
impoverished and ill. Why should
Medicaid get a special
deduction?
Thank you, Madam Sharon. Thank
you, Representative. So I do
have some issues with the F I r.
Just so you know who is eligible
for this, Uh, line is a
community community based
healthcare. Um, and for
Medicaid, the waiver recipients,
So it's a very It's not all
waivers. It's only those two
programs and then in the budget
that we put together, we went by
historical numbers.
Actually has access to this
program, and it's much smaller
than who is eligible for this
program.
Um, I'm terribly sorry. But so
the impact is, uh, and by our
calculations are much
Ah, much smaller than what you
see. Before you. I hope that
answers your question.
Representative. It doesn't Madam
Chair representative. I'm an
elderly fan.
And not just Medicaid but
elderly fan completely, so I
just like to see everybody
included in that so that we
could help everybody. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you any
further questions? I will
entertain a motion.
Okay, representative Chavez with
passing the second with
representative Ferrari. Is there
any opposition?
Seeing none. You have a do past
9 to 0.
Oh, I'm sorry. Okay, well back
up. Unring the hammer. Um
So we'll have 8 to 1 with a do
pass. Thank you. And you're in
charge, Madam.
That Madam chair
I It was pointed out to me that
the Golden Rod says that we are
hearing HB 11 hb 50 hp 93. This
is from yesterday and that's
that's what we had in our
information presented Jones that
we there was some sort of mix up
in the system. It was, um
It went in the correct way as we
have on our desks and we really
don't have a lot of extra time
to. Um, sorry for that. There
was confusion and it's being
worked on. But we are going to
plow on.
Madam chair. I wasn't prepared
to hear the other bills, and I
don't think the rest of our team
was either.
Um
The committee assistant says
that this agenda was sent out to
committee members yesterday, so
I'm sorry if we had all the time
in the world. We, uh we would do
that. But as the chair I'm going
to rule that it was sent out to
members. There was a mistake,
and we just We just I'm sorry. I
apologize. But
Hopefully, it won't happen
again. But there's no promises
that
What
Now on hospital. 98 accounts for
disabled eligibility.
Representative list. Thompson,
would you please tell us about
the bill? Thank you, Madam
Chair. This is a very simple
bill. Um, that was brought to me
by the state treasurer's office.
There's something called Able
accounts, which are accounts for
people with disabilities to be
able to put money aside and not
risk their public benefits their
Medicaid there. DeeDee waiver.
It's a federal program that the
treasurer's office
Um, generously offered to host
and take care of for us, So all
this bill does is make a couple
of chain of minor minor changes.
Um, so on Page two line, 24.
The ages. Raid that age is
raised from 26 to 46 in terms of
when your disability occurs, and
this is to follow with federal
law. This has been changed in
the federal system. So we're
just we're just updating ours to
just stay up with federal law.
And then the other change is
Page 19. I mean line, 19 on Page
four.
Um, it's it's the new material
is limitation of Medicaid
payback unless required by
federal law, the state or an
agency or instrumentality of the
state shall not seek payment
from an account for its proceeds
for benefits provided to the
beneficiary or undertake a state
recovery from an account and
these are very specific accounts
with the listed, um
Enumeration of what they can be
used for purchasing a house
purchasing a car education.
Things like that. So, um and I
have Jerry Morris from the
treasurer's office and if if she
wants to give a few quick
remarks, and then we are open
for questions. Thank you, Miss
Morris.
Good morning vice chair and
members of the committee. Um
Representative Thompson provided
an overview and for the interest
of time, I will just say that
there's a lot of misconceptions
around these accounts and are
able coordinator Denise Balderas
since Treasurer Montoya took
office in January. 2023 We have
hit the ground running, trying
to train state agencies.
Um, with the information on
these accounts, because a lot of
our consumers in New Mexico are
misinformed about these counts
these accounts and I just want
to print out a point out, um in
the F I r one of the things that
was brought up by, um, the new
healthcare authority as that is
that these accounts would cause
more people to be on Medicaid
and that
That is incorrect because these
folks are already on Medicaid
that are eligible for able
accounts, so that would not be
an increased cost to the state.
The other thing I just want to
point out about the F I R. Is
that the fiscal impact says that
it is indeterminant and minimal
to the state. And that is
because
H S D has not collected on
recovery since 2018 when this
program launched and they have
recently had a third party
contractor, Um Hmm. S that would
be collecting on the recovery,
but they haven't. They currently
have three accounts that they
have reported, but they have not
to this day room.
Recovered any funds, and so I
would just like to say, and then
I'll stand for questions. But I
would just like to say that the
persons with disabilities, um,
act and the New Mexico stable
accounts are to help these
individuals supplement the cost
that they have. As
representative Thompson just
made us aware.
It is not to supplant.
Any other benefits. It is to
help them to save and spend for
qualifying disability expenses
that they would not otherwise
have statistics show that
persons with disabilities and
families with Children with
disabilities spend 28% more in
costs, then those that wouldn't
otherwise be utilizing these
accounts. And with that, I stand
for questions.
Thank you very much, So we're
going to go to the zoom if
there's anyone who is in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
There are no hands. Is there
anyone in the audience who is in
opposition to the bill?
See none. Anyone on zoom, who is
in favor of the bill?
Anyone in the audience who
wishes to speak in favor. Please
come forward.
You interviewed one minute?
Please sit. Stay your name.
The microphone and who you
represent. Okay? I was just
trying to find a microphone
there. Yes, Yes. Speak a little
louder. Okay, There's mix in the
ceiling. Okay, we'll explain. I
am Greg Trap. I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
Commission for the Blind.
I'm in favor of HB 98. It has
the ability to encourage first
disabilities to engage in work
activity without fear of
immediately losing benefits,
which is a real barrier for
people who are seeking to become
employed.
The bill.
And help to raise those fears by
allowing people to know that it
is possible to create an able
account and not have to fear
loss of benefits or loss of
Medicaid or having their estate
are able to count going after
for a Medicaid segregation.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
My name is Net. Dean. I'm a
disability advocate and a person
with multiple disabilities and
my very first trip to Capitol
Hill was advocating for the able
achieving a better life
experience accounts and we
passed it at the federal level
and my disability occurred at
age my first injury at the age
of 28.
So I'm not been eligible for an
able account.
Mexico is collaborating with
Ohio, which is the stable
accounts.
Ah, yes. T and achieving a
better life experience. I will
Ask the experts to
Define the S and s. It's F and
the PTI. It's the state
treasures achieving a better
life experience. That's the
difference program. Um, I know
that this is a very important
savings tool, and I am not a
recipient of Medicaid, but it is
still a very important savings
tool that gives people an
alternative.
To achieve a better life
experience and a better outcome.
Um
There are some individuals who
thought that this was awesome.
Moved to Saturday, so there are
other individuals that are and
families that are in support of
this. Thank you so much for your
time Madam Chair members, The
committee sponsor next group.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chairman. Ladies and gentlemen
of the committee Chris LeRoi
from the arc of New Mexico. Our
CEO Heather Benavidez, who
previously worked at the
treasurer's office,
administering able accounts, So
we are strongly in support of
this,
uh, complies with the changes in
the federal law that will be
effective in 2026 as far as
raising age from 26 to 46. We
have
Over 300 guardianships at our
office over 500 Trust as well as
rep 80 accounts. Many of our
clients are alliance unable
accounts in order to survive,
and so we would like to thank
again representative Thompson
for bringing this bill and
stand in strong support of the
passage of this. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Wendy Lin Frank Allison
and I'm the program manager for
State, New Mexico Crisis and
Access 98 8 line and a member of
the New Mexico Behavior Health
Coalition.
Um, I stand in favor of house
Bill 98 too often times we have
community members from
New Mexico reaching out to us
expressing despair and I believe
that the raising from 24 to 46
of this action will help so many
people in need in order to find
hope and build their pathways to
recovery. Thank you very much
for allowing me to speak. Thank
you. Now we'll go to the
committee.
Hmm. Point of Order, Madam
Chair. I'm a question on the
golden Rod. This bill is not
listed. Thank you. We we that
was raised and it was mentioned
that the entire agenda was sent
out yesterday. But the golden
right had an error in it.
So Madam chair would be online.
If I went, I'm going to go look,
but it'd be online. I have no
idea. It was sent out to the
committee so that the committee
was aware of what was going to
be heard. We're not sure what
happened with respect to the
people who were putting it up on
the golden Rod. Okay, I'll check
Madam Chair. Thank you. Thank
you. Of I. C representative
Jones represented Vincent Is
there anyone else and
representative case So first,
we'll go to Representative
Jones. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson and
Um, I was writing women. You
talked about new material. I got
the
People are eligible are already
on Medicaid and I got increased.
We are increasing the age to 45
from 25 correct.
Actually from 2026 46 close.
But the other changes could you
explain them to me? Because I'm
still no Medicaid expert.
Madam chair and representative
Jones. Essentially, this just
puts into statute what has been
the practice where the state
Medicaid program does not go to
people's able accounts to get
reimbursed for, um, for their
Medicaid costs, and also that
they that the state not
Undercover undertake recovery
from an account after the death
of the person, Okay. Thank you
very much. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you. We'll go to
representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair in that
answered my question. Right
there. Right. Thank you. We'll
go to representative case. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for presenting this bill and
making sure that our state stays
in compliance with federal
order. I just wanted to say, um
I am old enough to remember a
time before able counts and able
counts have been able to provide
individuals with disabilities
the dignity of employment.
And the opportunity for
financial literacy and thank you
very much.
Thank you.
There's no other questions. I
will take a
Representative, Lord just point
in order. This bill is actually
listed on the website for
tomorrow, Not today.
So this is what we have done. It
was sent to the committee. We we
can't really have control over
the mistakes that the people are
having on the Golden Rod. But
what is most important is that
the appropriate agenda was sent
out to the members of the
committee. We do You want to
have your bill heard tomorrow
instead of today, Madam chairman
bills actually getting rolled to
Monday and that's not the point.
The point is that the people who
would want to make commentary in
this did not know that this bill
is happening today, and I don't
believe it's very
Fair for it to get
Enough scrutiny from people at
home from people on the website
or anywhere else because to
them it was put on for tomorrow.
Not for today. That's my point.
Thank you very much. One of the
things that I will say is that
this is being recorded so they
will have the opportunity to
view the recording and the bill
is going to pass to another.
To another committee, and they
will have an opportunity to
speak then.
I don't see anything else. I'll
taken Madam chair I'd like to
move to do pass for house. Bill
98. Thank you. Thank you. We
have a do pass in a second
motion moved to table, Madam
chair just because it didn't get
out to the people in time.
Thank you. We'll take a vote on
your motion to table. Thank you.
So the
She's second. So let me state
under Robert's Rules of motion
to table has precedence. So what
we will do is take a motion. We
will vote on the motion to table
all in favor of tabling both.
Yes, if you are against tabling
vote no.
So will you please call the
roll? Yes.
Representative Kates No.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Ferrari to table
I mean, I'm sorry.
The Pittsburgh Yes.
Represented. Are you OK? Okay,
Representative Jaramillo.
Representative Jones yesterday
table
Representative Lord Yes to table
Representatives, Opinsky
Note the table.
Representative Vincent
Yesterday, able
Uh, madam Vice chair.
No.
Madam chair. No.
Please read it. Okay, um
Three in favor of tabling seven
and 50 in favor of not
So
Thank you. So we're back on the
motion of for the bill. So now
we are taking a vote on I do
pass on house. Bill 98, Will you
please call the roll?
Representative case. Yes,
Representative Chavez s
representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative, Harem Eo.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lord No. And I
want to explain my vote.
Okay?
Representatives Kaplansky Yes.
Representative Vincent Yes.
Madam Vice chair. Yes.
Madam Chair? Yes.
Representative law to explain
your vote. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm looking at the house
Rules. 911 Committee Chairman
shall schedule each house Bill
House visitors your House
memorial to be heard in the
committee and the order, which
they were shown, And this is
shown for tomorrow. Not for
today, So I think that's a big
issue. It's not fair to the
people who would like to have
had a chance to speak on this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Lord,
Madam, You have a do pass. I
would just like to think Vice
chair and the committee members.
This is a minimal fiscal impact
on the state of New Mexico, but
it has a huge impact.
On the disability community, and
I just appreciate your mother.
Thank you.
Okay. We have been excused from
the floor. Um, let's see, we
I think we are going to just
have to, um
Adjourned for the day and we
will move the last two bills
onto our
Agenda for tomorrow. It won't
quite make the 24 hour rule,
but, um, since they were on the
agenda for today, um
We have to sometimes.
Hurry things up in the in the
short session, so, so, with that
we are adjourned until tomorrow
morning at nine o'clock in this
room, and I believe there will
be something for breakfast. I
don't remember who offered or
what it's going to be so
