I'm here.
Okay so let's get this show on
the road go ahead Representative
or yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee
we know we've heard a lot about
the health care professional
shortage in our state it is dire
especially in rural New Mexico
so this bill H. B. two oh nine
starts to tackle that shortage
by investing in young or not so
young health care professionals
when we we do that by providing
incentives for them to stay in
the state for move to the state
and we do that in three ways
first we delete primary care as
a requirement of the positions
that receive the it as for
physicians as a qualified health
care professional that means
that specialists like would you
I. ends cardiologists
oncologist can receive this
award the loan repayment plan
that already that already exists
secondly we increase the years
of a commitment to receive that
award from two to three years
that's a really really big deal
when it comes to recruitment and
it allows the bill allows the
higher education department to
provide even higher award
because we add another year
certainly it codifies that AGD
higher ed consult with the
department of health to
determine what in underserved
rural area does on your hand
that check it out.
There's a map.
Not not shows all the states and
how much the how much the award
toward the loan repayment
program you'll see that New
Mexico is not not doing great
so we believe that this bill
will create better incentives
will bring folks here will keep
them here longer and we have
built you know health care
professionals will will stay
here and and make a life here
there is money in the budget
increase from last year one
point six million now with
fifteen million dollars in the
budget so we can provide more
awards for longer which will
will make our state a better
place health wise I have an
expert with me Kerry robin
brindar from New Mexico Medical
Society and we are here to
answer any questions and with
that manager I stand for
questions very did you want to
say anything I'm just here K.
okay is there anyone here in
support.
The one online in support.
Lorenzo.
On mute Lorenzo and then you can
you'll have one minute.
Lorenzo.
Okay we'll skip all he's on
there twice okay.
Of the okay go ahead Lorenzo.
The only way to our house bill
four hundred.
Sorry I know that's okay okay so
we are on house bill whatever
Two oh nine so if the please
lower your hand if you're not if
you don't want to speak in favor
of house bill two of nine so
we'll go to J. D..
Morning thank you madam chair
this is Katie voices and seating
on behalf of greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce what is this
L. our state's urgent healthcare
needs requires and all of the
above approach we need to keep
their providers we have with
their years of crisis experience
and we will attract new
professionals to the field
broadening our loan programs
that all manner of leaders
positions are eligible will
encourage more specialists to
stay and work in New Mexico
hello also incentivize
healthcare we were for students
so setting the service
obligation we make sure our
doctor sitting around and this
bill makes a requirement for all
three years of service.
Thank you JT Janet Popp hello
Janet.
Hello hello this is my name is
Janet Popp on with the American
Civil there on the association
New Mexico chapter we stand in
support of this bill we think it
will help earlier years to
improve access to physical
therapy services thank you thank
you Janet Amy Dixon hello Amy.
Members of the committee my name
is rector of desert states
physical therapy network the
network is comprised of thirty
independent private practices
official officials are the
statewide which one half of the
committees are located in rural
and underserved areas what did
you see the rivers we believe
the eight metre line would add
another recruitment retention
tool in the office we stand in
full support of the bill you
thank you Amy the rent so could
you please lower your hand on
both of your devices until we
get to the and I promise if we
have a lot of public comment I
won't pass you by so Rifka
stern.
Hi I don't.
If you discern a family
physician here in Albuquerque
New Mexico I've been practicing
for almost thirty years hi I'm
very much in support of this
bill it's very important I think
of the people in and out of the
school is the worry they can't
repay their loans and I'm going
into
specialties when they can make
more money and so if we support
this hopefully we'll have more
people providers in primary care
consider for the needs of people
in our state.
Thank you
at that but see yep that's all
anyone here in opposition.
Linda.
So I am not or not.
D. O. H. can analyze.
Shop the.
Please okay is there anyone on
zoom in opposition if so and you
want to speak please raise your
hand.
Okay I'm not seeing anybody so
did you have any remote remarks
before we go to the committee
madam chair just this is a great
piece of bipartisan legislation
okay questions from the
committee.
Representative Jones.
Thank you don't forget to like.
We have a might problems even
now but I think you can you guys
hear me okay okay no I just want
to say thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
bringing this I think we all
agree that we need to do
whatever we can to to attract
physicians to especially to
rural areas so I I do have a.
Question about who would be
eligible for this I have I'm
thinking of a physician a
homegrown young man he's from
Deming and he just moved back to
Deming just because he loves it
to serve there is a physician
and even though the environment
is not you know it is not so
attractive we see with someone
who's already and I don't mean
just Deming let me make that
clear I mean rural New Mexico.
No we're so glad to have him but
would he be eligible for this
even though he's already made
the decision to move back Madam
chair representative Jones
absolutely he would be eligible
for this and that is a fantastic
place and I wish him up there
yeah and probably is under
service like houses very
underserved we have been for
many many years or it it it's
continuing to be worse and every
year so this is a really welcome
piece of legislation
Are there any plans to increase
appropriation for the program
Madam chair representative jobs
this year we went from one point
six million to fifteen million I
think that's not quite enough
but will will still be that
increasing as we go along I
think we're gonna see some
really great results from this.
So is there is there funding in
HB two for that Madam chair
representative as there is
already yeah it's fifteen
million at ten million.
Recurring.
Recurring madam chair it's
actually the opposite five
million dollars recurring and
then an additional ten million
dollars that would be
nonrecurring so that the higher
education department can kind of
proof that all of that money
will go out the door within a
plan next year to try to replace
that non recurring money with
recurring dollars and actually
up the appropriation has that
money actually gets spent down
by the higher education
department so we've you know
increased by what was at nine
hundred thirty percent share
Representative.
It's math.
Right thank you of a not quite I
have something.
I think we've pretty much
covered what I have but I sure
do appreciate it thank you very
much thank you Representative
Chavis thank you madam chair
representative I think this is
a great all right I have a
couple of questions.
so the first question that I
have is do we have a sense of
how many of additional
physicians might be eligible for
this by expanding the the
criteria madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Chavez so the way the loan
repayment program works right
now is all health care
professionals are actually
served by the same loan program
so the higher education
department markets that loan
repayment is available health
care professionals as defined in
the legislation are then able to
submit an application for loan
repayment so it could go to
nurses it could go to physical
therapist it can now if this
legislation passes go to any
physician not just primary care
physicians but all of those
applications are ranked by their
higher education department and
they give the award to the most
in need areas in terms of
geography and also in terms of
work force need so what we've
done in this legislation is
actually state now all
physicians could submit an
application but they'll still
have to go through that ranking
system in the current year over
four hundred health care
professionals applied for a loan
and only sixty were able to
receive an actual award payment
so by increasing the budget as
well we hope to expand the
number of health care profession
professionals in totality two
can receive award and also
increase those award amounts so
we don't have a specific number
because it will have to go
through that application
process.
And I know that in some areas
will be two way and critical
needs so hopefully we can get
some of them interested the
other question that I have is if
they don't complete their three
year term then is there a
provision whereby they have to
pay it back.
So madam chair members of the
committee and Representative
Chavez the way the program works
is you only receive the award
for the year in which you've
states so let's say there's an
individual who applies for an
award in year one right now they
get twenty five thousand dollars
for your one then if they re
sign for year two they get in
and another twenty five thousand
dollars for year two and then if
they re sign after this
legislation passes for year
three they would get another
twenty five thousand dollars in
year three what the research is
showing around the country is
three years is kind of the sweet
spot to be able to attract
someone without kind of this you
have to stay forever but also
give those individuals an
opportunity to really Grove
roots in communities in three
years you're not going to do a
short term rental maybe you've
met a partner maybe you've had
children and they're now you
know in preschool so three years
seems to be kind of that spot
where recruitment on works but
then retention has a better
return on investment but that's
the way the program works right
now.
Thank you madam chair and the
might you answered my other
question in terms of how much
The allocation is for each into.
Anymore questions.
Okay I.
Representative Kate manager I'd
like to make a motion for two
passed thank you in a second.
Okay is there anyone in
opposition.
The thing then you have it to
pass thank you thank you.
Okay next is House Bill three oh
eight special needs an adoption
special needs adoption tax
credit.
Are they not here I believe that
one was roled was that the one
that was wrong thank you I
think.
Okay that one's been rolled
okay House Bill three eighty
four.
There is go ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee
Representative Figueroa is in
House government this morning
and asked if I could present for
her and I will also note that
representative Armstrong is also
on this bill
madam chair members of the
committee house bill three
eighty so last year we did house
bill one ninety one which
allowed for expedited licensure
for anybody who is licensed in
good standing in another state
an occupation or propel
profession licensed with the New
Mexico and if there are New
Mexico specific things that they
need to get done they can do
that during that first year when
they have the expert on license
before they renew their licence
but that gets people in the door
and it allows people to start
practicing in New Mexico instead
of people having to come move
here and wait several months for
practice for the process when
they're already licensed in the
state would we I will note that
house bill one ninety one among
other things not only has made
it easier for people to move
into New Mexico but it has not
been recognized by the Pentagon
as being something that is made
New Mexico military friendly in
terms of basically silence and
has resulted in New Mexico
having a solid green over our
state when they when they look
at which states are military and
military family friendly when we
did that bill just for some
reason social workers and
veterinarians were not included
in the list and they've now
asked that they be included in
the list and we are happy to
oblige and hope that this
committee would be as well I
have with the superintendent of
the regulation licensing
division Linda Trujillo who is
here to help answer questions as
well.
Okay all right so let's go to
the audience anyone here in
opposition.
Anyone on soon.
Lorenzo still not yet.
Okay so support anyone anyone in
the audience on support in
support.
Okay anyone on zoom in support
okay go ahead Karen.
Madam chair members of the
committee members of the
committee that this is Keren
candidate with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
strong support of additional
course.
If we lose you care and are are
you were just that quick.
I'm sorry I think that I just
said we're support I'm here.
Echo or something.
Okay we heard you care in okay
thank you councilwoman Tammy
feeble corn my city councilor.
Go ahead tell me.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is people who
are Albuquerque city councilor
and mayor and also for this it
will we were social workers in
our state but in particular the
CEO Albuquerque is desperately
in many areas we really do
believe this LOL hopefully
additional areas in our area and
all across the state and this is
just an individual I want to say
in the the.
The specialty of Business and
actually here it and right now
it is in the middle of the night
there's no way I can take them
that hasn't happened as we
travel without the additional is
good for everyone across the
state absolutely support thank
you thank you Tammy Bob Carroll.
Yes chair members of the
committee my name is about their
own on the roof that are using
military family called Sliq we
support G. three eighty four
because it makes it easier for
the thousands of military
service members who are fully
licensed in one state the
exhibition the exhibition
a panel licensed to practice in
New Mexico thank you thank you
Jessica Johnson.
Good morning madam chair and
members just to get Johnson look
able to protection Motors we're
in strong support of this bill
particularly for the.
Additions the state needs all
the help we can get to attract
and keep veterinarians in New
Mexico because of a shortage
does affect animal welfare and
and we need help across all
sectors whether we're talking
about large animal veterinary
practices and for agricultural
purposes
all the way to small animal care
general practice animal shelters
this this will help losses that
we we appreciate sponsoring this
art thank you thank you and
that's all the public comment I
see
do do either of you want to
respond are we ready for
questions okay questions
Representative Chavis and then
Vincent.
I do have a couple of questions
one of them I just got a text
from from a constituent and
basically the question is around
staff.
one of the issues apparently is
that if folks call the for.
Or email there's not a response
given so there is there is there
a plan to maybe staff up to to
deal with that so that that we
can respond to people who are
calling who are interested in in
you know getting their license.
Finding out what the process is
those kinds of things.
Madam chair representative the
social work has already been put
online and so people should be
able to see where they're at in
the process if there is someone
who's not getting a response you
should have my phone number and
give me a call immediately and
we'll take care of that if you
don't have my phone number I'm
happy to send it to I would
appreciate that absolutely
Senator the other question that
I have is what states I I see in
here in the analysis that the
board is required to determine
those states and territories
from which it will not accept an
applicant for expedited
licensure do you can you tell me
now madam chair Senator which
states those might be or what
the criteria I'm thinking that
maybe another state may have
lower licensure requirements of
the.
But can you.
Madam chair representative jobs
the the model that we used in
one ninety one which we're
continuing and with these two
practice areas is that the
default is that in the state
is we will automatically accept
unless the board with
specificity provides why it is a
particular state does not comply
so we wanted to make sure that
if there was if if there's a
state who ended up adopting
standards that we're just simply
unacceptable to New Mexico we
had the ability to to make that
to distinguish that way.
If if necessary but otherwise
the default is that that all
states
will will qualify for the
expedited licensure likewise we
have exactly the opposite rule
for foreign jurisdictions for
introductions don't qualify on
less the board with specificity
says someone who gets trained in
this for location they would
qualify for the same excluded
licensure.
And so and so that that way then
people can be on notice as to
which ones are are the
equivalent and which ones are
not and we're still able to
protect state state sovereignty
where we need to do so.
Madam chair representative so
one of the reasons that social
work and veterinarians and
there's a couple of other boards
that are connected to RLD's
specifically which veterinarian
isn't on were not included in
the bill is because seventeen
boards were included in the bill
that are under our jurisdiction
and authority and it took us all
year with the full time legal
counsel to do that research we
haven't done that research for
the social work because it
wasn't included in it upon this
bill passing our legal counsel
will begin that work and then
they'll work with the attorney
general's office and the board
to adopt rules that specify
which jurisdictions may not it's
my suspicion that there won't be
any States territories or
district of Columbia it's not
equivalent to New Mexico because
social workers a party national
standard but I can't give you
that answer without that legal
work being completed.
Madam chair Senator I have one
more question.
What's the time what's the
waiting time right now of for
someone who apply.
A place for licensure for social
work.
Madam chair representative it's
hard for me to say what the wait
time is because most times there
will be something that will be
missing from the application the
biggest thing that we have to
wait on is because the way the
law is currently written we have
to get of passing of examination
national examination from the
applicant regardless of how long
they've been licensed so for
example California did not do
the national exam until twenty
sixteen so someone who is
licensed in California and
twenty fifteen who has
tremendous years of experience
would have to then go and take
the examination before they can
get licensed here and so it
really depends if you were if
you were educated in New Mexico
then you already have the
cultural competence course that
you have to take if not then you
have to sign up for the course
and you have to take that and
submit that to us so we're
trying to have eyes on the
application within three days of
receiving it notifying the
applicant what's missing and
then it's it's incumbent upon
them to provide it to us we do
try to restrict you know do a
reminder I will tell you at the
end of twelve months that
application is expired and
they'd have to apply again but
we are trying to get those
applications by on notify the
applicant within three days and
that's the beauty of having it
as an online application.
The madam chair Senator I just
thought of one more question how
many social work applications we
have waiting right now to be
processed Madam chair
representative I can get you
that information I don't have
that on hand today but I can get
to that information and I will
get it to you.
Representative instead I I
mistakenly skipped over for
Representative Ferrary who
actually raise your hand first
so my apologies you're playing
favorites.
thank you I've just
know how our community and doing
and at is particularly in past
it by not having enough that to
Marion's and so I appreciate
being able to have this
experience so that there are
others who could come and be
part of that provision in our
communities so much like quicker
thank you thank you
representative Representative
Vincent thank you madam chair
and senator.
Representative Chavis actually
got one of my questions taken
care of the why is it taking so
long to get reciprocity across
the board in New Mexico.
Madam chair and Representative
it's at the
The part of it is the historic
nature of state based licensure
and the and every every state
that has some kind of
idiosyncrasies that may or may
not match up with other states
are in terms of in terms of
what's required and and so then
you couple that with with
candidly boards that are
historically
where we're historically with
actual required the licensure
decision to go to the full
board.
So that to wait for board
meeting.
And and we're within we wouldn't
license somebody until they're
fully New Mexico compliant.
It just it just there's a number
of different things that end up
creating delays.
By employing this method here
where we where we simply provide
the expedited licensure on
initial entrance once once you
meet the qualifications which is
your license not state in the
case of a veterinarian you've
been practicing for eight five
years in the case of a social
worker at least two and a half
years.
and then we allow people to do
their next New Mexico specifics
after that we're able to Rabal
to significantly front slowed
that process and make it easier
for people to be able to cross
state boundaries.
Thank you and one more question
madam chair Senator.
Whenever you're doing a
licensure on let's say
veterinarians is there a
national registry or.
So there's if you were if you
were educated in Oklahoma and
you decided to come to rid so I
mean Santa Fe and
You were taught in Oklahoma.
Is there a national registry
that everybody takes the same
yes.
How does that work madam chair
and Representative that's it so
in some practice areas there is
a national yes
that is generally accepted by
most or all of the states
although as as a superintendent
Trujillo was just putting out
there's some out liars on this
and then with the residential
yes that helps.
because we end up going more
towards national standards but
there is no national registry
because licensure is done for
professional occupational
licenses is done at the state
level.
Thank you that's all have any
more questions okay I will
entertain the most.
Okay okay so that was
Representative Ferrary and
Representative Lord.
Is there any opposition.
Seeing line you have to pass.
Your members of the committee
thank you so much for the
discussions to see.
Okay we will go on to house bill
four hundred state administered
health coverage plan.
Madam with.
Good morning madam chair
committee.
I am here to present house bill
four hundred.
Which would establish a new
options for health care coverage
for New Mexicans
have a sort of astounded to
discover that we still have two
hundred thousand New Mexicans
that do not have health
insurance coverage right now
that significantly reduce from
ten or fifteen years ago but
it's still two hundred thousand
New Mexicans that are making
decisions between
their medical bills or seeking
medical services an important
other expenses for their
families like
whether that be food athletics
for their kids off all kinds of
things all those difficult
decisions that folks are facing
right now what this bill would
do it
it does a few things one it
starts with the study to look at
how we could expand eligibility
for Medicaid and ends in
expanding eligibility for
Medicaid we have confirmed with
uh Senator for Medicaid America
Medicare services that we would
be able to continue to get this
the federal match for funds even
if we were to raise the
eligibility for Medicaid.
it also the study would also
look at what a sliding scale
premiums would be so this would
not be
Medicaid at that is currently
does not have premiums this
would contemplate a sliding
scale premium fees I
simultaneously we would be
drawing down that seventy three
percent federal match which
would be a great infusion of
federal funds into our health
care system that we also in the
study will be looking at
other groups of individuals that
it may be extremely beneficial
to include
in this what we're called the
Medicaid forward plans so that
could be for example state
employees to offer this is an
option for state employees are
offer this is an option for
teachers or other public
employees in addition to the
private health insurance options
that they have
and one of the reasons for that
is that the economies of scale
when you are expanding Medicaid
because we have so many Medicaid
enrollees could be extremely
beneficial to some of those
employees and their kids.
and the bill also ask the
secretary to apply for the
federal waiver in a couple of
years so twenty twenty six so
that gives us plenty of time to
plan for the implementation of
this and you know I would just
add that what we're doing is
trying to create an affordable
another affordable option for
families that are currently
not covered and what we don't
want to do is up what the system
that we have now is that if you
are offered a raising your job
for example you have to really
consider am I going to lose my
health care eligibility what
what my options be maybe my
employer doesn't offer health
care coverage and so this would
allow for that option to be
there on a sliding scale so that
we are getting away from the
cliff of facts that
currently as so many families
face I'd like to introduce my
expert witness madam chair
Nicolas quarterback from the
center for loan poverty.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas court of a I'm an
attorney in the healthcare
director at the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and
we're members of the New Mexico
together for health care
campaign which is a community
led movement seeking quality
affordable healthcare for all
New Mexicans so every New
Mexican deserves access to
quality healthcare that fits
into our families budgets but we
know our current system is not
living up to that promise I want
to start by sharing the story of
a client for the sake for
privacy over for tourism Rachel.
To Rachel has two children and
lives in Los crucis and so years
a group years ago she was
enrolled in Medicaid but when
Rachel got a better paying job
she lost her Medicaid coverage
and had to enroll in her
employer's health plan.
Which unfortunately did not
covers many services and
required high out of pocket
costs.
After receiving care at her
local hospital Rachel was facing
thousands in out of pocket costs
but she could not afford.
And sadly that hospital sued her
in court for those out of pocket
costs something that could have
been avoided if she had access
to affordable health care
coverage.
And we know that over of the
over two hundred thousand
uninsured New Mexicans fifty six
thousand are uninsured likely
due to lack of affordable
options.
And starting in April of this
year over eighty five thousand
Mexicans are expected to lose
Medicaid due to increases in
their income that put them over
at the income threshold for that
purpose.
However coverage through an
employer or the exchanges often
too expensive in fact less than
four percent of Medicaid
enrollees who are distant
relatives later enroll in
coverage through the exchange
that's according to the Medicaid
and chip payment and access
commission less than four
percent.
And we know our current system
is not meeting the needs of our
families and so HB four hundred
presents a viable solution
putting the wheels in motion for
New Mexico to establish Medicaid
forward it truly affordable
quality coverage option for
families.
Medicaid forward is an
initiative in which New Mexico
with leverage existing federal
law to increase Medicaid's
income income limit so families
combine affordable plan through
the program which would draw
down federal funding.
This would leverage met matching
federal funds to provide a truly
affordable coverage offered at a
sliding scale based on families
incomes.
And this proposal Kerry strong
bipartisan support in New Mexico
for seventy five percent of New
Mexicans support this that
includes eighty five percent of
Democrats seventy two percent of
independents and sixty four
percent of Republicans.
And I I do want to reiterate a
significant piece of this
initiative because this
initiative leverages existing
federal law New Mexico would be
guaranteed federal funding at
the current federal match for
Medicaid that's roughly seventy
three percent.
And so that means the feds would
pay nearly seventy three percent
of the new costs for those
rules.
Federal federal law guarantees
these federal matching funds up
to any income level the state
establishes as the standard for
this group this presents a
critical opportunity to reduce
the costs of providing insurance
for public employees which are
borne entirely by the state and
whose insurance plans are often
very expensive with high out of
pocket costs H. before hundred
and Medicaid forward present a
unique opportunity for our state
to leave that nation in health
care affordability thank you.
Thank you Representative did you
have an amendment.
yes we do have an amendment
thank you thank you madam chair
of which I I have a copy of that
I believe was delivered to the
committee yes okay yeah
so I will move to discussed the
amendment.
Here comes one it's basically
striking the appropriation.
Yes madam chair
Then explain the assemblies
the amendment we do have half a
million dollars and house bill
two as a special appropriation
to the Human Services department
to conduct this study so this
languages now unnecessary and so
we're just removing the
appropriation.
Okay
is there any discussion on the
amendment.
Any opposition to the amendment
okay you have in the bill and
are you ready for question yes
ma'am okay we will go first to
the audience in opposition if
you want to speak in opposition
or okay.
Good morning Britain.
Here comes the Mike and I
haven't started your time yet.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
we stand in opposition to the
bill for a number of reasons
I'll go through them quickly
because time is short the first
is that this bill essentially
says study it and then
implemented where is it should
be study it and then see if it
works that is a I definitely a
flaw in the bill the other part
is but the bill proposes to
target a target is maybe a
strong word but look at a
population that is currently
being served by the health
insurance exchange if you look
on page five there's about forty
three thousand folks that are on
the exchange they have coverage
they have subsidies were we have
a hard time understanding why
you would focus on that
population of the bill also
affects providers part of this
continuing debate about the
availability of providers is
private pay is much better than
Medicaid reimbursement
increasing Medicaid
reimbursements increases the
pressure on providers in the
state and lastly I would note
that a hip is unaware of CMS
approving any program going up
to these levels four hundred
percent of poverty is beyond any
approval we have seen I take my
phone minute I gave you a few
extra seconds thank you for that
I appreciate it madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we
respectfully oppose H. B. four
hundred HB four hundred sets
forth the path to expand the
Medicaid program and leaves many
unknowns that will affect the
cost of health care for New
Mexico business and the state's
ability to grow economically
there are many questions that
emerge with this proposal that
are on answered by expanding
Medicaid what will the impact be
on our already tax health care
provider workforce what will be
the impact for our employers for
one whose workforce may be over
four hundred percent of the
federal poverty line and how
will this affect current
insurance premiums at a time
where access to health care and
the cost of health care is a
concern for all New Mexicans
this proposal has many
uncertainties and we're worried
about the unintended
consequences and disruption to
our current market including
more pressures on our current
providers at this time the NM
chamber respectfully opposes
this proposal thank you.
You had one second left perfect
timing.
Okay anyone on zoom in
opposition.
Karen are you in opposition.
No.
In favor okay and then hold on a
second
okay we'll go to the audience if
you are in favor please raise
your hand.
And if you would like to speak
please come up to the microphone
and we are going with one minute
today.
Talk fast.
It comes the Mike.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Leah
Sanchez in the co executive
director of the New Mexico
Public Health Association now
I'm here on behalf of our over
three hundred fifty members were
public health workers all across
the state we stand in strong
support of HB four hundred we
believe this is a common sense
bill that makes health care way
more accessible to so many New
Mexican families and is just
something that is vital vital
and needed so thank you so much
thank you.
Madam chair and representative
my name is whom we and and with
New Mexico Asian families I'm in
strong support of HB four
hundred because as an agency we
have seen a lot of domestic
violence sexual assault and
crime victims as well as and
limited English proficient and
low income family who doesn't
qualify for all Medicaid and
would like to be part of that so
this bill will help them as an
agency we have seen our
employee in L. didn't have
health insurance before and pay
like ten thousand dollars out of
that pocket and now as an agency
would like to be able to have an
option with these and by Intel
employee so please do pass this
bill thank you thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee of Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children and we stand in very
strong support of this
legislation.
You know I think we learned a
lot these last three years about
the devastating impacts of
health inequity and what happens
when folks are not able to
afford health care and they
delay care
you know the pandemic was
particularly tough for New
Mexico and I think we now have
an opportunity to do all we can
we have a responsibility I think
to do all we can to make sure
that we have affordable and
accessible health care and I
just want to say I think this
plan is absolutely brilliant
it is extremely cost effective
with the feds picking up a good
bit of the cost of Medicaid is a
particularly good plan and it's
successful in New Mexico and
expanding it will really benefit
our people thank you thank you
bill.
One more in person and then
we'll go to soon.
I am Rick Madden M. a family
physician practice nearly forty
years and the land and the
Representative in New Mexico
Academy family physician and
strong support of this bill I
think it'll help access greatly
there obviously some issues that
need to be tagged along with it
in terms of having enough
providers and some of the other
legislation that's in play right
now help with that but there we
stand strong support Jr to pass
thank you madam chair
Representative thank you doctor.
Okay now we'll go to zoom
caring.
Okay.
Get your steps into a thirty.
Madam chair members of the
community thank you so much my
name is Erin McCarty round and
are in a position and
underserved in rural New Mexico
more than three years I strongly
support.
I strongly support this bill and
feel like it will greatly
improve access officially to
Representative here when people
can't you know they can't afford
to spend money on insurance
premiums or copays they often
delay here is
going to merges around which is
not a cost to alternative and it
doesn't help with prevention
want to really work on Senator
street issues for healthcare New
Mexico we need to have
affordable coverage
It is a great system
administratively it's one of the
easiest navigate that's not
the answer.
Well but we do the a yes in
addition to this and as officers
and.
By on the spur of the bill thank
you thank you I think this is
Lorenzo.
L. Velasquez the last I don't
have a state at E. L. P..
Okay let's skip over the whoever
that is we'll go to and Julie.
Readings.
When we
I am a musician with sixteen
years of experience and that is
ten of them in New Mexico and
the executive director of the
clinic that serves many people
who would benefit from indicate
forward
a lot of Medicaid and when they
get a job that allows them to
make more money they have to
deal with the realities of now
something into the situation in
which they have incredible out
of pocket costs and as a nation
as a sponsor this is us that
really affects people to be
comical really want to reverse
that and encourage people to get
their jobs and they want to
dismiss it is without worry this
bill let another commenter said
it is really really answered
with a seventy three percent
match from the federal
government we can expand
Medicaid please education people
can seamlessly move into other
areas of care still within
Medicaid and I want to member of
the state of the I'm sorry we'll
go to Barbara Webber.
The morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Webber executive
director Health Action New
Mexico we stand in very strong
support this bill not only is it
necessary for the situation that
currently exists in New Mexico
access to healthcare but in the
coming year we're going to lose
a hundred thousand people on
Medicaid and unity there will
not be able to provide coverage
so this will offer aid or for
them to provide coverage and to
continue with
Health care solutions on toward
in order and the will to support
it as well thank you Barbara
Sephora.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is to support us and efficient
and I am the registered this for
New Mexico thrives as a state
nonprofit association.
H. E. four hundred is good for
our communities and it is good
for the people who serve them
the supporting HSD four hundred
thank you thank you
Reverend Bethany Mayer Evans.
It morning I remember that the
more at and I've been with the
New Mexico religious coalition
for reproductive choice and as
of late organizations we believe
that we're called to care for
the sick to see the justice of
the marginalized and to support
the health and wellbeing of our
families we believe health care
she excess over every person in
our community without
discrimination based on their
socio economic status or income
or background and a lot of
Medicaid so more people to have
access to enrollment as a
positive step towards creating a
community where all people are
able to take care of their
medical needs and the medical
needs of their family so we urge
you to vote in favor of Medicaid
four.
Thank you
a COVID pack.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Speaking for the league of women
voters in New Mexico we strongly
supported G. four hundred eight
hundred decision at all New
Mexicans should have access to
affordable health care and
education and they were single
payer health care.
To New Mexico's health coverage
is all too easy to fall through
the gaps between exchange funds
and educated by yourself with no
health care plan I wanted and I
got myself in lowincome years we
might be able to fix it by
sending the already existing
Medicaid program and allowing
people to buy an we will be able
to be four hundred thank you
thank you everybody's doing
great staying under their time
bill Wagner.
Members of the committee my name
is are co anchoring a clinical
social worker in the founder and
director of central community
rated nonprofit the price
behavioral health care and
social services to provide
services to community residents
regardless of their ability to
pay and we strongly support is
so fearing the financial burden
of medical that uninsured New
Mexicans suffering from mental
illness also select out of the
behavioral health care currently
four out of five of our patients
as I realize you do not have
access to affordable health
insurance this is a common sense
bill that would help our
patients nationally one in five
people suffers from mental
illness in New Mexico that
numbers one and for two hundred
fourteen uninsured New Mexicans
and it means over fifty thousand
people will go out and actually
life saving mental health
treatment the G. four hundred
would expand badly needed
services strengthening our
behavioral health safety net
during federal dollars to our
state I ask you to support it
thank you thank you
S. F. F. T. A. verna.
Yeah.
Just as much as possible on IT
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is.
Yes we can hear you.
Right and with New Mexico
together for health care and I'm
from a rural community community
after not.
County eight four hundred is
very important to me because US.
Act contrary to what we needed
of these and the receipt of New
Mexico have been told it health
services.
There is limited either due to
what quantum all are aware of
that after a few visits to the
specialist like I care and
healthcare just announced goals
a specialist we're limited and
then that the I will tell us we
can live you can live with for
the rest of your life and then
three people discover hello
eight.
Can build bridge the gaps and I
just care and
and I just want to ask for your
support on this please thank
thank you
for HB thank you very much.
Valerie Bilson.
And these children I have we're
in.
Trying to heal our children and
if this passes enable
one opportunity to see.
The house outside of my
community these are pretty
stretch of those long waiting
lists and I just want better
health coverage in general but
with so this is a an emphasis on
mental health thank you thank
you Valerie.
You all must have stopwatches or
something and and re gay.
Good morning Representative.
I'm the director of the council
and your support of this bill.
Mexico is one of the state that
they could do to make it in this
is some form of universal
healthcare first.
And this is that correction
thank you thank you.
next we'll go to the the rice
so.
And commitment this
morning.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Roy.
From the New Mexico north of.
Hello.
I have a list of New Mexico for
health care team I strongly
support at four hundred because
rural areas are most of the time
being over looked at.
We need in order to New Mexico
so thank you and support it
could be four hundred thank you
thank you the right cura.
Carol lots.
I need to yourself please.
Okay let's go back to I think
it's Lorenzo L. veil.
Are you there.
Okay I guess neither one of them
okay very okay go ahead.
About a thousand times.
You're going very badly.
I'm sorry which we're not able
to hear you I'm sorry we we have
you down in support so thank you
and I will now go back to
To that the sponsor for in the.
Last minute comments madam chair
just briefly and members I just
wanted to address the issue of
reimbursement rates we think
reimbursement rates are critical
the you will notice that the
study of the plan does include a
thorough review of what
reimbursement rates would be
needed to maximize access to
health care services and that is
the it the intention of that is
to make sure our providers are
full and thriving and that we
are really taking full advantage
of this federal funding
opportunity
at CMS has approved a similar
reason eligibility rates and to
other jurisdictions so far so
this is definitely well within
the precedent of what has been
done and I my final point would
just be for the business
community we see this as a
really viable option for the
business community we know
businesses small and large
around the state are paying
thousands and thousands of
dollars per employee for health
care coverage and so if we can
get more affordable options into
the state we think that'll
benefit the business community
as well thank you so so
important coupon questions I
have Representative of how to me
other Representative Ferrary.
Representative Lord and
talents.
So this is not so much a
question but I need to make a
disclosure I want to make sure
that I am completely transparent
and fully disclose that I
started and own a business the
largest private employer in
Socorro County that has Medicaid
contracts with MCOS I no longer
represent the company in any
dealings with the state or
federal government and I sought
an advisory opinion from the
state ethics commission to
ensure that I go above and
beyond in complying with all
ethics rules and expectations I
am confident that there is no
conflict of interest and the
state ethics commission has
advised me of the same but I am
happy to answer any questions of
the committee or anybody else
thank you thank you
representative Representative
joint Ferrari.
Thank you madam chair
I was just reading some of the
different things that were
suggested as part of the bill to
direct OSI to promulgate rules
requiring the change.
Is that something you might have
considered Representative Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative
definitely
okay thanks and I really do
agree that you know trying to
minimize the cliff effect when
people do get races to have this
available would really be great
and my sons who are in business
small businesses I think would
provide is very helpful for them
to be able to afford health care
more easily and
Also I think there was.
Something about
your bill Madam chair
representative it requires the
implementation
and I was wondering.
You know until you have that
study.
How do you know what the best
way to do that would be.
The madam chair and
representative thank you so much
for that question that's a great
question that the way the bill
as currently drafted it allows
the secretary total flexibility
and how the plan would be
implemented based on the results
of the study we are having
conversations over the number of
stakeholders right now about is
there something we should add to
make that more clear
when we started this process we
felt like it was pretty clear
but I think if we need to
clarify further we well.
Madam chair representative
there's room for you know a few
changes yes madam chair and
madam chair okay and.
You mentioned about the federal
application for the waiver I
believe so yes.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I'm so that was
going to be one of my questions
first questions I had chair
representative because it says
here the Human Services
Department had a issue that it
reports bill requires Medicaid
implement the Medicaid for plan
regardless of the results of the
study I think that's problematic
because I don't think they
should be forced to move forward
with something until they can
fully analyze and that is a big
issue for me and it is for them
as well of these to the bill
does not include a funding
mechanism to implement the
Medicaid forward plan
so how are we going to if this
does move forward where's the
funding going to come for that
Madam chair representative madam
chair and representative thank
you for that question it's a
insightful question because it
goes to our budgeting process
and so is since we deal with one
fiscal year to time thank all of
us who are working on this
legislation know that it's going
to be a long term project here
one is really completing the
study and then as a result of
that study we will have a clear
understanding of the fiscal
impact and will be coming back
to ask the legislature for the
funding for the fiscal year that
would include FY twenty six
so there's a little bit of time
to ask for funding for the
implementation now would be sort
of out of sync with the
budgeting process I guess I
would say so we fully intend to
you know follow the results of
the study it and come back with
the fully fleshed out proposal
this is what it's going to take
and that'll be the time when the
legislature can decide whether
they're going to funded up to
what percentage of the federal
federal poverty line they would
like to fund if that makes sense
okay Madam chair representative
so that goes back to that
question if.
Because it says here Human
Services department is worried
about that they have to
implement this and it has to be
implemented what happens in the
budget gets declined in
judiciary the appropriation
sorry.
Yeah I think we would have to
I think we have to come back in
and address that I don't know if
my expert.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee Representative Lord I
do want to highlight than
section three A. it does
explicitly say that as part of a
comprehensive study the HSD
needs to embark on
specifically paragraph for it it
the Anil it says that they need
to analyze the funding plan
including necessary expenditures
and total revenue generated
whether that's federal revenue
the the federal match
specifically or needed state
concert cost savings because
potentially public employees are
teachers are switching over
after that they're given this
option but I did want to
highlight that this is part of
the process that they would be
looking at this and then in
October twenty twenty four they
would present their findings to
the legislature as part of the
appropriation process.
Okay madam chair that I just
kind of agree with the Human
Services department because they
seem to be concerned about this
so then the question I have is
can you explain to me can you
tell me on page three.
line fourteen.
Have a household income that
exceeds one hundred and thirty
three percent of the federal
poverty level can you tell me
how much that would be I'm
trying to find at this range
because the other question then
ask you a.
About the other end of four
hundred percent so what is the
range that we're looking at.
you madam chair.
It's madam chair members of the
committee Representative Lord so
a hundred thirty three percent
of poverty line when you include
the five percent income
disregard that's part of federal
law it comes up to a hundred
thirty eight percent poverty
what that comes out to in real
dollars is for household of one
it's about one thousand five
hundred a month I'm for
household of four I believe it's
just north of three thousand two
hundred a month I can find the
specific dollar amounts that
they can speak to the one
hundred thirty eight percent
poverty but where the number
that percentage comes from is in
federal law
this path for expanding Medicaid
is available due to the
affordable Care Act which gave
states the option of expanding
Medicaid above one thirty three
percent poverty
as we should pan ski said this
is been I used by two
jurisdiction so far the district
of Columbia has expanded
Medicaid through this initiative
two two hundred ten percent
poverty and organise using this
path to expand Medicaid to two
hundred percent poverty is a
bridge to the basic health
program but again I can't I'm
more than happy to find the real
dollars afterwards Madam chair
representative for the madam
chair representative what you're
saying DC in Oregon I went to
two hundred and two are ten
percent but we're going to four
hundred dollars.
So what would that range beef
what would that look like in New
Mexico.
If I may defer to Mr Cordoba.
Madam chair Representative Lord
for four hundred percent poverty
that I will have to do some kind
back to the and Lokmat there to
see what a four times a hundred
percent of the poverty line is
but again more they have to
follow up on but I can look for
a specific document that
reflects what one hundred
percent poverty is.
Yeah that's a very important
question we think about looked
it up to something like sixty
eight thousand a year I may be
wrong on that that's why I
wanted to pass that was for one
person it seems like a very high
amount to be eligible for
Medicaid
So Representative and
Sorry Madam chair representative
can you tell me right now we're
looking at a tax payer I mean
server looking at the federal
match to seventy three percent
so that seventy three percent
just tax payer dollars correct
it's coming from the taxpayers.
And if ultimately Madam chair
representative yes and I just
have the answer to your question
good jacket thank you would be
forty five thirty a month for a
family size of one
Madam chair representative I do
want to
explained that the.
This plate this expansion plan
could require premiums so even
though Medicaid currently at one
thirty eight percent of federal
poverty line does not require
premiums for much costsharing at
all
part of this would be that
someone at four hundred percent
might be paying the full premium
for example and that's part of
what the study would be looking
at.
Okay Madam chair representative
that's kind of what I said
summer getting close to the
sixty thousand a year okay
Okay so the seventy percent
would be.
taxpayer funded and then who
would would cover the rest of
that percentage would that be
more tax dollars
that would cover the rest of
that to make it a hundred
percent.
Madam chair representative it
could be made up of premium and
costsharing for example so your
co insurance your monthly
premium payments it could also
include and employer
contributions for example if
we do include some of these
other groups of employees so
that is part of that full
affordability and costsharing at
step part of the study.
Okay madam chair and
representative of get that so
seventy percent is our tax
dollars and federal the rest
could be made up of other
sources so with this plan cover
non US citizens would they be
eligible for this plan approval
that come from other countries
with immediately be eligible for
this plan Madam chair
representative no
people without lawful status
are undocumented people are not
valid.
Madam chair representative going
back to the F. A. R. the Human
Services department says that
Medicaid currently provides
coverage for forty percent of
New Mexicans and such a
responsible
And such is responsible for a
significant portion of providers
payments with expansion Medicaid
forward agency anticipates a
potential negative impact on
provider retention and network
adequacy.
So one of my concerns I do have.
Is where are we going to okay
because Medicaid I've done
billing before insurance billing
and one of the reasons that most
doctors don't want to take
Medicaid is because a horrible
reimbursement I mean you could
charge a hundred dollars in the
gonna make P. ten twenty maybe
we're we're gonna find all these
extra doctors that are willing
to take Medicaid and how we
gonna stop from huge back up and
suddenly making a problem into
something where we have such an
issue where we have more more
doctor doctors leaving many more
doctors here and also we have an
influx of people who need to see
the small niche a doctors that
take Medicaid says not a lot
that they don't want to because
it's it's they don't reimburse
so how are we going to fix that
issue with provider retention
and not having long lines and
build up for this plan.
Madam chair representative so on
page five the study does include
a study of reimbursement rates
and specifically reimbursement
rates needed to maximize access
to health care services this is
a critical issue currently the
budget does include moving
Medicaid reimbursement rates up
to one hundred percent of
Medicare which is higher and
then for some specialty
professions raising
reimbursements reimbursement
rates two hundred and twenty
five percent of Medicare but
clearly we need to do
I have more than the
reimbursement rate issue
particularly because we already
have a large population covered
by Medicaid.
And madam chair is a deadly grew
with that because it's it's not
it's going to end up being more
of a nightmare because there's
going to be people there
suddenly eligible who and
Medicaid just does not pay well
they're one of the worst in
reimbursing I'm Madam chair
representative in the F. I. R..
H. is yield reports we're we're
we getting the they're looking
at a huge burden on to the staff
and resources who's going to do
this study how's it going to get
done in the gonna hire extra
staffing and rely on the people
that are already in the system.
I'm madam chair and
representative because that five
hundred thousand dollars in
house bill two I think agency
would have flexibility to
conduct the study whether that
would be is utilizing existing
staff but most likely could buy
a contract so that they can get
the actuarial analysis and the
other technical pieces
outsourced.
Madam chair representative so.
I have a concern about we need
more doctors that need to be a
huge priority for gonna move all
this forward we want people to
be covered we can't do it if we
don't have more doctors we can't
have people on waiting lists we
don't want to be like Canada
where people are waiting for
ever to get the care that they
need I worry about the lower
import reimbursement for
Medicaid my other biggest
concern so.
I have got I'm very lucky to
have a cobra plan through my
husband's plan which is five
hundred dollars a month you
speak to fifteen then suddenly
jumped up to five hundred the
problem I have is every time
that I go and look at the health
insurance market it's
ridiculous I'm sorry but I
hundred fifty one dollars a
month for six thousand eight
hundred dollars deductible
that's major medical that is not
health insurance six hundred
thirty nine dollars a month.
Two thousand five hundred and
this one six hundred seventy two
dollars a month for nine
thousand one hundred dollar
deductible is completely a joke
so how are we going to make sure
that we implement this we don't
have the same thing I for this
and then we subsidize is being
subsidized by tax dollars so it
it's still I'm still paying for
it one way or another how we
gonna sure that this is not
happen we're not gonna raise
premiums even more and we're not
gonna put a huge tax burden on
our people in the state of New
Mexico Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative I
think one piece of that is the
significant health care savings
you have an economies of six
scale and Administration so by
adding more people to existing
and CEOs and going through that
competitive bid process that is
would represent some cost
savings
I I think what you're citing is
what a lot of folks who are
going into the exchanger also
see where their premiums may be
extremely low but they're facing
fifty nine hundred dollar out of
pocket costs Max per year which
you know that at that point
you're just sort of fingers
crossed I don't get into an
accident or I don't you know
have some major medical issue so
that that is exactly the problem
we're trying to solve you have
health coverage but it's not
actually coverage because
there's so much in out of pocket
costs.
Chair representative yeah that's
a huge problem but what I see is
I don't know this this plan is
killing hybrid thing we're not
really doing Medicaid we're
gonna do is to Medicaid but
we're going to subsidize it
seventy three percent of our tax
dollars and then I don't know
what it's going to look like
because right now this is been a
huge disaster and honestly I
don't know whether I trust the
government after dissecting CYFD
it don't necessarily believe
that more government is
necessarily the answer to this
so chair representative that's
all the questions I have on this
thank you Representative Jones
and just a reminder we still
have three bills get through and
we have to be on the floor
eleven the last state to the
point thank you madam chair
Representative I have a question
about the study
I know that we it's been a
couple years ago we already did
a study that was.
Nearly four hundred thousand
it's the fiscal and now.
How does this relate to what
we're doing today.
The study that we're funding
madam madam chair and
representative of that that it
was a study of a completely
different plan that that Health
Security plan
proposes that consolidation of
health care coverage through one
provider of health care to all
New Mexicans
this is expanding Medicaid to
cover
at a higher to increase the
eligibility for Medicaid and I
don't know if my expert Mr
Cordoba's more familiar with the
details of that would this Madam
chair members of the committee
representative Jones so both of
these initiative C. to gets the
same goal making sure everyone
has access to affordable health
care coverage but they do so by
different means Medicaid for six
again leverage existing federal
law specifically what's called
group X. X. under the affordable
Care Act
and so because of that we can
through Medicaid for leverage
federal dollars so that's that's
a significant benefit for
Medicaid forward.
I still I'm just wondering about
that study after study it would
be a million dollars here and
we're studying about this see
what seems to me like the same.
And also that was formally
mentioned that that the we're
implementing before we even get.
So that's that's repetitive but
I do want to address also the
the effect this will have on
private insurance are we looking
at the possibility of this
implementing this doing away
with private insurance as we
know it.
madam chair and Representative
Jones no not at all of this will
be an alternative option and
also I think brings this large
infusion of federal resources
into our health care system but
not at all the existing health
care market you know the way
that people are ways that people
excess coverage all of that is
the same employers could still
offer health care coverage to
their employees people would
still be able to go on to the
exchange this is adding adding
that choice in adding that
option particularly for people
who are struggling to get into
the middle class.
Okay thank you madam chair
Representative I know that you
know the oil and gas revenues
that we have funds so much of
what goes on in our state what
what effect would it have when
our oil and gas revenues
declined what effect is that
going to have on this program
Madam chair representative
because this the way that the
study and the way that the plan
is set up.
the premiums can be sent to
offset the costs so you could
have it but but in addition to
our current system we would have
that seventy three percent
federal match so in essence you
could the the secretary could
propose a plan that is basically
self funding under this and that
is part of what needs to be
studied.
All right thank you very much
thank you Representative
permitted.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair in presenters and if I may
a direct question to your expert
one of the things that I
remember about Medicaid the way
it's set up is that children can
be covered at three hundred
percent of the federal poverty
level so what we're looking at
this we're looking at only
raising this higher so that we
can also cover that parents is
that correct.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative turned
in so the way that group expects
works both the statute and its
implementing regulations it does
say that
You are eligible for group sex
sex if you have an income above
one thirty three percent poverty
and you were not otherwise
eligible for mandatory Medicaid
or optional full Medicaid
coverage and so if for example
your child who is otherwise
eligible for of full coverage
Medicaid it.
Whether that again mandatory or
optional then you might not be
eligible for this but if you are
not if your current income does
not qualify for those programs
then you could be eligible for
this.
So.
That is good so.
Madam chair Mr
expert so thank you for bringing
that forward is it really is
important to understand that
we're not jumping exactly from a
hundred and thirty three percent
directly to four hundred percent
but that there are some
intermittent of amounts that are
being covered already that will
make this a actually a gradual
increase at miss and madam chair
members the amendments to
experts that the thing that has
been brought out about there's
going to be more people that
doctors are going to have to be
responsible for so we're talking
about the same number of people
that we've given them insurance
coverage so that they can
actually see a doctor and not
and not into our pain and
suffering without the help of of
health insurance is that
correct.
madam chair and representative
of her did yes this is really
good point.
And so madam chair madam chair
and representative of one of the
things that is that is that I I
we really should command do for
is right now the state of New
Mexico is forty eight in terms
of reimbursement for Medicaid
and so we are looking to bring
our standard of health care up
so that the people in the state
are are adequately of being able
to get coverage in addition to
being more doctors back in
because we are reason that
Medicaid right is that correct
Madam chair representative yes.
So thank you and then this one
one last issue with respect to
this if you could just to help
to be done to stand this right
now on the health insurance
exchange if you're at four
hundred percent of the federal
poverty level you can actually
get coverage at the gold level
so my question to you is to now
get assistance in coverage
through Medicaid forward at the
four hundred percent level with
the seventy three percent
reimbursement the likelihood of
being able to increase coverage
is going to going to rise
substantially is that correct
madam chair and and and
Representative Madam chair
representative yes so so thank
you so it it just looks in in
terms of the bigger plan of what
you're going to be doing we're
going to actually have people to
have access to doctors to
provide a method for reimbursing
doctors at a higher rate than
looking like a gun actually
being at a specific method for
bringing more and more doctors
into our state which is what we
absolutely need to do and I just
want to commend you on on this
plan and the way that you to put
this together and thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Vincent and just
a reminder that we still have
three bills and we're at about
an hour or so thank you madam
chair and representative.
So that's the bad part about
going last as my phone is
blowing up from people that are
watching this webcast and
With this Medicaid for all
approach who who bears the cost.
Is it going to be the Feds is
going to be New Mexico.
Madam chair representative so
seventy three percent would be
the federal match the remaining
revenue in the system would come
from a mix of sources so it
could be
premiums certainly and that's
discussed a lot of this bill so
that would be individuals paying
those sliding scale premiums but
it could also be other employers
other sources of income that's
coming into the system to pay
for those costs and it's not
this is not Medicaid for all
correct this is not this is not
Medicare to make reviews in the
regular share correct thank you
madam chair representative.
Will this increase payroll taxes
for employers.
I'm.
Madam chair and and
Representative I don't believe
it would and I think it might
actually reduce.
premium costs for health care
employers I but I asked my
expert iffy things differently.
Madam chair representative in
censoring of the we this bills
drafted is it would not
increases payroll taxes but like
with Japan's he's saying there
could be cost savings for
employers whether small or large
where right now I wasn't sure
you know
Spending on health care is
constantly viewed for small
businesses as the most
significant issue for them I'm
so this could be a really strong
way to actually save money for
small businesses.
Thank you madam chair
representative of what happens
when the federal match is
reduced you know because it
happens all the time.
I'm Madam chair representative I
believe that the federal match
would only be reduced if we were
doing really well as a state
with are fed up with with the
number of people of poverty so
overall it would be a great day
for the state.
in some ways because that would
mean that our residents were
doing a lot better
however then I think we would
have to look at what the state
portion of the funding would be
but I I I do hope for that
personally Representative madam
chair.
And madam chair representative
of.
Would it be fair to say it I
mean.
People just want affordable
health care.
The I mean I'm one of those
people I just want to formal
here.
And you know I've looked up.
I've looked up some of the
models like we're talking about
now and what I'm hearing is
you're you're actually delayed
somebody give you a real quick
and I know we're stressed for
time but.
About eight months ago I hurt my
knee.
And.
Like I hurt my knee and I wanted
it look at.
I couldn't get in for four
months.
And what I wanted to tell the
doctor is that you don't
understand my knee really hurts
and I need to see somebody today
like right now that could have
gone to the E. R. but I really
need to get money checked on
and.
Will a program like this make it
even harder to get into a doctor
is going to be a wait list and I
mean this is just to me what
about somebody that has cancer.
Madam chair representative and
you think you're going to the
issues of our health provider
network in the state which you
know we've all been talking
about
there it's so multi faceted I
don't think this program would
have a negative impact on that
because you would be bringing in
the federal resources it
actually have a study guiding
the reimbursement rates which we
don't currently have so you
would have a real plan on what
does it take to have access to
health care what kind of
reimbursement rates do we have
to have for the system in order
to get there and that would
address that piece there's also
the piece of just licensure and
other you know so many different
issues that are providers face
that we have been discussing but
I don't think this piece would
make negatively impact access
and effective I think it could
increase it because of the rigor
of the study.
And Madam chair representative
so I represent a lot of
veterans.
And they have ace you know we
have a a government run health
care for them and they hate it.
Now I'm not saying all but the
ones that I represent that
called me they do not like it.
And they want something
different let's stay on the
bills what and they once thank
you mentioned they want
something different.
And you know as far as the
health care goes.
I'm I'm looking at this and they
keep saying things about study
and mandates and
so.
Is this a study.
It's connected to mandating this
bill Madam chair representative
yes.
And would we be would we
entertain the thought of maybe
taking away the mandate and just
doing the study Madam chair
representative we're talking
about language that would close
more closely tied this results
of the study to the
implementation.
but I I would say you know I'm
with you in trying to improve
improve health care for veterans
but this does not.
Have any providers become
government employees or anything
like that so that aspect of
veterans care is part of this
bill.
Thank you also have.
Quick please of chair
representative I do have a
question just economy okay so
the federal government will
cover seventy two percent with
the current Medicaid that we
have we're now expanding that
coverage how are we going to
mandate the feds to cover that
seventy three percent.
Representative great question
actually believe a memo but we
do have in writing
Rick regarding this group X. X.
coverage from center for
Medicaid and Medicare services
that the seventy three percent
match would apply if we
increased eligibility so we have
that in writing and in the law
and legal come out Madam chair
that was my first question
actually when I learned about
this proposal thank you madam
chair representative I still see
that that would still have to go
back to the feds to decide so so
I guess what I'm saying is we're
going to try to mandate
something that we don't
necessarily have a guarantee
that we're going to have any
money representative you asked
for one quick thank you that was
it Madam I'm done okay so I I
just want to remind folks on the
the committee that when people
don't have health insurance they
their conditions get much worse
because they can't go in and see
somebody so something that might
have been a you know a five
hundred dollar brace or
something may turn into an
amputation or something along
those lines and they use
emergency rooms as their primary
care which stacks it up for
people so people not having
health insurance costs us all
money and time and all those
kind of things but with that I
will entertain a motion.
Okay Representative Ferrary as
amended as amended.
I think okay Representative Kate
Kate Monica can you call the
roll.
Representative Kate.
Representative have just.
Yes Representative I mean yes
Representative Jones the
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Well.
I heard.
Thank you seventy three you
invest.
Okay we are moving now to House
bill four four four dietitian
and nutritionist licensure.
Representative Thompson would
you please present the bill and
introduce us to your expert okay
I would so madam chair and
members of the committee this is
an update to the nutrition and
dietetics practice act which has
not been substantially updated
in the thirty four years since
this happened was written the
only change to the practice act
was in nineteen ninety six when
the number of board members was
decrease from seven to five the
education and training required
to provide safe and effective
nutrition services has evolved
over the past three decades so
significant changes are needed
in the practice that the changes
proposed in this bill will
strengthen the qualifications to
become a licensed nutritionist
at a scope of practice for
licensees and defined medical
nutrition therapy versus general
non medical nutrition
information medical nutrition
therapy is the nutrition
services for treating or
managing disease and holds the
most risk to the public when
provided by unlicensed are under
qualified individuals this bill
aims to protect consumers from
the harm of unlicensed medical
nutrition therapy while also
allowing for anybody to provide
general non medical condition
information and with that I will
turn it over to my experts to
introduce themselves and.
Hi I'm Rachel young I'm a
registered dietitian I work at a
hospital in Albuquerque as a
pediatric dietitian I'm here
today to represent the New
Mexico Academy of nutrition and
dietetics where member
organization representing over
four hundred fifty registered
dietitians in the state and we
helped to bring for this bill
because we would like an update
to our decades old licensure
fell but so much has changed in
those decades
so we already licensed
nutritionist in the state we
licensed dieticians in the state
but the term nutritionists is
changed throughout those three
decades the meaning of it is
change the training of for
nutrition assistance registered
dietitians have been around that
long but our training is
changing our scope of practice
has expanded so this bill would
help us to practice at the
height of our scope of practice
and that is really with medical
nutrition therapy in treating
diseases as it carved out of the
medical practice so thank you
for having me and I'm happy to
answer any questions you might
have.
And our madam chair or other
expert we all know Linda Siegel
so with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you all will go to the
audience first so all are there
any in the audience who are in
opposition to this bill.
I will stand out hands will go
to the zoo is there anyone on
zoom who's that opposition to
this bill.
I see no hands they're going to
the audience again are they any
who are in support of the bill.
Right thank you and I'm going to
these two are there any in
support of the bill of sale
please raise your hand.
First go into debt be lovely.
Yes thank you I am the president
of the New Mexico Academy of
nutrition and dietetics we are a
strong supporter of the State
Building again as regional
mission to update or licensure
after the imposition of medical
nutrition therapy which we can
mail this is a strong protection
to consumers thank you.
Thank you Robeco.
The lower.
Good morning madam chair and
committee my name is Roy
collateral a licensed registered
dietitian and I fully support
those bills for for for as we
lay has been over thirty years
and then you guys are extracted
as act has been updated and it
is just a couple of practice is
us today to ensure in New Mexico
over news by from qualified
professionals it is our duty as
a state and as professionals to
ensure that New Mexicans receive
science based information that
if you find the best available
research evidence I strongly
support because it'll for for
and thank you madam chair and
committee help in time.
Thank you we're going to Leanne
lonely.
Thank you madam chair members of
committee it is lonely I will
say that I am I teaching
nutrition is the practices you
know their own Lincoln County.
you just.
We agree with us everyone is so
far I just want to encourage you
to.
just a single so that we can do
this again or.
Level our abilities thank you
very much.
You want to use that.
And.
You are muted.
Thank you very much
of.
I'm on the eastern of ProPublica
that I do want to throw and I
twenty five years in Los crucis
as for us Graham a professor
of leading university in the
southern part of the state where
I was professor of human
nutrition and dietetics science
and the agenda internship
director and the manager of the
New Mexico nutrition and
dietetics practice or past year
of the enemy of the council for
education in nutrition and
dietetics we're just off on
education programs across the
nation.
Sure the have the nutrition and
dietetics consumer protection
licensure I strongly support a
jewel for for for this
these are licensure you just
have medical nutritional therapy
has grown in advance since our
little summarized this is New
Mexico I have a qualified
licensed nutrition and dietetics
practitioners thank you.
Thank you very much we're going
to percent drop dead.
And.
Chair members of the community I
am a registered and licensed
dietitian in Albuquerque before
the pandemic I attended
nutrition and dietetics practice
learning meetings that were held
in the regulation and licensing
department and I heard that in
this situation where people were
confused and sometimes even able
to find a loophole to obtain a
license without being qualify
due to outdated practices act
there was a bill that has to be
enacted in other bills of the
kinds of higher priority so it
didn't make it through the whole
process in interest of the
public ask you to please of our
house in the middle of this year
thank you.
Thank you.
Sen though further hands raised
without a bill to the committee
are they any members
Representative Benson thank you
madam chair and representative
in section nine of your field
Madam could you tell us the page
it's going to be twenty five
thank you.
None of the bill ways the
application fees for military
members and their spouses is
there any allowance for the
practice act for expedited
licensing for people licensed in
other states.
Bring this forward I think this
is really important
because of my understanding is
that this is going to make it so
that it will protect consumers
from the harms of unlicensed
medical nutrition therapist and
allowing for anyone to find so
it won't allow for anyone to
just find these non medical
nutrition information is that
right.
Madam chair and Representative
Ferrary it will delineate what
only that properly trained
people can do so we won't have
people in sprouts or whatever
pretending like they're
dietitians and and giving
recommendations so the
professionals will do the
professional job in the the
retail folks will do their job.
Thank you madam chair and.
For bringing this forward this
is very.
Yes Representative.
Representative K..
Thank you madam chair and
representative the only question
I had in and I'm on the fiscal
report.
it's concerned about the posting
of the minutes nights being in
compliance of the open meetings
act will you be able to look at
that in and make a friendly
amendment would you consider
that a friendly amendment.
Madam chair representative the
the board hosts is supposed to
be posting all of their
equipment and that's not
required under the open meetings
act but that certainly would be
a friendly amendment.
Madam chair I don't remember but
it seems like last night when I
was studying up on that it that
the the incident that.
Concern was that they were
posting them to quickly before
they were approved so we will
take a look at that and make
sure that whatever needs to be
fixed will be fixed thank you
very much going to
Representative Lord thank.
Thank you madam chair
representative of a question
about something that you just
had said on page twenty nine
in the new material line twelve
the tax that's a misdemeanor for
any person not license percent
Interxion tightest practical for
so going back to what you just
said about sprout how does it
affect somebody who works there
because I know a lot of those
people somehow drive some have
different degrees but they're
not licensed nutrition
dietitians so if they make a
suggestion are they now in
violation of a misdemeanor then
no madam chair and
representative no if they
represent themselves as a
dietitian or a professional
nutritionist is where they cross
the line if they can suggest you
buy this protein part of power
over that one as long as they
don't
Don't.
Make themselves appear to be a
licensed professional unless
they are of course.
Cantor think madam chair
representative I know that I've
known people that work there and
I think.
I think I remember correctly
there something with a offered
that their person was second in
house.
Nutritionist or they could have
gotten that degree certification
online so that would not be
applicable even if they said
okay I'm cert I got online
certificate and I can talk about
nutrition so they would be in
violation of this is that
correct Madam chair
representative if they call
themselves the same names that
are in here a licensed dietitian
nutritionist or licensed
nutritionist then they would be
in violation.
Okay.
all right I got to do some
research on that thank you madam
chair.
no further questions from the
committee I will look fits that
the motion.
It's been a motion ado passed
from Representative Thomas with
the second Representative
Ferrary are there any opposition
to.
I call the roll please.
Yes.
No with the explanation.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Nine two one do have a due pass
Representative markets provide a
vote yet thank you it's not a no
no it's I need to go talk to no
it's I'm gonna go talk to
sprouts and whole foods and just
make sure I just want to make
sure not step in any Tozer thank
you.
Thank you.
We're now onto house bill four
seventy six positions that
assistance certified yes.
Representative Ferrary present.
Are you ready Representative
thank you madam chair House Bill
four seventy six is pretty
straightforward.
Excuse me.
Do you need some water.
No I can I just need to clear my
throat a little bit sorry.
it allows the process of
completing a death certificate
to happen more quickly by having
a physician assistant to
complete the medical
certification on a death
certificate and often times a
medical physician assistant is
more closely tied to the patient
and can also make this process
more quickly happen and
What it does is it makes it so
that the physician the physician
assistant and getting that
signing of the death certificate
would not have to wait on a
physician or nurse practitioner
who are already approved to do
this and it would also make it
so that the physicians or nurse
practitioner wouldn't have to
take their time and it would
make it so that this process
happens more click quickly and
in some cases improving the
timeliness of the death
certificate process and benefit
families who are dealing with
funeral arrangements dealing
with troubling circumstances in
addressing any insurance our
budget situation.
Situations I should say and I
had one of my constituents asked
me if I would you know help make
this happen because of things
that
extended their
process for funeral services and
things like that for like over a
month so I think this is
something that would you know
Be quick and easy fix and help
our constituents so with that
madam chair.
Done.
Okay is there anyone in the
audience in opposition.
Anyone on zoom in opposite.
Okay seeing no hands anyone in
the room and support.
Anyone on zoom in support.
Okay so we will go to the
committee for questions.
Anybody have questions.
I will entertain a motion.
Okay to have a second out we
have two seconds okay is there
any opposition.
Seeing that you have an easy to
pass.
Committee my past this bill yet.
Senator I was just texting that
the first two senators on their
thank get here but then I see
you here.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm presenting Senate bill
thirty one this morning and my
expert witnesses are chief judge
Marie ward she's the chief judge
for the second judicial district
and judge Jane Lee the the
family court judge in the second
judicial district so madam chair
during the twenty twenty
legislative session Senate bill
one forty six was senator Linda
Lopez and Representative Susan
had out of this bill and that
was passed to subsidize kinship
guardianship so when CYFD is
involved with the family and
kinship guardianship allows for
close family member other
qualifying person to care for a
child when the parents are
unable or unwilling to care for
them and the law enacted in back
in twenty twenty codified the
process for subsidized kinship
guardianship under the domestic
affairs statute where that
kinship guardianship Act is
located however the funding
mechanism from the federal
government to subsidize kinship
guardianships requires that a
parent guardian or custodian
voluntary please voluntarily
place the child in the legal
custody of CYFD by entering into
a voluntary placement agreement
and voluntary placement
agreements and CYFD involvements
with families are under the
purview of the children's code
in order to achieve the intent
of the bill that was passed in
twenty twenty some changes are
necessary so what this bill does
is it removes the voluntary
placement agreement referenced
and financial subsidy provisions
from the kinship guardianship
within the domestic affairs
statute that adds the financial
subsidy provisions being
repealed from the kinship
guardianship act to the
children's code and updates
kinship guardianship Act
language to.
Aligned with the Indian family
protection act in the bill also
built upon the existing
voluntary placement agreement
language in the children's code
family services act including
clarifying court process for the
EPA's including timelines notice
and finding a macro and
providing parents access to
counsel prior to signing the V.
P. A.'s and throughout the life
of the VPA including in court
representation requiring an
assignment of a guardian Adlai
item for children signing upon
the signing up of EPA and
allowing parents children were
CYFD to file a petition for
court review of the EPA prior to
the signing or any point during
the life of the BPA and with
that I'd like to turn it over to
my expert witnesses to see if
they have anything they'd like
to add.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
Marie words has Senator
indicated on the chief judge of
the second judicial District
Court I'm also the chair of the
children's court improvement
commission along with Erica
Sanchez that children's court
prove my commission is made up
of wide array child welfare
specialist judges court
personnel
parent council authority in that
line items foster parents
service providers those with
lived experiences and this bill
went through the
creation and vetting process to
that commission I can tell you
that the to the sport Prudnik
Commission proves this bill the
children's court judges
association approved this bill
family court judges and then the
domestic relations rules
committee are all support this
bill.
Any do you want to make a
comment Madam chair
representative I'll just say
that and I'm the chair of the
domestic relations rules
committee and the we approve
this bill in part because it and
includes the insertion have the
Indian family protection act
into the domestic relations
statute which is new for us and
it also will put the funding
mechanism for this voluntary
placement agreements.
Which is where I think it was
originally intended.
Thank you I will go to the
audience anyone in opposition.
Okay on zoom is there anyone in
opposition.
Okay I saw hand and then it
disappeared so anyone in the
room and support if you would
like to speak please come up and
fast Freddie will get out there.
Okay thank you good morning
chair members of the committee
my name is Mike if it's an
animal Policy manageable futures
New Mexico and we support SB
thirty one our organization
works with impacted families and
we really appreciate the
thoughtful changes in the
voluntary placement family
services act we support the
focus of SB thirty one which is
on providing essential resources
and assistance to kinship
guardianship this can help
families stay close and work on
reunifying a family and our help
figure out permanent care giving
arrangement we really appreciate
the children's courts
improvement commission on
bringing invoices up all around
but especially impacted families
please support SB thirty when.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez I'm the director
of policy and advocacy at and
can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care to
improve their transition to
adulthood and we have more than
a thirty year history working a
child welfare issues we strongly
support Senate bill thirty one
in our work with young people
who are in foster care and young
people who are now parents we
know that kinship guardianship
their an important option for
families keeping children with
those who they know and love and
minimizing the trauma of removal
in the foster care system we
want to see the intent of the
twenty twenty subsidize kinship
guardianship law fully realized
and Senate bill thirty one is
necessary to achieve that we
strongly support this its
purpose the inclusive way it was
developed by the children's
court improvement commission and
how it will positively affect
families thank you.
Morning madam chair members the
committee Bill Jordan with New
Mexico voices for children we
also stand in strong support of
the legislation I want to thank
the sponsors all of those who
work on this bill in the
children's court improvement
commission it's just been a
tremendous effort and we
appreciate your support thank
you.
Good morning.
Thank you I'm good morning madam
chair and members my name is
Nancy Franchini I am the
president of the district
metropolitan court judges
association and we stand in
support of this bill as well
thank you for your time.
Thank you and soon we have
Christian Redbird up.
Don't hurt yourself right.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is
services record I was born in
New Mexico and I tried to
channel Hyla and leader with
little teachers today I urge you
to port to the port SB thirty
one guardian changes I was in
the air you might ask you care
and living with a foster family
I remember feeling so lost in a
comfortable thankfully I was the
one I did with my mom later in
kinship guardianship with family
and friends we're working well
being as a minor my parents
separated when I was a teenager
my mom let me my father
industries it's Oklahoma and it
is my moms or Los Angeles a new
life again thing then and I mean
everyone in this house and
individually stated started
living with her and her family
even though I have to do with
our involved in the situation I
don't know Wheatley maybe I
might be able to stay with them
for almost a year my mom was
able it was the.
Stay with me because I would
have been taken into foster
family and out of my native
American Community.
As the thirty one I'll also need
to say connected with their
family ties and other places a
stranger's and right local
council to parents are devices
like the and I'm incredibly
grateful for the provided me
please allow others to have the
option during a time of need
thank you for your time and
service please of our SB thirty
one thank you Christian this one
is NM can info.
Good morning chairman of the
committee my name is on where I
was I would like to ask that you
would vote in favor of Senate
bill thirty one because of
artisanship probably be able to
face time with my family because
my previous censuses
yes thank you for your time.
Thank you
May marlin back.
Good morning members and then my
name is Marilyn Act I am the
founder and executive director
New Mexico child first network
we are proud to stand in support
of this there are a lot of
equipment in the US Senate this
is a good way across some of our
concerns we absolutely students
from support of it as we know
that listing Act.
Committees and supporting them
it is a key way to keep our kids
safe we believe that it is safe
to use we absolutely Hey as
thank you for that
this this for working with us
and we are proud to stand in
support thank thank you
Clarissa.
So.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
first of all I am a member of
the Navajo Nation and I live in
Albuquerque I am an indigenous
leader with all teachers New
Mexico I am writing to you I'm I
am talking to you into the board
of SB thirty one guardianship
changes I am a mother and it
uses a quarter of all two
hundred if a child is abducted
because he is it it is extremely
important for the child to stay
with their communities whether
it be the families are closer
and so they can continue to grow
knowing your identity and the
part of their culture please R.
as we are doing our state's
changes thank you thank you.
A list said deal.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Gail
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on poverty we
stand in support of this bill
because we really experts to
determine child we also take
care of the family and as a call
to do that we also support this
bill because it continues to
dominate those who experienced
the problems as of today so for
the many reasons argument today
the support is eligible to do to
thank you thank you and our last
one is Joanna the lady.
My name is the only.
And I am here to stand in
support of that
Senate bill thirty one I believe
that the changes being made are
going to benefit our families
and children with.
And this is a practice that.
Thank you Joanna.
Okay did you want to Senator did
you want to comment before we go
to the committee for question no
we stand for questions okay
questions Representative Vincent
and Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
senator.
So I read this bill over the
weekend and I I was I think it's
a good bill but I was confused
when you said something about
the the executive order on the
the governor put out just why
are you bringing this
legislation after the fact that
she put up.
The executive order.
So madam chair and
representative to either if you
want to comment on that I mean
the intent of the bill is to
address some of the issues with
the bill that was passed in
twenty twenty and so it just to
make sure that that bill that
we're able to do what the the
intent of that initial
legislation once and if either
of money expert witnesses want
to add to that.
So I think this kind of solves
the problem and should be to fix
that that.
Looking for sick actually
utilized thank you madam chair
representative does this
supersede what what the governor
put out as far as the executive
order.
Madam chair representative
Vincent no this is this is
really primarily taking care of
issues that arise separate apart
from land the department
intensified and if you CENIC
like K. this is really about
kinship care and family support
okay thank you madam chair and
representative of Senator I I so
I didn't get a chance to read
the that the executive order but
Does the governor's executive
order address the cans in
guardians that we were mentioned
previous.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure I haven't read the
governor's executive order.
Madam chair representative I did
read it and I don't I didn't see
anything but I could have skim
through it and not seen it so
but this would they should be
looking at trying to keep
families together or at least
allow for effective can
including as was mentioned in
situations where children child
has been removed and then is in
foster care and goes back to
family and then removed again
and the foster family would also
be able to act as fictive can so
this is just trying to keep
children in based on
relationships when there is in a
relationship and for where there
is a need to remove a child I
think that's what the governor
was aiming for but again I I'd I
did not do close enough reading.
And madam chair Senator I I
didn't either I wish I don't
know that that executive order
come out because I just want to
make sure I'm a proponent of the
children I want to make sure
that they're taking care of and
I was just confused why you're
bringing this legislation
forward want to put that out and
I was wondering if she addressed
everything that you're
addressing are you trying to
address more than she addressed.
Madam chair and representative
this is just to make sure that
the bill that was passed in
twenty twenty is we're able to
implement that as intended so
it's just rectifying some issues
from that previous bill okay
some of the amount
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair I got
distracted because we have to
pull K. wonder why do that that
plug is way underneath there and
I don't want to cross.
By helping with that.
chair representative I some
questions real quick let me just
open up my computer again.
Okay on this bill
I know the state to Cerner view
the legality and efficacy of
safety plants this is bill
address that and what we are
seeing how the safety plan work.
Madam chair and representative
money expert witnesses respond.
Madam chair representative board
the vote these are voluntary
placement agreements that that
come into play and so this is
where a family is looking for
additional assistance and
support but we're kinship
competent kinship care giver is
has the inability financially to
be able to to take on that
burden so for example mother is
is has cancer and is and is
hospitalized and has no
resources her mother is may
provide daycare at times but
doesn't have the resources to
fully support and so that mother
could choose to place the child
in CYFD custody CYFD would have
to go through its licensure
requirements to make sure that
the home is safe and appropriate
and continue oversight and then
that time can be placed in that
home with a subsidy so that the
children could be supported.
Four if if the voluntary
placement agreement.
Is revoked by the parents and
the department has to go through
a number of checklist in
assessing what they have done
with their obligations are this
bill allows for court oversight
by any party at any.
Including the guardian Adlai
item for parents for review and
it does not preclude should
there be a safety issue if the
parent to revoke a voluntary
placement he agreement it
doesn't preclude the department
from taking steps if their
safety is.
Parents that they need to
follow.
Thank you madam chair resent
resent us.
And think about James Dunkley
Cruz.
With release the safety plan.
Days later I do support but I'm
always looking for there's the
little menu should things right
like how does that all play out
because I'm always very
concerned about the safety of
the children madam chair
representative is your team or
commission are they gonna work
over the internet committee
to work on unregulated
unmonitored safety plans and how
we can fix that.
Madam chair.
Representative.
Madam chair Representative four
what one of the things I can say
about this bill is that there
was a lot more.
So voluntary placement
agreements currently exist in
law they they if they're
difficult to access but they can
be accessed one of the things
that I think this bill does
that's really effective into
your point Representative Lord
is that it builds in the
additional legal protections and
court oversight that is
currently not in place so for
example
as I indicated if a voluntary
placement agree.
The child's and placed with that
care giver and a guardian ad
light and is appointed.
The child and that guardian
Adlai item also has the ability
to address any request report
oversight.
The card and I lied and said has
the independent duty as always
as.
to be a mandatory reporter so
there are concerns regarding
what to put in place for the
state.
All still be addressed within
this process this provides
addition.
Representative yet that I
brought forward a couple bills
for oversight and H. B. one
twenty nine offer support of
monitoring of children and
families immediately active in
return this UP Care to address
that exact issue they lost
traction HB thirty forty from
the definition of the fanposts
so those are just a couple
things I'd love for in the
future that we just definitely
look at those issues.
Here's safety plans definitely
in place for them but I do
support the bill I just want to
dress some of those things thank
you chair Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you right forward I was just
wondering as I reading about how
they will be offering parents
access to legal counsel prior to
signing the voluntary placement
agreement
what department would be
providing at office of
guardianship or.
Madam chair and.
Madam chair representative on.
The the office of Family
representation and advocacy
would provide access to look to
legal counsel for both
parents as well as upon the
entry of a BPA for the guardian
Adlai item and so that was
another one of the updates to
this bill from previous previous
revisions where that was going
to be the administrative office
of the court that that currently
handles the contracts for
representation guardian ad light
items this will now be the
office of Family representation
in working on this bill and CCAC
on one of the things that CCAC
did also is approach of the
family representation commission
regarding.
Make sure that they were also in
support and the indications
where they they acknowledge the
Senators.
So madam chair and senator
expert
they will have a legal counsel
that will help all the families
that might be referred before
they signed a voluntary.
At place.
Madam chair representative okay
thank you madam chair that's
what I want to be sure
Representative Kate's I'd like
to make a motion for deep I'm
sorry okay.
thank you madam chair as
representatives I mean the
experts.
I have a question about how many
activities is the department
moderate monitoring currently.
And with the length of time of
those are any of them over.
Madam chair representative I can
tell you that the that's one of
the challenges in terms of the
this current process being under
the fifth domestic affairs act
is that there is these are very
minimally used I think at any
one time there may have been ten
in the entire state I'm with the
second judicial District Court
With the children's court
division I can tell you that
I've been aware of three in
total in the entire time that
this has been.
I'm not aware of any fund.
Have gone through past a hundred
eighty day process into the
kinship guardianship with my
colleague.
Okay Representative Kate.
Okay so we have to pass on
Senate of.
A committee substitute for
Senate bill thirty one as
amended okay with that
Representative Penske okay
is there anyone in opposition.
Seeing none do have a due pass.
Thank you members of the
committee please thank you thank
you so thank.
No they are.
To the committee somebody else
did okay with that we are in
recess until eight thirty
Wednesday morning and please be
on time just were really filling
up our agenda that we got
through it today thank you all.
