Vice chair. Herndon here, Madam
chair here.
And we do have a quorum. So, um,
I think we will just get started
And I apologize. Um
For the long wait, but
unfortunately, I don't have a
magic wand. So people show up
when they get here, so so go
ahead. Representative Herndon on
We are on house Bill 33.
Thank you, Madam Chair House
Bill 33 creates the prescription
Drug Transparency Act to
increase transparency in the
prescription drug supply chain.
The bill requires manufacturers
pharmacy service administrators
organizations, health insurers
and pharmacy benefit managers to
annually report prescription
drug prices and trends to the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance by May, 1 2025.
Five.
The bill also requires OS I to
compile all data and publish an
annual report to present to the
Legislative Finance Committee,
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee.
And made available on the
agency's website and presented
in a public meeting. Madam
Chair. I have two experts with
me today, I will ask them to
introduce themselves and then
we'll proceed.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee is that
better?
No, thank you. Come on.
Okay. There you go. Uh, madam
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Barbara
Weber. I'm the executive
Director of Health Action. New
Mexico, a health advocacy
organization that is statewide
and I also represent the New
Mexico consumers for affordable
Drugs Coalition, which has
almost 30 members, comprised of
Advocacy organizations. Unions
professional medical groups, Uh,
ex cetera and, um, also want to
introduce my colleague Um Gabby
Rivera.
Madam Chair committee members.
My name is Gabrielle Rivera and
Paul and the policy and
communications coordinator for
Help Action. New Mexico.
Yeah.
Transparency in all businesses
is essential to accountability,
particularly in the health care
system. It allows us to hold
accountable to make sure that
the balance has been achieved
between the needs of patients
and the needs of business for in
a competitive industry of the
bill, you have before you
represents, uh
A direction in many states there
now 23 states that have passed,
uh, drug pricing transparency
and we have come through all of
those states to see the, uh
Uh, procedures for drug
transparency for New Mexico that
would be most applicable to our
state yet represent the best of
what we learned from other, uh
Uh, states that are passing
transparency bills.
In 2020 at the end of 2020. We
did a poll.
Statewide and New Mexico and 44%
of our residents reported that
they either had not filled a
prescription or that they were
rationing their prescriptions
that they had field due to cost.
When you are not able to use
your medications, uh, as
directed by your medical
provider than you really don't
have access to healthcare,
because that's how we manage
chronic conditions,
postoperative situations,
injuries, etcetera.
In New Mexico. We worked hard to
get access and with some a lot
of success to get access to
people to medical services. Now
we need to make sure that they
can afford their medications.
Thank you, Abby.
Thank you, madam Chair. This
bill has already been seen by
this committee in the interim
and endorsed and it is in that
form right now, so I don't want
to go too far into it, but, um,
I will provide a little bit of
summary of the bill. Um,
sections three Seuss through six
or the reporting sections, so
each outlines requirements on a
different entity in the supply
chain. First being manufacturers
reporting on drugs that meet a
certain price threshold or
increased by a high percentage.
Over one or two years.
Um, we also have some
requirements on Seo s insurance
carriers and PBMs. Um, Section
seven requires oh, aside to
prepare an annual report on
price trends and make
recommendations on actions that
can be taken until further lower
costs.
Um and section a is enforcement.
Um, And as rap representative
Herndon mentioned we are in
active discussions with industry
groups and with OS I to make
sure we have a strong bill that
accomplishes what we envisioned,
but also something sensible for
this state that we can execute
and enforce. We're happy to
answer any questions. Thank you.
Madam chair. We have been in
conversation with members of
industry and there will be some
minor amendments to the bill. I
do want to bring that up first,
but we are based on the
conversations. We'd like to go
forward with this bill and have
it approved by this committee.
And with that, madam chair, we
stand for questions.
Do you have an expert witness
online?
Madam chair. She is not an
expert witness, but we'll be
offering comment and raising
public comment. Yes.
Okay, so we will start with the
people in the room who was here
in opposition to this bill.
Okay. Um, on zoom. Is there
anyone in opposition?
So if you're on zoom this right
now we're talking about folks
who are in opposition. So if
you're in support, please lower
your hand and we'll come back to
you.
So will will Dane, are you in
support or opposition?
Down. Okay, Donna, are you in
support or opposition? Okay.
I think Donald
Yes, She's muted. Donna. Um, if
you
If you can unmute yourself and
let me know if you are in
support or opposition.
And those of you on zoom, please
wait till I asked for you to
raise your hand. Um so we don't
have to spend time figuring out
which side you're on. So we're
gonna We're gonna go away from
the opposing if it turns out
that will or Donna are opposing,
Um, we'll come back to you.
So anyone here in support?
Okay. Um, If you want to make a
public comment, you have one
minute and on zoom. If you are
in support, you can raise your
hand now. So if you want to make
a public comment, and there are
mix in the ceiling so you don't
have to bend over the
microphone, so come on up. It's
one minute and we will stick to
the time Madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Brent more I'm a
registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance
plans, and we are happy to stand
in support of House Bill 33
House Bill 33 gets after a
significant problem for health
insurance plans, Um, drug prices
continue to rise and pharmacy
costs are now 22 cents of every
premium dollar.
That is the leading cost driver
for health insurance plans when
they're trying to provide
coverage to their policyholders
And the problem with drug prices
is that that price is set in
isolation by the manufacturer.
We believe that house Bill 33
will try to pro try to provide
some light or some transparency
to this area that it continues
to be a significant problem.
And I would note for the
committee and please don't pass
over this lightly. Section five
has requirements for the health
plans. They are willingly coming
forward and agreeing to
additional regulatory
requirements because drug prices
are so difficult for them to
address a hip stands and
supported this bill. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Brent.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. Marla shuts
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico.
We stand in support of House
Bill 33. For many of the reasons
stated by all of the reasons
stated by Mr Moore, but also
just to emphasize the importance
of transparency along the whole
market cycle and of the
healthcare industry from the
insurers all the way to the
manufacturers.
Along that whole marketing
cycle. It's very important that
we do have that transparency so
we can see and evaluate. Where
can we cut costs and without
that, at the manufacturer level
stops there. That's a very huge
component. We know that drug
prices continue to escalate and
we do stand important in support
of this legislation. Thank you.
Yes, Madam chair and members of
the committee.
Ah, my name is Sherry Dotson and
I am a volunteer advocate for
AARP, New Mexico. We represent
240,000 members here in New
Mexico who are very concerned
about the rising cost of
prescription drugs. One of our
members who is passionate about
this lives with multiple
sclerosis and spends over
$93,000 on her medication.
The same medications in Canada
cost $23,000. That's a
significant difference. Imagine
paying those prices for over 50
years or more.
Ah, so many of our seniors have
to spit have to choose between
putting food on the table or
taking their medications. It's
time to have some transparency
around prescription drug costs
to make them more affordable. So
RPs that you passed house Bill
33 because medications don't
work if you can't afford them.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam chairman,
Members of the committee Larry
Harun registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian Health Plan and
Presbyterian Healthcare
Services.
We send the support of this
legislation, Mr Moore stated.
specifically the reasons for you
but prescription drug drug costs
are one of the single highest
cost drivers as we see
healthcare costs rise, so we
think this is a good step in
trying to control costs of
health care so that we can
continue to increase access by
trying to control costs on our
health care system. Thank you,
Madam Chairman. Thank you.
For the sponsors for bringing
this legislation.
I was just saying that people on
zoom say they can't commute
themselves. Thank you for that.
So what we're going to do? We're
going to finish the live in
favor, and then we'll go back to
zoom and do the opposition and
then do so it on. If you are on
zoom and you are an opposition,
please raise your hand. If you
are in support, please Lower
your hand. But I will come back
to you.
Yes, Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Dale
Tinker Represent the New Mexico
Pharmacists Association, and we
stand in support of this bill.
Madam chair mentioned that she
didn't have a magic wand and
determining a quorum. Um, I want
to point out that over 35 years
of
Trying to explain drug pricing
to legislative committees. Um
Very difficult because it's a
moving target. This bill is kind
of a magic wand and that regard
in that it will point out the
trail that drug pricing goes
through manufacturer to the PBM
through the P s A. Oh, I've
worked with all of those groups
and it is difficult and I think
this bill will
Provide a tremendous resource.
Um, I understand that some folks
have said it's pretty
complicated.
Drug prices are complicated. No
doubt about it. I think this
bill addresses that I think it
can get to the right place
eventually. Um, I've also heard
that the superintendent of
insurance, um amount of money in
the bills, probably not enough
and that that may well be the
case. Um, I think it can be an
expensive process to figure out
drug pricing.
But very necessary product
process, So I'm definitely stand
in support. And thank you, could
you please say what PBMs and PS
oas are? Okay, not everybody is.
Uh yes, PhD and fortunately, I
do have almost a PhD and all of
that. So, um, PBM stands for
pharmacy benefit manager.
Those in the companies that, um
Contract with the health plans
to manage your your prescription
drug benefit.
They collect rebates. They set
prices, um established
mechanisms for going between
really the pharmacy and the
health plan and the patient so
and then P s A is a pharmacy
Services Administration
organization, and that's a group
that contracts between
The pharmacy and the PBM
generally.
Um, And the money that goes
through the P s, A usually is a
dollar in dollar out kind of
thing, but not always. So I
think it's still good to check
those prices. Um, And was there
anything else any other initial
that
Didn't make sense.
Does it comes up for
Does it comes up full people are
texting me that there's no sound
on two, So okay. Geez. Great.
Um, I'll be here. Any other
questions. Thank thank you,
Dale.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. I'm Superintendent,
Alice Cane and OS II and I stand
in support of the bill. I would
like to thank the sponsors and
advocates for bringing forward
this legislation. The complexity
of the prescription drug supply
chain obscures how each
component of the chain
contributes to the final price.
This legislation taxi,
comprehensive look across the
entire supply chain.
Which is necessary, a necessary
first step for addressing
skyrocketing prescription drug
costs. With sufficient
appropriation OS I will be able
to carry out the data collection
and reporting requirements under
this bill, thanks again for the
sponsors for bringing forward
this important legislation.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Sarah.
Minor Schauble and I'm the
outreach and community relations
manager with New Mexico. Voices
for Children. We stand in strong
support of house Bill 33, and we
want to thank the sponsor for
prioritizing health, equity and
accountability with this bill,
and we urge your support as
well. Thank you very much.
Thank you, madam. Chair. Members
of committee. John Lip shoots
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. We represent around
40,000 active union members
around the state and thousands
more that are retired. And
needless to say, this is a very
big issue for all of them, Um,
you know, drug prices have gone
out of control over decades of
on
Unknown and unregulated prices
And, uh, I believe that this
would be a very good first step
and bring those prices back
under control. We think the
sponsor for continually pushing
this effort, and we hope that
you will support it yet again.
Thank you. Good morning, madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Terry
Cole. I'm the president, CEO for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce.
You know, I love it when I can
stand here and support a bill in
the same way the labor does on
one hand and voices for Children
on the other. I think that
speaks highly about this bill.
We support the comments that Mr
Moore made transparency for the
business community is at the
core of just about everything we
are about, and especially in the
health care and especially
within healthcare in
prescription drug costs. We hope
that this trend
As parents. We will continue to
be a step forward to increase
affordability and access and we
are very enthusiastic about
supporting it. And we appreciate
your support today on the bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee when I
was coming by the way, I'm
official medical school at U N
n. I don't represent your
number, name in great shape for
reform.
Um, I really want to support
this bill because it will help
us with patient care of
affordability of drugs. If I
position into a lot in New
Mexico prescribed the correct
drug to a patient, But they
can't afford it. Then I really
haven't done much. I was really
hope that you can support this
bill. Thank you.
My name is cilia Andrews. I'm a
nurse practitioner in a rural
community here and I'm for the
bill. Um, this is something that
affects us Every single day. Our
patients come. We're trying to
file follow the guidelines for
quality care measures We
prescribe the medication. The
patient comes back. They can't
afford it. So not only is the
access to those medications, not
there. The quality of care also
suffers. We're having a pick off
of the formula is something that
may not be great for that
patient, but because
Of the issue with pricing.
We have to, um so I'm definitely
for this. Thank you all and now
we will go back to zoom and
hopefully we have our tech
issues. Um
Fixed a A. Okay, So we are folks
who are in opposition first, so
we will go to Donna.
Donna, please unmute yourself.
Donna, are we? Are we good over
there?
Okay, I think maybe will Will
Dane.
If you can. You are muted, so go
ahead will muted and everyone
hear me? Yes, we can hear you.
Excellent. Good morning Chair.
Thompson, Vice chair. Herndon.
Members of the committee will.
then with the health care just
registered lobbyists with
healthcare healthcare
distribution alliance, otherwise
known as H D, A. I'm here today,
speaking on behalf of RPS in
PCOS, as mentioned by, um
The sponsor are one of the
reporting entities asked to
report to OS II and possible 33.
Men keep this short and sweet. I
apologize. I know over the
weekend and
I dumped about six pages on
On all of you committee members,
and I know how much you love
that, especially at the
beginning of section. Um so my
testimony there stands if you
have any questions. My contact
information is obviously there.
I'll just say that right up
front there just three things I
want to touch on and then I'll
expand on them. So what this
bill is asking of P s A S is for
the top 25 most frequently
prescribed prescription to
products or I'm sorry. Most
frequently dispensed
prescription drug products.
The top 25 most costly
prescription drug products by
annual spending and the top 25.
What prescription drug products
with the highest increase in
total annual spending compared
to the previous calendar year. I
included in my testimony
provided to the committee, um,
written testimony rather last
week. Well, you're you're one
minute with up. Thank you. And
we will go to Donna again.
Donna, if you can mute yourself
Donna, please un mute. Um it
looks like she
Disappeared. So, um now we will
go to zoom in support. So if you
are on in support, um or I saw
Kate Caitlin, were you an
opposition, Caitlin?
Good morning, Madam Chair. Yes,
I am here. Okay, go ahead.
Thank you very much and good
morning to the committee as
well. My name is Caitlin
Luparello. I'm the director of
state policy for the
pharmaceutical Research
Manufacturers of America.
Um, first, I do want to
acknowledge that. Rep.
Representative Herndon and the
proponents have agreed to work
with us to address some of our
concerns, and we continue to
have a dialogue with them and be
grateful for the ability to do
so. However, the bill is it
stands fails to extend
confidentiality protections to
the superintendent, staff and
third parties that may contract
analyze the information and
doesn't adequately protect
competitively.
Sensitive information. The bill
also requires advanced notice of
a new drug to market before a
drug is improved, which will be
very difficult to comply with.
There are also very low triggers
for reporting on prescription
drugs, and we suspect that will
produce just a voluminous amount
of reporting. We think that
narrowing those triggers will
reduce the burden on the state
and manufacturers and really
allow the state to focus on the
drugs of most consequences. The
same and new Mexico patients.
Thank you. Your time is up and
for folks on zoom, um we just
realized our screen says
HB six paid family.
And medical leave Act. That's
not the bill we're on. We're
trying to get that fixed. We are
on house Bill 33 sorry for the
confusion. We have new
technology and, um we're having
some growing pains, obviously,
Uh, so now on, zoom in support
If you are on Zune want to speak
in support, please raise your
hand.
Okay. I believe we have Arcas
Sanchez.
Go ahead and on mute yourself.
Okay. Okay, Archaic If you there
you go. Go ahead. Got it. Good
morning, Madam Chair Committee.
My name is Erica Sanchez. I am
with New Mexico Center online
poverty. We stand in support of
house Bill 33. Because we
believe that health care is a
human right and making
prescription drugs affordable is
crucial to ensuring that new
Mexicans have access to the care
they need.
House Bill 33 is a major step in
our state's efforts to increase
the affordability and
medications to create workable
solutions that meet the needs of
our families, policymakers and
the public need to understand
the scope of the affordability
problem Our families are facing.
We need access to the full
picture of what is driving high
drug costs, including
transparency for manufacturers
and others in the supply chain.
We ask you to please support
this foundational step toward
creating effective policy to
improve patient access to
medication and vote in favor of
house. Bill 33. Thank you.
Thank you, Jim Jackson.
And mute gym and go ahead. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. Jim Jackson.
I'm speaking to you today in my
role as a board member of Health
Action, New Mexico and I'm happy
to join such a diverse group of
the, uh people and interest
groups in support of this
measure for pharmacy
transparency.
Uh, we encourage your support of
this bill and I'll let it go at
that. Thanks.
Thank you, Jim. Is there anybody
else on zoom?
Oh,
I can't remember her name we
have. We think we
Yeah.
Okay. Okay, So, um, I'm sorry we
We have it Looks like we've lost
her. So, um she was
Well, she was in favor, okay.
And now now we will go to the
committee for questions
Represent representative
Plonsky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Um members and
representatives for bringing
forward this bill. I think it's
a
Such a critical issue, and I
would note the
Why'd variety of folks
testifying and support? Um, was
Really wonderful thing to see.
But it really reflects.
What a broad issue. This is and
how many people it does impact.
I just had a couple of
questions. One of them is, um
Madam chair and representative
in the billiard distinguishing
between
Brand name engineer IQ.
Uh, for some of the reporting
triggers and
One of the things that that I've
recently been learning about is
that generic drugs are not
always as inexpensive as we
would think they should be, or
could be.
Um And I just wondered if you
might walk through maybe some of
the differences and kind of how
you arrived.
At the different triggers for
the reporting on those, Or maybe
they're not that different, but
I'm curious to get your response
on that.
Madam Cherry representative.
Thank you for that question. Um,
this is pretty on par with other
states. One reason being is
brand name drugs to send tend to
set the tone as far as pricing
generics to follow the pricing
transept by manufacturers on the
brand names. Um, yeah, we are
trying to get at that issue of
generics being only marginally
cheaper than
Brand names with what we have in
this bill, so brand generic is
not significantly cheaper than
the brand name alternative than
that's what's being reported on
here. Um, and that is fairly
standard across the street
across different states that
have done this.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative, and, um, the
other thing I wanted to ask
about just a couple more
questions. One is on page.
Um
It's regarding the advanced
notice of new drugs.
Um
Page seven.
There's a
There's a clause in there that
just stood out to me about the
advanced notice. Can you talk
about what the
What that will potentially
achieve or why that was
included, because it seemed a
little different than some of
the other.
He says in the bill.
Madam Chair, representative.
Thank you. Um, this was included
mostly on behalf of insurance
companies wanting more
predictability with their
pricing. Um, once formulary said
they can't change it midyear
even due to a pricing change or
if there's a new drug on the
market, however, because of FDA
approval, how it works, we do
plan on striking
That section in the next
committee. Thank you for that,
Um and
Um, The last question I had was
just related to, um you know
other information of this nature
that is
Currently collected or can you
talk a little bit about how this
might
Had some additional information
Is there any additional
information like this being
collected currently within our
state?
And how do we, um
What do we expect this to sort
of do for
Um, our knowledge about
prescription drug trends,
Madam Chair representative. None
of this information is currently
being collected. Um, and as the
representatives here all know
this body has been very
interested in dealing with high
drug costs over the last few
years and largely, is relying on
industry themselves to provide
Um, information voluntarily.
This is making it mandatory,
making it fair across the board
and providing consistent stream
of this information that will
inform this body and the public
as to what's really going on. So
we do want to show the complete
picture of, um cost and pricing
trends so that everyone here can
make an informed decision about
how to deal with the cost.
Thank you for that. I think this
is going to be a really
important step.
Um and particularly for
consumers to to be able to
access the information and
understand what
What is happening with these
trends I know for for me, one of
the most common complaints I get
is the cost and the ever
changing cost and sort of the
differences and, um types of
coverage for the same
medication, etcetera. So I think
this is this is a good first
step. Thank you.
Thank you, representative
Vincent. Thank you, madam Chair.
And thank you.
Representative Herndon and and
presenter. We talked a lot about
this during the interim, and I
think that people do need
Lower drug prices and
Has a freshman coming in
figuring out what how much drug
prices really were, and Holden
people hostage literally holding
him hostage on their meds,
especially diabetic meds.
Um, I think that's that's I
thought we were better than
that. But anyway, um, one of the
things that I wanted to ask you
is what stakeholders were
contacted when you were making
this bill.
And representative Vincent of
the stakeholders include 30
organizations that are in our
coalition, and that's a pretty
broad coalition. But we've also
spoke with stakeholders like the
insurance industry. Uh and
that's why you see a hip today
and supported the bill and we
continue to meet with Pharma.
To see what common ground we can
find in the bill, and we're
willing to do things as long as
they don't prejudice the goal of
the bill to collect the
necessary information.
Thank you, Madam Chair, And will
that will that information or
those stakeholders be out there
for people to see.
The report that the U. S. I will
put together will include not
only public information, but
there'll be a public hearing in
which the public can come and
delves into the trends and to
the discoveries that the West I
has uncovered in their report.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Would
there be us where there be a
place for them to get on and
look, Look at it online. A
document really, really read it.
Yes, it will be. Excuse me. It
will be on the website and we
may try to see if we can get
other websites to connect to it
as well. And one of the catchy
phrases for this bill is
Um, the Transparency Act.
That's why I like it. The
transparency Act and and
We just We want to know what's
going on. And sometimes people
feel like they're in the dark.
And if they don't if they're not
involved in the legislative
process, or they're not looking,
they won't know.
And
The name prescription drugs,
Drug Transparency Act.
It almost seems misleading as
much of the data is being
reported, is confidential.
Am I right or wrong?
Um Madam Chair and
representative Vincent, the
Trade secrets have not been
included in this bill. Um, for a
reason, because then you have to
protect those Create trade
secrets. Trade secrets are
limited to anything that's going
to interfere with the
competition in the market, and
we're not there to do that.
Where there to discover the
information and find our state
solutions to bring the cost of
drugs down.
So a lot of the information is
not going to be confidential
because it's not going to
include trade secrets.
Without Madam chair without
giving out the secret. Would you
tell us what trade secrets are?
Yeah. Trade trade secrets are
exactly that. They're they're
They're proprietary information
that, uh, if
Shared would, uh and inhibit the
ability of the competition, uh,
in the market, And so those are
the trade secrets, and there's a
federal definition of them, so
we'll abide by that. And we
specifically say we're not going
to include trade secrets, but
there's plenty of other
information and there's only of
the 23 states are only three or
four that actually do.
Do trade secrets in their
information sharing, they don't
share their trade secrets and
therefore it's much more
expensive process to go on the
back end and legally separate
out trade secrets and the
information we're trying to get
to
Thank you, Madam Chair, madam.
The word secret bothers us all.
We just want to be fed the right
information, and I'd like for
everybody to make sure they're
getting the right information so
that that we're doing our due
diligence.
And then the last question I
had, which
It's a little bit lengthy.
Apologize, but what is the
purpose of including European
European unions and United
Kingdom drug prices?
And and let me just finish what?
That it's kind of a three part.
Not only do they not have the
same drugs as we have, but they
have different forms of health
care in different licensing
processes for their medicines.
Um, unless we're trying to lay
the groundwork for socialized
medicine, there seems to be no
reason to include this
additional data.
The the information would be
simply, uh, informational for
comparison.
Ah to see what the same drugs
are costing and other, um,
environments.
But it's not definitely trying
to lead us down the path to
making structural changes. This
is simply for comparison's sake
and transparency. Thank you and
Madame chair last one.
Um
I was looking on if you would
turn over the page two
Line 24.
To make the definitions of brand
name drugs.
And generic drugs match the
phrase marketed and distributed
in accordance with
With should be removed from Page
two line 24.
Two before the colon Page two in
line 23 just to make that flow.
In my opinion, Would you be
willing to do that Madam chair
and representative Vincent, We
definitely would. We want to
have the most readable document
for you as possible, so we will
take that under advisement and
make the change.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative Herndon and
presenters. Um in 2003, hb 666.
Brought by representative Denise
Pick, Crow was reporting a
prescription drug information
passed the Legislature and was
signed into law. It's an M s a
27 dash to dash one.
What has been accomplished with
this information.
I'm actually not aware that's
before my time, So I'm not aware
if there's someone else that
could do that Madam chair and
representative Jones. Um, I
remember discussing this with,
uh, with representative people
grow, but I actually don't know
where that legislation went,
except maybe into a folder
somewhere.
Thank you, Madam Chair and maybe
you don't remember it because
nothing happened. It was signed
into law. But nothing happens.
So why would we think this act
would be different?
I think the escalation has
increased during that time of 15
or 20 years ago. Last year, for
example, there were 40 to 60
drugs that were prices who were
raised over half of them were
increased beyond the point of
inflation.
And, um you know more drugs
around the market. More options
are available, uh, want to say
to representatives sense? Give
the uh we also are looking at a
time where biosimilars are
coming into the market, and we
want to track that so the market
has changed considerably in the
last 15 years. So we have done
everything we can to capture.
Ah, the nuances in the market
and what that means for drug
pricing.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Yes, I I agree with all of that
The market definitely has
changed. But additionally the
that act and IMSA 27-2 e Dash
one already requires
manufacturers to report to HST,
not the O s. I s D already
received the information,
especially considering the
Constitution in Mexico
Constitution.
Why isn't h s d involved in this
bill? Hb 30, Madam Chair
representative. I'm also not
aware of the specific provisions
of that act. Um what we're
requiring manufacturers to
report on here is new. It's not
duplicative of anything in the
past that we're aware of, Um,
Originally we had separated the
duties of this bill into a
couple different places. So, O s
I
Um, was only receiving the data
from the entities that it
Um, was only receiving the data
from the entities that already
has authority over PBMs and
insurance companies. Um, in
discussions with OS, I and, um
HST other entities looking at
the new healthcare authority,
where it could be housed as
well. We ultimately decided that
OS I was the best place for all
of this data to go.
So synthesize somewhere they can
prepare an annual report with
all the information at their
fingertips.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for that, Um
California has actually passed
similar legislation. It has such
a database of information.
I have a website for that has
New Mexico tried using a
database and if so, why not?
Madam Chair, representative, Um
we we are aware of other states
databases. They're actually
great resources for this bill.
Um, so we have even explicitly
directed OS. I in this bill to
use other databases to fill in
that information first when
there's a drug that meets our
threshold, they can get 80% of
the information from a database
like that, and then asked
manufacturers to fill in
State specific data the price
they sell for N. New Mexico
price changes made in New Mexico
as those are distinct.
Thank you. Um, I wonder why we
couldn't try using the
information HST has collected or
is collecting first before we
launched this.
Madam chair. Sorry.
Um Madam Chair and
representative Jones. Probably
one of the reasons is because it
just did collects information,
mostly on the Medicaid program.
And the Medicaid program is
subject to 340 B, So it's a
different
Um it's a different wouldn't
call it a market, but it's a
different space so that
information is a little
different. We do think that in
the future 340 B will be of
interest to the people looking
at drug pricing.
Okay. Thank you very much for
that. I appreciate it. And and
another thing is a definition of
prescription drug necessary
prescription drug product is
stated it's defined but the
manufacturer definition includes
entities licensed to manufacture
or distribute.
Prescription drugs.
Prescription can be written for
anything. Pharmacy Act of New
Mexico doesn't define
prescription drugs, either.
Um, only non prescription
prescription drugs. I wonder
about that definition It's
needed.
Madam Chair representative.
We're taking a look at the
definitions again. Um, part,
Representative Vincent will be
looking at the definition of
generic drug and brand name,
drug and can certainly revisit
prescription drug products as
well. Um The purpose of that
definition is just to encompass
both brand names and generics.
When we're talking about them
both.
Okay. Thank you very much. I am
with Representative Vincent all
for transparency. And so I
appreciate your bringing this. I
appreciate your answers to my
questions. Thank you. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else have
questions?
Okay, I will entertain a motion.
Sorry. I didn't sit my hang on.
Um I'll move for a do pass.
Okay, So we have Bill. Oh, I'm
sorry. House. Bill 33. Thank you
have a motion for do pass and
the second on house. Bill 33.
Jennifer, can you take the role,
please?
Representative Cates.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative. How Romeo
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord
Representatives, pants ski? Yes.
Representative Vincent Yes, for
transparency.
I met him. Vice chair. Yes.
Madam Chair? Yes.
By a vote of 7 to 0. You have a
do pass on house Bill 33.
Usually we don't allow, um,
clapping, but for this one, I'm
gonna allow it.
It was Chavez. Okay? My Mike.
Okay. Now we will go to House
Bill six, Representative
Chandler and Serato. Are you in
the room?
Oh, there's Serato back there.
Thank you for being here. And
for those of you who don't know
the room we've had until mid
last year was about
Maybe.
20% of the size of this, so
consider yourselves lucky that
we got a big room and you can
all be here. We enjoy having the
public here.
Whenever you're ready.
Good morning, madam Chair and
committee. I'm representative
Linda Cerrado. I'm one of the co
sponsors on the bill. We have
lead sponsor Chairwoman Chandler
and we also have Tracy McDaniels
with the Southwest Women's law
Center. Um, Representative
Patricia will also be joining
us. She's just coming over from
another.
Committee just to let you know.
I mean, if you if I may, uh, I'm
gonna go ahead and explain the
bill HB six, the paid Family
Medical Leave Act essentially,
is a win win win for our
communities are working families
and businesses provides economic
security for those facing
medical difficulty in their
lives and illness, Maybe a new
child in their lives caring for
their family members during
these necessitated times.
Given that economic security get
through those tough times, it
offers a low expense for
businesses because in our
conversations most businesses
offer something. Maybe it's not
written on paper. But when
somebody approaches the boss and
says they need time off, they
typically offer something and
when we run these numbers with a
number of different businesses,
these numbers come in lower and
it gives our community the
ability to take care of their
families. So specifically, what
this bill would do is it creates
a fund out of the Treasury with
contributions from employers and
employees into this into this
Fund. Um, that would allow for
up to 12. Weeks of paid family
paid leave.
Um, for an individual worker
that may be facing one of these
issues. If this sort of come up,
they would have their doctor or
their family member or their
loved ones. Doctor write a note
explaining why they need this
time and how much time they
need. I want to be clear it is
up to 12 weeks in most states,
In most places, the average is
much lower. We just want to
offer that two weeks for having
a baby bonding with the child
recovery from certain illnesses.
Chemotherapy, there's various
ones.
And, um, the funding as I
mentioned is made up these
contributions on a million
dollar payroll. It's about $4000
a year 4/10 of a percent of of
the the salary is paid by the
employer for an employee that
makes the median household
income of $54,000 that would be
$218 a year less than my Hulu
subscription as my husband loves
to remind me
Um, so just to have an idea of
those numbers, it's not. It's
not a big wave that comes out
this particular iteration of the
bill we've been working on for
two years. More than two years.
I should say, um, there's been
more and and chairwoman Chandler
will give them some of those
details. But in that time other
states have passed legislation
passed, Um ballot initiatives
and are starting to develop
their versions of this Bill.
Maine, Colorado have strikingly
similar legislation.
12 weeks contributions from
employers, employees all working
together for this and so we see
Other states have had this in
place for a number of years,
Also moving more towards this
model again, 12 weeks or adding
on a different ways, So I look
at this and I say another
states. Why not New Mexico? We
know our folks work hard and we
take care of our families. It is
fundamental to who we are in our
D. N a.
And we see this in the data. We
have one of the highest
sandwich, probably populations
of the nation. That includes a
lot of you. I'm sure of it. We
take care of our parents or
elders. We take care of our
kids, because that's what we do.
That's what we want to do.
That's why Gallup, you see they
have one of the highest
percentage is that in the
nation, so we've been working
with folks. We want one that
works for this generation. We
want one that works for this
modern economy, people that have
big dogs to do all the different
pieces. And so that's what we've
been listening to. How what
people want.
We included in this newer
version of this bill. It's
different from last year and
actuarial study that would take
place after the first year of
this to ensure that the fund is
solvent and make recommendations
to ensure that solvency. We also
increased. Um how long that deed
of the Department of Workforce
Solutions has to review claims
and giving 20 days 20 days for
them to review and 20 days for
businesses to respond in case
they have a concern.
Uh And then finally, we also
added folks leaving from
military leave to say their
goodbyes. Get their house in
order. We already had folks with
domestic violence concerns as
well and we also gave more
flexibility to Department of
Workforce Solutions if they
wanted to, Um, put an RFP out
for certain functions. They
could They are still entirely
responsible for the the
approvals and denials of claims.
We thought that was very
important since they are in
charge of the claims.
Um So I just want to mention
those pieces We do know across
the nation FML a reduces
violence against Children
reduces the it's it reduces the
maternal maternal mentality
rates and I can just tell you
that it means a lot that
economic security one last thing
and I'll hand it over to my co
sponsor is that one of our main
allies wanted to be here today,
but she can't She's um,
receiving treatment for her
cancer continues to spread. So
if I may, it's 30 seconds.
What she wanted to say was. My
name is Lansana, although I
cannot be there in person to
give you my public comment, I
want to thank you and those
reading my statement for
listening.
I believe my presence has made a
profound impact in the
Legislature. But today I hope it
is my absence that you feel the
most.
I'm currently undergoing a
procedure for my cancer to track
the growth of the tumor in my
lung.
For those that know me, I would
have called in from my hospital
bed if I could.
Many patients like myself feel
the deep impacts of our illness.
Whether it is medical trauma we
endure or the financial impacts
we feel we need a comprehensive
12 weeks paid family medical
leave to go through treatment
like I am today, or for my loved
ones to care for me as my cancer
continues to metastasize, or for
my loved ones to grieve when I'm
truly no longer here to do what
I love most
Advocate for my community. I
urge you today that in my
absence we as a community take
the courage to pass legislation
that will help all families and
on a select few. I urge your
support of house Bill six
without and hand it to our lead
sponsor Chairwoman Chandler, who
can get into some more of the
specifics of what I was giving
an overview of. Thank you.
Oh, thank you. Co sponsor. Thank
you, Madam Chair and, um, happy
to hear it Be here, Madam Chair
with you and your committee. Um
This.
Are you having trouble folks in
the back? Can you hear her?
Okay, Some I see some thumbs up
and something okay, so just move
it a little. I will. Um, Madam
chair. I'm sure you've had this
experience where the Mike's been
too close, and there's a big
boom coming out, so I'm very
careful when I use the
microphones right now in the
back. If at any point you can't
hear
Wave. Um, do this something get
get someone up. Here is
attention and we'll we'll ask
the speaker to speak louder or
get moved the microphone closer.
Go ahead, Representative. Sorry
to interrupt. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair. I am I'm feel
privileged to have worked on
this bill. Frankly, since I
entered the Legislature about
five years ago, but the work on
it precedes me by a great number
of years. I think discussions of
this policy and studies and
development started. I think in
2002
And leader Chase E was part of
that effort, as were others, as
was Senator Mimi Stewart, who
was also a co sponsor on the
bill. So this is not something
that we just thought up one day
and are presenting to the
community. This is something
that we have studied at length
and we have looked to other
states and looked to
professionals in the child
development and arena.
And air areas where elder care
is important so that we have a
good understanding of how long
people need to take leave. And
what
Should be covered. And what, um
criteria should apply when we're
considering who's a member of a
family? We've been following
that for some time, Madam chair
and what we are proposing is
very much in line with what best
practices we've been able to
learn. Um, In addition, I would
like to just reiterate for all
of you. We have been consulting
With small businesses we have
been attempting at least to work
with the chamber of Commerce is
and I'll have a little more
explanation on that as we in a
in a little bit. We certainly
have been consulting with health
care providers, Uh workers and
members of the labor movement in
the state.
And as I said, we have been
attending conferences and
networking with other states and
legislatures to find out what
they've been doing and what they
have found works and does not
work. So this bill has been very
well thought out, Madam chair,
um in terms of collaboration.
We have certainly reached out to
the New Mexico Chamber in an
effort to hear, um input and so
on, and I would like to express
some disappointment in the
unwillingness for them to
engage, particularly within the
last year or so last year. I'm
sure you're all aware we were
very successful in getting an
earlier version similar version
of this bill through the Senate.
It got stalled in our chamber.
And and, you know, we're
conscious of the need to always
be looking for input and not
long after the end of the
session last year, my colleague,
representative Serato reached
out to the executive director of
the chamber, suggesting we get
together and see if there was
some things we could work on.
And unfortunately that meeting
was never arranged. Promises
were made to follow up but never
came to pass.
Similarly in the fall as we're
proceeding and getting ready for
the session, same sort of thing
We reach out to the chamber. We
asked for a meeting sometimes
aren't convenient, promised to
get back to us now. No one got
back to us. So I just want to
clarify that because part of my
presentation is refuting myths
and I'll be talking a little bit
more about that. But if you all
have been hearing mythology
about how we are unwilling to
work with others
I can assure you that has not
the case and we can we have a
track record of talking not only
with those who agree with us,
but those who may have some
concerns and we are still open
to doing so.
I would note that I have spoken
to members of the insurance
industry and got their
perspective on the bill and some
insights because they have been
involved in standing these
programs up or, you know,
participated. So I got some very
good information yesterday. That
was very helpful to us, and I'll
share a little bit of that. Um,
as we move forward.
One of the mists, I think in
comes up often when I talk to
members may be small businesses
or large businesses is a concern
that somehow an individual will
use this this leave and I can't
think of a very good but I'll
I'm going to use the word
casually that
They can just, um, call up their
employer say I have a serious
medical illness and I'm gonna be
gone for six weeks. That is not
at all how this works, and I
hear it in terms of what? I
can't. Um I can't do without the
employee and and you know, how
do we know they're really sick
and all of these sorts of
things so we we have in our bill
requirements for proof.
Supporting documentation doctor
and a medical provider
involvement if it's a medical
condition, that's issue, so it's
not something As I said you can
do casually. It's something you
have to be able to provide
information on so it can't be
done generally at the drop of a
hat, of course, unless it's an
emergency, or it's an ex car
accident or something along
those lines, and we, of course,
have to accommodate those sorts
of needs.
Other myths, um, and truce.
This bill is, um, the result of
a working group that worked
through through the summer a
couple of years ago.
And there were many stakeholders
involved, including the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce. It's
evolved since then, but I want
to make everyone understand,
Madam chair that it is a
consensus document, um, brought
forward to you as a result of
that working group.
Another myth that has come up is
I I hear from employers. I can't
afford to pay the person while
they're gone, and I can't afford
to replace the person so I I
always hasten to explain the
program when they say that to
me. This is like an insurance
program. The employer is not
paying the salary of the
employee who is on leave, and I
cannot say that enough because
it comes up and nearly every
conversation. I have.
The fund is responsible for for
the wage replacement, not the
employer. The employer pays its
small premium.
The employee pays a small
premium and that is the basis
for the fund for from which
Those who are eligible draw
their wage replacement. So how
does that help the employer?
Well if the employer needs a
temporary replacement, the wages
that they are not paying can be
used for that replacement
employee. If there is need for
overtime, for example.
There is some room, you know,
wage room to accommodate that,
because that employer is not
paying the employee they are not
drawing on sick leaf. Unless
it's sick Leave, that's a
predicate to the long term
leave. I want to be clear about
that.
Oh, I just lead into my own
notes with unknowingly, so this
is not sick Leave, and I already
alluded to the fact you know,
sick leave. Um you call land
often? If you're you have the
flu. Your child has the flu.
And you give notice to your
employee that day generally.
The employer has can ask for
sick notes. If it's it turns out
to be a little bit longer than a
day or two. But it is not what
we are talking about, which is a
serious medical condition. The
need to bond with your child or
to address a medical condition
that arises out of being
pregnant. Um, it covers things
like caring for your husband or
your wife, who has a serious
medical conditions, all of those
kinds of things sickly
Leave is a short term, very
brief.
Type of illness that may lead
into you know a diagnosis of a
serious condition, but that's
what we're talking about here.
Um, as my colleague mentioned,
uh, an application is made to
the Workforce Solutions
Department. It helped the
department is responsible for
verifying the doctor's
confirmation certification.
Other required documentation.
Um, it is not on the employer to
keep that documentation. It's on
the workforce solutions.
Departments, um, plate to take
care of that, and they're well
suited for that, and I'll speak
to that in a minute.
In speaking with the insurance
industry. Yesterday, I picked up
of a fact um, that I hadn't
really focused on, but obviously
it makes sense when the
Department of Workforce
Solutions administers the
program. They have the ability
to confirm employment much more
easily than perhaps some other
entity because they're already
receiving information through
the unemployment insurance
process.
So that the form that one used
that that the department uses
can be modified, Um, a little
bit so that it can account for
that verifying employment
through this program so that we
can leverage some of the
infrastructure and means of
verification that's already in
place in the Workforce Solution
Department for this program as
well, leveraging it from the
unemployment insurance
department.
Again. Workforce Solutions takes
on the administrative burdens,
not the employer.
And, um, I want to bring up one
last point in. There are small
businesses, you know, care,
providing groups that I
understand. Operate on small
margins.
Many of them are part of
The state services and they
receive Medicaid reimbursements.
Ah, we on our team, and I bet
nearly all of you if not all of
you agree, we need to be looking
at Medicaid reimbursement. The
solution is not to deny this
program because there are those
concerns. The solution is do
what's right through Medicaid so
that those companies that
receive Medicaid re being
embarrassment yet a fair
reimbursement and they will be
able to absorb whatever
Small costs that are associated
with administering this plant
And and I think everyone of us
here
And others amongst you would be
more than happy to get together
and worked with those companies
and together and others to
ensure that happens And I would
say probably the governor would
be on board with that as well.
So without I'll conclude my
initial comments, Madam chair
and thank you for your
attention.
Members of the committee.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee.
Closer. Okay. Thank you.
Usually I speak very loud, but
with the sensitives Mike's as
hesitant again. Good morning,
madam Chair and members of the
committee. I am, um, happy to
join our lead sponsors in the
sponsorship of this very
critically important bill for
our workforce.
And I want to mention that, as
representative Chandler
mentioned I was asked to carry
this bill about. I think it was
five or six years ago. I meant
we're losing track of time
because it's been unfolding and
improving and expanding and has
become
A great collaborative effort and
a comprehensive approach.
Was every year it has improved.
And Madam chair. I do I bring a
different perspective, not quite
a different but
My life has been about working
poor I've been in the working
poor workforce my entire life.
Now as an elderly. I'm beginning
to realize that
That life span of working as a
community and labor organizer.
And, um, entrenched.
In community.
Has resulted in
Um, the realization that I'm
retiring. I have retired.
And I face no for a one K.
I have no other resources other
than Social Security, and I
bring this up because I was a
working poor single mom.
I was raising a young boy.
And I feared
For the day that I would get ill
or that he would become ill.
Because we had nothing to fall
back on in terms of either paid
sick leave where I worked or
paid family medical leave. There
was nothing of that nature.
I have had a history of medical
issues throughout my life since
my childhood
So that fear was very real. As I
was raising my
Young son. As a single mother. I
held down two jobs in order to
make ends meet.
And Madam chair. This was really
petrifying for me because I had
no other recourse. No one to
depend on. I was living in the
East Coast.
With no family.
So it was a reality chairman and
distinguished members of this
I'm sorry if you're on zoom,
We're not ready for you yet. So
I didn't met. I'm sorry, folks,
especially appear. Please
silence your phones. Put them
on.
Buzz or whatever, but but we
don't need any interruptions.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um so I raised these because
What? How I lived my life.
Has been
The way our workforce is living
their lives today.
It's no different. We have
families.
That fear this topic. Um often
Again. Technical issues. Sorry.
Um, I guess it's not coming from
our zoom. Um maybe we're gonna
be beamed up or something. I
don't know. So be prepared, be
prepared for anything. I'm so
sorry, Representative. That's
That's right. I I'll try to
continue my my train of thought,
um
So, Madam chair. I raised these
issues because these issues are
very real in today's in the
lives of many families today.
I also have been a caregiver of
four sets of parents. Well, two
sets of parents.
And my in laws and my own
parents.
I was faced with having to
Stop my full time employment.
And resort to part time in order
to be able to care.
For my parents who were both
very ill.
And I was there only caregiver.
Also madam Chair I was with my
husband and my son. The
caregivers of my
In Los my father in law and my
mother in law.
We were stretched between
traveling back and forth to help
carers for them.
Here and in, um in El Paso.
So
Going from full time employment
to part time impacted, of
course, our livelihood And this
again is how many of our
families are being faced with
because our families in New
Mexico have strong values and
part of those strong values
means taking care of family.
And so we won't hesitate to do
that.
So I bring these issues are
these personal lived
experiences?
To you today because they
reflect the many decisions hard
decisions that our workforce are
faced with on a daily basis and
to express the fact that
This is a workforce empowerment.
Bill that's aimed at
Helping our families retain
employment, helping our families
be able to take care of their
families.
And also it's a win win for the
employers and the work
employees because if you have a
healthy
Workforce with a good sense of
well being in their employment.
Then they
Increase their potential in that
workforce. And so that other
myth that because we're
providing all these quote
unquote, um benefits, fancy
benefits. Whatever you wanna
call it. We've been it's been
called all kinds of things in
our emails, Madam Chair.
Um, it's not so
All this does in partnership, it
creates a partner stronger
partnership between employees
and employers, and it makes and
enhances the work.
Of that employment it has.
That's why I said to win Win,
Madam chair for everyone
involved, so I wanted to bring
these points up just to further
clarify how important it is for
our employees and also for small
businesses, And we know that our
small businesses are the heart
and soul.
Of our economy in our local
communities, So I urge Madam
Chair the committee to please
support and endorse this bill
with your vote and thank my
sponsors very much for, um,
allowing all of us to join in.
Thank you, Madam Chair if we
they
Our expressways will give a
brief for little things we may
have left out that would be
helpful for the conversation. Go
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um good morning. Members of the
committee. My name is Tracy
McDaniel. I'm a policy advocate
with Southwest Women's Law
Center came to the law center
specifically because I'm very
passionate about this issue.
I don't know how much closer I
can get. Um
Can people hear me?
Okay. Can you hear in the back?
Yes. Okay. You're good. Okay,
Um, but I've been working on
this for five years and we've
made a lot of changes to the
bill. We've had lots of
conversations with business
community as well as um other
stakeholders. Community members,
workers around the state. We did
a listening tour through the
summer and the fall and
The bill that you have before
you represents a lot of changes
that have happened as a result
of those conversations, the
sponsors did a beautiful job of
highlighting many of those, but
I did want to highlight a few
others first, um there is
essentially a waiver for
employers that have fewer than
five employees, so four or fewer
employees that employer is not
required to pay the employer
contribution to
The fund.
Um, And as, um Was it a
representative Chandler? I think
so. One of one of them, Um
Highlighted that, uh, that they
don't have to pay when a person
is away on leave, so they're not
paying a contribution and
they're not paying an employee
when they're on leave. That
employee is still paying.
Their portion of the
contribution and has access to
that fund. So 66% of our
businesses in the state of New
Mexico have fewer than five
employees, which means that 66%
of employers in this state will
not be paying a dollar into this
program.
Second, one of the other things
that, um, we heard from the
business community was a concern
around the contribution rate.
And so we set a cap on the
contribution rate at this at the
same level as the Social
Security income cap to ensure
that those really high wage
earners are not paying in and
not receiving, Um
You know?
The balanced return on that.
Investment.
Next. Um, we've heard concerns
around if they're increases that
are necessary to ensure solvency
of the fund that, um employers
want to have some security and
know that stability knowing what
exactly, they're going to be
paying year to year, so there's
a solvency adjustment formula.
And this year, an additional
Cap on any contributions
necessary at 1/10 of 1% of wages
per year, So that's $1 for every
$1000 of wages is the most that
this, uh that contributions
could increase We don't
anticipate an increase in
contributions based on what
we've learned from the 13 States
and the District of Columbia
that have already passed this
and the actuarial study that
representative Serato mentioned,
Um
Yeah, um, also
Um, sorry. I lost my train of,
but, um
The Yeah. So it's capped. We
feel confident in the numbers
that we have.
And then, um, we also included
new language that clarifies and
specifies that an application
for, um for leave requires and,
uh, medical professional design
off with the expected timeline
for return from leave so the
employer will be able to
Predict when the person is going
to be coming back, and it is not
as has been stated earlier up to
12 weeks at the discretion of
the employee. It's really based
on that employee's needs and
their medical condition and how
long they would need to be away
on leave. And lastly, I just
want to come kill conclude with
the economic impacts of this. We
know that we're struggling with
our workforce participation
rates in our state.
Um, there was an analysis done
around a year ago by a national
organization that said that if
Mexico had the same workforce
participation, particularly
among women, as places that have
access to paid family and
medical leave, we'd have 47,000
more workers available for work
in the state of New Mexico and
an additional $1.4 billion in in
wages.
So, um, I will conclude my
statement, and I stand for
questions. Thank you.
Without
Okay. Thank you. And, um, the
secretary Workforce Solutions is
on zoom and she is ill. And she
said she looks terrible, so
she's not going to be on camera.
Um, so sorry to
Near, um
We're going to come to you now.
Sorry to Madam Secretary. I'm
sorry.
Hi. Um Madam Chair. Can you hear
me? Yes, we can hear you.
Okay. Thank you. And thank you
for allowing me to not show my
face on that giant screen. I
apologize for not being there
for this important conversation.
I am not well today, but it is
an important conversation on on
both of the bills before you
today and the governor believes
strongly in the concept of paid
leave, and that's why she put
these bills on the call.
That said This is not an agency
bill, so we are not here to
support or oppose, but rather to
just make sure that we can
answer any technical questions.
I do want to note that the
sponsors did address many of our
concerns that came up last year
in the context of Senate Bill
11, including changing some of
the times for us to process
Appeals as representatives
Cerrado mentioned and also
adding some members to the
advisory committee that have in
insurance experience. Um lastly,
I just like to say that, um, but
this bill contains no
appropriation, and my plea is
that if this bill passes or any
paid leave bill passes, please
do not under fund it or give
inadequate time for the program
to stand up because that will
be, um, a bad situation for
businesses and employees like
and I'm happy to.
Answer Any questions? Thank you.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Secretary
and hope you feel better. But
you will stay on for any
questions Correct.
Yes, Madam Chair. Okay. Thank
you. So we will go to the
audience and I folks on zoom in
opposition. Please raise your
hands so we will go to the
audience for opposition.
Um, if you are here in
opposition, raise your hand.
Okay. We will take 1010 comments
one minute each, so I don't want
there to be a mad brush. But
I don't know how else to do
things.
This is opposition. So when
there are 10 people in line, um
then stop lining up, please.
Um Kay, go ahead, somebody chair
and members of the committee.
hearing that dot com Or is it
just me?
Keep going. Alright, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole. I'm the
president, CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
You know, I just have to let all
of you know that I am not here
today to complain about the lack
of communication that we have
enjoyed with representative
Chandler and or with Senator
Stewart and the Senate the last
six months anytime we needed to
discuss this bill, they have
been accessible and open. And I
have appreciated that. So I'm
not here to complain about that
today.
The bottom line for us at the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce is that we just simply
disagree on the bill. And as we
represent our constituents, we
are concerned about the impact
of this bill on our especially
small business members, So we
opposed the legislation with due
respect to the US sponsors.
Um and I want to make three very
brief comments about why we
believe it imposes a new tax on
employers and employees alike,
and that's increased cost and
put. That's your one minute it
goes fast. I'm sorry. That goes
fast. All right. Well, I'm glad
we've already discussed it with
the sponsors. Thank you.
Madam Sherman, member of the
committee's My Name is Brian
Fallon with Albuquerque
Publishing Company and
Albuquerque Journal. Let me
state that we are not against
paid sick leave at all. We have
short term disability, long term
disability and sickly plans in
place, and I'd like to thank
representative Chandler for
making structural changes to the
bill based on some discussions
last year about Pyramid ng with
FMLA and things like that.
My concern is there's a new
Section three in the bill that
shifts all the costs of this
fund to the employees to the
fund itself.
And if you look at the Phi Rs,
um
That the the numbers don't work,
the estimated maximum benefits
every year exceed the
contributions and there's also a
funding requirement by the state
seed money if you will that is
not approved yet.
Bill says that this will take
effect if the funding gets
approved during this session,
But there's no build currently
about funding. Thank you. Thank
you.
And and folks in line. That's
too so the next eight will be
able to speak. And if your past
number eight and we don't we
won't be able to hear from you.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Jim Copeland, executive director
of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities,
Community Providers.
And we are not opposed to paid
family medical leave. We are
opposed to the employer
contribution of it will be. It's
a were opposed because it will
be an unfunded mandate for our
providers. The employer
contribution is not included in
either the current reimbursement
rates or the proposed 2023 rate.
Study rates. DD providers will
Currently receive. It's our
understanding that funding for
the new rights is included in
the fiscal year 25 budget for
the Healthcare Authority
Department.
Providers are currently working
under rights that were
established in 2019. Those rates
were not fully implemented until
2022
Providers have been providing
supports and services to new
Mexicans with intellectual and
developmental disabilities with
no permanent rate increases for
four years. Most providers are
100% dependent on Medicaid rates
they receive with no opportunity
to increase their operating
revenue.
Without a commensurate raise in
the Medicaid rates. Providers
will be unable to pay the
contribution provider
contribution.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Patsy
Romero. I'm president CEO for
something Maria Mirador and
intermediate care facility for
adults with intellectual
disabilities. I want to thank
representatives Serrato for
spending the time over the
interim to talk about our
concerns, But I'm here
representing my staff. My staff
have looked at this legislation.
And they are opposed because
they cannot afford another tax
on their limited salaries that
they already received. My agency
receives 97% of my funding from
Medicaid.
The other 3% comes from State
General Fund. My rates cannot
afford to continue to pay for
these unintended consequences.
In addition, it is important for
you to realize that when that
was per those individuals are on
f m l A. I have to cover their
services, their work and it cost
me over time.
Time and a half to be able to
meet the needs to serve our
disability community. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Amy Dixon, executive
director of Desert States
Physical Therapy Network
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. While we understand that
the state pays a percentage of
the salary for the person who is
taking paid medical leave,
making those monies available
for hiring temporary staff
hiring temporary clinical staff.
Is next to impossible as
recruitment for physical
therapist to the state is very
difficult. In addition, the
credentialing requirements for
the healthcare providers as much
faster now due to good
legislation last year but still
takes 30 days to complete and
the effective dates are not
retroactive. If you choose an
employment agency and can find a
traveling therapist, the
contract for the
Or that traveler costs more than
the fixed rate of payment for
services in currently now,
patients then are either being
treated not in a timely manner
or it creates an undue burden on
already stressed healthcare
staff. So we duly oppose this
bill. Thank you.
Madam chair Rob Black. I'm the
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce. I
want to start off because the
chamber was brought up as not
being willing to have a
conversation about this.
Three of the four individuals
here at the table. I spent three
days with at Vanderbilt
University at the request of the
speaker at a paid family medical
leave conference where we had a
lot of conversations about what
are best practices and examples
of those and discussions about
what should be included in a
bill and how to structure it so
that we're not undermining our
social safety net.
We have a difference of opinion
of how to get there.
So I just want to clarify that
we believe that the current belt
undermines our social safety net
as was described before between
previous two speakers. We
believe that the fund is not
sustainable over time, the IR
your staff, your financial staff
tells you that as much
And we also believe that the
advisory board structure is one
that is very unbalanced. And
while there may be different
definitions of what consensus
means we believe that it means
everyone's in agreement. That is
not what came out of the report
before. Thank you.
Okay, so we have, um, the man in
the kind of green shirt will be
the last one.
Or nine
I'm
I'm number nine, Madam chair,
Okay, we'll take one more behind
you.
Join the green
green shirt
That was nice
guys number 10 wrote. Okay,
literally. Actually, I believe
that you are number 10, but we
will take the woman behind you.
Just in case I lost track, So
let's go ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Abby
O'Connor. I'm 1/5 generation
rancher from Stanley, New
Mexico, and I represent New
Mexico Wool Growers Association.
Welker's opposes House Bill six.
House Bill six, is clearly
designed for a class of
employees in urban areas where
replacement help is readily
available and skill levels may
be low or very and we're wages
are monetary. This does not fit
in the cattle or sheep, industry
or agriculture at all, for that
matter.
Our members are not ready to
assess our members do not have
readily available replacement
labor. Our biggest challenge is
actually finding labor that is
qualified and knowledgeable,
especially in rural and remote
areas of our state.
It is also a challenge to train
them to know the country are
cattle or sheep.
And doing so, so that we can
satisfy our spring and fall
works and are grazing
requirements. Thank you. Good
morning, madam Chair and
committee members. My name's Tom
Patterson, McKell rancher from
Luna. New Mexico to serve as
president elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We have posed a B
six.
Provision in HB six that are
unworkable in practice.
In the cattle operations section
two s
The cattle industry. Some
compensation is non cash. House
utilities beef truck fuel before
an employee were to go on, leave
the employer and employee would
be paying premiums on wages that
is defined in section two s
would include that non monetary
income. How do we value it?
Section two d Replacement help.
They're probably in our industry
going to be day laborers who
make themselves available and
there are other jobs on their
days off. Are they also
employees under Section two day
who qualify for leave?
If we can find more stable, help
with the leave isn't taking
conception consecutively. What
do we tell them? The terms of
their job. Or how long will the
job last? Thank you. Thank you.
What?
can you hear me? My name is
George country. I'm a local
restaurant owner, and I'm the
current president in Mexico
Restaurant Association. I oppose
this legislation because it is
too broad and it's too
expensive. Virtually no family
businesses support this bill.
The vast majority do not some
do. Um, the employees that we
work with are not asking for
this. They've never come and ask
for it.
Um
They are not progressive
activists. They're just hard
working New Mexicans, many of
whom are low wage workers. They
want to work hard. They want to
raise their families and what
they really want from us as they
want higher pay. They also want
better schools and they want for
their cars to stop getting
stolen. None of our employees
are asking for this, and that's
one of the reasons that the
board of the Restaurant
association does not support it.
All of the problems that we have
in New Mexico or because the
poverty rate is too high. I am
sorry to tell you, but the only
way out of poverty is for more
and more businesses to be
started to be successful.
The only path out of poverty is
for more business, and this is
just another thing that makes it
more difficult to run a
business. Thank you for your
consideration. I'm going to
remind folks to stay on the
bill. Stolen cars is not a part
of this bill.
So we have one more and then and
then we will go to the other
side.
Good morning, madam Chip, Madam
Chair and committee members. My
name is Bridget Dixon. I'm the
president CEO, the Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce and our
chamber represents over 700
members. Businesses here in the
capital Over the last three
years, our businesses have faced
many many challenges and
struggled to find a qualified
workforce and build back their
businesses. Additionally, the
reeling from an attempting to
comply with a sick leave mandate
already in place.
Now the Legislature is
considering putting another
burden on them.
And also their employees as a
man as the President, Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce, our
businesses they do. Boo do
believe, and it paid family
medical Leave Act. However, we
believe this ad. This bill is
not the one. It's just not
sustainable and has too many
holes in it. Thank you for your
time. Thank you. Okay, we will
go.
If you are on zoom and would
like to speak in opposition,
We'll see how many of you there
are and then I'll decide.
How many? Um, how many do we
have?
11. Let's take the first five.
This is the place. Yes. Built
Lee mute and you have one minute
Carol's Oh,
Oh, okay. Sorry. Carol White
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Carol
White. I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico Restaurant Association.
I'm here representing Coalition
of 15 associations and chambers
that have been working on this
issue over the interim. We
formed this group after
realizing that the business
community was being left out of
paid family medical leave
discussions.
Our members strongly opposed
House Bill six, while the intent
of paid family medical leave is
commendable, or coalition
believes that the legislation
may have unintended consequences
for working families, businesses
and could be improved with
alternative sustainable
solutions are coalition members
are The Associated
Associated Builders and
Contractors. Associated
Contractors of New Mexico. New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce New
Mexico
Uh, Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce. Las Cruces Chamber of
Commerce. New Mexico Cattle
Growers Association Gallup
Chamber of Commerce New Mexico
Hospitality Association. New
Mexico Home Builders
Association, Greater Albuquerque
Hotel and Lodging Association
and the Dairy Association and
Homebuilders Association.
Central New Mexico. Thank you.
Um, Next. We have
Bill Lee.
Go on Mute yourself, Bill and go
ahead.
Thank you, madam Chairman
members of the committee. I want
to, uh echo. Many of the
comments that have been made in
opposition to this proposed
legislation, but also highlights
the added burden proposed in the
HP six on small employers that
will cause many to close and
several established businesses
already in our community are
saying if this legislation
passes
They will close shop and move
their operations to Arizona. The
workforce shortage and ability
to cover gaps that this bill
creates are amplified in the
states. Small immunities from
medical care to mechanics the
ability to build and maintain a
regular workforce is tenuous at
best in specialty areas where
there are no temporary
employment agencies operating
rule New Mexico to help cover
the need, leaving only overtime
and extremely high costs on our
businesses. We are not opposed
to paid family medical leave,
but believe the
Legislature should look at a
more targeted approach. Members
of the committee, Madam
chairman, We ask that you oppose
this legislation and thank you
for your time.
Thank you. Next. We have
Oh, Carlos Suntech.
Go ahead. Carlos. Madam chair
members of the committee. I'm
Carlos Santiago. I am the
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. We
opposed this bill for a few
reasons. I appreciate the
concern of the legislators that
want to see this happen. But
There are several things that
are going on. First of all, this
is a tax on employees and
employers.
This is a really bad time to be
doing that when we're facing
high inflation, and people are
struggling as it is to make ends
meet. Secondly, I was involved
in the task force, and that was
not a consensus task force. In
fact,
We surveyed our members and the
members of two other
organizations, both employers
and employees, and
overwhelmingly, there was
opposition to this bill. The
employees don't want it either.
Not that we have heard the
biggest problem with this bill,
I think is the affinity clause
that allows an employee that has
an affinity for anyone.
To take this leave that is going
to cause this fund to be
unsustainable. Thank you, Carla.
Neck. You we have Ruth Ponta.
I'm sorry if I mispronounced it.
No problem. And then morning,
Madam Chair members of the
committee. I am Ruth Porta
Honorable Esperanza Child
Development Center. Opposable HB
six. My program already offers
help, then told vision, shock
them disability and life is
students. In addition, we offer
for one k pay holidays and PTO.
I read the bill entirely and
found several reasons This bill
will be devastating to a small
businesses, especially childcare
centers. Statement
flushing between my name and
then I'm sorry. Could you hold
on a second? We're getting
interference me.
Okay, Carla, are you not muted?
You just continue. Okay? I will
continue. Okay. Go ahead.
Okay, especially childcare
centers. Statement date
childcare is to have a specific
staff to Children ratios at all
times. Childcare is in crisis
trying to comply with our staff
to child ratios in the healthy
workplace Act. Childcare
programs get multiple colleagues
from our employees placing us in
situations where we have to
close classrooms, leaving
formulas without childcare.
The broad definition of family
is the biggest issue in this
bill. I did the mask with my 45
employees program can have a
minimum of five employees and
medical leave at the same time
all year.
This bill passes constant
Collins and Mondays and Fridays,
NPT or absences. It will be
impossible to provide quality
anti Jeremiah Oh, sorry. I
turned my mic off instead of on
so, um then the last one is
Jeremiah are Jeremiah, Please
mute and go ahead.
Thank you, Madam. Chair Jeremiah
Ridged represented national
Mutual general counsel for
domestic Mutual were concerned
that the bill is currently
drafted would upset key
provisions and policy objectives
of the Workers Compensation Act.
We appreciate efforts to address
this last year in SB 11, but the
current language would still
create confusion, overlap and
allow for double recovery of
benefits. The Workers
Compensation Act was carefully
designed to incentivize both the
worker and the employer to
cooperate and get the worker
treatment and return to work in
some capacity.
As quickly as possible. It's
continues to better outcomes for
workers, both physically and
psychologically and being the
best policy is to continue to
allow the work compact to stand
on its alone on its own. Thanks.
Thank you. Now we will go in
support. So if you are on zoom
and in support, please raise
your hand. I'm not promising.
We'll get to all of you and I
have a list of 10 folks in the
room. I believe so. Oh, the
amba. I always pronounce that
name wrong. And we all raise our
hand, though. Yes. Yes. Thank
you. It takes a village, right?
Um, those in in favor of
House bill.
Six. Please raise your hands.
Okay?
All right. Um, now we can go to
and after all
is Alex CIA.
Dr SB Dr Hoffler.
Wester and I apologize for my
pronunciations Towers, Leah and
Lori. So if you could line up,
um
Okay, So go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Otium
behoove me. I'm the advocacy
director for a tarp. New Mexico.
We recognize that family
caregivers are the backbone of
our long term care system. We
have an increasingly aging
population in New Mexico and
touch this comprehensive bill
will support
And provide the flexibility
needed for people to take care
of their loved ones, especially
keeping costs down for
hospitalization, Karen nursing
homes and allow individuals to
really be at home where they
wanted to be in cared for. So
that's why we asked for for you
to support this particular bill.
There are 419,000 family
caregivers in New Mexico,
270,000 of them.
Provide unpaid care, which
translates to about 250 million
hours. $3.8 billion in free
care, And so with that this bill
will be instrumental in
providing that and making it a
reality for new Mexicans. Thank
you.
Thank you, Um Alex.
Is Alex here? Something
Oh, she's okay, so we'll keep a
list of zoom
Um so Alex will be first on
Zoom. Okay. Um, I'll FIA okay.
Go ahead. I'll see you.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the community
committee. I'm sorry, um, from
Twin Lakes. I mean, I'm from my
role, um, community north of
Gallup. My name is out there.
Yossi. I'm a wife of a mother, a
grandmother, caregiver and
healthcare advocate for McKinley
County. I'm here to ask for how
and passing House Bill six.
As a as my house deteriorates
from arthritis over that with
Lupus, my concerns and stress
for what my family will go
through, like time so times
awesome work school and putting
in events.
I have multiple appointments in
and out of town also out of
state XP six is a win win. Not
only for me but for all new
Mexican and my situation and
thank you so much.
Thank you. Sorry. You see what?
I'm looking at My phone so much,
Um and people are people text
and say this isn't working or
this that so We're not ignoring
what's going on. We're trying
to, um, the ringmaster of a 55
ring circus. I guess, Um Dr SP
is on stream so we'll come back
to her doctor. Hofler is also on
zoom.
A west to
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is West Sarkissian and the
public policy director for small
business majority in an
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is West Sarkissian and the
public policy director for small
Business Majority organization
that empowers America's diverse
entrepreneurs and we support HP
six.
During my time conducting
outreach across the state. I've
spoken with small businesses who
struggle with workforce
retention because they can't
afford to offer benefits to
their employees as such small
businesses and their employees
often leave to work at larger
businesses, sometimes in other
states, undercutting our small
business economy. This is a
trend we're seeing across the
state. Earlier this month, we
released the scientific poll
among the third Party poster
that found New Mexico small
businesses.
Overwhelmingly support this 85%.
They support the creation of a
state run paid family and
medical leave program.
Additionally, this survey found
that two thirds of New Mexico
small businesses support the pay
leave program because they know
it's the right thing to do for
their employees. The state also
has significant self employed
individuals who can opt in, and
they need an infrastructure to
support them. Thank you. Please
pass this bill. Thank you.
And Rep Jones, can I ask you to
not?
I know it. It's okay. Thank you.
It just gets a little much. Um
so we let me sorry. People
texting, um
Taz.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Tabarre. Go! I'm self
employed entrepreneur. I oversee
employers and consult with small
businesses in 2018. I received a
doctor recommended surgery $5200
out of pocket plus 10 weeks of
unpaid leave.
If you consider money for basic
needs wages lost. This procedure
cost me $21,000 and $31,000 that
year.
Um as the SP of New Mexico
States that 97% of small
businesses in New Mexico or
women owned
Uh, half of those 97% are women
owns, Uh, we're all just one
paycheck away from poverty. Um,
and this is a preventative
health care measure in our
troubled healthcare system.
Thank you.
Thank you. And again, um, I know
some of you got in line, I
allowed, um, Alan ticket in
line, but you will be the end,
so I'm I'm sorry. Um,
Unfortunately for those of you
out there who want us to have
more time support a
constitutional amendment for us
to have longer session so that
we can hear from all of you
because we only get 30 days and
we have way too much work to do
just just a little soapbox from
up here.
So next. We have, um Leah.
Course.
Yeah. Leah is on. Zoom. Um and
Lori Lori here. No Lorries on
zoom to Okay. So, Alan, you're
the last one in person and then
we'll go to zoom.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name's Alan
Sanchez. I'm, the executive
director of the New Mexico
Conference of Catholic Bishops.
We come not to impose but to
propose, and we propose that you
support this for the bishops.
They promote this piece of
legislation as an ethical issue.
We, uh we believe in a
consistent ethic of life.
There is life after birth, those
infants need two parents with
them at this crucial time. We
all all of us will find
ourselves one time or another,
and I like in a vulnerable
position. We need to be able to
be available to nurture a family
member back to health or walk
him to the grave.
There is a cost and we believe
it's worth paying that cost
because if we believe in family
family values, this is the bill
for you. This is a family value,
Bill. Thank you.
Now we will go to zoom, Um
I'm gonna go in the list that I
got from from the zoom
operators, so we're going to go
to Elena Rubenfeld.
Elena, are you on?
Sorry. Okay, She's gone. Okay?
Oh, okay. Elena, Go ahead. Yeah.
Okay, Elena, If you're there, we
will come back to you. Let's go
to. Well, I see. Um Leia up
there. So, Leah, I'm sorry. Go
ahead, Leah.
Hello. Good morning, madam chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Leon Messina. And I'm
the CEO Insinuate Media
Marketing Agency based, Could
you please speak up a little bit
and start over? We'll start the
time over. Yes, of course.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members. Can you pull your mic
closer? I'm seeing a lot of
puzzled looks on faces. They
can't hear you so either Turn up
your volume Better? Yes. Thank
you. Excellent. Thank you. Good
morning, madam Chair matters.
Members of the committee. My
name is Leah Massena and then
the CEO of Simulate Media based
in Las Cruces.
I would like to express my
support of HP six. I employ Team
of nine staff. Some parents,
some that take care of family
members and myself.
I'm a mother of four and I work
with my husband's. Throughout
the 18 years. It was a small
business owner has been very
important to me to be able to
provide support to my staff in a
way that goes beyond salary. We
offer health insurance, Dental
retirement paid time off,
However, this has been a great
financial commitment to our part
and my resources can only
stretch so far they are limited
and are much more at risk due to
economic change compared to
large organizations.
So you see, the fact is the way
to provide human care well,
including and supporting small
business interests.
I believe that this act will
enable my staff to continue
getting compensated. Well, they
have unavoidable life events in
a way that minimizes the
financial risk for a company of
my size. Also, the small
business owner, minimizing the
operational burden is hugely
important. Issue the thank you
very much. Let's see.
Okay?
Okay. Um, Cassandra, go ahead
and on mute. And then after that
we will have Lisa Hofler. Um
Alex Doctor SB Dr Hoffler, and
this is
Cassandra, Right? Okay, just
trying to keep track.
Thank you for the opportunity
opportunity to speak in support
of HB six. My name is Cassandra
Gomez, and I'm a senior staff
attorney at a better balance, a
national organization working on
paid family and medical leave
for over a decade, helping to
draft nearly all of the paid
leave Leicester at the country,
all of which have remained
steady and solvent. We were also
proud to present in a paid leave
conference in Nashville this
past November, where a number of
you and your colleagues were
present. We urged the committee
to move forward with HB six
Model Buil building on best
practices from years of paid
family and medical leave
implementation throughout the
country. Key components of
The six make it the superior
bill. It provides up to 12 weeks
of leave to workers, which is
the national baseline under HB
six program contributions are
split between employers and
employees, which is the fairest
approach that the majority of
programs throughout the country
utilize the purposes for leave
under HB six include the core
purpose is covered by the
federal FML A, including
military exiting exigency leave
as well as safely HB 11 falls
short. Each of these key
aspects, HB six will address the
needs of low wage workers and
address poverty as these laws
have done around the country.
Thank you.
Consideration of HB six. Thank
you right on time.
We're going to go to Alex, then
doctor. SB Dr Hoffler.
And I think that will be the
end. So Alex
Yeah.
What? Okay, Alex. Okay, um,
going once going twice. Um, Dr
SB. Is she on?
Okay?
I'm sorry. Yeah.
Okay. Hold on a second.
Okay. Now I'm getting a text
that says it won't let them hoax
on mute and and for those of you
listening on Zoom, um
If I haven't called your name,
we're not going to get to you.
So, um, we're still looking for
Alex. Let me check my next next
text and see what's going on.
Um, so okay, let's go to Lori.
Um
Yes. Alright. Good morning,
madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Laurie
Martinez. I'm the director of a
nonprofit engaged in New Mexico
serving Dona Ana County. We as a
nonprofit also own a small
business and I t company and as
an employer. I support paid
family medical leave because
it's important for small
employers to have access to
offer these kinds of benefits to
our workforce to remain
competitive, creates stability
and
Faster, healthy workplace
culture so that we don't lose
valuable time away from our
mission. Um, and impact our team
When we have turnover. Hospital
six has been carefully thought
out and worked on for years, now
vetted and critiqued by a number
of stakeholders statewide and
has numerous elements that take
into account both the needs of
new Mexico workers and
employers. It provides a means
for long term solvency covers a
range of situations and provides
job protection. It's also
affordable. I can cover my
entire team and engaged for
about $1500 a year, which is a
worthy investment in my mind. Um
it's a well thought out.
Out bill. Those working on it
have done their due diligence
for years. And I want to thank
you for your consideration. And
my thank you, my thanks to the
sponsoring legislators.
Kate. Thank you, Um, Dr SB or Dr
Hoffler. Are you on And if you
were if you are under a
different name
Oh, okay.
I'm on labor laws.
Yes, this is Dr Hofler speaking.
Can you hear me? Speak up a
little bit
ahead. Oh, I don't have my my
Khonsari. You might want to
speak up or pull the mic a
little closer.
Alright, I'll do my best. How's
that?
Okay, go ahead.
Okay?
Alright. Um, thank you, madam
Chair and committee members. My
name is Dr Lisa Hofler, Um, as
an obstetrician gynecologist, I
urge you to support HP Six. We
need this legislation for our
working parents and our
healthcare providers.
First paid family and medical
leave reduces hospitalization
rates for both moms and babies
and significantly degrees is our
postpartum depression and
intimate partner violence
keeping our mom's alive.
Second with paid family and
medical leave. Moms aren't
trying to return to work one or
two weeks after a C section. It
gives people the time to heal.
It keeps me from the moral
injury of telling my patients to
stay home after surgery, knowing
they can't afford to and
relieving that moral injury can
reduce provider burnout and
leaving healthcare.
Finally, a robust paid family
medical leave program will help
New Mexico attract and retain
clinicians, especially during
the significant health care
shortage when we're struggling
to compete with the rest of the
country for doctors,
implementing HB six would ensure
a healthier and more sustainable
workforce. The American College
of OBGYN Support H B six and I
urge you to pass this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um and last we have
Dr Eve s B and I'm getting a
text that she can't unde mute.
So do you see her on there?
Okay?
Well, we we We know how doctors
have to go when they have to go.
So, um
So I guess that will be the end
of, um public testimony and so I
will go back to the sponsors and
see if you have any responses
before we go to the committee
for questions.
I just a few, um, there was
apparently some confusion by Mr
Fanning from the journal
Employees are not the only ones
paying into the program based
under our bill, and I think
there was some confusion about
that, um, with regard to the
mass mutual comment, workers
comp we worked with them, Madam
chair last year, and we
understood that the language
that we adopted was his was
appropriate.
So, um, where, of course,
willing to work with them some
more. But I just want to make it
clear We adopted the language
that they asked us to adopt and
so little disappointed that
we're now having to revisit it,
But I just wanted to to share
that. And lastly, if I could
Address. Um another what? I
guess you might call a myth. I
would. I should have put it in
my original remarks. This bill
does not cause people to become
sick. Nor does it and I'm sure
this is no surprise to you cause
people to become pregnant
And I say that because I often
hear from employers, and that
was in the in the presentations
in the from the public that I
can't afford to have these
people leave well.
They will be leaving.
So if they are seriously ill or
if they have a child or if they
have loved ones who are
seriously ill. This bill
provides a support for their
employees so that they're more
likely to return to work in the
data shows. Madam Chair, they're
more likely to return to work,
thereby avoiding the need for
those employers to incur.
Recruitment, retention costs and
training. So with that I will
close Madam chair. Thank you,
Senator. Serato. Okay. Um so I
on the list I have so far,
representative Cates Jones.
Lord Vincent.
Okay, So representative,
Representative Kate's go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
thank you very much for this
presentation. Um, I just want to
provide a little background for,
um, our audience members and our
voters. Um, I have run many
small businesses and nonprofits.
I've also been a single mom with
kids, and I also now have an
elderly mom that works with me.
So I feel like I sort of walked
around this issue. 360, I will
say and you can, and I'm sure
you will send me an email. Um,
you're gonna pay for safety
program or you're gonna pay for
Workman's comp.
You're gonna pay for an S M l a
program or you're gonna pay
unemployment. I understand how
difficult it is to be a business
owner and the workforce is
managing is very, very
difficult.
Um, And so I absolutely
understand that my question is
my only concern in this bill.
Um, is I've had federal in past
employment. I've had federal,
state and city.
Contracts. When I have a federal
contract, they have a set
boilerplate in all their
contracts that when the
prevailing wage changes the rate
changes that is never true for
state and city, and when you
have if I was selling cookies
and this for somehow reason I
don't see why, but if it was a
financial burden
I may need to raise the price of
my cookies. But when I am in a
state contract for five years
sometimes two, sometimes five
years, there is nothing in this
bill that will protect me and
make that rate be adjusted. And
I will say that is my only
disappointment about the bill
that you've presented today. I
wish there was an amendment or I
hear rumors. You might be
carrying another bill that might
address that, can you
Please follow up.
Thank you, madam. Chair and
representative. Thank you for
your comments and your
observation and I agree with
you, Madam Chair and
representative that our state
contracts should have provisions
that provide for an automatic
mechanism to adjust for costs
that are created by legislation
or regulatory requirements. I
have no beef with that. I have
filed a bill. I think it's house
Bill 194, but it's in that
vicinity and I'd be happy to
work with anyone on
This committee to try to get
that bill over the finish line.
get a message. And if we don't
get a message this year, we can
work on it. Next year. I would
point out that we don't start
drawing. We don't start. Um
The tapping of premiums, I think
till 2026 so we have a little
bit of time to work on it, and
we can make that a priority
because I agree, ma'am, you're
100% with you Represent it. And
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Um uh
Chair chase. Uh, Chandler. I I,
um I come from disability
community providers, and, um,
they are struggling
unbelievably and, um, and and
and they don't need another
hurdle for that, but I do
encourage and employers to
understand that
Um
That it managing workforce is
difficult. I've had it. I've run
my own f m l A. I've abided by
the federal guidelines. I've had
individuals, um, who were taking
chemo on Wednesday and then
they're fine to work on
Thursday, but every Friday
they're sick and so that you
have to be able to adjust my
workforce for such a, uh
A a accommodation and I end up
with a longer term employee. And
so thank you very much.
Thank you. Next is
Representative Jones, followed
by Lord
Thank you, madam Chair.
And thank you. Representatives.
presenter for bringing this
bill, I I think it's important
as we've seen already that we We
share some of our personal
stories. I think the public
needs to know that
When we sit up here as committee
members that were people we have
long histories of often being in
the workforce, and I'm one of
those people and, uh,
So I'm not in the habit of
sharing my personal story in
detail, but I will. It's very
pertinent here. Um
I had seven Children and
Some of those years I spent
raising them as a single mom. Um
I worked all of the time that I
was pregnant and took leave.
Took my, um
My F M l a leave or actually, I
believe it was FMLA leave. It's
been a while now. My kids are
all grown, but but I did take as
much leave as possible. But I
prepared for that by saving up
as much as I could work till the
day I was in labor of possible.
Um, so I have an understanding
of how important it is and how
much moms want to stay home with
their kids and
How much that family unit is
important. Um, I also have a
history of I don't know if I
said this already. I worked as a
registered nurse. So as an
oncology nurse For many years, I
walked through
Giving chemotherapy with
patients of all ages. Babies all
the way to
Some 100 year olds.
Um And so I understand from a
nursing perspective what my
patients went through.
And how much, Um
How much there can be a need for
Um
For a pay leave. Um
So I am the workforce. Um, I
would have loved to take that
paid leave for three months.
Every time I had a baby. That's
21 months, but
I knew that it would burden my
coworkers. And so I also have
this understanding of, um
Of what this would do.
If everyone would get three
months of paid leave what this
would do to our businesses. Our
hospitals are small businesses.
And as a legislator, now I have
to look at all of my
constituents. And so that's what
I plan to do as we go through
this bill.
Um, it would have burdened my
coworkers. My employer.
And most importantly, it would
have burdened my patients.
Because those of us who have
skilled workforce positions are
difficult to replace. And as we
know you don't just find a
nurse.
To replace somebody who goes on
leave.
So I didn't also mention that I
did take I took unpaid leave.
To take care of my late husband
who was dying of cancer. I think
I've had I have every
perspective on this issue.
So I have a lot of concerns.
Um, I won't. Even There's no way
I can get through all my
questions, but I will take my
top few
Did you consult with small
businesses in my district?
District 32, the southernmost
district, southwest, New Mexico.
Thank you, madam Chair Thank
representative again. We've
consulted with businesses across
the state. I mean, we heard from
one in Las Cruces. So I'm and I
know that Dona Ana is a large
county. Uh, I mean again. We
consulted with a number of them.
I don't know the entire
divisions in there, but I
anticipate that, um, regionally
speaking, we did. Um, and one
thing I do want to just point to
that you also mentioned was, um
Any leave would have to be
approved by a healthcare
provider in across the nation.
The average leave is around six
weeks and I can say from my own
experience my mother took off
when I was having a baby Madam
chair and representative that
she didn't take the full time
that she was allotted. She took
less because she also worked at
a hospital and wanted to get
back and my anticipation is that
many Mexicans would share that
same, but I just want to mention
that as well. But it's not
necessarily 12 every year all
the time, but I appreciate it. I
do believe we did head south and
I do not know the exact lines.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative Erato.
Um
So my district is a little bit
different. I'm sorry. I get too
close or too far. It's right
here. My district is a little
different because we are very
rural. The part of Dona Ana that
I have is is rural. It's near
hatch, and we're still suffering
from the shutdowns that were
related to the executive.
Um
Mandating those shutdowns during
Covid are small businesses are
really not recovered yet, so
I'll just I'll just say that
before I go on, go on to my
next, um, concerns here. I want
to look at the bill and on Page
four
Um, line
Line two
Well, I'm 234.
Right. It talks about
Ah!
Who is
Able to take this leave, and it
says any other individual
related by blood affinity Who's
close association with the
employer or employee or
employee, spouse or domestic
partner is the equivalent.
Of a family relationship. The
word affinity is a real problem.
I think because I'd like to know
Madam Chair and representatives.
What definition do you have for
affinity? Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Representative
for the question. Um, this
language is common with a lot of
states and I will point to that,
Um, in the federal if you're a
federal employee that paid
family medical leave that you
have has the same definition and
the intent. Um, I think truly
aligns, Madam chair and
representative with our values
And what family is here in New
Mexico, and I see this a lot in
northern New Mexico.
Um, you know, family is it
expanded you?
Um, and so we want to make sure
that people who are at that
close list I will point out. Um,
truly that when we when you're
asking for healthcare provider
to provide a doctor's note, they
will explicitly say what they're
doing to take care of this
individual And what? Why they're
there. Um, and and Madam chair
and you know again as my mother
works in hospitals, we know the
people that show up are not
there.
On vacation there. They're
taking care of their family
members. So for a lot of the
LGBTQ community for a lot of
northern New Mexico
You don't just sign up to bathe
someone and wipe someone and and
care for their babies. Unless
you have that strong affinity,
So it is there is a national
president that in terms of the
federal government how they
manage their paid family leave,
But then there's also other
states that are doing this as
well. And it does. It does align
with our how new Mexicans take
care of family in our state.
Thank you.
Thank you, representative
Toronto. I think that
The family, um not paid family
leave the federal
F M L A. I don't believe that
affinity is that link in that
language?
I'm sorry, Madam Chair. I didn't
I'll get better, madam. So what
I mean is that if you're if you
work for, um if you're an
employee of the federal
government, um they're paid
family medical Leave that they
have not F m l. A, which applies
to private businesses, but the
paid family leave that is in
place for workers at the federal
level. Um, it is included there.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and representative. Yes,
And I don't even know if we can
really compare this.
Um
But affinity.
Okay, you have you have to say
that it's written here as
affinity, which is actually the
definition is an affection for
Or
A liking to
Someone and and that really
leaves the door open for anyone,
and I'd just like to point that
out.
Um so basically, anyone who has
an affinity for someone
Can take advantage of this. And
maybe it doesn't happen often,
But I think I have to wonder
Madam chair if this would
happen.
If this were in place. How long
would it be before someone says,
you know, I could just
I have a liking to my neighbor
and want to take care of them.
Or, you know, I have an affinity
toward so sorry.
I was supposed to be somewhere
right now. Obviously, I'm not
there.
Um
But how long would it How long
would it be before?
Anyone could take advantage of
it, and people would realize
this is easy.
And because affinity is vague. I
mean, it's I just believe that
it is. So thank you for that.
But Madam chair. Um, I'd like to
move on to
Uh, page five.
And
Section. Oh,
And talk a little bit about
another.
Some more wording, I think is
very vague and it talks about
safe leave.
In quotes, meaning leave for
which an employee can apply for
leave compensation pursuant to
the paid family and medical
Leave Act. This is granted to an
employee who is the victim.
Or whose family member is the
victim of domestic violence,
stalking, sexual assault or
abuse.
This is what they calling safe
leave so madam chair and
representatives the way I
understand this and tell me if
I'm wrong, Anybody who's a
victim
Or any family member who is a
victim.
Um um of of domestic violence.
You can take this leave. You can
apply for this Leave.
If you're an employee
Who, if you are a victim, or if
you're a family member of a
victim, So what's to say that
madam chair representatives that
if my sister, my child who
whoever, somebody even loosely
related to me, or that I have an
affinity to could take this
leave based on this vague
language about safe leave.
And you address that for me.
Please. Um
Madam chair and representative.
Thank you for that question, so
let's first by start by pointing
out that
A lot of domestic violence
occurs in the workplace. We hear
stories frequently met him chair
about, um
People being killed or otherwise
attacked in their workplace, and
it's sometimes even involves
other people. So this this
provision, in part helps to
address that issue. The second
point Madam chair is that, um,
proof will be required as again
there will be some need for, you
know, say domestic violence,
Court order or a police report
that shows there has been a
report of domestic violence so
there are safeguards in terms of
Of the ability or inability I
would say to abuse it. And
lastly, in Cannes in
Mm. Kinetic attack. I believe
there are we have a record of
55,000 claims for the state and
only 13 claims were safe Leave
related, So it's a very rarely
used provision of the law. Madam
Chair.
And representative
Well, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, representative.
Yeah, I appreciate that answer,
but
And I certainly wouldn't. I
don't minimize, um
Anyone being victimized in the
workplace, But it doesn't say
that doesn't say in the
workplace.
It leaves that open.
From what I can tell, it says
Any, um
Medical Leave act that was
granted to an employee who is
the victim or whose family
member is a victim of domestic
violence, stalking, sexual
assault or abuse. Safe Leave
applies if the covered employee
is using the leave from work.
To protect the employee or the
employee's family member.
So anybody that I wanted to call
a family member and had an
affinity to
Who has been victimized in any
way.
Is someone that is a reason to
take this leave according to
what is written in the bill, and
I appreciate what you're saying.
Madam Chair representative. I
do. I appreciate the situation
you described. But in the bill,
it doesn't say that.
So
I can move on.
Um, Madam Chair just under that
On the same page Page five
number one under. Oh,
Seeking a civil protection order
against the perpetrator.
Obtaining medical care or mental
health counseling for the
employee or for the employees,
Children to address physical or
psychological injuries.
Psychological injuries.
Um
Very vague.
Madam chair seeking new housing,
relocating or making the
employees home secure from a
perpetrator. These are all
reasons. Madam Chair
representative in the bill.
To take this leap.
Another attending or preparing
for court related proceedings
are seeking legal assistance to
address issues related to the
act of domestic violence,
stalking sexual assault or
abuse.
Those are all written in the
bill. Madam Chair.
It is so broad and so big. Um,
I'll move on to the next page
Page six.
Under Q. Another reason for
taking this or would be allowed
to taking this leave paid leave
is serious health condition,
which means
I'm not opposed to anybody
taking leave for a serious
health condition. Of course, But
But what does this mean An
illness, injury impairment or
physical or mental condition?
A mental condition.
That involves inpatient care in
a hospital, hospice or
residential medical facility or
continuing treatment by a health
care provider.
Madam Chair representatives.
That's very vague being a
healthcare provider myself. I
know that
Even the words healthcare
provider for a mental condition.
Could be construed as being
stressed out on Friday and
talking to your
Um, pastoral care or your
neighbor who does counseling on
the side.
Um, it could be from where the
way I read it. It could be just
about anything. It's so vague.
Can you address that for me,
please?
Madam Chair and representative,
I trust medical providers.
A medical provider can tell you
whether or not they're inpatient
care in a hospital hospital or
residential medical facility is
needed, and a medical provider
can certainly attest to whether
or not continuing treatment by a
medical health care provider is
needed. And, frankly, Madam
Chair I don't think it's vague
at all. This is, um, language
that is incorporated in many of
the comparable paid family and
medical leave.
Um, and an F M l A. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Um
Health care providers and very
specific. I guess that's my
point is that provide healthcare
provider could be
Um
A mental health tech or a
nursing aid.
A nursing assistant.
So I'll move on. I just pointing
out areas, Madam chair that I
think are very vague and can be
taken advantage of.
Which would make this proposed
bill unsustainable.
So on page 11.
Under G.
Um
And
Substantially similar to or
greater than the leave. You know
what I have to back up an
employer this adopted and
operates a paid family and
medical leave or program for the
benefit of its employees that
provides leave and leave
compensation substantially
similar to or greater than the
leave and leave compensation
offered pursuant to the paid
Family and Medical Leave Act.
May apply for a waiver to exempt
the employer and its employees
from participating in the paid
family and medical leave
program. Can you explain that to
me, please? Madam Chair
representatives.
Madam chair and and
representative, Um
You're referring to the same
substantially Similar language
Madam chair represents that is
language that the chamber asked
us to include. We had somewhat
different language in the bill.
early versions of the bill, and
it's anticipated that through
the rulemaking process the
parameters for this language
will be more fully developed.
Madam chair and representative.
So, Madam Chair representative.
I guess that brings my point is
that I feel like if there's if
there's room for reworking the
wording, which I see a lot of
that here that maybe this bill
isn't ready.
To really be, uh
To move forward.
Um, we'll move on, Please. Madam
Chair. Um, you moved to
Page four.
An employee.
When you back up just a second
before.
Yes, Um
I'm sorry I was page 14.
Sorry. In Section five. This is
new material.
Eligibility leave compensation,
calculation leave duration
notice of determination.
Representative Jones, could I
ask you to give us the line
number? Okay. I'm sorry, because
I That was on 13. It was just
looking at the section. Okay?
Yeah. Just just the line number
where you start so we can very
good follow you. 14. It's line
23 Section D.
An employee or self employed.
individual may receive leave
compensation for intermittently
in increments of no fewer than
eight hours.
So
If you if you put together,
Madam Chair representatives you
put together what we've already
looked at and the vagueness of
who can take advantage of this
and you add to that the fact
that they could take off eight
hours at a time.
Three months of time. Time off,
paid time off eight hours at a
time. If I were stressed out,
Madam chair, which I could be if
I were a stressed out employee
every Friday because Monday
through Thursday was really
difficult. I could take off
every Friday for mental health
Day and I could take that eight
hours.
And and I can get paid, and
that's that is what it says
here. So, um, another point
That's very vague and very
dangerous. I think that would
cause more unsustainability.
And could you address that for
me, please? Madam chair and
representative. Intermittent
leave is provided for under the
Federal Family Medical Leave
Act, So it's not an unknown or
unusual concept. Um, I disagree
that every, uh, an employee
could take every Friday off
unless, of course, a medical
provider.
Provide indicated that that time
was needed, for example, to
receive dialysis treatment
cancer treatment radiation There
will be a substantiation process
that would be involved in the
need to take intermittent leave.
And as I said, Madam Chair, it's
a concept that's well embedded
in these sorts of policies.
Madam Chair, representative. If
that were true if somebody did
need, um
Healthcare every Friday. I would
understand, but according to the
wording here in the bill,
Um, an employee could argue that
they could have a mental health
day. Every Friday. Madam Chair
representative again, they'd
have to documentation from a
health care provider that would
be risking their license of what
exactly that was. And then there
would be a 20 Day review process
with the Department of Workforce
Solutions, and if employer
disputed that they would also
have 20 days to dispute that
back.
So and again, it would have you
know this this calculation of 12
weeks We're not looking at 12
weeks. Most are approved for 6
to 7 weeks, and many people
don't take whole nuts. I just
want to point out that it is not
always 12 weeks, but for our
families.
I will argue in the north that
you know our relationships are
not vague to us. We have
relationships and we're taking
care of each other. That is that
affinity and that is our duty to
do that, and the doctor would
have to substantiate that. We
have data that proves that and
lasting. A woman should
anticipate that intermittent
leave about 22,000 additional
workers to enter our workforce,
helping with our shortage of
work workers that we have today.
So
I want to mention that you
So, Madam Chair representative,
do you? You anticipate that this
bill will cause those workers to
to be added to the workforce?
Madam Chair representative? Yes,
because they would have the
ability to care for themselves,
their families and their
families. Yes, that's what
we've. That's what researchers
down for this bill.
Madam Chair and representative.
Could you direct me to that
research?
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representative was the
center for American Progress
came to 22,000 workers. I'm
sorry. I'm sorry Center for
American progress. Thank you.
Center for American Progress.
Madam Chair representative our
workforce Solutions. Um,
Director Secretary has
information on this particular
point.
Madam secretary.
Um, Serena, and there
Madam secretary. If you're on if
you could raise your hand so we
can find you.
Madam chair. Well, while we
wait, Um, if I may sorry it was
the National Partnership for
women and Families where that
22,000 worker number came from
the National Partnership for
Women and Families. I apologize.
I had the wrong citation Sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
right that down, please. Madam
Chair. Yes. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Jones. We are
familiar with the research that
the sponsor is citing.
We have not done any independent
research on that. And statistic
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
don't know if that I understood.
You have not done that research
in New Mexico, saying that she's
heard our research but that she
hasn't done independently. I
see. Okay. Thank you, Um
So another concern I have on
page 23 the first line. Uh,
It looks as if this would be in
addition to vacation. Well, it
would be in addition to
vacation. Sick leave. I think we
already know that but leave
taken pursuant to the paid
family and medical Leave Act
shall not result in a reduction
of the total amount of leave.
To which an employee is
otherwise entitled.
Pursuant to contract policy
collective bargaining,
bargaining agreement or other
law or rule in excess of the
amount of leave actually taken
pursuant to the paid Family and
Medical Leave Act.
So the way I understand that
This is in addition to all the
other leave that an employee
It has available to them. Is
that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and
representative. It says that it
cannot be counted against, um,
taking this leave cannot be
counted against existing leave
balances, So I think that's a
correct statement would point
out that unless you work for a
very large employer, you're not
going to have very large leave
balances.
Yes, Madam Chair representative,
and I think that's a good point.
I believe I have businesses in
my district who really treat
their employees employees well,
and because of that they have
Uh, very long term employees if
they were
If they were able to do this
kind of paid leave, they would
offer that to their employees,
and that that is brings up one
of my serious concerns about the
big picture in that I've been
told by numerous businesses that
if we pass this that there is a
good chance that they will close
their doors, and we in my
district that, I guess.
It was pointed out to me on on
text that we never really
answered that question. In the
beginning about did you consult
the people in my district? Are
they
Um
The business people in my
district and I don't think that
happened, but but anyway.
I have consulted them, and I've
heard from people across the
board the individuals who be
impacted the workforce, the
business people and that, um,
would this would close their
doors. I honestly believe that
they would they would be
offering this if they could
their place because they know
it's good for their business.
So
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Getting to the end here.
So about funding Madam Chair
representatives. Uh
I understand There is no
funding. There's no
appropriation here. I think we
covered that.
In this bill, but we're
anticipating funding in the
future. If this passes is that
is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair and
representative. There is
capacity in the current budget,
and it is funded.
And this provision if you're
talking about the provisions on
the last page section, 15, madam
chair and representative
provides a, um payback to the
front to the state for the start
up costs. I think it's
unrealistic to think that there
will be no startup costs
associated with setting up such
a program, and we have provided
for them and it is embedded in
the rates that there will be a
payback, Madam chair and
representative
Okay. Thank you for that, Um
I don't have my notes in front
of me, but I if I remember
right, I was told that to create
this If this bill passes and we
create
This.
Bureaucracy, additional
bureaucracy and our new Mexico
government that there were, it
would require 216 and full time
employees to implement this
program.
Is that a number that you're
familiar with?
I will ask the Secretary of
Workforce Solutions to address
that madam chair.
Go ahead, Madam Secretary.
Madam chair. Thank you,
Representative Jones. Yes, That
is our estimate, and we base
that on the estimated number of
claims as you read in the LFC
analysis, there's a pretty wide
swing there, but, um, we
basically think it will be about
the same size as the
unemployment insurance program.
Additionally, when we looked at
other we looked at a number of
other existing programs, and
there are very few that have all
of the functions in one
department from claims the
minister.
Aeration to excuse me to text.
Two appeals to, UM, claims
around protected leave so
That is our best estimate. Yes.
Thank you very much. And chair.
Um
So I'll give somebody else a
chance. But because there are so
many other things we could
address I could address myself,
But I do have a deep
understanding of the intent of
this and and the need for our
workforce to have
To be treated as individuals
really to be treated as
individuals and that there are
needs at times for people to be
off work. I get that.
But we simply cannot afford to
put our business is at risk.
And I believe that this bill is
unsustainable. And because of
that, I can't support it. But
thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Next. We
have representative Lord. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, good to
see you represented. Feels like
we were just here the other
side. I don't just looked at it
and went down. We still here.
Did I never leave?
I just want to say I appreciated
the healthy debate. We had
yesterday gave me enough time to
ask enough questions because you
know as legislators were trying
to make decisions.
Based on what we can in the time
frame that we have
Ah, thank you, representative
for asking so many questions. I
was going to ask. It takes a big
chunk off of me, so I'll try to
hit some of the top ones that
the other representatives still
have time.
So am I understanding correctly,
So there's going to be a startup
costs correct, and that's 36
million, and that's just for the
first year And then after that,
that the tax will take over that
the new fund is that correct.
The startup costs are estimated
to be 36 million, and after
that, after a collection of
premiums for approximately a
year, it will be started to be
there will be a collection of
funds that will be available to
pay it back over. I think a six
year period madam chair and
representative
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. So
Okay?
I'm gonna try to get an overview
of this because I think this is
a bill that needs to debate a
long time and hopefully in the
floor another other way Other
places will get some more
answers.
So
What will happen explain to me
the process of what happens if
we have that money for startup.
I'm trying to figure out because
you Anytime you run a business,
you're trying to start a
business. You always trying to
think of cost. So we have this
36 million
Really? Yeah, that's gonna be a
first.
Okay?
So we have the startup costs
that's coming from our our
funding.
I'm trying to figure out help me
with the transition. So we have
this 36 million and we're going
to pay that back if I'm
understanding correctly.
The tax is coming from the
employer and the people to fill
up that new fund. What happens
if somewhere along the line
It doesn't balance out. There's
more people taking advantage of
the fund than there is money in
there. We're gonna raise the
premiums or what is what happens
at that point.
Madam Chair representative. I'd
like to defer to Secretary Neri
If that's possible. Go ahead,
Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Jones. So my
understanding is that if the
fund reaches a point, there's a
calculation in the build
warehouse solvency is created.
And or are calculated and if we
were to reach that point where
the calculation suggested that
the fund would become insulting
the calculation doesn't wait
until we're in the red. But if
the if the calculation were to
show a risk of insolvency, then
the department would have the
ability to increase.
The premium and I think the
amount of the increase is capped
at and the sponsors can probably
give. The better number on with
the cap is on it. Annual
increase. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. Thank you.
Representative to fill in some
of that, Um, if you turn to Page
eight lines seven. The solvency
is determined at 135%.
So that is where you would not
be at zero in order for it to be
solvent have to have 100 35%.
Um, expensive covered. And then,
um, if you look at Page nine, I
believe it's Yeah, it's on its
section B or one b up line, 12.
It caps how much it can be
increased. 2.1% So 1/10 of a
percent. Um, in looking at every
other state, even those that
went through the pandemic with
this in place.
No one has gone above 1.1%. And
so we anticipate that that will
be similar here. So and then
that 0.1% would be split between
the employers and employees.
Thank you, And so the employee
would take on 0.055%.
And the employer would take on
0.045%. Thank you Mantra That
was going to be my exact next
questions. I'm trying to figure
out how this plays out. Okay.
Um, the other I just want to
make sure I'm understanding on
something I just with. This is
partly in another view. I have a
page on
When when someone is going in.
I have two questions on this. So
if someone goes in for medical
care
And, uh, sorry mental health
or counseling and let's say
They need to go in there. Their
marriage is on the rocks. You
need to go in three times a
week. Is that is that something
that's approved that something
is going to be okay, even though
so, how is that going to work
out there? They're gone Monday,
Wednesday Friday for that, that
counting they've got
appointments, so they have a
child that's very sick.
So they get covered.
But then how does that I'm
trying to get housing employer.
Go have to go and try to find
somebody to work on.
Monday, Wednesday Friday, but
then they're often Tuesday
Thursday with that, is that how
that would play out?
Madam Chair, representative. Um,
I think I got two. We're going
with this question, I think, but
I mean, I'm I will go back to
like the principle that we have
in the state that we trust. You
know, physicians and patients to
physicians and patients to
understand what's best for
themselves and for our patients
so that you know that that no
one else to make those
determinations. So again, the
documentation that needs to be
filled out important HCP
healthcare provider that has a
certificate and his license in
the state.
Um, would have to sign
documentation explaining what
the time is needed for why they
have to take this leave how long
they have to leave for visit
Intermittent. All those details
in they would have 20 days to
submit that to deduct the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, then the employer
could dispute that if that was a
concern for Friday reasons,
let's just say, you know, I
can't afford that for a variety
of reasons. Um and and again.
it's captain. How long so, you
know, 12 weeks if that's it?
Um, the other. I think those are
the big kind of pieces. So you
know again, we're going to trust
the process of the part of this
as we all know, make drafting
legislation is a bit of an art,
right? How much you put in
statute that you can't change
and how much you want to keep
enrolls to ensure that it is a
flexible policy. But again, the
stand that there's there's
protections in place to ensure,
um that those considerations are
taken. Okay, Thank you, Madam
Chair and represents that kind
of
For some reason, I might there
for some reason. I need to speak
louder. Um
So I have explained to me
because
If they had somebody, and let's
just say, I don't know They're
in a restaurant and they're
having a hard time finding
people and that person for
whatever reason has a disabled
child, or they have to go to
therapy and three times a week,
couple times and they're having
a hard time they can't replace
that person.
As horrible as it would be. I
would understand both sides.
They need the time but also
stand the employee side.
How does that dispute process
work? How does that How would
they move forward with saying
this doesn't work for me. I
can't find anybody if they can't
work full time or if they are
not going to take all the time
off. It's not gonna work.
Madam Chair, representative
dispute process relates to
disputing whether or not the
employee has a valid reason to
take the leave, not and and
under which conditions not, um,
a dispute that the law should
apply. If that is kind of the
nature of your question, madam
chair represented
Yeah, Madam Chair and that was
kind of trying to figure out how
the business owner goes about
this.
Because I know it could be very
challenging.
To let somebody go. Especially
don't want to let him go and
you're trying to work with them.
And you can't. I'm trying to
figure out how they would
resolve that. But I'll move on
from that.
Um so
I'm just asking a question. This
one's gonna be probably more
challenging. Answer. Um, I know
because someone could take time
off for foster care. I'm glad
that that's in there.
But in New Mexico, most Children
unfortunately, stay in foster
for 30 days.
I'm saying if somebody was doing
something to first without and
took more time off, how I'm
trying to get to
Because we know if they see a
doctor right or therapist and
they have to prove that they
have to do the paper. But if
they're just taking time off or
something that they can't prove,
then how does that work out?
With the, um how How would they
There would be no way to knowing
whether the reason they took the
time off. They're still using
unless there was a doctor
involved a therapist correct.
Madam Chair and representative
Lord, I
There is in, um
A later section of the bill, I
would have to take a second to
find the line and page number.
Um, but information about how
these are verified and the birth
adoption or foster of a child
would be documented. You don't
go through those legal processes
without documentation, and so
that documentation would come
from
Um, other kinds of leave. Which
would I mean, I'm sorry. Other
kinds of, um
Professionals and that would be
established through rules
through the Department of
Workforce Solutions. I'll also
point out that this is the
inclusion of adoption or foster,
Um
Is included in Family Medical
Leave Act. It's included in all
of the other states and the
Abuse and fraud is incredibly
rare in every state that this
is, um
That this has been enacted in We
don't see people, falsifying
documents or having someone sign
off on something that isn't so
you know, those are all legal
documents that can be submitted
alright and absolutely, Madam
Charon and representatives agree
It starts on page 20. What I was
trying to imply is that there
are still ways around it.
That
If let's say somebody did get a
foster child and God bless all
the people that take in foster
Children. If let's say this was
a person that was and on the up
and up and take it.
And they wanted to
And they wanted to take more
time off. I guess, saying that's
one of the loopholes and
unfortunately whole because they
could get documentation that
they're now foster parent. It's
only 30, but they take the whole
time. That's all I was trying to
say, is that there's a way
around it.
Um, also sorry. Somebody's just
gonna note on something.
So the dispute all of the
requirements on employee side.
Is science statement by anybody,
and that's on page 21 lines one
through six so it could be
signed by anyone or does have to
be a specific person. I'm sorry
I haven't looked at that yet,
And that's on page 21 line one
through six. Let me get there,
too.
21 lines.
Six.
Um And so how about we do this
on page 21?
Line three. Can you define what
an advocate would be?
That might help explain some of
this.
Madam chair.
Madam Representative. What
section apologize. We're okay.
Hold on. We're in.
It starts in 20 See line 23. The
department should require an
employee or second point of
visual six safe leave
compensation that we jump over
here and it, says Police report
a court issued document or a
science statement from Victim
Services Organization that makes
sense of clergy member attorney
Or an advocate. What would an
advocate be?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I would go back to page 20,
Okay? And you will note that it
says Excuse me.
In accordance with department
rules. Which line are you on,
Madam Trump? Sorry, age 29 25
20, Okay.
And Madam chair. It's my
expectation that as part of this
development of department rules,
there will be a development of
definitions related to these
listed items. Madam Chair and
representative
Okay, Madam Chairman when I was
just pointing out is I see the
police report that makes sense.
The court issued document.
Or
An advocate. I would like to see
some further explanation what
that would be. Maybe they're
saying
I mean, I guess it could be
somebody who has
Your health takes care of your
health. But that would be
something totally different. I'm
just if you could get with me at
some point tell me what it
advocate is because I'm not
quite sure how this plays into
them. Signing something of what
What your definition is of what
an advocate would be to sign off
on this document because we want
to make this as legit as
possible, and I had that once
more on the big side, So I do
have some questions about
Okay with work because I was
trying to go through and there's
a lot of stuff to go through.
That requires a lot of debate on
this bill. Um, so the other
question I had is. Oh, sorry. I
thought I said Mount Chair,
Madam chair. Come quick question
before we get to that one does
this include day laborers, or
were they excuse? I know
somebody brought that up or they
excluded from this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representatives so they
would have to have worked in the
past six months.
Ah to qualify for this within
the past 12 month period, right?
So, so, 12 months you have to
work at least six months of that
period. Okay? I mean, again when
we use the term day labor again
or they're filing a 1099. You
know, there's a lot of detail in
there, Madam Chair
representative on what that
would look to look like. So, um,
you know, just depends on a lot
of those pieces like, um, For
example, Madam Chair
Representative. Yeah, I think
I'll leave that Okay, Manager,
so I was trying to figure
because you know, there's
different types employees,
There's contractors and I'm
trying to forget my husband's a
contractor. How he plays into
that. I know some people that do
day labor and I
I need, you know more comments
represented, just, you know, um,
self employed individuals like a
contractor would be able to opt
into this program. 5%. Yeah.
0.5% 5/10 of a percent. So so
Madam Sharon and ribs it So
somebody who is
A contractor for Landel.
Would be able to opt into this.
Because they're you know how
they have big contractors hire a
lot of people Would they be
exempt or altogether or they
because they're hired outside of
flannel?
Um, Madam Chair representative,
Um Los Alamos National Lab
certainly hires companies who
are contractors. Subcontractors
to them. They those
subcontractors are the employer
right? So that employer, of
course, would be contributing
the 0.4% and their employees
would be contributing the 0.5%.
Unless, of course.
They qualified for a waiver or
an opt out as we're calling it,
Madam Chair or representative?
Okay, And that brings you to
another question. Madam Chair. I
noticed that there are some
exceptions. I also know that
pueblos are allowed to be exempt
with their specific reason to
add them specifically in there
for exemption. Madam Chair
representative that isn't
acknowledgement their sovereign
Um, nation and then we cannot
compel them. But we madam chair
give them the opportunity to
participate Should they so
choose.
Okay, Um
I'm going to ask this question.
Probably not afflicted
mentioned. What about land
grants? Can they also opt out of
that as well?
Because they're kind of in
between that madam chair in
representative if they provide a
substantially similar, um,
program Madam Chair
representative. They can as
other employers can. Okay, So
the last couple questions I
have Madam chair is going to be
out about workforce solutions. I
didn't see And maybe you can
find it on here for me.
I know that What? What's going
to happen? I know Workforce
solutions can handle. But what
are we going to do? How many
more employees are going to need
to hire? How much is that going
to cost them? Or they're gonna
need new computers and phones
and para. How much is that going
to cost Workforce solutions to
get this up and going to handle
all of this paperwork.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. We worked
significantly. I think I can say
with the Department of Workforce
Solutions to come to the again
that $36 million starting amount
to get staffed up to also get
the I t necessary. Um and I will
say in some of the conversations
with small businesses, they
welcomed an expansion of DWS
overall process claims more
quickly.
Okay, so madam chat rooms and so
that 36 million is going to come
in from because I know that
everything is a cost. That's why
DPS always gets mad at us
because we throw things at him,
and we always never give them a
cost to do it so
What about for long term for the
employees and the pair for those
new employees? Is that going to
come out of that taxation to the
employees and the
Business owner and employees.
It's out where that's going to
be representative. It would come
out of the fund. Yes, thank you,
Um
There was another question I
had, but it's eluding me, so
maybe I'll wait for it to get on
the floor. Um, unfortunately,
there's not enough time for me
to have
To make a decision. When I can't
make a decision I always do. No,
on the sake of I don't know
until it gets out to the floor.
Also, we heard a lot from
Some of my people in my
district. Um farmers, ranchers.
I have to stand with them. They
stood out some of the business
people in my district do not
want this bill, so I have to
stand with them and I get really
concerned about
Mostly my ranchers and farmers
who have
Um
Hard enough time trying to find
somebody and I don't want to be
punitive to them. So for that
reason I will be voting No on
this bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative Vincent
and remember the police stay on
the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, presenters. Thank you.
Representatives.
Where I know you have good
intent on this bill. I'm looking
at it as an employer, and I'm
looking at it as an employee.
And as an employee, I know it's
favorable and as an employer,
it's not as favorable
So the questions that I have,
I'm just trying to to get that
middle that middle ground.
And I worked for a municipality.
So I understand the FMLA and the
sick leave and stuff, and so
What I was. What I wanted to
know is, um
You know, whenever I Whenever we
go to work, we started curing
sick Leave.
And, um, we get to bank that
sick leave.
And if somebody is
More sick than the next person.
Then we all used to come
together as a group and donate.
Are sick Leave.
So that that person was good.
If they got to the point where
the person was not good anymore.
And we couldn't donate any more
time.
They were able to go on F M l A,
which gives them up to one year.
To get their affairs in order.
That's what our municipality
did.
F M L A would give you up to a
year we in that that
municipality would have to hold
your position.
And at the end of that year if
you were not well enough to come
back to work, or in my case, I
was a firefighter, so if you are
not fit for duty
Then you had to. You had to
vacate the position.
And I'm wondering
And maybe you can help me
understand this? Why we have to
have legislation.
Whenever we have a lot of these
municipalities that have
everything that I just explain.
Why can't
We let employees employees
bargain with their employers,
And I'm not saying bargain like
union if your union bargain if
you are just an employee in your
nonunion shop, then just bargain
for
That particular benefit.
Madam chair.
Um Madam Chair and
representative, Um, I'm pleased
to know that your county
provides you with sick leave and
vacation and that you have a
group of employees are willing
to participate. However, um not
all counties or municipalities
offer such programs, nor can
they offer such programs.
Because, um, the individuals
really relying on them to take
their full wages. In this
instance small county small
municipalities are paying small
premiums and we went through
that earlier so that their
employees can participate in the
fund. So I am I appreciate your
perspective, however, it does
not apply to all, um
Governmental entities that have,
um, perhaps the tax base that
your community has, Um, so
that's why it's needed. And if,
in fact your employer has a
comparable substantially similar
plan, they have the option of
opting out. So, um, I'm not sure
I see what the concern is, Um
Madam Chair and representative.
Instead of a madam chair instead
of legislation.
I'm just looking at a free
market of free approached this
To where employees could talk to
their employers.
Instead of a $36 million and I,
madam chair. I don't mean to get
off the subject.
And I'm not even going to say
the word but I I can spend that
36 million. Our kids are not
okay.
And I could find a better way if
we could take an approach where
we could sit around the table
like ladies and gentlemen, and
bargain this stuff because the
workforce participation
It's not good.
And since Covid
Right before coming up. Here are
our local subway was paying 16
bucks an hour.
And sign on bonuses.
It's not that they don't wanna
help with their employees. They
want to do what's right with
their employees.
I personally am. I have a small
business and I don't know what I
would do with my employees.
I have a foreman back home. I
wouldn't be able to come here if
it wasn't for him.
So I appreciate my employees and
when they need something I do as
much as I can to give it to him.
Just looking for why can we not
take a free market approach? And
maybe you have an answer for
that?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative of the
question. I want to give you two
quick briefings. Brief examples
with my two daughters. When I
was pregnant with my first I had
a handshake agreement that they
would be able to give me 12
weeks paid family medical paid
leave and they remove that
option from me. Uh, and and that
was taken away. And so I was
struck without that time off
that I was anticipating. Um, And
what did I do? I did what
Thousands. Millions of people
do. I left that employment and
so they had to do a new job
Search.
To find somebody new. Luckily, I
found a great employer who I'll
always adore who took me on and
let me have time. Waste my my
daughter and I established
breastfeeding stabbed. We breast
fed for about a year today,
American Academy of Pediatrics
recommends breastfeeding for two
years.
And if I view mastitis that
tongue ties all those elements
of breastfeeding is very
difficult, so I'll always always
cherish that second employee
that came in with my next job
with my next daughter. I had a
nonprofit that gave me three
weeks. They've cobbled it
together and they gave me three
weeks of paid time off. But with
my second daughter had a C
section, And so that is a long
recovery and especially of
stairs. Just fun fact very
difficult.
And so, um, but I wanted to
mention because they did
everything they could. That was
equivalent of $5000 for them to
spend. Just on me. A colleague
of mine husband was very sick.
They couldn't diagnose what he
had, Which is why some of these
terms have to be a little bit
broad and and she also would
have cost them that around 5000.
We got paid around the same.
That's $10,000 for two employees
taking out the four called the
full budget for that non profit
was a million dollars.
But let's just say that was on
that, even though the payrolls
distraction that had this been
in place, they would have been
paying $4000 a year and they
would have been able to give us
that flexibility and then they
would have had those funds on
hand to have people step in. Now
I have a you know, I do certain
work. My colleague just certain
work, but we all could kind of
contribute and we've seen in
other places where workers don't
have that and they leave. And
then those places like one of my
childcare facilities, they had
to reduce their hours from 530
PM Pick up to three PM pick up
and instead of just
That for the 12 weeks that those
those mothers would have been
out
They had to do that. Madam chair
and representative for two
years, So our pickup was reduced
by two hours for that long And
so those are the those are just
kind of examples that in my own
experience, But I know a number
of the workers and the families
that are here today have
individual ones of this is why
we all have to pull together to
get a fund that solvent that we
can really pull through. And and
also with that I apologize went
on, let alone
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
know you're not gonna let me
pull the audience, so I'm not
even going to do it so I won't
even try it.
But
I would love to know and don't
raise your hands or I'll get in
trouble.
I would love to know how many
people in here are employees and
how many people
On businesses.
And you see the disparity.
And I see, I think that I think
that, um
You have the employees have one
way of looking at things.
And the employers have another
way and what you said.
I wish we could go back to where
we could shake hands and that
was a deal.
And if you shake my hand, it is
a deal. I'll guarantee you that
However, you know, I guess we're
just not in that. I wish that we
could get to the point where our
employees and our employers
could have a relationship and we
were not having a pass stuff
like this.
Then they have their own
autonomy. They can make their
own deals and we don't have to
get involved so
Thank you for that.
Next question, Madam Chair is
how will employees how will
employee contributions be
collected? Will it be in payroll
deductions? Madam Chair
representative? Yes.
Okay?
How much will this cost the
state as an employer.
Madam chair. I don't have that
information. I imagine it will
be in a future F I r. Okay.
Thank you, Madam Chair and the
state of New Mexico has its own,
uh, paid parental leave program
based on
Executive orders 2019-0 36 and
2020-062
How would that How would this
affect that?
And with the state get a waiver.
Um
Mhm, representative Vincent They
have talked repeatedly about how
if you have a substantively
similar, you can opt out so it
would be the same for Let's try
and just cover new ground. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, but do
they get a waiver?
I need to know that
Madam chair, and I'm sorry if we
haven't been clear if there is a
substantially similar plan, the
employer may apply to opt out or
you might call it waiver. It's
the same language we're using.
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, madam Chair.
And, um, So is this making
workforce solution? The third
wheel
Madam Chair representative. I
don't know what that means. Is
this making works for solution?
Uh, third wheel leave. This
generally arranged through a
company's HR department.
And now, so if I'm an employee,
and I want to take this leave, I
don't go to my HR department. I
go to Workforce Solutions, which
my HR department is going to be
completely left in the dark. Is
that right? Madam Chair
representative. The employee has
to provide notice to the
employer that they are applying
for this leave through the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, Madam Chair and
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And what
would that whenever they do tell
their employer
How much notice do they have to
give
Madam chair.
Well, Madam Chair
representative 20 days. If one
can plan for it, I think we all
recognize the new certainly as a
fire official understand that
there are accidents and so on
emergencies that cannot be
planned for in that way, Madam
Chair representative, Right? And
thank you, Madam chair, So I
come from a real place and
that's what I'm trying to get
wrapped around in. My simple
little mind is
Where am I going to find that
skilled labor for three months
whenever I'm short staffed
anyways.
Um, Madam Chair representative
right now, and this has come up
before this leave does not
create an illness. It does not
re create the need. It addresses
the need and you will lose that
employee, regardless of whether
or not this plan is in place.
And in fact, if this plan is in
place, you're more likely to see
the individual return to the
workplace.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So in a municipality like I
worked for
Do you have to exhaust your
cured? Sick leave before you
apply for this Leave, Madam
Chair representatives is some is
I'm assuming some of this will
be in rule that's not written
into your bill. So let's try and
stay. What's actually in? I
mean, a lot of stuff will be
done through rule so that there
will be flexibility for
inflation. For whatever, Um, a
pandemic whatever may come.
So let's let's try and stick to
what's in the bill, as opposed
to what might be in rule.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So in this
bill, uh, those are separate. So
you would take your paid family
medical leave that was approved.
And then you would still
technically have your sick
leave, Presuming, as we all
know, after personality gives
birth babies have to go doctors,
etcetera. So thank you. Thank
you for that.
And I'm not trying to be a jerk.
I'm just trying to get my mind
wrapped around this because I've
got so many questions and Madam
chair. Um
And representatives do we need a
definition of the word timely?
It is used in in H B. 63 times
in section 913 and 14.
What is timely, Madam Chair
representative. We do not need a
definition of timely that will
be interpreted through rule.
Madam Chair.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all I have.
Thank you. I just have a couple
of things myself. So as many of
you know, I have a son with
autism, and when he was young,
he required occupational and
speech therapy. Two days a week.
My husband and I both worked.
although when we applied for
Social security for him, we were
advised one of us to quit work
so we could qualify, which, um,
Kind of struck a nerve. But
anyway, so my husband had more
flexibility of his work, so he
took
Um, F l m A. So not only were we
paying hundreds of dollars a
week for therapy, we were also
losing his time at at being
paid. So, so that happens to a
lot of families. Not everything
is, you know, 12 weeks and it's
done. His condition is lifelong.
and I'm glad you talked a little
bit about turnover. You know if
you're pregnant, and you don't
have leave
And you, you go on. You're gonna
probably not go back to that
company because you just and so
turnover and recruiting and
training and all those all those
costs can be decreased through
this, Um
And then, um, you know, I view
this not so much as a tax as an
insurance plan and insurance
plan for the employee and for
the employer, uh, so that that's
just how I look at it, and we
really need to start looking at
things upstream. You know, we we
talk about crime. We talk about
por education. It all stems from
early childhood. Essentially, um
and so we're trying to go
upstream instead of paying for
prisons later, we can pay for
two.
12 weeks for Mom or dad to be
able to to bond with that baby.
And I'm not sure. Um
Where I read this, and I tried
to find it, but I read something
recently. That said, Are we
going to let the greater good be
the victim of a few bad actors?
So, of course, everything we do?
There's a chance that people are
going to cheat. I mean, that's
just that's human nature or
whatever you wanna call it, so
the fact that we're going to
prevent, you know 99.5% of
people from having this benefit.
To punish the 0.5. To me. It's
just wrong and this is the right
thing to do. And I will go to
representative the pan ski
Thank you, Madam Chair, I would
move a do pass on House Bill
six.
So we have a motion from
representatives of pants Key and
a second from representative
Travis.
And please call the roll.
No representative Cates
represented cases Yes.
Representative Chavez? Yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lord No.
Represent representatives. Capan
ski? Yes.
Representative Vincent No.
Um, Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam Chair? Yes.
By a 6 to 3 vote with one
Excuse. Do you have a do pass
it?
And we have been excused from
the floor. But, um, I think we
probably should end now and we
will. We will roll house Bill
11 and we will be meeting on
Saturday. We have to figure out
when we can get a room. And when
we would so if you have other
committees members that are
meeting on Saturday.
Please send me a text and let me
know what time they're meeting
so that we can try to avoid
conflict, But I'm not promising
anything. Thank you. Thank you,
Public.
Friday.
Fighting.
830
