It warns so I will be
As usual it out vice chair will
take over if needed so go ahead
and call the roll.
The case here Representative
Travis here.
Here Representative kind of meal
here Representative Townsend
Here.
Representative Lord.
Representative Nancy.
Representative is here.
Vice chair here.
Madam chair.
Here I am the.
We have.
Yeah.
The first bill that will here
today is house bill forty two
public health and I just was so
you'll see.
Is the forty four is a well
known this time so let me just
let.
Representative then.
To use.
Before.
Can.
The mobile.
Senator hers.
I.
They're willing worry that
percent of CS expertise to cope
with Senator NIKIL will do one
of those killed forty two.
The.
The.
Then.
Stephanie.
Okay.
Madam for the quarter.
Thank you.
This.
With.
The.
Okay.
That's.
Thank you.
Yes.
The morning madam chair and
committee members.
For short while they.
Moved ahead and then I need
this here we to to live have
members we will start forty two.
If that works there.
We start with forty as I do have
an effort with forty six.
But I don't work.
Sorry everyone if you're new to
the legislature this is.
This.
A full.
Thank you madam chair this is a
simple bill that I've been
running for quite a few years
and I have no idea why it won't
pass but so it's called
non traditional communication
right for you have a story for
you.
So think of a man with autism
you can hear a lot of offices
and stories who got picked up by
his job from here by his
provider.
And then had to go to the
bathroom so they were rushing
and they got stopped by the
police and the man with office
and saw there was a bathroom so
he jumped out of the car and ran
the police folder.
And luckily the caretaker was
able to.
Takum down essentially but those
kind of things happen we hear
all the time about people who
you know for one reason or
another for acting strangely and
so what this bill does is it
allows you to register your car
and it's totally volunteer and
no one has to do with you can
check a box that says either the
driver or someone in the car may
have a disability and I also
have.
Transaction when you get stopped
by the police what do you do I
read to my pocket to get my card
and while they're yelling hands
up don't shoot and your point in
your pocket but things could
happen so we when you register
your car you check a box you
find in the rules will determine
what you have to find some sort
of medical proof that that you
have ordered or if someone in
the car may have a disability.
And so when the police stop you
they run your plate and it will
pop up that driver's death or
person in the car has autism or
anything like that and I talk
with police from all over the
state the more we know the
better and and I'm a hundred
percent behind it it's totally
it's totally voluntary but it's
it's to protect the officers who
may not know what they're
getting into and the person with
a disability so that's pretty
much what it is.
Thank you madam.
Percent of.
So of do you have an expert I do
not this is all my all right so
then we'll go to the audience
and are there will pursuit
opposition is there any
opposition to the bill.
Six are there any in favor of
the bill.
Okay I see three people and
would you like to speak I don't
recognize all the nations you
don't want to see you do want to
speak please stand.
Hi there my name is Jenny
Sinclair and I just retired
after teaching specialist for
thirty years.
So I'm very familiar with some
of the need to be with people on
the autism spectrum and they can
be really triggered by.
This bill could really really
prevent some Senator.
Gary Varvel population.
Thank you.
Another feature mail you yes
ma'am.
That.
That the
many of you see here a lot and
you see using sign language and
not using sign language and it's
because I have three TV this.
And I have what's called the
trade processing disorder that
was exacerbated to the wearing
masks and I didn't really
understand how much every the
food and during that time and so
it's been a time of day isn't
transition for me but even and
looking after the use of state
the nine eight eight nine four
try and incorporate of the best
support percent disabilities who
have different needs of what
would you do service dog what
would you do if you needed this.
As a communicating understanding
or proper Salford's feel that
your state working out the state
so I do support for a bill of
Madam chair representative
Thompson and co chairman for the
committee because I think
provides additional have access
that may.
encountered some site chase with
those reference that's the same
way.
Thank you I stand for.
Thank you very much I will go to
the committee we have any
questions from the committee.
You have one of your main I'm
sorry I didn't see that one
please.
There was madam chair and.
My name is crystal or the public
policy officer for the ark of
New Mexico we represent people
with
disabilities throughout the
state of her number I will
office or or hearing of other
diagnoses that would make it
very difficult for them.
A difficult matter what law
enforcement so for New Mexico
strongly stand behind those
things.
Johnson.
Thank you thank you have on this
in the body else.
All right thank you will go to
the committee.
The members of Representative
Hotmail Representative Johnson
representatives.
Chair of madam chair.
Thank you for bringing this bill
to lights and I know that we had
discussed it as well I also have
a child with autism and in our
small town unfortunate that I do
go to the police department and
explain what her needs are so
that they they look out for her
when she's walking
my fears there's a new officer
what happens and I know that the
that the officers appreciate the
fact that they would know but
the onus of having to go to
every police officer in my
community is very.
If we lived in a large city that
would be possible so thank you
for bringing this to the
forefront so that we can really
support individuals and and
living their best life and and
integrating back into the
community.
Thank you.
What will she it's not just for
autism in deafness it's can also
be for bringing to the for some
a seizure disorder that
structure I flashing lights of
up to two police vehicles if we
don't limit I don't limit what
it is but those are just some
examples.
So madam chair Representative
Representative Jones would you
excuse me just once we miss to
people that
and we just want to make sure we
don't miss them so we're going
to go to the so and I want to
remind all of our speakers
providing public comment thank
you do have two minutes we do
have a timer and we're first
going to LA pints.
This
looks to see here.
You're on mute.
All types and we stand.
Hello would you start enrollment
we had not unmuted on our side
and we didn't hear you two
minutes will.
Okay and I will be two minutes
I'll be very quick Ellen plans
representing the disability
coalition we represent the
interests of persons with
disabilities of all types and we
stand in support of this bill
encounters between police and
persons with disabilities and as
Representative Thompson has
pointed out this applies to
people with various kinds of
disabilities but those
encounters often turn very ugly
up to and including the death of
a per person who all does not
respond to a order from an
officer simply because they
didn't hear it or they're unable
to address the situation and
conform to the order I think
would be very helpful to both
the police and the people with
disabilities to have this
information available to the
officers who are engaged in
these encounters so we do archer
supported this measure thank
you.
Thank you Mr I will go to Heidi
Rogers.
Hi everyone.
I'm Heidi Rogers and I am a
family nurse practitioner and an
educator here in New Mexico I'm
here to speak to house bill
forty two but since we're
talking about this one as a
primary care provider taking
care of folks with disabilities
I think this is an absolutely
fantastic idea something that we
would that we would all really
appreciate and so I just wanted
to say J. I think it's great.
Thank you thank you Mr Rogers
we'll go to the car up.
Hello chairman and committee of
this actually letters on tag
here coming to you as an
individual private citizen who
is a retired law enforcement
officer I did twenty years with
the Albuquerque police
department I appreciate the
the bill sponsor and all those
who are speaking for the need to
have a method to alert police
officers when I do a traffic
stop the committee a driver or
occupants with a disability.
I am opposed to this bill from
the perspective of that it has
language that that requires
officers to.
Check the database in some cases
it looks like prior to making a
car stop so that flashing lights
will be used yes there's.
Does have a disability that it
could trigger
right now all the morale and and
you know policing is harder than
ever and there's no requirement
on the amendment in this regard
is not going to be helpful I'd
much prefer if I were still
making car stopped myself you
have the ability for a lot of a
car or driver to put a sticker
on the back window of their car
learning officers that.
With disabilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak I.
Not the and could you pass this
bill problems that would cause
creating and maintaining a
database and of itself is much
more difficult in the south yes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much now will go
Representative Jones thank you
chair representative I I share
the sentiments about
being a very good thing for the
officers and the person who's
being stopped tax information is
really helpful the more
information the better but says.
I do want to ask you about the
implementation of this and I
have questions concerns officers
and and the way it's implemented
there's no recreation and yet if
we created the database that to
me that serial software huge
expense a lot of
Time involved in training and
that and that sort of thing the
possibility that it may not be
used because it would be it like
you said additional staff they
would have to take me to the
timing of it would be yes I are
so as I'm just I'm just
wondering have you looked at
different ways to implement
this.
Madam chair I have my first
thought was a sticker on the
license plate and the deaf
community immediately came out
and said we are already targeted
if we have that on our license
plate everyone knows that you
know we've got an issue and so
they said absolutely not so that
that was my first thought and
that it will not be a separate
thing if you just according to
officers I've spoken with and I
decided a few years I've had
officers as expert witnesses
basically a bunch of stuff when
they hit when they put in the
license a bunch of stuff comes
up this will just be one more
thing this is not a different
databases so to this will be
incorporated with the and that
the system that's out that they
are do you.
At the thank you I was away
Madam chair representative I'll
get it.
That from what I understand they
have a software called tapestry
that they use already and and I
think if if there's a
possibility of adding that as
a question.
That just comes up like you said
in addition to everything else
that doesn't require another
staff for this does indeed may
have an issue.
For.
I would be in favor of that but
I don't see that.
Area.
What works madam chair work
pretty much leaving it up to the
department to figure we don't
like to put in there you know
what software do you use or what
whatever because then if any new
software comes along they switch
programs that we have to review
the loss of the and we've
they're the experts so we let
them we let them decide how how
that that's the rule not in the
law.
Thank you.
Thank you we'll go to
Representative Madam chair
representative.
As a retired first responder and
running a lot lots and lots of
calls.
Would you say that this is of a
rare occasion.
Would you happen to have a
percentage of.
How often it does act madam
chair no because there's no way
to track I mean you know when it
when an officer right to take it
or whatever they don't say you
know the driver with gaps so
there's there's no one keeping
that kind of data I have a son
with autism he's thirty almost
thirty two years old it's
happened to us what.
so it's not something that's
going to be happening every day
I would gas you know he David
statewide but you just think
about how much how often you
speed or do whatever and don't
get stopped so it's not like
it's going to be you know.
cases that day it may be a
hundred cases a year I have no
idea but based on our.
Fund our experience it's very
very.
Madam vice chair representative.
I I feel for this because my
sister in law as well as in our
office to child.
But I I've never encountered it
the whole twenty five years that
I was there in in order to
implement a whole new software
system and.
Tapestry.
And the the of the money that's
going to be put into that for
the small percentage of calls
that they do wrong I would not
be in favor of that what what
what I would like to ask you
vice chair representative is yes
do you believe there's a way
that we can work with the
existing MVD database to where
we didn't have to create because
I like to build I just don't
want to spend the money that
that's that's big madam chair
that's the plan is that in the
come up with just an extra box
of what you are you do when you
register your vehicle and it
won't be it won't be a whole new
database if I you know it's rare
but we don't want to be on the
national news where police
officer shoots that did a deaf
person dead or a kid with autism
who is acting weird things you
have that to me it's work it may
be several thousand dollars to
get it up and running to save
one single life because we hear
about it all over the country
all the time so it's a rare
thing but it would be a tragedy
if if we I personally feel if we
don't pass this and something
happens to someone with a
disability and then the
liability around that in all I
mean you know you have to weigh
the costs benefits and to me
saving a life is is worth a few
thousand dollars if indeed
that's what it will cost.
Madam vice chair representative
I'm very familiar with the
south's and it's not going to be
a couple thousand dollars is
going to be excessive because
it's software and it's
integrated and like the officer
spoke you know it's one more
step that they have to take and
as as police officers nowadays
you know I would like to help
them.
Understand about you know this
this proposed bill here and what
your concerns are and you don't
really work with the police
officers and make sure that
they're trying.
And the ones that I know in my
community like here in
Albuquerque you know
everything's through the through
their laptops in my community
they literally called into their
piece up.
And they're they're they're
running
The running stuff like felony
stops you know people that are
dangerous and then you know
that's the the priority and the
and we go to.
Then what we're going to go to
the database that you're talking
about and I'm all for it as long
as it doesn't cost money and we
can we can it's a great the M.
MVD database into the into our
local peace up.
Madam chair that's my
understanding that that will be
helpful C. will not be an extra
that that will just be me like
anything else that comes up when
you're stopped it will just be
one more piece of information
and there's no mandatory think
about what the officer has to do
and all the officers I've talked
to including you president
state.
Knowledge is power the more we
know the state for we all are
so.
It even if it to me saving a
life is worth a little
investment and over the long
haul not having a lawsuit that
makes the department look bad
that makes the statement that is
worth more than it's not going
to be all new software it's just
gonna be adding a box on your
DMV do registration.
Madam vice chair representative.
Did you happen to get a FIR from
the state police
it Madam they don't do FY are
safe you if they are sure that
the person who was doing the FY
are
let's see the are requests that
and they can't force people are
departments to reply so as I
said I I work with the state
police over the years I've
worked with Albuquerque police
and the sheriff's office and
they were all in favor of the
idea.
Vice chair representative thank
you for your.
Thank you of the any of the I'm
sorry Representative Kate thank
you madam chair and and two of
Representative shared
for this as well I just want to
clarify because I took time to
to redevelop the bill clearly
says adding fuel to the existing
statewide database which all
please use of a may have their
own way of accessing it all use
the same one is adding new fuel
I was part of of passing the
bill many years ago that added
fuel to such databases well for
he cap parking and so I I'm I'm
aware of the process I am just
I guess I'm asking because I
didn't see anything that the
hindered it is that vehicles
that are transporting multiple
individuals with different
abilities that come from
provider groups are Senators
they would also be eligible to
register that vehicle correct
yes and thank you again I would
also state that this is not just
saving the life of the
individual with disabilities
this is the life of the peace
officer they don't want to be a
threat needs and they want to
stay safe and they don't want to
end up party someone was
mistaken and their behavior and
so I I would think that it would
be safe to individuals and thank
you very much.
We'll go to Representative
Thomas.
Madam.
Is there anyone in opposition to
the.
Yes if I if if no one was in
opposition we would just move
forward but I just okay thank
you so
We'll do a roll out of state.
Representative K..
Yes.
China yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
This is.
Yes.
Representative Jones yes.
Representative stands yes.
Representative.
No but with an explanation
please okay the the only reason
I'm voting no is because I need
to know that this is not going
to be a software issue and a lot
of money being spent if there
was an ingredient in the only
and there was no for fiscal and
that that I would vote yes for.
Yes.
And madam chair yes.
To madam of the lotus eight in
favor of a do pass of one
opposition you have in the past
thank you.
Both moved to house bill forty
two okay.
So madam chair mission I will
just get it started and renting
Education.
Thank you.
Funds are here on here.
Thank you.
Would you please introduce
yourself and to do.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair members of the committee
expressed in or yes
representative position for you
to.
House I'm honored to be here
with my expert witness trusted
more.
start he'll answer lots of
questions as of each reporting
two response to our state's need
to protect vulnerable and
impacted communities as we
experience more and more climate
of the.
We've seen an increase in lots
of health issues including
respiratory diseases like asthma
COPD we know after this spring
and summer how dangerous wild of
wildfire smoke is health I live
in impacted community Intel's
County we saw lots of issues
related to the welfare of the
pecan and fire that feels that
fire last for months and months
and months
And that and I know that we we
have lots of ways in which our
address is that this bill
addresses the impacts of climate
change in two fundamental ways
of first establishes a health
and Clemente program that works
in collaboration with agencies
statewide secondly it creates a
public health and climate
resiliency Fund that makes
grants to tribal nations and
just entities to prepare for and
respond to public health
emergencies related events and
I'm I'm happy to answer any
questions from the committee.
So it was just like your expert
to make this yes thank you very
much Representative Madam chair
representative on the committee
I am Charles good marker in this
state we have a New Mexico
voices for children.
To tell you about this bill.
Our health district changing
climate.
Threats are here now.
New Mexicans are ready suffered
physical and mental health
consequences because changes
that happen requirements and not
just from the extreme events
such as the Cascadian Hurvitz
before.
We'll talk about that.
So this is your opportunity is a
legislature and our our
opportunities state to
proactively reduce harms that we
know are coming our way.
That there.
Permits peacock canyon fire made
clear that the health of our
neighbors are already.
The impact of climate change is
here it's all around us and we
know it's going to be increasing
in frequency and ferocity.
That the data tells us this is
so good calfskin interprets the
fire was predicted not
specifically that fired with
that the fires and see come more
intense and have greater
consequences for smoke and
corresponding flooding that
happens in the aftermath.
So it's important that you know
that the first part of this bill
region eight in the HM to task
force report which was delivered
October thirty first of last
year HM to was sponsored by
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong and was passed by this
committee back in twenty twenty
one.
It required the department of
health to convene a public
health health task force to
recommend strategies for
improving public health
infrastructure the potential to
improve the health of New
Mexicans and reduce costs.
So additional creating this the
first part of the bill was
Representative Ortez noted
creation public health and
climate resiliency program at
the department of health.
That was a direct recommendation
in the report that bureau
program with provide expertise
support development and
implementation of response
systems and improve inter agency
collaboration.
So in fact the public health
concerns would be raised along
with the concerns of other
agencies as the executive
agencies B. as part of the
climate Task Force.
The second major element of this
bill establishes a fund it would
be called the public health and
climate resiliency Fund.
And what that would do would be
to assist and enable local and
tribal communities to.
To adapt to climate change
respond public health
emergencies be they from weather
extreme weather events for the
ongoing changes to requirements.
These two approaches along with
meaningful engagement with
communities
will improve health outcomes
equities privatization.
The program staff at the fund
get back to the first part of
this bill will help will
administer the fund and most
importantly they're called on to
proactively health the local
communities develop their plans
and proposals they would write a
grant for.
You have before us to hand out.
The
first was produced by New Mexico
forces.
One engine.
On page fact sheet.
As I said I'm here sorry as I
said on and here on behalf of
New Mexico voices for children
because while the climate
changes threaten us all because
of the very strapped to those
most formal minus journal of
course from among the most
important.
And as this committee knows well
and Dr Scrase secretary
department of Human Services New
Mexico has the highest social
vulnerability index.
So we have a lot of people that
are very vulnerable to these
changes in the climate and
Again the structure and do
something about.
Early this bill also helping
with federal dollars to New
Mexico.
The more resources to local
communities.
The reference for proposals from
disadvantaged and low income
communities reference for that
requirement also that more than
half of the funds to be spent in
rural communities throughout the
state.
And it specifically states that
there would be no matching
requirements for communities
applying for the funds that is
an obstacle for many smaller
communities bats Water State
programs this is the we know
that this.
Program will help local and
world.
The D. O. H. notices of which
I'm not sure if you all have a.
You for there was reference to
the LFC analysis but in the
original says of.
noted that twenty twenty one.
That the epidemiology response
to this end of the New Mexico
department often apply for CDC
funding under a program called
brace building resilience.
Yes quite a.
The proposals for high but
federal government.
But because there was no staff
capacity to implement the
program.
You received help funded for the
applications four hundred
thousand dollars.
so here right here the.
Create the program we will have
staff to be able to get these
requests.
Importantly also for local
communities.
They could run right into their
grant proposals to obtain.
To build some of their own
capacity also access other state
programs that require either
local capacity or matching funds
so I'm thinking here especially
at the C. program that was
passed last year that
Representative with me today
what's the sponsor the community
after.
All of our.
Which for which local
communities can apply to help
whether it's low income homes.
This water communities can't
even start to apply that because
they lacked the capacity to this
bill.
Could be used to provide
capacity to access the
importance of this.
Again this built our collective
opportunity to help for people
from the certainly to happen and
already happening.
Weather related hazards.
Thank you very much we will go
to the audience are there in the
in the others who are opposed to
this
legislation.
Thank you.
And other any on the because
those who are opposed to the
legislation.
As
of.
So with respect to the two
individuals who are posted you
have two minutes if you'd like
to make a statement.
Chairman vote committee members
thank you for joining us today
my name is Ross McCormack.
What we're in the Senate in
opposition of this bill there's
a lot of questions of this bill
that that we would feel the need
to be answered for us in support
of.
One of the things is out of the
one point one million dollars
covering just the cost of
staffing and program or is that
for hiring more staff because I
I don't know if the department
of health and has been pleased
to be able to staff of this
project.
What would classify as a as a
client.
Yes.
As any clear definition of.
How far that will continue.
In rural America at less than.
They should.
The public you know in the event
of a public emergency there
the staffing for the small rural
areas as the hard to find
people.
Right to know how to administer.
in the who is going to make sure
that these funds are going.
To be properly administered and
if the funds are being used in
the weather intended to use
force the consequences.
At.
Yes is the party of the
individuals
are they required to give.
Just the two questions that we
that we have to thank you.
Thank you for that.
Chairman members of the
committee is looking for workers
and we also have several
questions I I.
The respective positions forty
two
one of our first question is who
is going to evaluate the climate
science to determine the level
of our Senator.
what is the definition of course
let's see as compared to an
extreme weather
both terms are used in this
piece of legislation and finally
how many grants will be awarded
each year those are just
maintenance.
Number here for.
Yes thank you for your patience.
Thank you very much.
We'll go to the audience and is
there any of the any in favor of
this.
So
What we will do in the process.
What we'll do on the in the
interest of time is you'll want
to have one minute to speak so
that we can get everybody
opportunity to be heard so
Mister time people to please
implement that one minute.
I thank you with all of with
this will start at the back row.
Thank you madam chair committee
members
of the Persian appears to care
for the.
Mexico.
For decades.
Representative Mexico the
society the state chapter of the
American academy of pediatrics
children are at increased risk
of harm from climate change.
We strongly support HB forty two
thank you thank you yes the man
and the last well yes thank you
madam chair damage are
representing the New Mexico
rural electric cooperative
association research seventy
five percent of the land area
the state and when these
wildfires occur they get a state
are members facilities we think
this is a very good first half
in helping rural communities
like more.
Some of the station.
Thank you very much yes ma'am.
Chairman of the committee Martha
shows registered lobbyist for
the cross the shield of New
Mexico and we stand in support
of the resiliency fund and and
more importantly and that is a
plan of action which will
promote and improve interagency
collaboration focused on public
health equity and the changing
climate conditions to assist
communities in preparing for and
responding public health.
Thank you yes your next direct
contact with New Mexico voices
for children action plan and we
stand strong.
Thank you anyone else allegro.
I will move yes please.
Madam chair members committed
can use with the coalition
stated with unity's.
Representative Carlstrom.
City and county settles screws
service service stand strong
support.
Still thank you.
Let's move up to the to the next
so yes you would be next thank
you very much of Madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jim yeah I'm with the regal
energy industry New Mexico and
we're blessed to work in a
industry that we go with our
solution.
To provide a change but we also
Representative very much
recognize that this is a public
health issue and we need to
address it that way that the
funding for rural communities
native communities and have as
part of health is a state job
great stuff to work on this
issue and so thank you very much
we support.
Thank you what also that growth.
They moving forward on the the
second role is is there anyone
who wishes to speak.
In favor.
Okay about the first growth.
Yes ma'am most of the lady thank
you Alyssa and here's a
volunteer representing this year
Club former legislator from
Oregon and I serve for ten
sessions the healthcare several
sessions the health and Human
Services budget point budget
committee we spent creasing a
lot of time on public health
modernization we know that
there's a lot of debate around
the causes of and solutions to
to Department crisis but I think
there is widespread agreement on
the calamitous of that
increasing floods fires droughts
and so I was really seventy one
and moved here in twenty one is
and had my first right here and
saw the horrific effect of the
fires and the subsequent
flooding hi.
Yeah so
what.
An activation center just that
dozens of families who had
almost lost everything their
health their mental health was
tremendously affected so all
right stronger support for this
bill I think it's not only the
compassionate thing to do
particularly for rural under
represented communities but also
it is time to thank you thank
you very much.
madam chair members the
committee my is chasing Claire
again I'm a retired public
school educator New Mexico
thirty years I'd like to give
you briefly what is I could do
many times rural and tribal
communities do not have public
buildings that they can use for
evacuation centers for fires or
extreme events and the school is
the only available evacuation
center the scope of the
education of the school of
children cooking said early
impacted by having folks
evacuated the schools this fund
could provide technical
assistance and the funding to
prepare the school districts for
like this so that it does not
impede the consistency of
education.
Area and the staff at the the D.
O. H. could also provide
assistance to the small
communities to give them our own
health in developing the
requests in developing the
programs and in developing the
valuation systems for those
grants and programs thank you so
much I support thank you please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Shelly Man
Lev hello I am a public health
leader in the state of New
Mexico I served as a member of
the agency task force and has
privilege of bringing
international expert Dr Christy
to the task force and with her
presentation and added that the
that sounds that thank you
Matthew strict the task force
was so powerfully moved by
understanding the deep impacts
public health impacts and
environmental health I think the
the establishment of the program
in the department of health one
of their four top.
The public health infrastructure
in the state of New Mexico
currently we have zero point two
FTE zero point two FTE of the
public health expertise in our
department of health
understands the impacts of
smoke drought flooding wildfires
you know for those extreme
weather events that are
increasing in intensity and
thank you Mr.
We appreciate your comments and
is there anyone else.
It would have to go to public
comment on this.
We'll have those who are.
Posed to the legislation to
speak first so only here opposed
to your hand that otherwise
would you take your hand out.
All right that we have to in
opposition so data Costa you
will have one minute please move
please.
I'm sorry I'm not in opposition
sorry I have my hand raised
okay.
The setting for we'll come back
to you thank you.
Are are you in opposition.
Yes madam chair and it's Leri
Sonntag.
As part of the.
Organization grassroots
organization around Mexico
called better together New
Mexico for opposing the house
bill forty two due to concerns
that apartment raised by those
present in the room about
ambiguity sh just like the
further state that the
epidemiology Department already
is tasked with a public health
program for the state your
actions diseases and this bill
talked about climate science and
all kinds of things I have
nothing to do with the knowledge
Department hello matter of use
of this money the other thing is
you're taking short term.
Money that is in surplus right
now and for the good and to no I
that has no sunset cruise not
good stewardship of tax dollars
for those reasons we oppose
house bill I oppose house bill
four sessions.
Thank you Mr sun.
It all those who are in favor of
the legislation please raise
your hand.
If you if you wish to speak.
From.
All right you will each have one
minute to speak we will begin
with John Brown.
Yes good morning committee and
thank you for this bill spot the
bill sponsor my name is a sister
Joan brown I'm the executive
director of interfaith power and
light here in New Mexico and we
interface me to support this
bill our houses of worship and
faith communities on the front
line when we do have major
challenges coming more and more
from climate change but I'd also
like to mention the
intergenerational effect of this
bill which is proactive and
mental health I continue to hear
in my ears the voice of one of
our young adult leaders who is
from a rural area who said I do
not know if I'll have the
strength and the courage to face
all the suffering that I'm going
to face in my life as a result
of all of these things happening
from climate change so thank you
very much for considering this
bill and we very much support
this as proactive and huge
ethical moral stance for our
communities and our state.
Thank you sister brown we'll go
to Joanne stronger.
Good morning madam chair and.
Eddie my name is Joanna Strother
and Services senior director of
advocacy for the American lung
association the American lung
association is the leading
organization working to save
lives by improving lung health
and preventing lung disease as a
public health leading Public
Health Organization weird
support of house bill forty two
New Mexico is already full of
historic drought wildfires and
rising temperatures in fact due
to climate change New Mexico
order largest wildfire in state
history this past year the
American lung association's
twenty twenty to sit at the
airport ranks Pueblo herky as
the twenty second most polluted
in the county for ozone report
also found that Albuquerque
ranked eighty eight for most
needed for particle pollution
and that's from their ranking of
two hundred and twenty seconds
in the previous report but it's
not just Albuquerque the
problems are statewide Los
crucis also some more days of
particle pollution and Eddy
County some more days of ozone
the report found the Eddy County
is only one of two counties in
the country that are in the top
twenty five most polluted.
Levels of care and find
solutions thank you your time is
up thank you thank you.
Marley wrote in.
This Peroni with you.
Yes good morning.
I'm sister Marli impaired and
sister of mercy and I want to
support this bill because of the
effects of climate change
I'm particularly concerned about
The support systems of when we
have these catastrophes.
I'm hoping that this bill will
really
the more comprehensive in state
looking at different areas
and that they have a program
that has an issue that they can
address the issues that I
particularly is support the the
woman that said you know as far
as schools in these rural areas
you know I think every area
rural areas should have a
program for addressing this
issue thank you.
Thank you we'll go to this
Rogers.
Everyone thank you so much for
your time today I'm Dr Heidi
Honegger Rogers and I am family
nurse practitioner and a member
an active member of the alliance
of nurses for healthy
environments we are in support
of house bill forty two for many
reasons
just to shine a light on what
has already been said one of one
of the opportunities having
public health infrastructure for
climate response and resiliency
is that it'll give us as nurses
and as health care professionals
across the state working in
communities with our patients it
will give us a place in a way to
gather and communicate I can see
the state of New Mexico has a
really great opportunity to lead
in this work and I appreciate
your support.
Thank you.
Senator.
Okay good morning and thank you
for taking my comments
I my name is Laurie is honor I'm
resident of Albuquerque New
Mexico and it caused it to end
of the chair of this committee
Liz Thomson and our I think the
madam chair respond string this
bill and urge all members of the
committee to pass.
As we fight to mitigate climate
change we need this bill to
address the health effects
having on New Mexicans now thank
you very much.
Thank you will move to John of
calls that.
New tools to respond to the new
threats that are hitting them at
home and closer to home and
harder than ever before and as
devastating as the permits peak
canyon yes canyon fire was it is
really just a preview of what
New Mexico is going to be
experiencing and so it's
critical that the legislature
give I think long term and give
our communities the tools they
need to protect themselves from
climate induced health threats
thank you so much thank you
we'll go to a married man.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name miss
Maryland Hidalgo I support H. B.
forty two thank you.
Thank you and Paul Gibson.
And I want to thank the sponsors
to bring this bill I called
Gibson
I am the co founder of retake
our democracy a nonprofit
organization that advocates
legislature every year with
forty five hundred members and I
speak in strong support of this
bill we've got a preview of
what's coming from climate
change and we have a lot of
small communities throughout the
state that have no where near
the resources to be able to
anticipate research and come up
with solutions that will help
mitigate or prevent some of the
likely outcomes from about
climate change just think in
terms of extreme heat and so I
think this is a great way to
have communities come together
with the state providing
resources to make it so that
they can be effective in their
work we strongly support this
bill.
Thank you thank you very much so
those are all the and this is a
public comment we'll go to the
committee first we'll go to miss
a how to meal I'm sorry
Representative the meal the
representative is a fancy
Representative Jones the
representative Benson please
madam vice chair thank you for
being here I do
I would like a definition of
political subdivisions and I my
biggest concern is that the
nation has a hundred seventy
four thousand members and this
looks at a hundred thousand
population New Mexico has
several satellite in the nation
of reservations well actually.
Right or pine hill and Alamo's
wood.
How would they be integrated
into this bill for or would
they.
Not be able to participate in
this because as a bigger
organization or or nation they
are a hundred forty five
thousand strong.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question
political subdivisions are you
any spell the county at the ship
Sekyere.
The land grants and they can
apply for for this funding but
in particular for as we could as
it relates to tribal nations on
page three.
The.
Online if seen political
subdivisions state or Indian
nation tribe or pueblo can can
apply for grants up to two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
under the in the United.
So you know I believe that the.
The community whatever its size
of its a tribal nation can apply
for these funds not under not
necessarily thousand.
Which is okay so so any any
smaller communities within
Navajo Nation although Navajo
Nation is a hundred and seventy
five thousand members the
smaller communities could still
I at the heart of the fun and a
smaller.
Members chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the question Representative
Hermio yes yes it's right now.
The political subdivisions for
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
and then also.
the
customers.
That the
elements about the size of the
world community.
The reference two hundred
thousand was
There it's on the need for.
Why.
Fourteen.
so that's political subdivisions
of the state so that would fly
to the in the nation tribe or
for.
Okay thank you very.
Thank you Representative how do
we Representative is the best
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative a second marker
I just I.
I think that this legislation
has the potential to really
provide a new center of
expertise on a change.
Within that they held which we
don't currently have we don't
have a whole for those kinds of
issues which are not necessarily
natural resource issues they're
not airlaid water utilization
issues they are the impacts of
of the extreme weather of
climate change in general he you
know he is can be a killer we've
seen that across our country as
we grappled with these high
temperatures you know many
communities
I don't probably tells don't
necessarily have a lot of homes
in their conditions for example
they're not equipped to deal
with you know hundred five
degree day that a pop out and
then we have a disproportionate
impact on our elderly on these
matters greatly vulnerable thank
I see a lot of problems with
this
one of the things I wanted to
ask you about was there's
mentioned in that fire about the
ability to to draw down federal
funds
so even though you've got one
point one million in here for
staffing
five million for grants what
what other kinds of federal
funds might a program that made
available for us to actually be
in the position to apply for.
Vice chair representative has he
thank you for that question
so I mentioned earlier the fifth
race going resiliency.
Sorry for getting the exact for
the so that's that that's a CDC
program there's also.
The
through FEMA there's program all
right there for them but not
building recent resiliency
communities that local
communities can apply for
directly that so so far there
have been applications within
the state.
And the lack of city and
awareness of them so part of
what this would do would be to
help find the awareness of these
opportunities to.
Local entities.
Thank you for that I think that
that.
presents an enormous opportunity
for us to start getting more of
those resources
in addition to madam chair and
representative I do represent a
lot of stuff the City of Santa
Fe but I also have secured
federal communities in my
district which includes can see
though Glorieta.
Some of
so you know I I I do want to
think the cattle growers
representatives in the
categories of the oil growers
for bringing some of those
questions forward
I think click Representative how
DO I was thinking about how
these communities apply for
these funds because they don't
several of them are rated they
don't have grant writers don't
have grace managers they don't
have so I think it
more a suggestion to you for
your consideration think about a
minute before the tax committee
on
Page four where it says
lines eleven through fourteen
point is not less than fifty
percent cetera.
So we awarded this political
subdivisions of total population
of less than a hundred thousand
because for for example for us
to do you know advance fire
planning board at the county as
we the purse the and that what I
for those plans but the the
population of Santa Fe County is
over a hundred thousand.
So I think the media is probably
implemented like human
population to serve communities
well for the subdivision.
Might be larger than a hundred
thousand but the community
service less than a hundred
thousand I don't want to trade
words fly I think that
I would suggest that because I
think that would resolve some of
the concerns raised I around how
to how do you actually use the
money if you have no staff and
if you don't have this in our US
government
And then finally we can you give
us some examples of Madam chair
representative it.
The types of he.
There is that climate resiliency
like can you just talk about
the.
Interplay of those terms it and
what types of situations these
play grants may be used to get
have including what would
include for example and with the
recent massive fire that we have
we have a lot of people were
staffed with you know they were
dialysis patients didn't know
how to get to that center the
center part of the closed didn't
know how to get their
prescriptions didn't know how
that they were experiencing like
respiratory distress how do we
get them treated you know those
kinds of issues with with those
kinds of things falling into
this.
Madam vice chair representative
of us thank you for that
question and also thank you for
coming about how to make this
bill better to answer the
questions that Representative
you you had and the gentle curve
you might be here Nate Committee
I thought those are those are
really excellent please I come
from a County that is a resource
to many of us are from counties
are under researched just don't
have the capacity to preference
to manage the requests for
federal funding it's it's it's
challenging all around so I'm
hoping that we are able to start
consolidating this expertise in
agencies and they can start we
are working with the global
subdivisions to ensure that
we're able to get the monies and
resources to those communities
and that need it most of their
other things to it to address
that through the session but I I
want to talk a little bit about
and then and then vice chair and
representative what that with
this weather events locally and
in December of twenty twenty one
of the had a devastating sales
call I did not even know what a
snow squall school was never
even heard of that term of of
what I know is that communities
in my district yasal via lost
power for about two weeks
because hundreds of thousands of
trees were downed in our forests
downing power lines.
It led to devastation and
tragedy in my community those
that that's an extreme weather
event winds that were up to
sixty miles per hour in December
near that should not be
happening and and the response
was was quick but inadequate so
when I think about what this
kind of funding can be used for
for a place like PTA's County
the committee like can you ask
to be able to you think it's not
just a cooling center in ninety
eight Keating center a place
where where folks can gather in
charge their phones charging you
get their dialysis machines all
set up have a place to store
their their medication that
that's the kind of thing that
can that we can do on a
community level you know not to
mention that the fire staff and
you know every every single day
many of us are working together
to insure that people had food
had access to medications and it
just kept going on over every
single day was worse and worse
and the our our communities do
need support so working with the
DO H. working with at the newly
developed expertise in our
agency that can work with other
agencies we can.
Health our committee's plan
better cool Center heating
Center you know maybe maybe it
is doing a little bit a land
more work as well after those
fires I don't know if you've
seen if people have seen the
devastation of those fires right
the soils become hydrophobic
which leads to the to the
flooding right there's nothing
to hold in the water and the
monsoons came early which was
great to put out the fire really
terrible for a growing season
which is rather short in our
Sorry I missed out there in the
house Mister Moffett to to add
in there thank you
Representative thank you for the
question Representative Stansky
madam chair members the
committee yeah
To also to speak to that
specific question and as well as
some concerns raised about what
their climate events what are
what are these where we
anticipate a of one.
Factor in the handout is really
important
Include visual because what it
costs what it shows doubling
over from twenty third two
thousand and two thousand twenty
so this is accounting for the
the fires recent fires cited
counting for the representative
just told us about of course
that was a different type of
weather.
He possible he emergency room
visits in New Mexico have
doubled in that eleven period.
Without the major specific that
happening.
So our our climate continues to
change and affect us and all
sorts of different ways so again
to address some of the concerns
about the the openness of the
bill.
we we've discussed various
scenarios summers justified and
comments from the audience.
The bill is purposefully open
about what those things might
be.
It's a grant application process
so that local communities can
develop a Graham says in our
jurisdiction for our people we
see these that's possibly
happening.
We would like some funds to
start preparing.
To start planning that in
advance of those events
happening so if they can make.
The successful pitch so to speak
to the grant to the department
of health.
Department of health would have
the authority to decide yes this
is worth funding or now it needs
some work.
So thank you thank you thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative we'll go now to
Representative Jones thank you
madam chair and representative
and.
More thank you again good market
more thank you thank you I and I
appreciate the questions and and
your answers I've I've got a
better picture of of what we're
talking about this is very broad
and I have to say one of my
concerns right away was the fact
that we've got we've got so many
layers of bureaucracy here and
that we already had an existing
health care system that is not
adequate I'm not sure how
another layer of bureaucracy
would actually get the boots on
the ground people like me as an
RN's
better at better opportunity to
have a better outcome of
patients so I I don't know.
You can answer.
There is already an
existing.
Initiative for climate change
its New Mexico climate change
action that was put in place by
our governor and governor Lujan
Grisham and twenty nineteen and
I looked at that website and
there is actually an emergency
management health and resilience
Department that which gave me
another layer to the concerned
about and how to do all of these
things work together and I and I
I personally hello I'll stop
right there and let you answer
that.
This.
Thank you Representative
Townsend for that question I'm
sure members of the committee
excellent question
The we we have it sort of
they're not here to testify
themselves it people from the
other agencies for that specific
bureau is located that you
mentioned forget the fact that
that we've spoken to every.
Other state agency that has any.
Corresponding related disease
and none of them have indicated
that there's any conflict with
any of their activities or that
this overlaps precisely with
what they do.
Okay.
As.
So.
Give me a second to.
I also concerned about the the
speculative nature of that of
defining whether versus climate
and how that relates to.
Differentiating patients in my
practice I would never per for
one patient who has asked not
because they it might have been
caused by.
Smoke inhalation from a.
The band over another patient
who had chronic asthma maybe and
how do I even determined that
that this.
This I I don't know how we
actually implement that and how
that's any different than what
we were already doing with our
existing healthcare programs
that are are under funded
underserved especially in rural
communities like mine
so so still a little bit
concerned about how actually
gets put in place with with a
huge kind of.
Issues with the final.
The the whole climate change
weather related health care
I really I'm I'm I'm in favor of
a hundred percent this money
going to.
Fighting more doctors nurses to
actually care for patients and
and deal with these problems
right.
Which is is not being done right
now.
So
Another thing about no question
about the recurrent funding I
noticed that there's there's one
point one million with that when
would that go into effect.
And and then there's another
five million from twenty four to
twenty eight.
How would that and and we ended
twenty eight and then what.
Madam chair members of the
family thank you again for that
question.
Representative Jones
yes the one point one million is
required for the staff so that
would be required.
The five million dollar fund.
Would be a one time
appropriation nonrecurring.
Except that it does have a it
does have a definite in the
period of twenty twenty of sorry
twenty twenty.
So it's a five year we know it
may take the program a while to
get the right so certainly needs
to last more than one year yes
there's a need for recurring
staff
but also to the so the five
million dollars frankly many
people any advocates said that's
too low the problem is so much
bigger.
We are confident that to this
program to get that there will
be.
Communities that were available
cells of some programs.
Ever again the service will
support for the area and the
people in those communities will
be better protected and people.
Which did not avail themselves
of the opportunity for the next
ex extremely that happens for
the ongoing consequences become
greater elevated speak.
Thank you madam vice chair
representative Johns
We're not talking about making
requests to that the hospital or
to allow for more doctors which
is sorely needed understands
this is not the individual
patient level this is really at
the at the planning levels local
health councils level tribal
nations to take me to better
understand the commerce bonded
to a public health emergency
that's related to an extreme
weather event so that there's
more in integrated resource
planning around cooling centers
are going you know what we're
the health of the heating
Keating Senators maybe your how
to respond very very quickly
that that serve that's really
what this fund is looking at is
to ensuring you better better
coordination better planning
really integrating that health
council
that that's what it looks like.
Thank you mentioned thank you
Representative Jones with going
to Representative this Madam
vice chair representative.
Would you help me the how many
people you are you thinking this
is a to me before you one
higher.
Medic vice chair representative
isn't
I think it looks like around
seven this seven staff members
six point five F. T. E.'s on.
And then vice chair
representative in the delayed
child.
Ram so this would be much better
vice chair representative this
would be a whole new division
of.
Government this is the.
Madam bye Senator is in the a
new program within the deal
which so would be a new program.
Madam vice chair representative
are you familiar with your local
emergency managers.
Madam vice chair Representative
syntax I am very very familiar
but because the CNO this on my
street.
Sometimes it was chair
representative I spent.
Sixteen years as an emergency
manager and everything a lot of
the stuff that we're talking
about here is already available.
And you know there could be
additional duties for all the
people the help with planning
and help a lot of that stuff and
you know I've worked with I've
worked with our local tried
Mescalero and
with working through them and
working through some of our
people in read also as well as
the city.
They have come up with with
things like cooling we did call
it cooling centers we have
evacuation Inc you know recorded
also is number two in the entire
nation for catastrophic wildfire
so we really took that serious
and as while I was the fire
chief there that's probably why
my hair to grow in the morning.
Gray overnight but.
You know we we constantly work
on planning all the time.
I love what you got here.
But I'm not a fan of building
bigger government so madam vice
chair.
Representative.
Thank you Representative yes
ma'am vice chair representative
first thank you so much for your
service and I I am regretful
that I did not mention regions
so the results of fire happened.
So devastating and almost
immediately we went into fire
season in the north and I am
really grateful that you working
with your community to get.
To address that that total
devastation thank you for that I
am I just I just want to address
that some.
Some regions some counties are
better prepared than others and
and this was the range this
would bring other counties in
and other regions up to the
level of response that that is
that that's needed some that's.
It Madam thank you again the
Madam chair representative.
When we we had a pandemic in red
so that
this is when I really feel felt
the state emergency management
had something awfully with
through the H. one in one
pandemic and they were able to
get us twelve hundred
inoculations into Lincoln County
and we did that as a service and
the way that emergency
management is set up here
especially with their planning
is is just top notch.
And I would just encourage you
to tap into them on on things
like this so.
Thank you Mr thank you
representative will go to
Representative Thomas thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward I and I absolutely
support I think it's something
that we probably should have
done.
You know.
You're right changes upon us
that has been.
Think of you know it also in
terms of looking at and reading
the FIR in reading the
information.
The.
you know one of the one of the
pieces that I'm hoping that it
will do is reduce the number of
emergency visits we know that he
purchased the business at the
box.
Our health care system we've got
to keep people out of the
margins.
so that the person doctors can
can can.
Take care of of.
Traumas and you know everything
else.
That I have for you is can you
talk a little bit more
expendable but more on the the
possibility of collaboration
that this bill
what.
Madam vice chair representative
Chavez it really is very very
focused on collaborations will
be a statewide office that would
work with other state agencies I
was not fortunate to the state
team here the task force
recommendations and would like
to ask Mr.
This is.
R. for Madam speaker I'm not an
expert on the entire task force
recommendations
if but I again it is one of the
Andrew this is
The public noted zero point two
FTE with an apartment.
Which means that the health
department perspective off on
that statewide climate Task
Force is is minimal even though
there are people there are
concerns.
Racetrack or the other agencies
about resilience of course so
what we're going to.
So I I I if I could also.
What consequence of.
The representative this
invention Emergency Management
and cooling centers rescue
Senator our our response for
for.
For oil can't read this but he
said.
It's a newspaper COVID spreading
and and M. disaster centers.
Valuation so we're asking for a
deposit yourself as we talk
about consistent filtration and
ventilation those issues would
have been addressed head on have
health department people been
involved in that planning
process so Representative
Bentsen's actually correct these
problems thanks every jurors are
there are emergency response
disaster response plans were but
they don't all the corporate
health perspective.
Thank you thank you mentioned
thank you representative of the
representative for our.
All
did want to speak to someone to
make a motion to pass a second.
As seconded for to pass will you
please safe will.
Representative K..
Yes.
Travel yes.
Yes.
Hi yes Representative Jones no.
Semansky yes.
Venison.
By two yes.
This paper to oppose the past
thank you very.
Will move forward to the next
bill which is on independent
certified are in and see if.
And this this is.
It is.
Hi.
With with retired assistant but
also you have a specific job.
It not anymore.
K. presented that very idea this
thank you madam members numbers
of the committee I'm and then he
state representative on the
seventh which is my expert
witness
can drive economic power and the
the challenges with disabilities
say that word this is.
I've been working with this
group for some time and I still
have dollars the state I also
implement stated it's a real
honor to appear before this
committee I served on this
committee until well the session
and how hard to go to work and
to a look and I'm happy to say
that I'm gonna be back a number
of times and hopefully always.
I'm I'm I'm sure get a warm
welcome but I also posted to
pass.
so we're here today on a on a
bill is actually a very simple
bills
in nineteen seventy one seventy
two because changes in federal
law because the act
Johnson the certified nurse.
And this is were allowed to
independently practice which
meant that they did not have to
have a supervising physician
dentist or whatever to approve
with the.
And as a result of that and
since that time in the state of
New Mexico they have have
practice and they also practice
independently in the military
and other things they are
recognised long time of
providers of quality in this and
CEO allergies Services
And they are critical to our
rural health care system in the
state and also within the six.
And so the bill is simply a
effort to updated to reflect the
practice that has been in place
since the nineteen seventies.
And if you'll know there's
actually only one provisions
that's being what was actually
to page two of this section.
Twelve sixteen and instantly
updated because changes in the
name of their professional
associations that they needed
the bill is part C. beginning at
seventeen.
All we're doing is removing the
out of state for now fifty years
I think the out of date language
that used to require that they
were license issued.
and that's what this is all
about is is very simple
situation and I'll let doctor
Allen adding some additional
information all right madam
chair.
Thank you for having me Chris
Pollard Lee she.
My name is Dr Shannon elevators
for thirty five years down the
county I really do and Anastasia
for the last twenty three years
and
I just wanted to kind of address
this issue it is very you're
well language be in somebody and
so on cleared it talks about you
know just working independently
fifteen at the same time there
are no supervision requirements
whatsoever and you have over
twenty also your age group
fourteen around the state I did
send a map ahead to you showing
you where those were located I'm
not sure it got to you are not
it's not a so we from.
that's a pretty significant
portion of the state and
specially rural areas that rely
solely on the floor and for
providers here
we've actually been doing it
since the nineteen fifties when
some of our young nurses and
this was not something that
you know when they first started
was that they work hand in hand
with
the surgeons but that can
actually be a detriment because
if the surgeon sometimes you're
looking at going to rural areas
and they're concerned about
whether or not they're going to
be having to supervise the
anesthesia which is actually not
true you know that could
potentially be a very here so
what we're wanting to do is just
clear up that language
Also provision if you look
through there there are no
requirements we were actually
made an offer out state in two
thousand one which meant that we
could feel without those Isshin
supervision for Medicare
Medicaid and then so what we
want to do is just to kind of of
the staff.
Right now seventy one percent of
all New Mexico SCG care is
billed by siRNAs without
supervision so we're doing a
huge amount of the SCG in this
state in it's call queues the
billing and I don't know if you
have the actual little Max's
since you've but.
It gives you a change from two
thousand ten to two thousand
twenty one we went from the.
Thirty nine percent of all
anesthetics QC to seventy one
percent so they're really
relying heavily on us to do that
I guess what I want to do is
this you know.
Coming from the rural area and
you know we talked about earlier
and another one another meeting
but you know whatever the COVID
here in our small community I
work at a very small hospital in
Lee County we don't have an
intensive care unit
when it you know we we do have
your nurses who are familiar
with validators interests but we
also have some nurses who are
working like mad servers you
maybe have never worked in the
intensive care.
We have patients that we could
not get out sometimes for days
or a week because there were
additional hospitals to sanity
you know we were calling as far
as St Louis and Phoenix Arizona
and unfortunately some of them
we couldn't get out in time and
you know they passed away
because they couldn't get to the
higher facilities so I stepped
in during this time.
And I actually talked to my
family this is this is going to
be a really critical thing that
comes to the community and I
really applaud hospital needs me
and and I asked my family for
permission to my husband my
daughter to remain on campus for
that sixty days during the COVID
surgeon November December I live
in the house.
During the pandemic.
I helped the nurses because they
did not have that but expect
experiencing critical care I
can't imagine how stressful it
was for them to even some of the
maybe you graduates be handed
this huge
critical care patient you know
that we can get out so I health
to manage the ventilators
hospitals will go home today I
would stay there through the
night Google nexus looking
recovery room so the something
went off the track activity
immediately available helps with
you know cardiovascular drips
blood pressure to heart rate
stable help keep the patient's
sedated
you know helping the nurses try
trading with Europe so they
started to get wrestle sometimes
so for sixty days I stayed
there.
It is my ability to work without
supervision the allows me to
make that difference and so I am
giving you many letters from
around the rules state and even
in the big cities asking you to
please support updating our
nurse practice act because we
have a crucial role that we need
to fill so there's letters from
physicians hospitals nurses.
it's a big step into the.
This.
And madam madam by chair if I
could add.
Doctor Allen was one of the five
health care providers that
receive the governor's
The executive orders that your
down day and.
Yeah that is one of the five
critical care providers during
the pandemic.
Was split in the season
proclamation and got our own
days the state and so forth so
thank.
Thank you very much and with
that applause we.
All of.
Was staff for question.
Thank you will first go to the
audience are there any of the
arguments to oppose this
legislation.
Seeing none are there any who
are in favor.
And was to speak.
All right well thank you very
much for the first of the film
on the first row.
Thank you madam chair crystals
on the register lobbyist for the
New Mexico association of nurses
and ask Miss.
Hospital correctly
in the membership is in support
of this piece of legislation get
the money that this body this
committee they have assonance
with this bill and went to the
house the house voted on state
support specific station the
last six day session we got
stuck in the rush hour incident
Judiciary Committee just stepped
away from the governor's desk
but here we are again we hope
that you support additional one
time I appreciate about the
audience sharing a personal
experience
what she had been doing in rural
New Mexico and I think she will
share with me that there are
hundreds of siRNAs and one of
Mexico's are doing the same
thing on their own communities
thank you check thank you very
much we'll go to the lady in the
second row yes ma'am.
Up thank you very much.
Madam chairman and CEO and our
representative the nurses
association or practitioners.
I have nurse practitioners and
back into the processes of the
human rights for thirty years
now and nurse midwives have
hacked into practice and
prescriptive authority for
twenty years the C. R. A.'s sure
has they have that language in
the nursing process which says
independent and that's exactly
what the C. R. you should have
because there would be no answer
there would be no surgeries in
rural New Mexico working off of
the sea Hey this is sort of an
interface you and I've done many
church issues with health care
providers and other healthcare
providers she we don't have
enough providers of any car in
the state.
We have a shortage of everything
as you'll hear me talk more we
have we have a shortage of six
thousand RN's Mexico.
And we're not doing a lot of
stuff that we put some money
into education we have to do
more opening up the Sierra Leone
program at New Mexico state will
be an incredible benefits these
are I I and it's time to just
let go of these turf issues that
stop access permissions.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else who is
speaking in favor of the
legislation hi is everyone
spoken who wanted to send the
audience but we're going to
public comment so.
If there's anyone who opposes
the legislation on the.
on the US no please raise your
hand if you are an opposition.
Hi if you are in favor of the
legislation please raise your
hand.
Thank you we'll go to Pamela
Blackwell else.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Blackwell and I'm the director
of government relations and
communications for the hospital
association we stand in support
of this bill on H. B. forty
eight this bill as you've heard
codifies what's already been in
practice in New Mexico for over
twenty years so since two
thousand to New Mexico CRTs have
been eligible to practice
without that supervision of
physicians this has allowed our
New Mexico hospitals especially
in rural communities to access
necessary Anastasia Services
provided by our State Arnie's
including for surgical
obstetrical respiratory and pain
management services these
services how to ensure New
Mexico residents may receive
quality clerk care closer to
home the FTC has actually right
weighed in on this issue stating
that N. M. M. D. R. physician
supervision of securities is not
warranted that if it was more
a significant competitive cost
to health care consumers and
patients and impede rather than
foster effective team models of
care that provide access thank
you sure okay we support thank
you so much.
Thank you very much we'll go to
the committee now.
Okay first we will begin with
this I'm sorry Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you madam madam chair and
thank you for bringing this
forward it this is something
that we really need to
make available make sure that
you aren't having to be under
that supervision and to be able
to provide for specially our
rural is all had mentioned
I'm not sure of.
It was mentioned that there's
going to be a program at NMSU
can you tell me a little bit
more about that chairman by
chair representative for our
youth we are opening up the
first time ever in New Mexico C.
R. and programs which is going
to be wonderful because what
happens right now if we have to
go out of state to train and so
what happens you've got these
not really a nurses that are
coming C. R. A.'s but then I get
comfortable where they go out of
state to train in the state
there
you know I was fortunate I went
forward to training came back so
this is gonna have a huge impact
in making more see Arnie's
available it's scheduled to open
next September and I'm really
excited about it.
Thank you and that something
that manifest here
I really do support.
That you know we continue that
growth of health care providers
in our state she said they can
get that training here then they
will most likely stay here and I
think this is an important part
of that so thank you for
bringing this forward.
Thank you the next
representative jobs thank you
madam vice chair Representative
Matthews and Dr Alan as a fellow
nurse my gratitude to you for
what you did the sacrifices made
pandemic I know occurred
obviously agree with that but
I'm fully in favor of this and I
you know it's always do this
The registered that the nurse
practitioner and the nurse
Nessa's are fully capable of
Carrying out their duties
without being
Associated with the position so
this is something we need to do
there's one thing I'm curious
about this mentioned in section
at and that is it's as if the if
the board issues expedited
license to percent this was
prior licensed in a
jurisdiction.
State and.
they may require that percent
pass exam at do we have how
often do you come across that
situation where
someone comes in and is not
required to take an exam from
outside the state madam vice
chair representative Jones also
you are in a have to be for sure
I before they can work
that they have to pass a
rigorous exam so even after you
get through
was for the by twenty twenty
five they will all graduate for
it but that we are required to
pass a rigorous exam and every
eight years now they have
started re examining this as a
learning tool let's see if you
have any weaknesses on the TV.
Russia that.
Yes this question it does so
thank you and and Madam chair
representative and Dr Alan so
this really doesn't apply in it
sounds like this is not it's
probably a piece that should be
taken out of here not that I
want to delay this passing I'm
just saying it doesn't have to.
the expedited lies.
Will assist you with Sen.
Without work without causing.
I just wanted.
Clarify that.
So is there is there a way to
fix that or does that need to be
fixed.
Madam vice chair.
Representative Jones
That has not been the focus of
our effort and quite frankly at
I think that this is kind of a
standard provision in many
health care licensing bills and
just offers this is an
alternative to the extent that
some seven.
Strange circumstances what
happened where we needed to
bring in for example as we did
during the pandemic visiting
nurses.
and
I don't I don't think that we
need to change that at this
point I would hate to see the
bill of lading for this for that
purpose because I I don't think
it does any harm and it's really
for an extension circumstances
that I think is it looks like a
lobbyist for the Florida nursing
might have some additional input
doctor or.
Others are on that point there's
going to be available to
communities thanks committee
that some of them being certain
sections of the nursing practice
act in the house the expedited
licensing or change starting Jan
one we are removing those times
are.
Things that are no longer so it
will be taken care of.
Yes thank you and thank you
madam chair and of the
depreciated for export.
Thank you of Representative
Thomas yeah I just want to make
it
I this is my second time in the
legislature I remember this
issue back in two thousand nine
so it's like time.
Madam vice chair representative
and Dr Alan.
I just want to tell you we love
nurses and we.
I have something going on and I
get into a nurse or doctor very
thankful for and in my rural
area we do have lots of this
this that they're capable
sometimes almost no offense but
a practitioner cell when you get
comfortable with you just to see
them as you have a doctor I mean
they're they're that good and I
I believe they should give you
the reins and let you let you
perform because I think you're
more than capable.
Is there a reciprocity.
So if you are board certified in
Florida you came here is our
reciprocity or you really do
have to take a test.
Madam madam vice chair
representative
I think we just talking about
is.
Representative Representative
Zabel.
he may have I think of this but
I think it's just a compact.
Of madam chair.
Please.
Members of the committee.
Last year the passcode.
For many health care providers
and nursing was in there so now
if any type of nurse nurse
practitioner C. anna are
registered nurse comes to New
Mexico with a valid license from
another state with no discipline
on aberrations they must get in
New Mexico license within thirty
days and then they get a
temporary license for one year
and during that one year if
there's some qualification that
we or some who require them to
prove they have that here to do
that before they get their
permit
and access to really make it
easier for people to kind of our
state and and right now we only
have one comp and that is for
health care as a registered
nurse compact whether if you
come into the state west of rice
the compact rises from another
state automatically practice.
Thank you thank you madam vice
chair.
Representative Dr Alan.
I want to ask you a question
just to make me feel to.
And hopefully makes the audience
feel good so what happens if a
patient has a severe reaction to
anesthesia or there is something
some other kind of medical
emergency R. C. N. A.'s able to
safely handle that situation.
I share
Representative yes we are trying
to work independently we have
extensive training.
Assessments and pharmacology and
merchants in the.
so we we are prepared to take
care of it we.
And madam vice chair
representative I want to stand
of one of the things we at in
preparing for Representative
disorganization.
In the legislature we looked at
malpractice records and
There are virtually no
malpractice claims you can see
R. and K. in recent history it
is a remarkable
A remarkable fact quite frankly.
Madam vice chair representative
Dr Alan.
One more our question are there
any downsides to this.
At all it's gonna present.
Access to care we have a stellar
safety record.
we provided economical safe
choice for hospitals are trying
to figure out from the financial
burden of COVID I don't see any
downsides the reason I ask that
is the older I get the more a
list so I shared with.
Madam vice chair.
