Here.
Here and madam chair Thompson
here.
And so we will start is there an
echo or is it just me the okay
don't know what's going on but
okay so we're gonna start with
health bill eleven office of
child advocate act go ahead
Representative madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you HB eleven is in acting at
the office of child advocacy
it's important to note that
forty three states have enacted
an office of child advocacy or
similar ons but it's office that
they often point out of tragedy
and this entity.
Today we begin the journey of
becoming the forty fourth St to
provide such of such services
the office of child advocacy is
created in administratively
attached to the office of the
Attorney General it is the
desire that this department will
become an arms length partner in
the pursuit of fair and correct
children services and will help
these complex an overburdened
systems of CYFD through
through their fair support
resource guiding through problem
identification and assistance
and organizational critical
analysis and promotion of
conflict confidence with that I
will turn it over to my expert
with witness is Jason Espinoza
and Matt back.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza on
behalf of New Mexico child first
network
and we stand strong support of
this legislation and have been
working on legislation like this
for a few years I'm just to add
a few comments on the
Representative Lujan news
comments you know really this
office the trial advocate this
bill provides for a permanent
independent and objective
mechanism that really do three
things to identify systemic
problems and recommend solutions
for measureable improvement
within the child what welfare
system by examining policies
procedures and practices of the
department.
To assist children families and
other individuals that interact
with the welfare system child
welfare system my receiving and
investigating complaints and
reviewing cases and trends to
evaluate the extent to which the
department is expectedly
discharging this trial
protection responsibilities at
third to provide for a healthy
framework for conflict
resolution by creating a truly
independent process that is free
from real and perceived
conflicts of interests the
office of the child advocate is
based on four principles
independence impartiality
confidentiality and a credible
review process and these are
needed to maintain a high level
of credibility with the public
and to carry out its mission
free from political
interference.
Last the legislation is really
designed to shine light on the
issues by promoting a structure
that has the ability to enact
change that has long lasting and
positive impact on children and
families here in New Mexico
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee morning my name is
Matt back thank you for having
me here I'm an attorney in
Albuquerque I primarily practice
and and litigation focusing on
criminal defense and oil and gas
line kind of a very practice a
niche practice that came to me
is what a gating again CYFD.
And what I found is that there
needs to be.
An independent ombudsman.
Hearing that we can't hear you.
Try that and we may need to go
to a.
What I've found is that there
needs to be an independent
ombudsman office.
Mr Espinoza talked about this
being a permanent independent
and objective office the last
two points there I think are the
most important but it's
independent and objective what
I've seen in terms of the CYFD
is when there are situations
that arise whether be with
children foster parents or
parents.
The Avenue that those
complainants may take is through
the internal process for CYFD
for resolving complaints that
leads to the inspector general's
office.
Having participated in a few of
those what I've seen is that.
Whether it is perceived to
reveal.
The complainants often find that
the system is stacked against
them.
Because the way that those
complaints are resolved.
This through a hearing officer
employed by CYFD and the
ultimate person making the
determination in those cases is
the secretary of CYFD.
When I found often times is
that.
Everyone involved in that
process from CYFD side.
Is aligned and fears retaliation
for going against what is.
I recognize that there are new
procedures and CYFD the office
of the child advocate that to
provide some services for these
sorts of complaints for the
children's bill of rights.
However I don't think that
addresses the real imminent
need.
For this independent and
objective office.
Mr Espinoza spoke about real and
perceived conflicts of interest.
I have seen.
That everyone involved in the
system whether it be parents
foster parents children's season
this process a perceived
conflict of interest and my
experience has taught me that
that perceived conflict of
interest in the internal CYFD
process is a real conflict of
interest I think this bill is
extremely important.
Not only to help CYFD improve
itself and improve the outcomes
from responsible children.
I think it's very important to
keep and the people who
volunteer their time to be
foster parents to provide
support and to make sure that
they feel like they have an
outlet for the support that they
need.
Anything else no with that we
okay question all right let's go
to the audience for people who
are in the opposition.
Okay on zoom is anyone in
offices.
Okay in support in the room.
If you would like to speak
please come up and we're going
to limit it to one minute you
don't have to but if you want to
that's fine.
Thank you committee chair and
representative my name is
Maryland back I am the founder
and executive director of New
Mexico child first this is an
initiative we have brought
forward to you for the past five
years and probably last year it
passed unanimously out of the
house of representatives before
the time ran out and the Senate
it's very similar I just want to
say going off of what
Representative part of me is sad
this is a national best practice
as demonstrated by forty three
other states and also it is
worth noting the both Idaho and
Louisiana do you have similar
legislation introduced so we
might not be forty four three
might be forty six and I just
want to say that it's
particularly telling that four
to five of the states were
ranked in the any four to five
of the worst eighth ranked
according to NET Casey do not
have on but office and this is a
national best practice but what
I want to say today is that
today's the first day of the
month it's March first for the
past four months in a row we've
if we operate a Facebook group
with over six hundred
municipalities across kinship
guardianship foster families and
they're all on this page for the
past four months in a row
families have gone to the
Facebook page and that is it
just me or is my reimbursement
for my kids and I'm caring for
not admitting account is might
medical Medicaid subsidy not in
my bank account it's happened
four months in a row today's the
first day of the first month in
case it is going to happen again
there are simple problems for
complex issues like child
welfare like hitting the submit
button on the Medicaid subsidy
reimbursement you have to okay
thank you so much.
And if you want to speak please
get in a line so we don't.
Waste time because we got a lot
to get through today go ahead
Madam chairwoman members of the
community my name is Alvin
so lamb a professor emeritus of
social work I've worked in this
field for over fifty years most
of it in my home state of New
Mexico I've also consulted with
thirty states and universities
across the country and I stand
in support of this bill I've
seen it work and other states
have actually recommended it and
other states I also would
support the new office at CYFD
is developing they serve two
different functions and child
abuse and neglect is everyone's
issue it's a the communities
issues it can't be just put into
one specific department so I'd
like what they're doing and CYFD
in terms of their department
that will help immediate
resolution of individual cases
but at the same time we need
this much broader spend then
position to make sure the
community as having input thank
you madam chair thank you.
With one sorry sometimes they
have a weird little button I
hello madam chair committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak on my name
is Alice in Endicott communis
and I am the legal director of
advocacy Inc we are the largest
provider of legal services for
children in the in the child
welfare system in New Mexico and
I just wanted to speak on behalf
of my colleagues and myself that
we are very much in support of
this bill on there are a lot of
changes that have been proposed
and one of the most important
ones is addressing issues of
accountability and this is the
best way to do it CYFD has been
provided the opportunity for
year after year after year to to
improve itself to address its
own issues to make to remedy the
the lack of accountability and
they have failed and at this
point in time things have only
gotten worse and we really need
an independent oversight of this
agency of CYFD in order to be
able to need to meet the needs
of the community and hold them
accountable for the decisions
that they are making and the
things that they are not doing
and so thank you very much.
So we'll go to zoom I see Lucas
Frank.
good morning madam chair
committee members I am the New
Mexico attorney and route it
what if of officer current in
the last five years my wife and
I take a filter in our care we
have attended every meeting and
every hearing concerning the
children in our care as a
consequence we have come to know
all the acronyms at CYFD I don't
always agree with this is we
CYFD but I admire and respect
everyone is you know I just the
item that I think us we're
asking too much is why it's easy
to lease themselves it is bill
presents an independent
opportunity for oversight I also
read HB four six one and the
related analysis well I'm
encouraged by the way if you
need support for AG four six one
HB at eleven percent better
option for New Mexico because
one H. eleven creates really
independent office or seen by
the AG's office that has the
ability to issue an independent
decisions regarding complaints
HB forty six one by the office
to see what I have to do and
only invites investing office
with that we're ready to make
findings and recommendations to
set a time thank you we will go
to Marci star.
First of course these are.
Albuquerque and I am an advocate
for children and foster parents
who were within the.
The.
I'm also.
If.
What
would.
So
on this it is.
Hello.
And someone we can.
And.
And help them thank you very
much thank thank you
we now have Shelley Boettcher.
Madam chair and members of the
committee really quite a long
email yesterday with a lot of
information in it hi when we
support the concept of it is
this for the same reasons the
actor would have said and the
proponents I can tell you from
almost ten years of current
employment and independent
oversight the bill we need a
little more are added to it in
order to affect change of the
measure requires PED to get a
response and in monitoring it it
is going to be a report on that
here's what I really encourage
you to incorporate for the
session I stand for honest
reviews.
Is really important because of
the transfer of the services.
And
did you hear review because.
Funding to support this bill
will give it to funding from the
on that thank you thank you and
Chasey Trujillo.
Your last one.
Good morning madam chair
representative training as the
CEO I am the executive director
of the house and Senate advocacy
center we service Sapporo Center
and after counties datacenters
are on because we're gonna have
to live in an independent
advocate outside of detective
Services Department enables
courageous conversations to
happen with our pricing
increased let need to check and
balances to best serve our most
vulnerable children and our
state leaders right electron it
is for this reason I stand in
strong support house eleven
thank you madam chair and thank
yous okay we'll go back to the
sponsor do you have any
responses are you ready for
questions.
I think we're we're recognition
Representative Vincent I just
have one question madam chair
and Representative why did you
ask me sign on to this view.
You better start thinking about
me I better I I apologize madam
chair.
State to bring this forward I
like oversight thank you
Representative Kate's.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and can and thank you for
bringing this forward as well
Thank you very much I just have
a couple of
to questions like so if if this
bill passes who's on the bus.
Who are they reporting to
directly.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to my expert witness state
Madam chair representative
Kate's they don't report to
anyone specifically this month
the model of the office of the
child left at is that are very
similar to the suit office of
the superintendent of insurance
and the ministry of hearings
office
specifically recently I think
administrative hearings offices
created about six seven years
ago at this point for very
similar reasons so this is the
reason this office is being
created six years ago when we
talked about creating
administrative hearings office
it was because tax protests we
before the tax department which
was inherently biased and have
the perception or reality of
conflict and so what they did is
follow this very same structure
to create independent
administrative hearings office
on so that they could have truly
independent non-biased hearings
for taxpayers so the.
But child advocate is selected
by a selection committee on page
that then moves forward names to
the governor's to the governor
for appointment.
And to insulate it from
political interference the child
advocate can only be removed for
malfeasance or misfeasance by
the governor.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair and representative I'm I'm
just trying to clarify it for
also the constituents although
everyone is very strong and my
phone is been blowing up very
strong support for this bill and
I
also I'm I'm I'm a sponsor on it
I just want to be able to
clarify what their processes B.
as as we heard from the call
caller their concerns that is
CYFD is not required to be
transparent R. or on the bus
does not have the authority to
review that's why I'm asking how
that happened so I think you did
answer that very clearly
but we're will leave the house.
They were and madam chair and
representative they will be
housed in the office of the
Attorney General.
Thank you madam chair and and
representatives and then I will
just of the state just for
record I I appreciate the
comments on independence
objective and permanent but I
will strongly say permanent is
important and I've been a part
of committee for on the bus for
for education for people with
disabilities for the families
and then on the bus is temporary
so I think permanent is just as
important word there as
independent and objective and
thank you very much.
Thank you
Representative Lord and I'm
going to ask folks to try and
keep the questions and answers
brief because we as usual have a
long agenda Madam chair
representative I think I think
it's just a sign on it tried to
sign on to it but it's.
Thank you bring this work is
been a long process of trying to
get this through and I hope we
can finally make it all the way
to the finish line so thank you.
Representative Jones thank you
madam chair Representative
experts I just want to say you
can add me to the long list of
supporters and I did sign on
yesterday thank you for that.
Okay Representative Herndon and
then Chavis.
Thank you madam chair and
members and panel you.
My concern about the video is a
you said you've been doing it
for ten years so fourteen years
for example I think one person
sitting and I think you also I
what have you determined in
those years that you've been
trying to trying to implement
the provisions of this bill and
working with C. I. CYFD to
whatever their problems are can
you explain to me how you have
been interacting with them of
those past two years.
Madam chair representative I'm
going to defer to chase.
Madam chair representative
turned in.
To be honest it's been
frustrating last year when we
brought this bill forward on and
pass the the house unanimously
and was tabled in the Senate
health of public affairs
committee
part of the reason was tabled
was at that time the secretary
asked for more time.
the the year prior to that the
secretary asked for more time to
right the ship.
we've seen the committee after
committee convene the within
CYFD.
And we have not seen the type of
action that's needed to reform
the department and improve the
lives of children in foster care
so we really do believe that
it's time to have the
legislature move forward and
create this permanent
independent impartial office
that can provide assistance I
mean one of the things that we
do realize.
Is no one person alone no one
secretary alone no one
administration alone can solve
this problem.
We need additional resources and
we really do believe that
providing this independent
office will provide additional
resources provided additional
knowledge the legislature so
that we can enact the policies
that we need to do to really
improve the child welfare system
in New Mexico so thank you madam
chair presenters so maybe I
wasn't clear my question so over
the ten years you are looking at
investigations are looking at a
problems that you seeing with
CYFD did you make specific
recommendations to them not with
respect to the PO but the CYFD
itself and if they would simply
refuse your recommendations
Madam chair representative
turned and again in in those
committees that you know members
and other stakeholders to
participated on I think
recommendations have been made.
And it's not followed up on
additionally one of the problems
that this bill does try to
address is identification of
those problems stakeholders in
this area have had issues
accessing information I think
that was one big part the
representative of Kate's talked
about the ability of this office
to access information to
subpoena individuals to learn
about cases that's what we need
in order to solve to identify
the issues and the proposed
recommendations right now we're
unable to do that we have a
really hard time getting the
information that we need out of
the department to solve our
issues madam chair and
presenters one of the issues
that was brought up it says that
the bill does not discuss the
our address federal
confidentiality requirements
tell me how you are addressing
that issue with this bill.
And we're I'm gonna remind you
to keep your answers brief.
Madam chair representative
Herndon.
Former professor and it's nice
to see you.
the confidentiality provisions
are not addressed in this bill
there are confidentiality
provisions in the New Mexico
children's code thirty two eight
dash four dash thirty three.
Those protections apply
information the kids children's
code in this falls under that
title of the children's code and
so those will apply to the to
this office and the information
in the children's department not
that subpoena but and the
department it it's also there is
a bill going through the
legislature right now I believe
it's house bill ten which
recommends revisions to that
children's code confidentiality
provision thirty two eight H.
forty dash four dash thirty
three a which will address.
Specifically disclosures to this
office of the child advocate.
Madam chair at the sept two more
questions for clarification it
this analysis also talks about
the conflict between Senate bill
seventy three and house bill
four sixty one however you
resolving a conflict if all of
these bills will pass because
they all relate to some sort of
office of children's review our
oversight.
Madam chair representative print
in I I think the other
references to Senator Gallegos
bill which also creates a office
the child advocate we've been
working with both sponsored the
legislation we're we're now
working to align those bills on
so that they have the most
success and
Are similar enough to each other
if they do pass.
Madam chair and representatives
of panelists one of the things
that I'm looking at is even you
made mention of the Internal
Revenue Service and there
independent review of tax items
and.
Actually I thought the system
does work because I used to work
there and so one of the things
that I I'm wondering is why you
chose the Office of the Attorney
General to house this one
provision when you have other
offices like health and Human
Services which are more in line
with the types of services that
might be provided in terms of
access and so tell us why you
chose that office.
Madam chair representative
Herndon the office was chosen
given the the new attorney
general's interest and really
advocating on on behalf of the
rights of children in New Mexico
we believe with the
investigation function
it really aligns with the
attorney general's office and
and they were certainly willing
to I have the office
administratively attached.
Thank you.
Okay I just have a couple of
things at their in the FIR under
significant issues the Attorney
General says that there are
several references made to
Department but it's not defined
in here so I don't need an
answer I'm just after.
Asking you to look at that so
that if this does move on you
can clear that up and then the
last part of the F. I. R. this
bill introduces substitute
caregiver defined as quote
person including a relative of
the child licensed or certified
by the department for child
placement agency to provide care
for children in the custody of
the department or agency this
definition is already in place
for foster parents so these
these two I mean that we're
putting two different people.
Defined by those terms so you
just might want to look and see
if if you can at.
Clean that up or clarified a
little bit not major things just
things that that to think about
and I will go to Representative
Chavis I move to this second
okay.
Any opposition.
Okay all rules okay all right
cultural please money okay.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Senator Ferrary yes
Representative Hotmail yes
Representative Joe.
Lord absolutely yes
Representative stance.
Yes.
Representative Vincent's yes.
Vice chair Hernan no madam chair
tops yes and
you have to pass.
At nine to one.
Okay and and Representative her
by two hundred would like to
explain more about thank you I I
I applaud you for what you are
trying to do here in terms of
improving services for CYFD but
I also think that over the years
that there needs to be worked
with CYFD I don't know that it
it doesn't appear to me that
that needs to be in it at
different division created
outside of the department and
I'm the best position within
side looking at exactly what's
happening and making those
recommendations I think is a
better plan and that's why I
voted no of looking at this
process so but thank you very
much for which to bring and
we'll see where it ends up thank
you next we'll move on to house
bill three seventy three mental
health crisis triage centers.
Thank you.
If you're ready Representative
good morning madam chair and
committee.
So madam chair house bill three
seventy three proposes to amend
the mental health and
developmental disabilities code
to define crisis triage centers
provide authorization for law
enforcement agencies to bring
individuals to a crisis triage
center for a mental health exam
and to provide authorization for
create for crisis trios centers
to offer voluntary and
involuntary evaluations and
treatment to certain individuals
in crisis.
Madam chair and committee of
basically in Los crucis we've
got this wonderful triage center
and we're really trying to get
in line with national guidelines
to make sure that the people
that this facility is meant to a
treat and house is up and gone
and we've got all the the
safeguards around that and so
about what we're trying to do is
find the least restrictive
environment
support long first met officers
so they can come bring
People in crisis to the triage
center and so they and they can
leave so they can continue on to
their job and we are also trying
to
make sure that those in prices
are able to be linked up with
appropriate care
Appropriate medications
appropriate mental health
providers it is a way to make
sure that we put wraparound
services around those people in
crisis at that particular time
when I was a baby social worker
I started off and I did
psyche valves at the in the
emergency room and if you all in
I now have been to the emergency
room everybody goes to get care
for a broken arm if there's a
full moon everybody is out and
there's crisis is going on and
so this really puts puts people
with that are having a mental
health crisis in the right
facility
madam chair committee of like to
introduce you all to Jamie
Michael she is make sure that
her the journey and they County
health and Human Services
director and she's been working
really hard on getting and
working on this facility and so
I'd like her to speak to you
just for a little bit to tell
you about the good work we're
doing in Los crucis.
Thank you Representative again
good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am with Dona
ana county government and we do
have a crisis triage center that
is licensed as a twenty three
hour facility we are one of
three licensed facilities in New
Mexico and we are asking to
amended this the the law to
allow crisis triage centers as
another option for law
enforcement right now they can
only use emergency departments
and jails and I think we all
agree that those two
environments are not the best
for most people who are
experiencing a crisis we have
real world evidence from over a
decade of actual care in these
types of crisis facilities and
it's very well documented that
that patient outcomes are much
better when the pathway to the
next level of care is through a
crisis triage center verses an
emergency department or
obviously through a jail so it
is much better for the patient
it's a much calmer place when
people are there they're created
by appear their assessed by a
nurse and their assessed by a
clinician so we have all the
safeguards to be a true triage
center if there's other medical
issues we can triage people and
they can make it back to an
emergency department or another
level of care but they also have
appears that work really hard to
engage people and they also have
clinicians and as a
representative Gallegos said the
the primary purpose is really to
take that opportunity of a
crisis and connect people to
care connect people to
medication connect people to
outpatient or inpatient services
and emergency departments are
not designed to do that so we're
asking for that change the other
change in here is including
another type of professor of
professional licensed
professional in the definition
of qualified professionals and
that is simply to align with the
Medicaid behavioral health
rural.
Where all of the licensed
specialized behavioral health
providers are listed so we
wanted this language to me here
that language and with that I
will stand for questions thank
you thank you Representative you
have an amendment.
There was an amendment Olympia
on the Senate side we did an
amendment on this also we worked
with
Andrea.
Okay what I have here is
If
I proposed to the house health
and Human Services Committee the
following amendment on page lot
page one line twenty three
strike shall and insert in lieu
thereof may do you want to do
the amendment okay yes madam
chair of the panel did not get
the amendment folks I know that
there is something maybe on this
on the Senate side because we
have a more
bill and also I'm I'm getting up
to speed okay if we could if we
could pass out the amendment.
And as I I've already explained
it so what can I have a motion
to adopt it essentially.
Okay so chaos and and Ferrary is
there any opposition to adopt in
the amendment okay.
You have an amended bill.
Great news.
Luckily it was the easiest
shortly she okay so we will go
to the audience is there anyone
in opposition.
On zoom anyone in opposition.
Okay seeing that anyone in
support in the room okay if you
want to speak please come
forward and I'm gonna be really
strict with the minute I've been
trying to give people a little
more but you give them two
seconds and they take ten.
Go ahead thank you madam chair
members committee leader in
Wrexham lobbies for the city of
Los crucis I would think this is
an important tool in this
Michael hit hit the highlights
perfectly the other the only
alternative is emergency rooms
and jails which is not the place
for people behave in in crisis
we need to relieve stress on the
health care system and also this
is is good for our criminal
justice system and and the other
piece we appreciate the
amendment because my other
client Presbyterian has an
inpatient behavioral health
system and we if it was a shell
they may have been required to
act as a crisis yes Sir so this
makes it clear that that these
are designed to be standalone
facilities of we think this is a
good piece of legislation thank
you.
The madam chair members of the
committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyists for the
county of Dona Ana this is a an
effort that's been ongoing for
many years ago is all the way
back to Senator Mary Kay Papen.
who put aside the money for the
structure of the building itself
and of ms Michaels has has done
a lot of work in and pulling
together all the people that are
necessary to staff this in
talking with New Mexico counties
and a lot of the counties around
the state the one comment they
said was this is much better
than where we take a today and
it is it's a burden on our
hospitals and our jails and more
importantly it doesn't treat the
individual appropriately so this
is a good effort and I would
urge your support thank you
thank you Charlie.
Good morning madam chair Jim
Jackson for disability rights
New Mexico members of the
committee as you know disability
rights New Mexico's always
cautious about involuntary
treatment of people with mental
health issues but of for the
reasons that have been the
specified by the sponsor in the
expert this is a much better
alternative to jails or
emergency rooms for people who
are in crisis it's a very short
term arrangement typically so we
do think that this is a much
better way of dealing with
people who are in crisis and we
encourage the support of the
bill thanks thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee M. drive able
I'm directed to pay for all
services division within the
Human Services Department and as
such I can't speak in support of
the bill technically but I do
want to assure the committee
that this this proposal is
entirely in line with that that
gathering evidence of how crisis
triage centers are most
effective across across the
country and it's also entirely
consistent with our model of the
ninety day crisis now they were
building out to provide
behavioral health response to be
a valid Crisis.
So that I just wanted to make
that point thank thank you
doctor.
Saving the best for last.
Thank you.
The staff it's working thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee on plants representing
the disability coalition and we
stand in support of the bill we
all know you all know that
people in mental health crisis
often end up in the law
enforcement system it's not the
best place for the and when the
law enforcement system has a
hold of them they can't take
them under current law to a
crisis triage center it's much
better place for them that a
hospital emergency department or
jail but because technically
that's an involuntary admission
they can't take them to a C. T.
C. so we support this change as
Jim Jackson said we're very
leery about involuntary
treatment but this is one case
where allowing the cops to take
them involuntarily quote and
quote because they're in the
hands of law enforcement it
makes sense and we urge your
support thank you.
Thank you okay Representative
did you have anything you wanted
to know what okay so I have so
far I have Chavis and then
Ferrari and Kate.
okay hold on go ahead
Representative Chavis thank you
madam chair representative so I
do have a couple of questions
one of my questions is I like
the idea right
but one of my questions is so
how long
how long do they stay and then
the second part of that question
is after they're released will
kind of where they go what kind
of follow up with is there what
kind of supports are there so
that they can do to the crisis
doesn't continue with the so.
I'm I'm sorry go ahead and
answer the question I forgot to
go to zoom for people in support
so answer the question my
mistake I'm sorry.
Thank you additive Madam chair
representative Chavis in most
cases it's a matter of hours
that people are at this facility
this is just allowing the time
for the evaluation to occur if
the end if after the evaluation
it's found that the individual
needs to move on to the next
step in the involuntary process
then there would be a transport
to a hospital and there would be
the process through the District
Court the civil commitment
process so at that point the
person would leave the crisis
triage center if there's any
inpatient involuntary admission
it would still happen at a
hospital the the important thing
that the data shows us is that
when people come into crisis
triage centers involuntarily
about eighty percent of the time
the transition to a voluntary
very briefly after they've been
to the facility because it's a
nicer place than a jail or
emergency department so people
are more agreeable and willing
to engage in treatment at the
time the average length of stay
right now are triage center is
up about twelve hours so for
this it would just be a short
time to have the evaluation
conducted.
And but let me go to soon okay
I'm so I apologize to everybody
Mike up Pearson.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mike Anderson I'm the chair
of the behavioral health
planning council is also
services offices using Medicaid
medi the second vice president
National Alliance on mental
illness and I'm standing in
front of support of HB reason
three
I am also a person who did it
along to the races Center Dona
Ana County early last week
and I was there for six hours I
also person who twelve years ago
was aghast at the detention
facility and education
facilities and can tell you
which was a better experience my
organization also help develop
right now model and so I I can
tell you also these very
strapped centers are much
better.
It's overall and are part of the
national standard for licensure
model and our organization as
far as the rules when it counsel
we we are actually recommending
this as the least restrictive
means for this so that's it
thank you thank you
Dorothy seat.
Madam chair good morning
Representative the line was
originally families this may
wonder why there is a military
families are interested in just
we're citizens of the state to
and we realize that registry I
sure kind of mirrors we do in
the military sorting things out
in the most efficient manner and
giving people a safe and then
hearing place and instead of
wasting law enforcement time and
is still nursing and medical
time we get to see people into
of the sort of three that's
almost right for them this is
one hundred per accident thirty
two years in prison as a
political supervisor well
familiar with this population
and I.
People who if they had treated
properly in the beginning
much different life I thank you
for allowing me to yes I think
you thank you
grace Phillips.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
Was general counsel for New
Mexico counties and for the
really good reason argument
stated our our lord stands in
full support of this island and.
Thank you I'm.
Now me and M. to.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Abigail teacher and I am the
executive director of nami New
Mexico I'm.
In my organisation dating in
full support of the cell thank
you very much thank you okay now
what again I apologize we'll go
back to Representative.
So the second of the question
that I asked previously was is
there any kind of of follow
through I know that you explain
that they go you know maybe to
another you know longer term
center for but what kind of
follow up is there if any.
So so Representative I'm gonna
go back to your first question
to you you asked how long they
could be there it's up to twenty
three hours and so it can be
from one to twenty three hours
and then follow through it can
be anything from making sure
that there is medications
provided of prescriptions you
know that are are called in
wraparound services through
counseling through therapist
you know looking at what it's if
it's makes making sure that they
there's food insecurity or
follow up with B. it it it the
the it varies through the gamut
of what the needs are so that's
part of what that assessment as
also if it is a higher level of
care that's needed then what we
would look at making those
referrals to whether it's last
Vegas service it some type of
hospitals to make sure they can
meet the long term needs
Representative and Madam.
And then my other question I was
in the house labor committee
yesterday where we had a bill
that spoke to the issue of
vacancies
CO correct.
And I heard a little bit about
the Los crucis triage center
there because I asked about you
know what are we doing to reduce
the inmate population right and
so my question is are there is
there any data that shows how
the triage centers are actually
effectively reducing the inmate
population in New Mexico or even
across the country if you have
any of that data madam chair and
representative there are and I'm
gonna have my expert talks and
I'm just gonna remind folks to
try to be brief we still have I
I yield to no one I'm just just
a reminder I'm not saying
anybody is not but reminding
you.
madam chair representative I am
not aware of the evidence that
shows inmate in prison impact
there there may be some
literature out there there is
evidence that shows a reduction
in jail in detention center
population four County jail
detention centers obviously if
there's another door another
Avenue for law enforcement to
use instead of the jail then
it's going to reduce the the
population crisis triage centers
are a form of diversion out of
the criminal justice system and
there is evidence to to show
that occurs so that would affect
our criminal justice population
over all.
Okay so I have Ferrary David
Cates lord and Herndon.
Insurance okay.
Go ahead Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Representative for bringing this
forward this is
been a good addition to our
community and I think this
expansion will also help but I
was also wondering
in the FIR mentions that this
bill could
potentially create legal risk
management regulatory issues for
providers because patients
requiring an involuntary
admission currently are directed
to an acute psychiatric hospital
and because of the potential for
danger or harm of harm to self
or others in creating this
facility with the different
licensure level for involuntary
patients would require crisis
triage centers to be brought up
to regulatory standards similar
to any cute.
Care psychiatric facility
necessitating safety and
staffing changes depending on
the diagnostic mix of patients.
That set what things are we
having to change it that
triage center to accommodate
involuntary thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative I'm gonna have my
my witness go ahead and answer
that thank you madam chair
Representative Ferrary
there will need to be through
the licensing and regulations
there will need to be
specifications for the type of
staff in this type of stuff
trading and the environment
medication and other things for
the the triage centers there are
triage centers all over the
country that do this so we have
the the models that we can
follow to change our licensing
and allow this to happen that's
why I think the NMAA is
important because we don't want
to force some triage centers who
may not have the the specialized
staff or the environment the the
physical structure in place to
do this but it is done very
successfully at most crisis
receiving centers and we can
work with D. O. H. to bring in
those experts and help craft are
licensing and rigs to to match
that and again people are only
here for a short period of time
so it's not the same type of
regulations that an inpatient
hospital would have to comply
with.
Okay thank you and that's all
chair thank okay Representative
Kate.
Thank you madam chair and and
committee and thank you.
Chair guy it is for bringing
this forward I only have and
thank you for all the other
questions the state wiped out
most of my questions
is there a population of
requirements or recommendations
for the triage center because we
are mostly rural state I I I'm
so happy that we have success in
Los crucis and we can copy that
that's very exciting but is
there is there a specific word
county rural county areas could
have trusted you might be one
person or two people it could
you tell me a little bit about
that would with this bill could
help support.
I'm so I'm gonna let my my
expert answer most of that but I
think when we talk about the
rural areas for I know my a lot
of my district is rural area and
so it would be law enforcement
and it would be the shares
Department that would be able to
have that partnership to be able
to bring people into the triage
center and so I don't know if I
adequately.
Madam chair representative there
is data that shows just to
sustain of standalone crisis the
facility the population of Dona
Ana County is probably one of
the smaller populations that can
sustain that model we do want to
serve the region not just doing
Ana County we want to serve our
neighboring counties and as
Representative I was said so the
law enforcement in other
counties can also to bring
people drive them to the crisis
triage center which again is
more more helpful especially in
those rural areas where there
emergency departments probably
don't have psychiatric care and
their jails may or may not have
on call regular psychiatric care
the state is looking at a plan
and a model across the state so
everyone is within a standard
proximity to these types of
services and it may look
different in Dona ana county
than it does in in some of the
other other counties and maybe
co located with other types of
facilities that may be more of
an on call type crisis response
in your community so we know
that there are considerations
for different communities in New
Mexico thank you madam chair
into.
Okay Representative.
Thank you Mr sorry but law
enforcement were unfamiliar with
this bill so they are asking me
a whole bunch of questions so
chair representative so the
first question I have so.
Do they no longer call EMS or
did they take them directly how
is that going to work.
madam chair representative it
could work either way crisis
centers are meant to be no wrong
door anybody can come anytime
and the answer should be yes
please come on in so law
enforcement can continue to
transport to the crisis triage
center they can pass a message
to transport to a crisis triage
center most of the time when
someone's in protective custody
or law enforcement custody law
enforcement does the transport
and again another benefit of
crisis triage centers is the
standard is for law enforcement
to be in and out in less than
five minutes I think our average
law enforcement time on scene at
the crisis triage centers like
two point five minutes an
emergency departments again
aren't set up to to have law
enforcement back on the field
that quickly and madam chair
representative they want to know
what the standards are I mean
this is somebody that is
suicidal are the is it for
everything and because what
they're wanting to know is
because are unfamiliar with this
bill it also kind of surprised
that this chair representative
so they don't know what will the
standard to be for somebody
that's in crisis.
Madam chair representative.
The only criteria is for the the
the centers that are currently
licensed or license for adult
only so you would just have to
know if your facility is
licensed for adult only or adult
and children again we want law
enforcement officers to not be
put in the place of making
assessments on scene we want
them to bring anyone to the
crisis triage center intoxicated
suicidal having a bad day there
is no medical clearance
necessary so as long as there's
not some this medical somebody's
unconscious somebody has
uncontrolled bleeding then
anyone can come to the triage
center a nurse will immediately
triage them and then if there is
another need because of the
substance use or or something
else to send them to another
level of care they can there's
also medication available so
they are licensed the pharmacy
board so they can find
medication similar to emergency
department medications so again
it should be easy that the ideas
it's easy for law enforcement
and mentors and I think some
last question so what happens
they take that person the crisis
center.
So madam chair again the model
is designed to never say no to
law enforcement it's and
different then a hospital so we
don't have budget and the bid
gets full and then you can't
accept more people it's set up
much much different it's it has
recliners and it has a kind of
an open space for people to
interact so we don't necessarily
need a bed for each person and
again people are moving through
the facility so quickly that
we've never come to a place
where it's been two full the
other facilities that work
across the country have never
come to a place where they've
been two full they always say
yes to law enforcement NEMS
Madam one more question on the
last one what happens if the law
enforcement officer takes them
there and they run off who would
they would there be a liability
in the law enforcement.
Madam chair representative the
the liability would be on the
crisis triage center it again
functions just like an emergency
department people run off from
the emergency department
The crisis triage centers if
they are licensed as
involuntary they will have
locked doors they will have some
security measures in place thank
you madam chair representative
David Ensor and expert thank you
for its Representative hundred.
Chair of the presenters thank
you very much I I and looking at
the care center and you're
talking about the tree odds and
are we talking about the same
location.
There is a facility on the cares
campus that is licensed as a
triage center in New Mexico you
can be licensed as a twenty
three hour facility or fourteen
day facility the one on the
cares campus is licensed as a
fourteen day facility.
Madam chair and and presenters
you talk about a twenty three
our facility and I heard you
mention that is there's
something and the staff to that
says you can't stay twenty four
hours.
Madam chair representative
twenty four would turn it into
residential so it changes what
facility would be required to
offer so that's why twenty three
is kind of the magic number and
again evidence shows us that
within twenty three hours people
are able to stabilize be
evaluated and be connected to
the next level of service and
one final question madam chair
presenters so you talk about law
enforcement is this also an
option for judges to present or
at I tell people to go there is
that is an option to doing
something else and I just wanted
some clarification on that and
not just law enforcement.
madam chair at anyone can make a
referral to a crisis triage
center and I think it would be
wonderful if judges notify
people that they're working with
that this crisis care exist in
their community again it's a
short term crisis intervention
it's not a long term program or
treatment so a judge can let
someone know that in crisis this
is a crisis intervention that
could complement their ongoing
treatment that might be required
by the court what clarification
madam chair present is how many
do we have an Bernalillo county
how many of these triage centers
do we have in Bernalillo county
there's one licensed and they're
breaking ground on a second.
Thank you Representative Jones.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Expert and.
I'm I'm especially glad to have
you all down and doing it just
right next to my district
we we spent a lot of our
resources dealing with people in
crisis mental health crisis and
and so can you clarify for me
currently what what is.
Where do you get your patients.
Madam chair most people come to
the crisis triage center right
now are self referred family or
friend so people are just
walking into the building
seeking assistance right now
between fourteen about fourteen
percent are brought in by law
enforcement and then another
about fourteen percent are
referred from other community
service organizations like some
of the services for people who
are experiencing homelessness
they may be in crisis and they
make a referral over to the
facility but the majority are
self referred just walk ins with
family and friends which is very
different than all of the other
of triage centers in the country
where their primary referral is
law enforcement because law
enforcement have more access
when you can do a voluntary and
involuntary.
Okay yeah I was just I was
having to go back to the
beginning and and figure out
exactly what the this
legislation is doing but but I I
most of my questions were
answered except I'm wondering
since there is a travel time for
with rural clients that are are
are being brought into the
Senator and the sheriff is
bringing them and you said they
can actually drop them off there
but they're there for twenty
three hours are we are is the
same as sheriff's department
required to come and and pick up
the patient within twenty three
hours or do they have to stay
and see what decisions are made.
Moving forward with the patient
madam chair transportation is
always a challenge again one of
the services we have built into
our facility is transportation
so when an individual is leaving
the facility whether it's to go
to an outpatient appointment
back to their house or to
inpatient.
We contract with our providers
to transport so they have a band
and they drive people to the
next level of care or back home
we could do the same type of
agreement with Luna county or
other counties we use our health
care assistance fund to help
support some of this operation
so no the law enforcement
wouldn't necessarily be required
to come pick up the individual
they're no longer in police
custody a family member could
come pick them up or we could
have an arrangement where in
Luna County we know that we're
going to reimburse the staff to
drive someone back to their home
in Luna county I think we can
work on arrangements.
To really be a regional service
that's excellent I really
appreciate.
Thank for law enforcement to be
able to to bring them in and I
support your bill thank you
thank you Representative Vincent
thank you madam chair.
So this facility Madam chair
representative.
Is there is there law
enforcement in the facility is
our security.
madam chair representative no
this of functions like a
behavioral health facility there
is no law enforcement or
security the security comes from
how the clinicians and peers are
trained to interact with
individuals so this would not be
a place for someone who has it's
it's not a public safety
facility so if there's weapons
or other
I guess violence behaviors this
wouldn't be the that type of
facility of functions just like
a behavioural health so they are
working with people who are
aggressive people who are their
symptoms are can can look
frightening but the staff there
is trained and again the
evidence shows that staff safety
and patient safety in these
types of environments it's a
really high standard and and
it's meant again because the
environment is so much more
pleasant than an emergency
department or jail.
Thank you madam madam chair
representative so procedurally
if somebody had a meltdown and
they got out of hand what would
be the procedure of handling
that.
So madam chair Representative
again the procedure would be
very similar to other behavioral
health providers and if there
was a case where it turned into
a public safety issue law
enforcement would be called law
enforcement would come to the
facility our staff at our triage
center work very closely with
our law enforcement so they know
each other and so they would be
able to coordinate that law
enforcement response if needed
but again the evidence shows us
that that just does not happen
very frequently at these types
of facilities Madam chair
representative I'm always
worried about people's safety
and I know that some people can
you know I've seen meltdowns
happen and and they're very
aggressive and do you believe
that your facilities should have
some form of security and maybe
maybe possible rumor of sales
that they could put amended to
law enforcement and second
question is.
Have you had to call law
enforcement for somebody that's
on Rulli and what is the
response times.
madam chair and there is
safety features built into to
these facilities and I'm
probably not I'm I'm not the
expert in seclusion and
restraint and what happens
within a facility to medically
address those those situations
again they are not very common
and the staff there is trained
the procedures and protocols and
all the tools are in place and
when we look at organizations
that provide this we ask for
their record of patient safety
in their record of of employee
and providers safety and there
are no significant issues with
either patient safety or
employee and providers safety
the only time we've had to call
law enforcement is not because
someone has been aggressive it's
because we can't keep them
involuntarily they are choosing
to leave and the health care
provider has said it is not safe
for you to leave because the the
forty three dash one dash ten
already allows qualified
professionals to keep someone if
they feel that they're in
imminent harm to self or others
so in that situation right now
the qualified professional does
have to call law enforcement to
come and pick up the individual
but during that time in the in
the couple times that it's
happened over the last year and
a half the individual has been
engaged in a set very common
quietly still wanting to go home
and still threatening to harm
themselves but they've been able
to keep them there without
incident until law enforcement
comes and I do not have the
response time but it's not ours
it it remind people let's keep
it brief please.
Okay and then madam chair
representative.
I just wanted to be on the
record I do support your bill
but I worry about you folks and
I wish you had security there
thank you okay I will entertain
a motion
okay so Representative Chavis
for two passed by the second
thank you Representative Penske
as amended.
so is there any opposition.
Okay seeing no you have a due
pass.
And I'm gonna remind the
committee that we have about
seventy five minutes left and I
built so I'm gonna limit each
bill to fifteen minutes
so if you have questions
etcetera make them brief and
answers brief and I will really
limit the public comment SO
Representative Trujillo go ahead
good morning madam chair
I bring to you house bill
number in my.
Three ninety three the ninety
three which is the.
The study use of silos silo site
been for health treatment of
them sorry I.
Silas Ivan is much too is a much
mushroom
Medicine old mushroom bill and
what it does madam chair is it
proposes to create an advisory
group.
And it it it'll attach it
administratively to the
department of health it'll be
quit we're requesting a hundred
fifty thousand from the from the
general fund appropriation for
twenty four and twenty five to
study it and
It'll have eight voting members
and put I'm going to do is stop
for a minute and have the my in
my experts introduce themselves
so that they can explain to you
how we got to this process and
how we want to move it forward
thank you madam chair in my the
first person is funny secede a
Baca hello and thank you
honorable chair vice chair and
members the committee I have the
honor of speaking to today as
the president of the New Mexico
second sign IT our hope as a
society is to achieve passing
legislation to fund this bill
for a governor appointed working
group to study the feasibility
and establishing a culturally
competent ethically sound as the
training program for
professionals to treat certain
mental health conditions using
psilocybin as a medicinal
application for psychedelic
assisted therapy as I had
mentioned in our previous
proposals proposal we are
struggling with their within our
very own pandemic of severe
mental health illness crisis
here in the state of New Mexico
poverty and substance abuse
disorders that have played their
last for decades the global
pandemic of COVID nineteen
brought in my.
I think we face as a state we
have seen an unprecedented rise
up two hundred thirty six
percent that in this in the last
year and that percentage is
rising steadily as as the death
toll.
And yet we have also seen a
sweeping across our nation and
many states psilocybin and its
potential therapeutic use is
providing to be unlikely
potential start at the forefront
of mental health.
There have been recent studies
met with is present success and
smoking cessation PTSD addict
addiction palliative care and
trauma from universities such as
Johns Hopkins UCLA Washington
University NYU imperial and even
our very own University of New
Mexico.
As we have stated we do not
believe that psilocybin alone is
magical pull or that this
therapeutic modality is going to
create a panacea however to
continue the halt of setting the
substance and integrated type of
therapy here in the state of New
Mexico with these rising numbers
and death related to mental
health illnesses including
substance abuse this could
possibly lead to missed
opportunities and many more
deaths thank you thank you.
Madam chair my name's Jeffrey
hall on thank you look okay my
name's Jeffrey holonomic
clinical therapist I've been
practicing in the field for well
over a decade and it started off
in harm reduction in the state
of New Mexico.
Madam chair of we stand for
questions okay is there any body
in the audience in opposition.
Anybody on zoom in opposition.
Okay anybody in the audience in
support.
Okay.
And you have one minute.
Good morning I'm walking out of
school I'm a board member friend
PSS I'm also a military veteran
who did three combat deployments
to Iraq and I benefit benefited
from suicide and services I am
also a former ambassador for
rural parts project where we
sent veterans down to South
America to receive a psychedelic
PTSD treatments and we found
that psilocybin therapy offers
hope it's and inexpensive and
innovative solution to come
indicates but people should not
have to leave the country to
receive the services please pass
house bill three nine three
thank you thank you.
Hello madam chair and members of
the board I am a volunteer at
and I'm PSS and I am a licensed
mental health counselor
I am doing outreach.
Your name open the Burkhart I'm
sorry and I'm doing outreach for
education for an NPS as and I am
going out to the community and
events and talking with people
and educating them about the
benefits and the safety measures
that we're taking to.
Remote us psilocybin and I
finding of that the public or
receiving this with positive
accolades of an PSS so thank you
thank you.
Okay anyone on zoom in support.
Okay see none we will go to the
committee.
Representative Lord Vincent
Jones.
Thank you madam chair so I've
actually I've member guys last
time you heard lessons part of
this
I'd like to see a lot of
research on this with it's very
it's under.
Very have a clinical therapy
it's not I just wanna make sure
people understand they're just
going home and taking anything
by themselves that it's it's
it's with therapy and I was just
reading here John Hopkins
university they did a lot first
randomized control study of
treating major depressive
disorder using I don't know the
synthetic but they said the
synthetic for this trial
the study published and Gemma
found seventy percent of
patients experience a clinically
significant response which is an
improvement that last at least
four weeks after at fifty four
percent Medicaid criteria of
total remission by having
psilocybin therapy also note
works tremendously for PTSD it
works depression worse for a lot
of different things so I
actually support this bill so
thank.
Chair committee members I'd like
to also acknowledge that has
recently been given breakthrough
status by the FDA.
Thank you Representative Vincent
thank you madam chair and
representative.
I want to support this bill and
I need you to help me out just
for a second I've always been
taught that these are bad even
whenever I was a little kid you
know mushrooms are psychedelic
Sir all that that's bad.
There have so Representative
Lord did just kind of answer my
question you have seen first
hand that it does work.
Madam chair committee members
yes the the studies were stopped
when the war on drugs kind of
started in the seventies but
they were very robust what we're
seeing now is infinitely more
positive in regards to results
regarding PTSD trauma depression
substance use disorder things of
that nature so I understand your
concerns but the the science
bears out that this I want to
say to have magical results no
pun intended but it can it can
have a phenomenal results to
those who take.
Thank you.
In a controlled environment.
Thank you Representative Jones.
You madam chair and
representative I'm just looking
at your advisory group and the
wide variety of people who make
up that group I think that's
great.
We have everybody input from
everyone
I'm just
A little curious about I keep
seeing that this is.
We're going to study to treat
individuals with certain mental
health conditions and certain
words certain keeps coming up
and so would you tell me what
those certain.
My experts will be.
Sure madam chair committee
members
We're gonna stay within the
parameters that we're seeing
results so we're looking at
things like trauma PTSD anxiety
substance use disorder those the
areas that we primarily want to
focus on including end of life
situations.
Very good thank you thank you
madam chair thank you end up I
just when they do the this group
presented to us in the interim
Legislative Health and Human
Services and it was fascinating
and we could go into more detail
I put that on Twitter and I had
two people private message me
who said this save their lives
if they hadn't had this they
would have committed suicide so
that was pretty strong for me so
Representative Hermio and
referred to pass.
Okay is there any opposition.
Seeing then you have a do pass.
Thank you thank you
and you did it in record time.
Everybody else is yes.
Okay we will go to House Bill
three oh wait Representative
Hernandez.
And on to Roch.
As a matter.
Whenever you're ready
Representative.
And.
Is my system sensitive compared
to the other ones.
and madam chair we do have a
committee set forth that should
have been delivered sometime yes
we have a user give us a second
did not set out I'm and I will
entertain a motion to discuss
this up.
Okay.
Okay.
Hey want to go ahead and start
explaining the slab.
So madam chair and members of
the committee house bill three
await is an update to the
adoption income tax credit I'm
just gonna talk about the
committee so because there was
some glaring issues in the first
draft of this they got filed so
the income tax credit relating
to adoption was first enacted in
two thousand seven and hasn't
been touched since currently it
gives a thousand dollars a year
to families who adopted a child
with special needs.
so what we did is we would like
to raise this to seven thousand
dollars for the first year to
help defray the costs of
adoption and then fifteen
hundred dollars a year after
that for a child with special
needs and then for every other
adoption we would like to do a
five thousand dollar first year
to help defray the costs and a
thousand dollars a thousand
dollars a year after that we did
remove the international and
step parent
Adoptions from this area and it
will be available only as long
as you live in the state of New
Mexico you when your adopted
child
we did add severe trauma to the
special needs definition because
has my two experts will tell you
that
you know you get a child in the
in their first year of life and
you have no idea that they're
going to have developmental
disabilities or other types of
disabilities as they go along
and most of that is from severe
trauma so adopted people are
less likely to engage in
criminal behavior become
homeless become addicted to
drugs have they have better
health the pursuing education
secure job state are better
members of society I myself am
adopted we have a lot of
adoption in the our family
including my brother in law the
just adopted some of children
that.
Whose parents were heroin
addicts and now that they've had
them for a couple years they're
running into the developments
disabilities and
attitude and be
They get in trouble a lot the
best way I can say that and so
there they have a two they're
having to take him to attend a
specialist just so that they can
have a normal life so I'd like
to introduce my to experts you
guys can pick which one of you
guys first.
Please introduce yourself.
Representative my name is Joe
Michel and I'm must take up a
little bit all right my name is
Jill Michels and I am a foster
parent.
You want me to go
to the and so in my experience
kids don't come into foster care
in less they absolutely have to
the situations that bring kids
into foster care often Germanic
and have long lasting effects
the families a step up to care
for and adopt these children do
so with open and loving hearts
but with limited support and
help from the state.
The New Mexico legislature can
change that and give these
families the support they need
to not only overcome some of the
barriers these children face but
also to give these children and
their families the opportunities
to thrive.
My husband and I are adoptive
parents to five amazing children
some of which are in the room.
State and who entered the foster
care system almost fifteen years
ago and so I'd like to take a
minute to point out some of the
out of pocket expenses that
families face when the adult
children at out of the state's
care.
A lot of times these children
have a higher level of need
which requires additional
supervision extensive medical
appointments specialized
therapies an in dept training
for caretakers all of which
limits the time and availability
parents can devote to typical
full time employment well some
of these things might be
considered routine expenses for
raising a child the needs of
children adopted out of foster
care can go above and beyond
what most children and are not
in their us often long lasting
due to their first circumstances
the circumstances that brought
them into custody and a long
term trauma they've experienced
in some cases maintaining a full
time job may not always be
possible.
Examples of additional needs
from adoption that adoptive
family space our evaluations and
therapies for our therapy vision
therapy sensory therapy physical
therapy speech.
These are not always covered by
insurance books in trainings to
improve and understand the
children's needs tutoring for
two learning delays often caused
by drug exposure supplemental
nutrition for feeding issues and
eating disorders specialized
food or feeding equipment
adaptive classes for children
who can't register for regular
recreational classes home
modifications like ramps and
lifts security alarms and air
purification systems extensive
dental care service animals
sensory clothing weighted
blankets waterholes.
Since recall coming appointment
like swings and trampolines
special education advocates
Vision and hearing hearing
excess Ortiz
lock boxes for medications these
are all expenses that adoptive
parents experience more so than
and then not after parents in
here in New Mexico there are
just under about four hundred
children legally freed and
waiting to be adopted so
expanding the state's special
needed option credit would
provide the necessary support to
give more families the
opportunity to open their homes
to the children in need so I
encourage you all to pass this
legislation to help the children
of New Mexico thrive and.
Hello Representative thank you
for allowing us to speak my name
is Christy but over I am also an
adoptive parent through CYFD
foster care my two children also
hear present today learning
about government and
I.
I'm here to ask that you go
ahead and support this it is an
important piece of legislation
for those of us that have
adopted children I adopted my
children replaced with me at one
week of age on the adoption was
finalized at three years old
during the time in foster care
there was an extensive amount of
trauma due to some circumstances
with what brought the chair and
David extenuating circumstances
with biological family after
their adoption finalized in the
past several years there have
been additional diagnoses
multiple additional needs and
These are just two children as a
parent I have no question about
providing for them and I knew
walking into this that adopted
children especially with the
circumstances that brought them
into care could have that
potential of meeting extra
however it has cost a
significant amount
many of the things that Mr
Schall has already mentioned our
state is that I live in
experience in in talking with
other individuals who have also
adopted older children some of
the concerns are the inability
for children to self regulate
And due to.
Prenatal exposure having issues
with regulation and causing
physical destruction to property
in the home
staffed which obviously is
something that happens
unfortunately and it doesn't
matter how much time and effort
apparently put into it the
brains are wired differently.
so those are all things one of
my friends is actually having to
pursue custody of our
guardianship of her child as
they turn eighteen because they
are not able to make decisions
appropriately and live
independently those are all
additional costs that could be
offset by this tax credit
but I believe that it would be
eight because you to vote yes on
this not just for these families
but also because these children
will become members of society
and by providing them with the
support and essentials now you
better their chances as they
grow older thank you thank you
so we will go to the audience is
there anyone in opposition.
On.
Opposition.
Okay see none in support.
And if you want to speak I will
take three three from from the
audience so please come come up
to the microphone I'm sorry we
just are really short on time.
We thank you chairwoman
representatives my name's then
back I'm the founder and
executive director New Mexico
toppers network we stand in
strong support of this issue for
all of the very many just
reasons that were presented to
you thank you you.
Okay anyone on zoom in support.
Okay seeing no hands I will go
to the committee.
Okay so we'll start with Vincent
lord.
Jones will just move this way
ahead thank you madam chair I'm
gonna make a real quick
statement it'll be real brief.
Thank you to thank you
Representative Hernandez for
bringing this forward.
The more that I get my mind
wrapped around CYFD the more I
appreciate people like you and
I'm thankful that there's people
that will foster I think this is
thankful that there's people
that will ultimately adopt and
and bring kids in your family
and love them and give them the
the joy that they need and
Representative Hernandez your
parents did a good job on you.
Thank you.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I appreciate the bill thank
bring it forward I too is also.
But it's it's great to see this
bill actually when it's faster
day.
Okay Representative Jones thank
you madam chair Representative
Hernandez ladies.
Thank you for the commitment to
providing a loving home for
these children we we all should
be in support of that and I
definitely am signed on to this
bill and I think we whatever we
can do to help you
achieve those goals were willing
to do thank you so much
Representative Chavis thank you
I just have a.
I just have a quick question I
just have an eighteen in terms
of the tax credit.
We know that kids right.
Absolutely madam chair I mean I
I'm I'm in that would with you I
mean I lived with my parents and
to my mid twenties through
college and all of that so
I think it's because the legal
definition of adults started
eighteen and so TRD asked you
know cuts the child tax credit
to the team so we need to follow
suit on that.
Thank you thank you and I will
say that I had I have well I had
to nephews who were special
needs adoptions and
unfortunately one of them
committed suicide
so with that I will entertain a
motion.
Okay Representative Chavis since
I was at a lower.
Okay is there any opposition.
Okay seeing line you have a do
pass thank you madam chair.
hold with it's not you okay I
need
exactly so I need to okay so we
we will.
Move a do not pass on house bill
three await but I do pass on
health health health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill three oh eight
does anyone change their vote
okay good now you have a
correct.
Yes.
Okay next we have
Representative Jones.
And our meal I don't know.
The okay.
Whenever you're ready.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Representative this is different
I've never been on this site
before.
That we're here nine.
Okay okay we're here to present
House Bill three fifty one it's
a rural health tax credit
eligibility
Madam chair members of the
committee this bill just cleans
up a problem that we identified
in the beginning of the session
we discussed the expansion of
the rural health care provider
tax credit during that
discussion we realize that
health care professionals who do
don't work the traditional forty
hour work week like nurses who
work three twelve hour shifts
would never be eligible for the
tax credit and we learned that
in order for the even the
traditional forty hour per week
provider to qualify that they
could never take a vacation.
So we we also learned that the
department of health has full
discretion to change the
definition of rural which has
caused some providers to lose
the credit without any real
change in their rural community.
HB thirty three fifty one solve
these problems by doing two
things it decreases the number
of hours of provider missed work
from two thousand eighty down to
one thousand five hundred eighty
four this means a provider we
need to work thirty six hour
week which is is three twelve
hour shifts and forty four weeks
a year it allows for the
provider to take a vacation but
still be a full time employee
and get the full tax credit it
also changes the definition of
rural from D. O. H. discretion
to be tied to federal
designation of rural and
partially rural underserved
areas so I have Kerry remember
under here is my experts and and
we stand for questions.
so we will go to the audience
anyone here in opposition.
Okay seeing none anyone on zoom
in opposition.
Okay anyone in support in the
room.
The lady in the dark glasses.
Thank you madam chair here comes
the Mike.
I just have my eyes dilated so
you're a trooper.
Linda Siegel for the New Mexico
nurses association a nurse
practitioner council and we
strongly support this bill I had
a lot of nurse practitioners who
had been in getting the tax
credit and then suddenly D. O.
H. changes the rules for what is
rural and now they don't get the
tax credit yet they're still
practicing in an underserved
area and and in an area that is
not that close to a large urban
areas so we would love to see
this go back or go to a better
choice so that.
We can fulfill the purpose of
the role tax credit which is to
support people practicing in
rural areas thank you thank you.
Okay anyone on zoom in support.
Okay seeing none we will go to
the committee.
Representative Chavis thank you
Madam chair representative.
I'm looking at the the F. I. R.
on the third page and every
remember a bill about rural
provider tax credit and the
committee and the and I thought
that they were going to work
because you raise the question
or somebody raised a question
about
those who work thirty six hours
a week right it was based on a
forty hour week
calculation and so my question
is and you know Wirth says the
under conflict application that
this bill conflicts with thirty
eight and four thirty seven of
can you sort of expand on that
or talk a little bit about that
I'm interested.
Madam chair members the
committee and Representative
have as so this house bill
thirty eight is Representative
Miguel Garcia's bill that
expands the eligibility of the
tax credit that's actually the
bill that when it was in the
health committee earlier this
year we realize this problem of
of if you're at thirty six hour
week employee you're never going
to qualify and even then you
could never take a vacation so
his bill is currently sitting in
the house tax committee for
consideration as part of a
larger tax package what we would
really like to have happen is
this bill then also moved into
the tax committee an after tax
committee is working on the tax
package they can then decide if
they're going to expand that
role health care tax credit to
also then do the hours so that
we're making sure that we're
covering those individuals with
thirty six hour work weeks and
allowing our providers vacation
time but still be employed full
time and get the credit which is
what's happening right now
there's just this you know
conflict between the reality on
the ground and the statutory
language so that's kind of the
intent of moving this bill
along.
Of Medicare present if you're
working with Representative
Garcia.
Right thank you.
I like to make a motion for to
pass I think okay and I would
just state every year I've read
these things and thought you
don't get a vacation you don't
get to be thank you don't get
anything so I I'm glad that
you're doing this so we have a
motion and a second
on house bill three fifty one is
there any opposition.
Okay seeing then.
You have a do pass.
Okay and we'll go one to house
bill three sixty two there's
practitioner in emergency.
Medical direction.
Good morning
madam chair members of the
committee good to be in front of
you again.
Usually sitting on the other
side in this committee so I do
miss this committee but I've
moved on and and the I thank you
for what you do I know it's a
harrowing task so thank you
madam chair and and members I do
have an expert witness that's on
zoom his name is dusty choked C.
H. O. A. T. okay and what house
bill thirty two
Is is attempting to do is add is
is amended the emergency medical
services to allow certified
nurse practitioners to provide
medical direction so madam
chairman and representatives
members of the committee what
happens in rural New Mexico and
I feel like it's always my job
to stand up for rural New Mexico
There has to be a director of
EMS services we have right now
in catching County we I was one
of the few counties in the state
does that does not have a
hospital.
At seven thousand square miles
and not one single stoplight.
Our average drive time to the
nearest hospital is
approximately ninety minutes.
After County has had to medical
directors for over twenty years
and only one M. D. resided in
catching County he wishes to
retire in twenty twenty three.
Our local clinics are staffed
with nurse practitioners and
RN's the next closest clinic is
staffed with the nurse
practitioner with the declining
number of physicians in the area
it's becoming increasingly
difficult to find a willing
participant to act as the EMS
director.
and of and with with that madam
chair I'd like to have let touch
dusty make a few comments please
we are sorry for any if you
could
that that's the I think can you
on mute okay.
Are you able to hear me madam
chair yes we are maybe you could
speak a little louder move a
little closer to your
microphone.
Certainly members thank you
Representative Armstrong thank
you for having me on
Representative Armstrong
representatives are very well we
are definitely struggling to
find a medical director within
our area we do have options to
reach out to the UNM you know as
a consortium.
However that does would be a
larger costs with the already
stretched very thin Fund Act
money that we receive here in
the county.
And we're looking to do and and
with this is to allow MPs to
serve as medical directors they
have the local knowledge of the
geography of the area and the M.
service at the primary care
physicians for many of our
residents that we serve.
So they already have an
understanding of the medical
issues that we're facing here in
in rural New Mexico.
Other than that the.
Representative Armstrong
mentioned just about everything
I was needing to discuss and I
do stand for questions okay
thank you so anyone in the
audience in opposition.
Okay anyone on whom in
opposition.
Okay anyone in the audience and
support.
Linda.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee level for them I
hope.
I would just say go for.
The nurse practitioner council
and we strongly support this
bill I noticed in the FIR that'd
it had a question about further
credentialing and that door for
their experience in that area
and that's something that nurse
practitioners do they
specialize in certain areas and
they go get more education if
that's necessary in order to
provide the specific service as
as you may some of you will know
that nurse practitioners have
had independent practice in New
Mexico since nineteen ninety
three so they require no
supervision they collaborate
with all of their other health
care providers and it is
certainly something that they
could do as you may know the
direct the Medicaid the medical
director of Medicaid is a nurse
practitioner and she is
exceedingly qualified thank you.
Okay.
Anyone in support on soon.
Okay seeing none I'm just going
to point out one thing
Representative Armstrong on page
six line eleven and it says
securing physicians and
certified nurse practitioners
that may be should be in or
because it sounds like you're
going to have to do bowl.
Just something to think about
that was something that was
brought up in FY are and we
don't want to make it harder.
I'm willing to make that
amendment if you so choose madam
chair
Okay is there secretary.
Anyone in opposition okay so
just get that I'm not exactly
sure how to get it drafted up or
whatever if you could follow up
and I just don't want him can
you imagine having to get a
nurse practitioner and the
position thanks okay so
questions Representative
Vincent.
Thank you madam chair.
Brilliant idea.
Brilliant idea I can't tell you
that's why my hair turned gray
when I was like thirty five is
trying to provide medical
directions for our ambulances
and.
I just I was just sitting here
thinking what a great idea that
is to have a practitioner
because they know it our whole
scope of practice as paramedics
and why would they not be able
to to
Find the medical direction one
question that I had madam chair
and and the chairman Armstrong
is.
This is a saving money.
On medical direction
Madam chair representative I
doubt it very seriously it just
expands where people exactly
what you're talking about will
would be able to do this job and
it actually running the
legislation was my idea but it
was brought to my attention by
the emergency manager
dusty choked that's my expert
witness who I went to high
school with his mom and his dad
so.
Madam chair representative that
I mean he that's a great idea
and I think that.
I see a lot of our practitioners
really coming up in the world
you know and helping out with a
lot of health care issues and I
know that some people that had
just zoom seo practitioners that
of full MD so thank you and good
job you.
In a Ferrari thank you madam
chair and thank you for bringing
this forward I know this will
help a lot with our rural areas
as you were speaking of but I
was also wondering as we're
looking to amend position tech
I'm sorry physician assistants
to be able to do other and
provide other services would
also help for them to be able if
there's not a nurse practitioner
to be included in this Madam
chair representative I thought I
don't want to push the envelope
too hard and I think you know
we're already pushing and I I
respect all aspects of the
medical health care industry and
so for this.
Particular piece of legislation
I think we should stick to what
it the way it's written but
thank you for for thinking about
that okay just thought it might
help broaden and the services
that you need thank you future
legislation.
Okay anyone else okay will
entertain a motion.
Okay Representative Vincent and
lord with the second is there
any opposition.
K. king and you have a unanimous
do pass and I want to ask as
amended and I want actually it's
not amended.
The.
how did you get only one
committee assignment whatever
your magic is I want to know.
I have no idea madam chair maybe
it's because I'm nice.
I was going to say what is that
thing about the rest of
we should all practice.
Okay if you thank you okay and
we are on our final
Again the item Senate bill
seventy one as amended organ
donation discrimination
representative Brandt and and I
mean Senator Brandt and
Representative Jones called
tight Senator thank you madam
chair person.
In the news.
Chair representatives and.
Forgiving the time if I
accidentally called you senators
because they haven't been in the
house for a while but this bill
is is actually simple build but
has profound effects
This bill simply makes it
illegal to discriminate against
the disabled person.
When it comes to organ
transplants.
We do not have this problem in
New Mexico.
So to say that right off the bat
because that's usually one of
the first questions I get.
But we have seen this problem
and other states.
Especially with the down
syndrome community.
A down syndrome children tend to
have to have heart transplants.
and we have down syndrome the
seventeen year old down syndrome
young man
die in Texas because the because
of down syndrome they did not
give him the transplant.
so this bill just make sure that
that doesn't ever happen in the
state of New Mexico.
but I did have the down syndrome
the national down syndrome
society called me in my office
couple weeks ago really excited
about the bill I I was care I've
been carrying this bill for last
couple years actually for a
pastor's wife who has adopted
four children with down
syndrome.
And so I actually called the
stories law but we we don't like
to do that kind of stuff in the
Senate but putting it law so
with the the little girl who has
mostly medical problems with
down syndrome her name is
Laurie.
and so we're just trying to make
sure that when Gloria needs of
organ transplant which probably
will happen at some point in our
life that she won't be.
Discriminated against and that's
it that's all those buildings.
The gentleman thing you'd like
to say is one co sponsor I would
just like to point out that I
don't think this bill has
received any opposition and
didn't fly through all got all
the way to the house last year
House for less yes it actually
came through this committee last
year was a unanimous to the
house floor and simply ran out
of time.
Thank you okay is there anyone
in the audience in opposition.
Okay I feel like the teacher who
all the kids are sitting in the
back back back of the room and
so is there anyone on zoom in
opposite.
K. seeing none
in that room and support if you
want to speak please come
forward.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee again
Ellen plants representing the
disability coalition I don't
think I need to work very hard
to convince the members of this
committee that this is a good
idea unfortunately
discrimination in health care
based on disability and
prejudices about disability in
this unfortunately widespread
and we applaud the Senator and
now the representative for his
commitment to this issue with
yes he said he has carried
before and got very close last
time we hope this time it will
make it over the finish line and
we are to support thank you
thank you.
Yes crystal Roy public policy
officer for the ark of New
Mexico we represent people with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities and all stages of
life would like to think Senator
Brandt and Representative Jones
for bringing us and stand in
strong support of this bill
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico up
keep it brief for all the
reasons that have been explained
this is a great bill
it's regrettable that we even
have to plan for these sorts of
situations but it is important
to put this kind of statutory
protection in place so we
encourage support thank you.
Okay anyone
On zoom in support I see Jodie
with their hand raised.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jerry
Hendrix and I am the executive
director with you I.
We just lost you Jody.
Can you hear me now yes.
Great
families across New Mexico and
that we ask you to support this
bill because New Mexico has a
very real and urgent need for it
ends in a.
In the states that doesn't
really to prohibit
discrimination we're still
seeing those with disabilities
discriminated against when
needing life saving transplant
services I think that this bill
that beautiful statement for New
Mexico it is that we will not
stand for discrimination and
unethical practice insurance
coverages for those with mental
and physical disabilities so we
ask you to support this at all
and state assets to prohibiting
discrimination interferes with
the disabled individuals ability
to CENIC here thank you thank
you Jody okay we will go to the
committee for questions or did
you did you all could I forgot
to disclose that I am also a
disabled person and so this bill
will affect me I'd just make
sure I disclose that every time.
Thank you.
Any question Representative
Vincent.
Okay okay I just have one
question before we go there so
who is Jonathan Spradling.
Okay so
It refers to changing the name
of the entire section to the
Jonathan Spradling revised
uniform anatomical gift act
Helen if you know the answer
come on up.
L'oreal.
This goes rather way back madam
chair members of the committee
so I'm not sure I know many of
the details but Jonathan
sprout wings mother used to work
in the Senate I believe she was
a secretary in the major office
and Jonathan Spradling I think
was killed in a car accident I
don't recall the details because
this as I said because way back
but that's why it's named the
John Spratling Act thank you
it's nice to have people who
have to history I'm showing my
age.
Okay so we have a motion to Pat
to pass Senate bill seventy one
as amended and the second.
Of okay that's right is there
any opposition.
Okay seeing then you have a do
pass.
Thank you all for getting us
through our agenda today your.
