I might Chaves but I'm here need
to.
Roger one.
I am here thank you.
Please Representative Louis that
off of.
Your.
Sorry Representative Liz
Thomson.
I'm here.
brewery.
Madam chair Deborah A. Armstrong
I'm here.
Representative the excuse to
yes.
He'll be in later I'm sure thank
you.
So are to those listening it is
the time of year where we are
all juggling of putting on our
own bills and other committees
which means sponsors are also
juggling to get here to put on
their bill so we may juggle the
agenda around a little bit to
accommodate when our sponsors
are available which we're going
to do one forty seven first this
morning our Representative
Martinez is not yet available
for one twelve.
And just want to announce to the
audience and to the members I
got a request over the weekend
to roll house bill one sixty on
to Wednesday house bill one
sixty that comment protocols at
abortion facilities the sponsor
is putting on a number of bills
in other committees this morning
so we will not be hearing house
bill one sixty this morning.
but we still have a full agenda
so house bill one forty seven
we're going to hear first
Representative bash on do you
have experts you want us to
bring over.
Please.
Rachel Leung.
And Linda Siegel.
Representative fashion members
of the committee I was able to
find Rachel I don't see miss on
there yet.
but as soon as she is on I will
promote care for you and then
madam chair would you just do a
reminder for the audience about
the interpretation availability
today yes yes and and to the
audience listening and to
members we do have an
interpreter available this
morning for those of you who
want to you hear it in Spanish
or in English you have your
selection so
of the button is on the bottom
of your screen.
Okay Representative bash watch
for miss.
You.
Several months ago members of
the academy of nutrition and
dietitians came to me to help
them accomplish a total rewrite
of their thirty two year old
practice at.
Their practice act originally
passed the legislature in
nineteen eighty nine and has not
been substantially updated since
that in that moment you can
imagine that with all the
changes in the health care over
the past thirty two years the
act definitely needs to reflect
the current practice of
dietitians and dietetic and
dietitians nutritionists.
And I have with me today right
Sheryl Lee
And
And we hope Linda Siegel can
join us soon
to explain the bill in the
amendments.
Yes.
Saying your name right.
is Rachel Lee young the.
Sorry.
Okay if you would like to go
ahead and explain the bill with
madam chairs permission go
ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am a licensed
registered dietitian I work in a
hospital in New Mexico and today
I represent the New Mexico
Academy of nutrition and
dietetics we're an affiliate of
the academy of nutrition and
dietetics which is the largest
organization in the world of
food and nutrition professionals
in here New Mexico we represent
about four hundred and fifty
registered dietitian
nutritionist we sought to have
this bill.
As we wanted to rewrite our
practice act so this update the
goals of an artist strengthen
nutritionist qualifications to
put better protect consumers
from harmful nutrition practices
to add a scope of practice to
our practice act and to make
nutrition and dietetics
licensure we're consistent from
state to state
hopefully so that we can move
across state lines and consumers
know and understand what we do a
little bit better as licensed
nutritionist and dieticians we
work with individuals and groups
and a variety of settings to
help treat manage and prevent a
nutrition related diseases such
as cancer heart disease
metabolic disorders obesity
diabetes and food allergies so
this specially Services called
medical nutrition therapy and
when it's done are provided by
a qualified individual can be
harmful if it's provided an
ethically can be harmful to a
person's health so we want to
protect medical nutrition
therapy
I'm available for any questions
that you might have about the
bill or about will be do as
staycations and nutritionists
thank you.
Chair is this the time to
introduce the amendment
are are less you can explain
that a little bit for the
audience but will will take it
up for discussion when we get to
the committee members all and
Linda has now joined us if you
want her to say anything.
I'm Linda Segal is here and do
you have anything to add to
misli
Statement.
You have to unmute Linda.
Thank you madam chair
Representative bash I'm just
gonna be here to talk about the
amendment and the other two
little amendments we need to add
to it.
Okay.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Okay are you ready for us to go
to the audience.
Okay.
I'm and that Gabrielle do you
have a poll.
Yes madam chair.
So first for members of the
audience we're going to do a
poll of how many are here in
support of house bill one forty
seven and how many eight might
be here in opposition.
Okay.
I think that
are still weighing in but I
think that's good
So we had thirty in support and
zero in opposition.
so will just one last chance if
there's anyone here in
opposition to raise their hand
if you want to speak I'm
assuming not since no one voted.
In opposition.
Okay and those in support.
If you wish to speak.
And
Raise your hand.
Okay we're going to go first to
Maria are retained all.
Morning one of the.
Good morning.
When
you go to the committee to
number did not have a family.
Hello the governor the only
mothers and the budget for
together after.
So what you will but informally
that.
With someone on a dealer lot
forty four I should be simple.
US president by the program up
with the state.
Corporate imperialism of the
State Farm.
So this is this the vote the
agency at this point are not
available.
This one but
but also yes yes
Yeah we're not speaking on one
twelve right now.
Okay I'm sorry.
My program I just is not in the
system.
Thank you representative is this
is on house bill one forty seven
the dietitians go ahead Donna.
Donna there's something are
wrong with your audio.
We can't hear you.
yes Representative.
Possibly.
Or maybe you're standing on the
pole so maybe we treat the poll
because I think following the
wrong people jumped on that it
seems like.
But I don't know I I don't know
I don't know what we'll go by
the hands that that one yes
ma'am thank you madam chair and
Donna at just comes across as
squeaky noise.
And try once again.
Yeah we can't we can't hear you
I'm so sorry.
we'll go on to Rebecca Leverone.
Go ahead Rebecca Madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca lateral I am a
licensed registered dietitian
and I work as an instructor at
UNM I support this bill to
protect consumers from nutrition
misinformation from unqualified
individuals receiving
information from unqualified
individuals could have
devastating health consequences.
Thank you.
Thank you next tablets a mackay.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is have it that I'm speaking in
support of the one forty seven
I'm a registered dietitian with
the University of New Mexico I
worked in outpatient right now
and what I think is interesting
about this bill is that it
hasn't been read that revised
and as long as I've been alive
thirty years and so it's time to
sort of take a peek at that make
sure that we're protecting the
people of New Mexico so we're
trying to get nutrition therapy
to over the last year and in a
lot of increase in people
seeking health and nutrition
education especially amid the
pandemic but what I've also seen
is that they've gone to people
who are under qualified and have
been getting advice that is
particularly dangerous and have
been coming to me as a result
with things like ninety percent
and at the end of their health
speaking at Jerry and so I think
it's important that we make sure
that we protect our New Mexicans
and we make sure that we have
the ability to also make sure
that we have insurance behind
them so that more people can
have medical nutrition therapy
at a reasonable cost and that's
what this bill can help us
achieve thank you.
Thank you
next we have panicking.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you so much for taking the time
to hear this really important
piece of legislation that's
going to update our practice act
I am a registered dietitian here
in New Mexico and have been for
about the last ten years and I
my primary areas of work have
been in research and community
based programming and a little
bit and in the government sector
and this is just such a critical
piece of legislation to move our
profession forward to protect
the public here in New Mexico
and I think one of the other
things I'd like to add is we
have you know incredible crop of
New students who are coming into
our profession and they are
having increasing demands on
their education and what their
requirements are going to be
including but it's going to need
to be a master's level
credential as we're moving
forward and so ensuring that
what they're entering into is a
protected profession in a
protected scope of practice is
an even better incentives to get
more of that more students in a
more diverse a class of students
coming through the Senator
nutrition programs in the state
so thanks so much and I'm and
very strong support of this bill
thank you Patty.
R. will try to
Donna locked there one more time
CEO for audio.
Donna.
Is this any better there you go
all right good morning madam
chair and committee members
thank you for your patience I'm
Donna Lochner and I am an
associate professor emerita of
from the university of New
Mexico nutrition faculty and I'm
also registered dietitian
nutritionist.
I was among those who helped
draft the original licensure act
in nineteen eighty nine sure
makes me feel old when another
previous speakers so she wasn't
even born yet but anyway we
worked very hard for licensure
at that time because each of us
had seen members of the public
whose health and compromised by
following advice given to them
by individuals who call
themselves nutritionists or
dietitians who lack training at
that time anyone could set up
practice and described
themselves in any terms I chose
so I'm proud of the work that we
did in nineteen eighty nine but
the lot definitely is allocated
there have been so many changes
in nutrition practice in the
thirty plus years I'm also
particularly impressed that
those who worked so hard in this
revision this year of work with
other state agencies and
organizations across the country
so there could be some
standardization across states
for nutrition licensure I fully
support H. B. one forty seven to
ensure that nutrition therapy
and counseling is provided by
well qualified individuals who
rely on science based and
evidence based information to
improve the health of and well
being of New Mexicans thank you
very much for your time this
morning.
Thank you.
And that is
That is all I have and the
public wishing to speak and
Representative.
If you want to move your
amendments and have Linda
explained I I will tell you they
got turned in on Friday Elise
the ball got don't know about
any new ones that that when the
mentioned but it's unclear
whether all the analysts got it
so will let's talk about it and
and see
and if everyone is is
comfortable
at doing the amendment so I if
you wanna
move your amendment for
discussion purposes and.
Give us the two oh two number so
we're sure we're looking at the
right thing.
Thank you madam chair.
The to to remember.
Is point two one nine five
three.
Four point four okay got it.
And also also second for
discussion purposes.
I would like Linda Siegel to
explain the amendments okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so as you have
heard this is an extensive
re write of the practice act and
so we've been finding little
tweaks that we miss stand also
when regulation and licensing
Representative.
View this bill they have some
more changes so the bulk of the
changes in the amendment have to
do with administrative things
like getting rid of
certain language our about moral
character which they're asking
us to remove in every scope of
practice statute addressing the
sunset provisions changing at
two twenty twenty seven and
twenty eight and adding a
provision about criminal records
which is something that that
we're doing every single
practice at so these are largely
or AFP tweaks are adding a word
here and there I don't think you
want me to go through exactly
where they are but they're not
in in most ways substantive but
what happened when your analyst
for the majority amber Duke's
reviewed it she found to
inconsistencies in one place on
page twenty six where we had not
removed the good moral character
language and in another place
where we have been removed there
are requirements of fingerprints
for criminal background check so
the amendment has everything.
The R. L. D. wanted but we miss
these two
taking out two of these areas
that are L. D. had requested
that we do they're taking out in
one chart for one category of
provider and they're not taken
out in another category
providers so that that's the
substance of the.
Okay.
Representative Armstrong.
Just what can I speak on the
amendment now yes good question
okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Linda and and
Representative fast I was
curious on of course I don't
have the man in front of me
because I my printer ran out of
ink and I only have one
computer.
So with that being said I one of
the it issues for me is RLD
still going to be appointing
instead of the governor or is
that been taken out.
madam chair members of the
committee I'll answer that
There have been two
superintendents of R. L. D. and
it was our understanding with
the prior superintendent that
they kind of wanted to shift
towards having the
superintendent make appointments
to certain boards because there
was would likely be faster and
that these boards didn't have
huge numbers of licensees so we
did that in the original bill
and thank and when
superintendent when when the
Trujillo economic and she had
talked to the governor's office
we put it back to the governor
so the governor appoints still
appoints okay and so that's in
this amendment is that correct
yes madam chair representantes
Tong okay thank you madam chair
and representative the other
Question I have is on the sunset
is it coincided with Senate bill
one forty five.
That is is coming forth with the
sunset commissions.
Madam chair our Representative
Armstrong I did just look at one
at one forty five today I
believe that.
It does because R. L. we had a
hand in in making sure that one
forty five was correct and all
of the is the one who told us to
put these dates in our amendment
so definitely verify that.
Okay thank you I'm just curious
why the sun's anything talking
about the sunset is in there
because of house Senate bill one
forty five is already extending
it recommending the extension to
twenty twenty seven so I'm not
sure why they even talk about it
in this bill other than the fact
that it is that that it does
have a sunset because they're
extending it and Senate bill one
forty five so I just wanted to
bring up those two points and
that thank you for taking out
the the old language moral
character are we we talked about
that a lot in in our sunset
subcommittee it's just how do
you measure that and it's anyway
thank you so much thanks for the
answers.
Thank you on the amendment
Representative Matthews.
So I can't really just read the
amendment right.
I think what I think we need to
the okay that's okay I have just
a I I notice in the comments of
the reviews I was reading the
analyst I was reading that they
that there was a conflict in the
definition of telemedicine or
telehealth with other language
and also it needed to be amended
regarding that the conflict
between U. LA at St rose Act and
when you describe the amendments
I wasn't clear whether those had
also been.
It corrected.
Or if if you weren't it or if
they were going to be amended to
fix those problems madam chair.
Representative Matthews
If those were RLD corrections
yes that we do have them of this
number fifteen are on the
amendment strikes in accordance
with uniform licensing act.
If not when you're asking about.
And telehealth.
language I believe this address
by amendment to.
Okay okay I just wanted to be
sure because there they had
mentioned specifically in a
couple of the analyst thank you.
I'm on the amendment
Okay.
So.
I'm L. and a little bit this is
really difficult to read with
this long amendment and two
still missing that need to be
fixed and I'm wondering
Representative bash how you feel
about
that we continue on with our
questions on the substance of
the bill and and then ask you to
go to get a committee sub and
bring it back on Wednesday and
will vote just so that we're all
sure what's all in there and you
have one more look with eight
council and so forth to make
sure that we get this right
because it's really hard with
this many pages of amendments
and still things servicing that
didn't get caught I worry that
we're gonna hand off of bill and
a long list of amendments and
add to the and it not still be
quite right.
Share and that's fine with me
okay so let's go to the
substance of the bill committee
members and so that we get our
questions asked in total and
then we can come back with a US
seven just some on Wednesday
with a brief discussion of F.
and questions of necessary and
and and vote at that time but
let's are discussed the.
the bill of and Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair one of my
questions was how many.
What kind of goes back to the
some of the sunset.
In the sense that it's
recommending that eliminating
nutritionists and nutrition
assistance licenses.
So how many different licenses
are we talking about in this.
Particular bill.
Madam chair.
Madam chair I would referred
that to one of my expert
witness.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong I can answer that of
right now on our current bill.
Our current act we licensed
nutritionists dietitians and
nutrition associates with this
re write we recommend getting
rid of the nutrition associate
we currently don't have any in
New Mexico and it's not
consistent with any other states
and then keeping.
Dietitians except giving us the
title licensed dietitian
nutritionist that's just to take
home the point that all
dietitians are nutritionists and
it's also consistent across the
United States and then the other
one is we're keeping Tyson's
nutritionist just changing the
qualifications updating at to
become at and licensed
nutritionist.
Perfect thank you so much thank
you madam chair and
representative we that that fits
in perfect with what they're
doing in house Senate bill one
forty five so one of my
That was my other I had already
asked my question about the
sunset we are a or extending it
to twenty twenty seven
so that's I don't really know
why it's put in here
I it may be confusing to people.
We're having it in there
the others being.
And that was okay
reciprocity.
Is it addressing reciprocity and
do we have reciprocity in New in
this division in New Mexico.
You can I would madam chair I
would ask one of my expert
witness.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong.
Yes so.
Currently it does say and our
our current bill and in the our
current act in in this bill that
if you are a licensed
nutritionist at licensed
dietitian in another state you
can apply to be the same here in
the state without any extra work
as long as that the requirements
are similar in that other state
so another big goal of this act
is to make it more consistent
state to state so it is easier
for licensed dieticians and
licensed nutritionist to work in
other states without having to
go through lots of different
criteria to become licensed.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you for that information I
just want to make sure that we
are allowing people into New
Mexico with a certain math
course meeting a certain
criteria but not such a high
criteria that people are passing
through New Mexico going to our
neighboring states thank you
madam chair thank you
representative next I have
Representative Lord.
You madam chair
and madam chair and then
Representative I I want to say
thank you first and foremost for
providing exemptions for fees
for active duty military service
I would also look to see
protections their husbands
Veterans some a little bit
biased towards that but thank
you for that and their
depreciate that.
I have some questions and excuse
me it's it's a big bill so
excuse me as I go through this
I'm did I hear and what the
amendment because there's so
many amendment and so much of
this bill it is a little
confusing at your grand that.
Did you take out or did your
moral character or do you define
what moral character is the
reason I ask is because this is
been a topic of discussion and I
almost wish everybody would take
out more character an ad we're
gonna look at background checks
are going to look at their
disciplinary actually look at
all that so did you change that
wording or would you consider if
we define it so we know exactly
what is more characters thank
you.
I'm sure I can answer that right
feeding so yes we have taken out
good moral character.
In one spot and that is one of
the additional amendments we're
going to have to make because we
didn't take it out in the other
place where it was located so
R&D regulation and licensing as
requested that we take out all
references to good moral
character so we are doing that
and there are requirements for
people in suits with other
requirements that we're getting
rid of that language which means
nothing.
Sh thank you for answering
questions thank you
miss thank you Madam chair
representative yeah because what
what I'm finding is is even
almost of it said reference to
our code internally you know
this is what good moral
character means because it's
it's so you know you could you
could insert anything into their
and not give me Morris
the question so with this.
Okay I know because I've worked
in health failed and I run a
clinic before I understand we're
trying to DO and is this
definitely needed updates that
is for sure so when you're
talking about dietitian
nutritionist and nutritionist I
just want to make sure a few
things
you know when you go to the
health foods store and there's
somebody there that says all of
you have this you should take
you should eat more current and
more Kelso is more kale the
answers with more detail so.
Are these guys going to be in
trouble are they going to be
under the creating fines
practice act relations or not I
just want to make sure that
health care person working
health food store if they
recommend kale is it going to be
fine who's gonna penalize
Would star ski.
Madam chair.
Madam chair and members of the
committee so this is actually
one of the goals of this re
right is to make that a little
bit more clear so industry right
we say that licensed
nutritionist and licensed
dietitians can provide medical
nutrition therapy so that's what
we use in our practice to treat
prevent or manage health care
diseases so outside of medical
nutrition therapy anybody can
find general non medical
nutrition information so and
that's both are defined within
the bill what is medical
nutrition therapy and what is
general non medical nutrition
information so they were
pertinent recommending kale just
because it's a generally healthy
food or healthy diet that is not
something that's protected are
usually harmful.
Okay yes thank you I'm just I'm
I think you mentioned
Representative and thank you for
that because I'm always trying
to make sure that our kids we
had a great time were they were
going down so hard on the health
of sources trying to regulate
supplements are just trying to
make sure that they don't fall
within that two of the other
question did happens to be my
last question so
I mean I understand that
medical doctor can give all the
new by the want and this is just
applying to these licensed
nutritionist is that correct I
mean it's not going to regulate
let's say a chiropractor who
doesn't extensive knowledge of
food nutrition coordinator path
same question they're not going
to fall into this and fall into
the building under that
practiced Act violations is this
is not applicable to them is
that correct.
Madam chair members committee I
know there is an exemption
within that the act that if you
are licensed health care
professionals within nutrition
is within your scope of practice
that you you're not in violation
of this act yes thank you make
sure that our our vitamin
supplement people are covered
under current practice covered
in our nature pastor coverage so
I thank you for instance
question that's all I have thank
you madam chair representative.
Thank you our next I have
Representative Matthews.
You are muted Representative.
Thank you madam chair
My questions
Representative bashin and
experts.
Related to the relationship with
regulation and licensing and I'm
interested in this.
Because I'm working with another
agency that's had some
conflicts with their physically
attachment the RLD wants to that
has been involved with making
hiring decisions and other kinds
of things and I'm just trying
to.
Understand how agencies and
particularly your agency is
going to be
part of our L. D. and with the
decision makers will be the
board your board or R. L. D. so
I guess my first question is is
there a change under this
statute you in the relationship
of the board.
Of your agency with our L. gate.
Madam chair from I can answer
that question I'm trying to find
the exact page there is in the
act a clarification about what
the board does and what R. L. V.
does and.
The perfunctory activities
saying that's a licensee comes a
potential licensee comes in and
they meet all the criteria for
getting a license in New Mexico
the staff can issue the license
because it's not something that
the board would have to meet
economy in these boards only
meet up three to four times a
year if they are lucky
and and so you don't want to
have a licensee have to wait
months in between a board
meeting plus if they met the
criteria they met the criterion
they should get a license so
that is where I in the act and.
They are real do does get to
hire the staff I mean that's
their role it's always been the
role they hired the quote
director of the Board and
sometimes those directors in
fact most of the time those
directors are the directors for
three or four two to three point
so that that continues on the
fiscal responsibility for
managing the licensing fees that
is with the staff of our
ability.
So if that clears.
Is.
Madam chair have you Linda is
that the same relationship that
the board now has with R. O. de
or is there a change.
Madam chair representative use
that's essentially the same
relationship but it's now
codified and and clear because I
believe and.
Our our licensees correct me if
I'm wrong is that the board
often had to approve the
licenses and that that's just
not a smooth functioning
situations so that might be the
only change but it's really just
kind of find and clarifying that
what the board does and what the
staff of our ability due on that
point Representative I know that
I've talked to the
superintendent about the sword
we heard just I think during the
interim that there's been a
confusion because some of these
laws are old that wasn't real
clear what are all do have the
authority to do to carry out the
day to day operations verses
particularly maybe something
like this that that was created
more than thirty years ago and
are all the was not what it is
today and it it the
responsibilities were on the
board and so it was not clear
that are all the had that legal
authority to do some functions
so
as they're cleaning up
licensure acts they're also
cleaning up and clarifying where
the authority lies.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Linda I appreciate that I
that's why I was just trying to
get a clear sense of how R. L.
D. is is working with these
different agencies these
different billboards and I take
it that the border nutrition
must be fine with this
relationship and is looking
forward to a long and happy
Relationship million forward so
that answers my question thank
you.
But some muted Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman I I've
just got one question this
morning to the sponsor of
sponsor Representative Basha
heard in the testimony of.
A supporter indicate of support
for your bill and and she the
the term was used was protected
profession and as a cut and
economists that always gives me
a certain degree of concern so
Representative I I've just
asking you to of if you would
reaffirm my belief that your
bill in fact is driven to
deliver better health care for
New Mexicans that we're not out
of in a of profession
protecting efforts here could
you respond please.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Anderson
yes this this bill will better
protect the health of New
Mexicans and will clarify the
role of nutrition this and need
to die Titian nutrition this.
Does that answer your question
it really does and and and as
the bill goes forward I urge you
not to of of follow that path
because I don't think that's
really the the the path I
understand that that students
trying to make career decisions
have to have of gain some degree
of
Of certainty but life has no
certainties in the absolute
sense and if we start trying to
protect professions I just don't
know where we're going to stop
with that thank you
Representative I look forward to
supporting your bill thank you.
Thank you representative on next
I have Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair
Representative actually members
of the committee I just really
have one question because most
of it has been covered of course
we just want to propose
amendments later on how do you
how do you think this will help
rural New Mexico
Madam chair representative sorry
was.
Screen flashed so how how will
this help rural New Mexico.
I would like to referred to my
experts about rural New Mexico
My my sense is that there is
probably a lack of license
nutrition this in rural New
Mexico but.
I may be wrong about that.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm.
I believe this will help rural
New Mexico just the fact that
it's more consistent state to
state so I'm nutrition is coming
from another state is the same
coming here as well as a
dietitian so just recruiting new
licensed dieticians and
nutritionists all across the
state we've just a little bit
more at little bit easier with
that little clear definition of
who we are and what we do and
that medical nutrition therapy
is what's protected.
Thank you very much I I just
know that this there's difficult
difficulties in New Mexico Madam
chair representative with
retaining and bringing them of
licenses in other fields so I
wondered if that was an issue
here and if that would that
would help resolve some of that
that's all I have madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you and I would just like
to see also thank the sponsor
and for all the work on this to
update those
medical
level of nutritionist dietitian
is critical not just in
hospitals but in nursing homes
in the senior centers
and and a lot of other schools
all the places that are
responsible for providing meals
that that meet the.
nutritional requirements and
variations if there's medical
issues it
This profession is yes a
critical component of delivering
good care and services in those
settings so thank you and I
apologize that we have to bring
it back on Wednesday but I think
it'll be much easier in the our
committee's going forward and
you still have an an amendment
some tweaks to fix to get one
last look at it and put it all
together in the committee some
and we should be able to take
care of it pretty easily and
quickly on Wednesday morning if
you can get that sub to us
quickly thank you madam chair
okay.
Thank you
Let's say next
Let me just.
texting Representative Martinez
who said he would come as soon
as we were.
Ready to hear house bill one
twelve.
Give him just a moment to.
Get over here.
Okay he's on his way will watch
for him and the attendee list
and move him over.
You will hear
house bill one twelve.
Just give us a moment and for
the audience if you weren't on
when we first started I just to
let you know we are not hearing
house bill one sixty.
today.
Representative Martinez is here
in the attendee list somewhere.
So long intended less sort of
areas we've got on and
Representative do you have some
experts that you wish to have us
move over.
And
I do madam chair I've got the
three Sherman named from center
line poverty and
The call lasts
I don't recall Nicolas Leslie
But he should be here in the
attendee list.
Okay I have
Nicholas Cole yes thank you.
I see just a generic no ma'am
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty let me.
Senate.
Yeah there's there's Nicholas.
There's Serratia okay I think
we've got we've got a.
Thank you madam chair would you
like me to proceed yep go ahead.
Thank you and thank you for your
flexibility this morning it's
kind of a crazy morning all over
the place for for a lot of
members
of and thank you members of the
committee for for hearing house
bill one twelve house bill one
twelve prohibits state and
locally funded health benefits
from discriminating on the basis
of immigration status these
benefits are any health programs
are solely funded by state or
local governments such as county
indigent care programs which pay
for some health care costs for
low income uninsured county
residents.
by by way of background madam
chair and members I've actually
worked on this issue for a long
time along with my colleagues at
the center line poverty and
really the idea is to ensure
that local governments that have
existing agreements arrangements
with local hospitals for
indigent care don't feel forced
to discriminate on the basis of
immigration now let me explain
that for a minute here.
Part of why many of these local
governments and local hospitals
are being forced into these
discriminatory practices is a
federal law from back in
nineteen ninety four I believe
it was from nineteen ninety six
the the personal responsibility
and work opportunity
reconciliation act which was the
federal you know big welfare
reform kind of deal that came
out of Washington that among
many in my opinion not very good
thanks one of the things that it
did is it forced these local
governments to apply these
discriminatory practices in the
way they provide some of these
indigent fund supports however
the federal government in its
equipment with them did allow.
For these governments to to to
to practice non discriminatory
practices but it forced him to
essentially pass affirmative
state law saying we will.
Apply non discriminatory
practices
many states have done this
including our neighbor to the
east Texas our neighbor to the
west California and many others.
I should also add that many
counties in New Mexico have
actually done this regardless of
any county has one of the
strongest indigent care programs
in the state it does not
discriminate I'm Dave
interpreted their ability and
their funding sources as a long
time to do this other counties
have not other counties have
taken a much more conservative
approach to this main among them
as my own old county of radio
County
I should also note that
Knoll County has come to us and
said the women and we want to
keep our discriminatory
practices in place I think the
the the pandemic certainly but
also just the health care crisis
in the state has moved many of
these county officials and and
and even hospital administrators
to a place where they want to do
the right thing but they need
affirmative state law in order
to do it
so that's what the bill in front
of you would do
before I have my experts are
provided to us we chair there is
an amendment that we brought
forward in that you should have
been I don't know if you want me
to go to the amendment now or if
you want me to go to my experts
first and then have the
amendment for discussion.
I'm it.
I wanted to go ahead and let's
move the amendment for
discussion so we discussed the
whole bill before it goes to the
audience.
Okay so the amendment in front
of you is the five nine nine
point one.
Everybody has it this is just
some technical language cleanup
the association of counties came
to us when we first filed a bill
and have some concerns that
believe the bill was written
originally could be interpreted
as forcing them to create new
programs and to secure more
money so working with the
association counties miss Bowman
and his staff we made some
changes to clarify that into to
put them at ease which which
which we have through the
amendment.
that that's the gist of the
amendment.
Thank you way will discuss the
amendment when we go back when
we go to committee
questions from the from the
committee but just so that the
audience knows before we take
comments are what's the gist of
that
Okay do you want to have your
experts
of say anything and introduction
yes yes please
Experts please please go ahead
and and
Give you two sets at this time.
Thank you madam chair.
Was the committee my name is
Nicholas Cordoba I'm an attorney
at the New Mexico Center on Law
poverty I'm here on behalf of
the centre line poverty but also
the but statewide movements New
Mexico together for health care
it's a community led movement
seeking affordable quality
healthcare for all New Mexicans.
And so we had New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty but also at
New Mexico to get for health
care strongly believe that every
New Mexicans should be able to
access critical health care
programs.
And certainly most health care
programs are obligated to accept
all patients and most do not
discriminate against patients
based on their immigration
status.
Unfortunately some programs do
deny immigrant patients from the
indigent care program pointing
to just Representative Martinez
said that federal law
restriction.
And H. B. twelve allows all of
these programs to meet their
obligations to patients without
any barriers.
In the central of poverty we
worked with clients who showed
up at a hospital but we're told
they could not treated outside
of the E. R. because they were
not qualified for financial
assistance programs.
These patients were asked to pay
fifteen to twenty thousand
dollars up front for medically
necessary care including a
teenager who needed surgery an
elderly woman who the broker
and.
And a man who needed knee
surgery to continue working and
support his family.
Certainly many others.
When patients can't access these
services they face massive
unpayable medical bills.
Or you're simply unable to
receive critical medical care
altogether.
Now more than ever especially
during this pandemic nobody
should be turned away from
health care.
One twelve would also make
health care programs
significantly easier to
administer.
Although hospitals have an
obligation to treat all patients
hospital administrators and
providers have great difficulty
figuring out federal rules
around immigration status.
The should not be put in this
position.
R. checkerboard of indigent care
programs unfairly forces them to
make impossible decisions about
who gets care and who doesn't.
And so creating uniformity in
our county indigent care
programs so they no longer
discriminate on the basis of
immigration status ensures that
patients can get the care they
need when they need it.
Finally HC one twelve would not
increase costs of the state or
are counties as mentioned most
hospitals in counties are
already providing care to
indigent patients regardless of
immigration status.
All hospitals are obligated to
treat patients and they're
already using state or local
funds to do so.
These programs are funded
through property and gross
receipts taxes which is
set this actually means that
many New Mexicans to pay into
the program for been from
accessing it.
These taxes are equitably
imposed without regard to
anyone's immigration status.
And it's only right that the
programs the finance are
equitably provided.
And ultimately allowing every
New Mexicans access these
programs is absolutely the right
and the fair thing to do.
New Mexico should do everything
we can to ensure every New
Mexican has access to critical
health care programs.
H. B. one twelve helps make that
a reality.
Thank you I urge your support
for H. B. one twelve and I stand
up for questions.
Thank you Sir Richard did you
want to add anything.
You madam chair members of the
committee thank you for having
us my name is Theresa manning
I'm the executive director with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and also worked in
health care issues for quite
awhile over ten years now
including that county indigent
care programs and I sit on the
Bernalillo county task force
with UNM hospital that continues
to meet with that CEO about this
issue and others we've seen this
issue come up in in lots of
different contexts but I just
want to again it say that most
hospitals don't discriminate
against patients and most
counties don't either and this
bill is really just trying to
clean up and create some
uniformity across the state so
I'm here to say you know help
answer questions for this bill
thanks so much.
Thank you.
Okay
Representative are you ready for
us to go to the audience yes
please okay thank you thank you
so first we're going to do a
poll.
And those in support of house
bill one twelve and those in
opposition.
You can answer yes or no support
or opposition.
Okay looks like we're
that stopped answering so we
have thirty seven in the
audience in support and three in
opposition.
And we will go to opposition
first so if you are opposed and
so those I think who have their
hands raise now I don't mean to
be speaking in opposition so
please take your hands down and
if you want to speak in
opposition.
Okay Maria Gerber go ahead.
You have to on mute.
Maria you are muted.
So we'll.
W..
Not going to.
She's okay well we're gonna I
don't see any other hands raised
in opposition.
So go ahead.
Go ahead.
No.
Chavis and build all simple of
gate in state telemedicine with
COVID but I maybe got.
Okay thank you.
Our next we have Maria Rotonda.
Representative.
Members of the committee that
number might have looked on.
He said that I just had
difficulty in that and then and
then on the other hand.
It is therefore together after.
What three people who died in
the family that yes among
analysts you look at for you and
that's it Santa Fe Los.
Your
also get with the program six is
the.
And we make one sick let me let
me start by Senator the state's
Mrs you feel but I will most of
the with never levels.
We were medical brought but also
north Korea's the CW.
Thank you the funds you see know
what is the program the other
one model we are pleased by that
look on the other to see
Canadian dollars.
Your if you sorry hello what are
you going.
No we will buy that is second to
that this is how this but if the
program but I spaniel the record
record so let's quite didn't
look in New Mexico would
Informatica
of COVID tutor what what what is
the program that activity in
photos which address.
Thank you Maria.
Next we have doctor Tasha
Barnes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dr Tasha Barnes today I
Representative primary care
advocates for healthy
communities a group of about
twenty primary care providers in
New Mexico I support house bill
one twelve it is important that
health care services be funded
for all New Mexicans regardless
of immigration status I am happy
to work for a federally
qualified health center where we
find primary care to everyone
but the difficulty comes when we
need testing imaging or special
to special to service that.
I often find myself negotiating
with patients how important
those studies are for diagnosis
or treatment other medical
issues because they are unable
to afford them imagine for
example going to your doctor
with gene that comes and goes on
your right side of your abdomen
your physician examines you and
worries about your gallbladder
possibly having stones but they
are unable to order an
ultrasound because you do not
have funding in these cases I
often have to send patients to
the E. R. for really non acute
issues just to get worked out
many of my patients are hard
working essential workers that
she property and sales tax a
need to be able to benefit from
these funding program it
provides for better care and can
prevent expensive ER visits
later thank you.
Thank you
next will go to Phil Hess and
I'm would like to ask members of
the audience please bureau as
brief as you possibly can being
and and non repetitive I do want
to hear from folks but please
keep it brief thank you.
had still you have to unmute
yourself.
Everybody my name is bill Hicks
on the intensive case manager
with the City of Albuquerque New
Mexico sessilis and I'm here to
support the bill you know same
situation every single week in
office we see patients and
clients that are seeking
services and guidance because
our tens of thousand dollars in
medical that for essential
procedures and are uninsured and
unities are avoiding higher
levels of care that we need to
refer them to you because they
are terrified by the costs and
the debt and the impact it could
have on their financial futures
and and we just health care
workers need to be able to refer
these patients out and give them
the peace of peace of mind they
will be turned away for their
immigration status nor ability
to pay up front and and these
are essential workers that are
paying into these funds and not
to mention during our public
health crisis they haven't
access to unemployment benefits
many of them stimulus or other
public public benefits that they
could really really use in the
very least we can do it during
this public health emergency is
lower barriers to health care
for uninsured immigrant
community members
and yet I think we need to
support H. B. one twelve and
thank you for letting me talk
today thank you.
Next we have a lot to you all on
your own.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Go ahead up to on mute you muted
yourself.
There you go okay.
My name is Dr Lonnie all I move
to New Mexico early last year to
continue my training care as an
obstetrician and gynecology
resident I'm humbled and I'm
proud to serve the state of New
Mexico I worked across the
spectrum of health care settings
during this pandemic including
labor and delivery outpatient
clinics and ICO I've seen up
close how Covid has already
stolen the license to many
family and community members as
a physician I have sworn to
provide quality and equal care
to all patients without
discrimination based off of
one's ability to afford this
care by providing our community
members regardless of their
legal status with the necessary
medical care each person
requires we help keep all New
Mexicans safe and strong as we
fight this pandemic I urge all
of you to support house bill one
twelve thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Nicole Martin.
On you meet yourself and go
ahead and.
Thank you.
Just.
Go ahead.
You hear me yes gore and.
Okay.
Yes at the net good morning my
name is Nicole more in I am.
One of the co founders for
indigenous women.
And community members share into
a territory which is Albuquerque
on remember you and the
surrounding areas.
I just wanted to urge our full
support on H. B. one twelve.
As indigenous people
our core values
One of them being is that our
health is our wealth and
everyone despite their legal
status shin and losers
access to health care without
worrying about financial
That may occur so I.
Support and
thank you for your for the time
to speak thank you next we have
Bill Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children.
We are in the middle of the
pandemic and still learning the
lessons of the importance of
public health and the importance
of maximizing health care for
the benefit of all of us.
None of us is safe and healthy
when some of us are not safe and
healthy and each of us is
healthier when all of us are
healthier it's critically
important that New Mexico take
every step possible of maximize
health care for all of our
people if we want to open up our
schools if we want to get this
pandemic under control if we
want our kids and families to be
healthy that passing this
legislation is another essential
part of this public health
effort and we thank you for your
support thanks thanks.
Next I have a list Lopez.
Can you hear me just go ahead
okay good morning madam chair
and committee members thank you
for allowing me to speak today
my name is Liz Lopez and I am a
case manager access to this a
little I'm here in support of H.
B. one twelve which affects me
personally because I have many
clients and family members who
are struggling to pay their
medical bills due to lack of
financial support aligned with
their immigration status to
their input.
They are put in a difficult
position because
they have to choose between
paying their utility bills for
medical bills just in hopes that
even twenty dollars can make an
impact or a dent in their.
Thousands of dollars of medical
debt that they already hello so
I'm just asking that these
families have some sort of
relief and to support H. B. one
twelve thank you.
Thank you Liz next we have all
under a customer Rubeus.
Go ahead.
Everybody thank you so much for
the chairman committee members
for letting me speak in support
of the health benefits for non
status as this morning legacy
anymore CENIC kinda consider
this and registered nurse I
would key in on the emergency
room or urgent care re have fun
right now in a community clinic
on the south follicle custody
said Luke and unfortunately I
have seen the various ending the
quality that these pandemic has
rice I had always been there
buddies being a little bit
harder right now for all other
patients sadly I seen the
suffering and illness for fear
to go to seek medical help
because they don't have the
money they don't have the
insurance and they don't you for
medical that I have seen as many
of my patients with horrible
stories at I can remember just a
couple that come to my mind
that's an elderly patient came
here in the wheelchair after
years of being diabetic and
being afraid to go to the
hospital for any questions had
some for no insurance and
unfortunately we had to send her
to the emergency room because we
go into anything else for and
according to that do they have
to help before if they have just
the basic care problem because
the state and other patients you
know she came with a mass on her
brain is that she has seen going
to the hospital because
mammograms so expensive you know
like just they fear that they
don't have insurance could be
devastating for the family so
she was seen that stage three
cancer.
Or Italy she had to go to you
know to a higher level of care
so even with insurance the
copays are so expensive I have
to be put in an array for three
hundred dollars so for these
patients said they don't have
any money or just a little bit
of money so hard on themselves
so thank you so much for helping
us and hearing those to help of
poor health benefits to non
citizens to helping with their
physical mental and emotional my
status and thank you so much for
everything you.
Thank you.
Next I have Lorraine Cordoba.
Rain if you're on mute you can
go ahead.
Lorraine you need there you.
This is.
The rain actually just went to
the clinic or with the patient
so okay will not be able to
comment at this time okay then
we will go to Barbara Webber.
Go ahead Barbara.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Webber executive
director Health Action New
Mexico when anyone in New Mexico
or any community is denied
health care we are all
diminished and ultimately we all
pay the price Health Action
stands in strong support of one
twelve thank you.
Thank you Barbara next we have
Tania James.
Hello madam chair and committee
I'm Tania James with four
together action from got
McKinley County I support H. B.
one twelve because my daughter
doesn't have a C. A. B. and it
prevents her from going to
surrounding hospitals because
they want that proof that she
has Indian blood to go to an
Indian health facility I want
her to have equal and accessible
health care please vote yes on
H. B. one twelve thank you.
Tania next we have can you.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is Ken
hacking and just I am a clinical
coordinator access system to
enhance part of the H. B. one
twelve
no one should face this type of
discrimination I have had a
family members and friends who
have had burdens and and a lot
of the debt in which the
struggle the struggle is very
very
burdening on whether they have
to pay for their medical debt
for utilities at home so I am in
support of the H. B. one twelve
and hope it gets passed thank
you madam chair and committee
members thank you Kenya.
Next we have Kurt regular.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is Kurt
record on the director of
Lutheran advocacy ministry of
New Mexico with our advocacy
ministry also speaks on behalf
of the New Mexico Congress of
churches we to advocate for
equitable access to basic health
care for all in our communities
in our state and therefore we're
here today to say our strong
support for H. B. one twelve.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee thank you.
Thank you Kurt next we have an
aligned.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm an OBGYN
resident here in the state of
New Mexico and here as a junior
fellow of the American college
of obstetricians and
gynecologists I'm here to speak
in support of house bill one
twelve my experiences providing
care resonate with what others
have already shared often we
find ourselves working with are
undocumented patients to find
creative ways to get them the
care that they need and deserve
it's important that we find
standard of care for everyone
and don't find stratified Care
based on immigration status but
often we find ourselves
negotiating with our patients to
justify additional labs and
imaging within our existing
fragmented systems to help them
get the services that they need
and provide financial support we
have much work to do and it's
essential that when seeking care
no one be turned away this bill
really provides the bare minimum
of what we should be doing which
is freedom from discrimination I
urge the support from everyone
thank you thank you.
Next I have Gaby Hernandez.
When is the us you'll hear me
yes go ahead.
Yes hi eight chair and committee
members my name is Gail Vietnam
this I'm a community organizer
Act us of the salute I'm here in
support of H. B. one twelve I am
a doctor recipient and like many
immigrant families my mother did
not have access to any type of
financial support and when we
have to see care it was up to us
to figure out how we would pay
that thousands of dollars for
one E. R. visit.
Many times my family had to
choose between paying medical
bills or paying our utilities
this has happened before and
continue to happen during this
will crisis pandemic.
Support issue one twelve because
no one should be facing
discrimination when accessing
health care thank you.
Thank you Gavin our next we have
all Sierra.
There you go go ahead morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is not the A.
Ozzie I'm with forward together
action on from McKinley County
and I've been fighting for this
bill for four years now
affordable.
Health care for the whole state
of New Mexico families and I
support H. B. one twelve because
as of the four years is I've
been fighting I was talking
about my own health care with
rheumatoid arthritis overlapped
with Lucas.
And everybody heard my story for
three years.
And now that I have my mom moved
in with me.
She was
She was hit with the COVID and
my brother.
And now that I'm standing here
fighting for their right I thank
you know.
We should all be you know.
Hey David R. medical bills
should be paid for with
Medicaid.
And it's hard for me to go
through this because I've been
through a lot with my own health
care and now my and now my mom
and my brother.
Also my grand children.
And we need to realize that due
to payments it's going to be
harder for us this year.
Because not being flown out.
From the pandemic being Austrian
transferred with hot with
Apple and all that bills are
coming in on my mom.
I just ain't even doing anything
although doing is sending are
built back.
And I would really like for H.
B..
One twelve to be passed because
I believe everybody New Mexico
it deserves affordable health
care.
Nobody should be turned down for
race or any other reasons.
I've been fighting for this
health care for the whole state
of New Mexico families.
Not just mine not yours but
everybody.
And I'm.
Really H. B. one twelve to be
passed.
Nobody.
Thank you thank you thank you
off they are and it's nice to
hear from you again thank you
next we have so free selfie cam.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is so if you can I'm a resident
of Bernalillo county and a
fellow with forward together
action I stand in strong support
of house bill one twelve because
all people should have access to
quality health care regardless
of income level immigration
status or anything else thank
you for allowing me to speak
thank you.
next we have doctor honestly to
may have.
Thank you can you hear me yes go
ahead okay thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Anjali to Asia and the
family physician and I and the
executive director of casa this
flu clinic which sees a
significant majority of our
patients are uninsured we find
creative ways to get them high
quality health care that they
need
I also work in emergency rooms
in the Indian health service and
see the effects of where folks
are locked out as others have
mentioned
I am also on the governor's
council for racial justice in
the health committee and this
was one of the bills that we
push forward for the governor to
consider as part of a move to
improve racial justice in the
state we need to pass this
affirmative law in order to make
the immigrants eligible for
local budget this exists in our
state constitution non
discrimination against
immigrants and we need to catch
up to states like Texas and
California will cover immigrants
without discrimination and we
find that the benefit of that is
huge in in our local community
there's a program you amendment
care with you in a hospital that
would be wonderful for many of
our immigrant patients to enroll
in but they are not allowed to
because of the issues that this
bill would would address and
open up that program to them
and that hospital and many other
hospitals can make this work and
support our our community so
just to be creative in this time
and forward thinking and thank
you so much for this time.
Thank you next I have Lydia
McLaughlin.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Leah may McLaughlin I am the
leader of four together action
I'm also from McKinley County I
support house bill one twelve
only because I was part of in
one of those people that have
problems with Medicaid right
when I
My son we both me and my son had
a problem my boyfriend was fine
because he was under his months
I on the other hand after I had
my son I became an adult so I
had to do almost everything on
my own to get back on Medicaid
to get back on all the other
things that we needed I urge you
please to support in past this
house bill one twelve so nobody
like my age during my age at the
age of seventeen.
None of the kids that we can be
in that situation like I did
thank you thank you Leah next we
have Karen Witt lock.
Even kommentarer.
Chairman the committee chairman
what lock with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter and we stand
in strong support of this night.
Building sorry about my dog.
Do anything to improve upon the
test powerful test then we've
already heard thank you very
much thank you care.
Next we have Cecilia Fred.
Good morning man
My name is Fred and I'm a
support HB twelve one.
One twelve because everybody is
can have health care thank you.
Thank you.
and last we have a rose a guy
goes tomorrow.
This morning madam chair and
committee members I am a mental
health therapist in Albuquerque
New Mexico specializing in
immigration evaluation I am
calling in strong support of H.
B. one twelve I worked with many
refugees that are coming to our
state to seek asylum and seek
safety after the most horrific
experiences of discrimination in
their own homeland and I ask
that we see them as human beings
in need of our assistance and
that we allow them to access
healthcare without
discrimination thank you.
Thank you Rosa and one last one
this come on and off
Ramona Urbina.
Go ahead on you yourself.
And.
And then this and we number one
I would be now third from the
bottom this little Anthony and
will make people believe that
for what who are you your vote
usual for you but I lied I
Chavis you all say it with me
start S. also will sign you'll
be hello Mexico City on opinion
was messed up and they got
Representative Moses then one
but I don't center last night is
in the mid thirties any other
lotus would for this and up and
then took was thirty Jim Miller
is that all that is when I met I
met rolling the candidate LCS
I'll allow you living because it
is so very well hello this be
those local you're but a lot
should be simple goals in which
of us.
Thank you.
Okay think that is it for our
testimony so we can go to
members of the.
Of the committee Representative
Lord.
let's see well we already moved
to the amendment
It was there.
Sir discussion on the amendment.
Let's do that first.
Discussion on the amendment any
objection to the amendment.
I'm sure and I'm sorry might
might just real quick what the
if they can just briefly on the
amendment might computer
dropping from enrollment I think
I miss that and I just okay I
apologize and that's that's all
right that's all right if we
could representative review
briefly let the amendment does.
You madam chair that the
amendment thank you
representative that I so thank
you for the question the
amendment clarifies language
that was
highlighted by the association
of counties that they were
concerned that the the language
in the original bill would
potentially force them to create
new programs that's not the
intent the intent of this is
simply to make existing program
is non discriminatory all have
Nicole last take you by the
specific sections very briefly
just so you know the difference
between the original language
and the the new language with
the amendment.
You madam chair representative I
I so just to reiterate what
Representative Martinez just
said this is these amendments
just generally put our intended
to switch concerns anyone would
have that.
The bill is imposing new
requirements obligations you
programs on counties or
hospitals beyond just getting
rid of this these discriminatory
practices on immigration status
and so for section one of the
bill
I guess taking a step back
section one is eight general
provisions that are basically
says all state or locally funded
healthcare I'm programs cannot
discriminate on the basis of
immigration status and one of
these amendments is it
clarifying facts county indigent
care programs are one of those
states are locally funded
healthcare programs
section sections tutor for our
the it at the proposed
amendments to the hospital
funding act but also the
indigent hospital in county
Health Care Act
and these are specific to.
You know counties being able to
contract with agencies and
hospitals to provide for the
care and support of indigent
patients and so really the
intent is to go into the
specifics statutes and say that.
At a hospital level hospitals
also cannot discriminate on the
basis of immigration status
and getting rid of a specific
language that initially said and
shall be provided consistent
with the prohibitions against
discrimination under New Mexico
law we strip that out just a
really really clarify that again
it's not imposing larger
obligations or rights beyond on
getting rid of the
discriminatory practice based on
immigration status for these.
State or locally funded
healthcare programs.
And there are some technical
amendments to yeah that this is
a broad overview what these were
intended to do.
Madam chair the reason the the
amendment three pages is you've
got to remember and re letter
everything so that's really the.
The bulk of it.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank.
Thank you Mr you will go over
the screen there for a second
what we're going to go thank you
thank you is there any further
discussion on the amendment.
Any objections to and our
Representative where did you
have want to talk on the member
the whole bill that's why I keep
I'm sorry that's alright that's
I'm just check and make concerns
were to hand back up all I know
you want to hold the is there
any objection to the amendment.
Okay I'm not seeing any and I'm
not hearing any so
Representative you have and
amended bill.
And now on to the on to the bill
as a as amended Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative
I always get really concerned
when I don't hear from both
sides I I've heard one side of
the story.
And I'm and it was deeply
concerned I didn't see any kept
double checking in the Here file
I don't see any analysis from
any hospital I don't see any
analysis from the New Mexico
hospice Association I don't see
any malice is from you and and
H. so can you tell me has your
intimates apparently they were
going to do an analysis on this
whether they supported or denied
it do you does anybody have that
analysis manager.
And the for the Representative
answer I mean you should talk
about his discussion with the
hospitals and the counties but
they don't generally submit
input on the analysis of that's
usually the state agencies so
you won't necessarily find in
that in the analysis.
Necessarily but Representative.
Yes yes madam chair and
Representative Lord that that's
a good a good question as this
bill bills drafted over the last
couple months meetings were had
with many stakeholders including
hospital so ciation including
you MH including its ciation
counties the only one that raise
concerns and hence the amendment
was association of counties and
so we we agree to make these
amendments in order to put them
at ease but as as far as we know
others not only not opposition
but in some cases you know
people were supportive of what
we're trying to do again because
as I said to beginning this
really on ties the hands of of
these local governments and
hospitals that are trying to do
the right thing but because of
pro or other federal law he felt
that they couldn't.
Thank you representative madam
chair yeah the reason I ask that
because I was told thank I did
call some hospitals labs in
radicals in hospitals it's mixed
reviews report summer against it
I heard that there was supposed
to be an analysis by UNM H. and
they were supposed to say
whether they do agree or not
agree with that so this is
clarifying to say that it comes
through so continue with my one
of questions from me
so one of more standing as so we
have this new projects I right
now it's all of us just read one
page we have the indigent funds
indigent funds come from the
gross receipts tax
that some some counties have it
some don't
This is like I want to take a
small hospital we don't have one
in our my district would have a
hostile so let's say like click
New Mexico I think that was
smallest hospital so what
happens to them if they have of
the G. R. T. funding and
expects.
And they are forced into
treating everyone which I think
there was a turn this establish
that right off the bat my
concern is.
Click New Mexico they run out of
money and this is mandated
Denton what happens with them
where they get money here or
what what what what's going to
happen next for them.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative lord you know
again you know we're not
imposing on them on new program
being new funding sources all
this bill does is it allows them
to open up whatever program they
currently have in a non
discriminatory way you know
doesn't mean that they've got a
you know find.
Thank you know a Cadillac health
care plan for for anyone in fact
the funds that we're talking
about here I don't really do
that I think you an image may be
the most comprehensive plan and
that's obviously because they
have a lot more money but across
the board these are very small
programs already that help
support with limited financial
assistance
many of these indigent patients
and so.
To to your example you know I
would expect them to create
anything new I would just expect
them to open up those programs
in a non discriminatory way.
Representative manager
appreciate that and madam chair
again on my line of questioning
is my concern is
I don't want small hospitals had
closed but at the same time I
want to make sure that people
like my grandparents would you I
don't think you've been in the
committee at one second did come
from Mexico and they did come
over undocumented however as I
said before my grandfather was
very proud manage didn't want
any assistance from everybody
was able to pay cash back in the
days when we could afford to pay
cash for things.
So I'm going back and forth
between and look at this picture
my grandfather were don't want
to be discriminated against and
members trying to figure out
ballots click New Mexico in
hospital that may close because
like we don't have the money to
fund this so I'm very concerned
because that means they have to
raise their taxes so there is
some implication.
Financially further down the
road it'll affect the small
hospitals because.
Yes you want to get chair but if
they didn't apply for these
funds or if they don't have
enough money in their gross
receipts taxes this counties I
mean estancias looking at going
broke many of these counties in
hospitals they just can't afford
everyone the care they need and
I'm just trying to figure out
where that gap is going to come
from cover those costs I'm I'm
really struggling with this so I
don't think I really the
question just wanted to point
out that the G. R. T. is the one
that funds this Ana County
doesn't have the money that they
can't they won't be able to
fulfill this obligation and I'm
just wondering what's going to
happen to the hospital trying to
balances out so that's all the
questions that I have right now
thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank you Representative and on
that point
Indigent funds have been around
for a long time they don't
guarantee anyone gets covered
for all of everything that they
need because the funds only
stretch so far what this does is
just allow those yeah and in
particular UNM has has felt like
they can't offer it two of two
noncitizens are without an
affirmative state law that says
they can cause the federal law
requires that state and local
our programs can't be offered to
local to non citizens unless
there's affirmative state law
saying that it that can happen
so that's largely what this's is
just put.
even access button no one is
guaranteed that they'll get
everything covered that they
need the funds only go so far so
thank you madam chair I
appreciate input on that I I
really would have loved for a U.
N. NH to either write a letter
in support or actually call in
today because that would have
made it a much easier decision
thank you thank you I I would
say it is I know about it but I
know the bill they watch the
they have lobbyists who watch
the schedule and if they had
wanted to weigh in against they
had every opportunity to do that
I would say that the fact they
weren't here is they're probably
neutral.
so.
Representative process.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative about the agency.
bringing up the conversation of
this legislation and of the
committee and those who are
watching
you know.
The thing is.
talking about undocumented.
Can you hear me.
Are you able to hear me yes go
ahead.
Just look at the.
You know I my district is
very close to the border
and and what being that I work
hand in hand with the medical
providers quite often I will
tell you what in
and and and then I'll ask
questions was going to quit
office I've seen many many that
the.
Luna County which is not part of
my district but I see this
there's something very hard
issues are gonna have the baby
or the need to get checked is
not reading or whatever in at
one those border towns there but
almost and I see them
constantly people to call
hospital there in them.
I know that here at in in Grant
County I know that there's
certain people are are many many
thanks.
I can tell that
provided a lot of support to and
been very.
To a lot of people needs that
need that support.
That means.
I'm gonna questions of course
and that's some concerns.
A wonderful human being and we
always want to do the best that
we everyone and I'm I I myself
mmhm more going further I speak
you included and it's a very on
their.
Tell you you know it's just what
happens sometimes people donor
they don't understand the
process and we'll just stick to
that so right now are present
that passed away
your is all in on honestly yes
I've never ever had a single
County
turn the funding I will tell you
are immigrants moms group since
Mexico just our our our borders
to the birth we have Mexico
which works with us consulate
consulate and helps and
consulates will help us bring
immigrants back home to the
north back to their home we're
thanks for flights in
preparation so for but I can
tell you and assure you that
I've never ever been to one
county that hasn't
But that hasn't are taking care
of an indigent
An indigent K. okay welcome to
burial now
my question to you was I heard
that and this is more might
might might internet I lost
Commission and I Representative
Madam chair and madam chair and
Representative I think it was Mr
quarter levels stated that there
was there were some places that
they have been.
Sarah where was that.
Where did that happen.
Madam chair and president US
says
on my end you you keep freezing
and the connection is coming
across a little choppy so I'm
not sure if I heard your full
question.
but did you can you can you
repeat it maybe our cat and I'm
sorry that that's happening
that's that's our problem and
and and New Mexico is the inner.
Okay my question madam chair
Representative this Mr a lot.
It cut out right when you were
stating there were some people
that were denied here where did
that happen.
Madam chair and Representative
that us so all have a Mr gold my
expand on that you know I I I
also.
Know of many cases here in my
home county and I think we heard
from public comment that that
happens quite often I want to be
clear that.
Currently you know hospitals
across the state have to take up
cases through the emergency room
you can't deny that part of the
care.
But beyond the emergency rule.
Short of of the the person that
accumulating a great deal of
medical that should there not be
supports for that person either
through the federal program
state programs account programs
of those people those folks in
those situations are routinely
denied care but all have a Mr
Cordoba expand under P. as a
particular example I certainly
have a few that I'm happy to
share as well.
Thank you madam chair
Representative USCIS so Sir yes
certainly some of our clients
who we've had to work with the
center long poverty who've been
denied that care or that
financial assistance have been
in Bernalillo county but I I do
want to say that most of the
participating county indigent
care programs do not
discriminate on the basis of
immigration status of Dona Ana
County included.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you can score a
lot
Representative just a hand on
the zoom if you're having
connectivity trouble if you want
to thank you yes ma'am I can
help.
Yes ma'am thank you yes ma'am.
We will help
again of Madam chair
representative all my things so
so back to what
Representative ward have asked.
Question that I didn't hear an
answer to was when that when
they run out of funds.
How is that to be taken care of.
Madam chair and and
Representative
again you know I I don't we're
not asking these these.
Local governments for hospitals
to come up with new programming
all we're doing is asking them
to not discriminate on the basis
of immigration
I my assumption of these very
safe assumption is that the
administrators of those programs
you know might have to retool
their specific indigent care
program to ensure that they
don't run out of funds now keep
in mind you know these funds at
least here in Brenda County
these funds come in about once a
year ours is based on a property
tax for a military on property.
And it you know flows into the
U. N. M. H. to the tune of you
know ninety million dollars a
year.
you know other communities that
may not have those kinds of
resources you know would
probably just have to administer
those funds a little bit
differently but also keep in
mind you know the the the big
hubs where I would expect.
You might see a little bit more
demand from from noncitizens for
indigent care are probably gonna
be.
You know last crucis Albuquerque
you know perhaps Santa Fe and
those are you know I lease we've
heard already doing and it's
actually.
Ahead of the curve here in in in
not discriminating are you know
smaller communities like the
Colfax example I mean I I doubt
that you would have you know
thirty thousand immigrants
breaking the system I mean
you're just not going to have
that
so I I I don't know C.
appreciate can expand on other
funding sources that hospitals
can use but that would be my
initial reaction to your
question it's a great question
and it's a very fair question.
Madam chair and chair go ahead
I'm sorry what.
Thank you representative madam
chair representative so I just
wanted to add that the indigent
care system in New Mexico
actually has a lot of different
funding sources to it and those
include you know state funds
federal funds and county
indigent funds and I think as
the chair woman had said before
the county indigent funds are
actually very small sliver of
that they're only a portion of
it and in fact what happens in
New Mexico it's it's it's not
the case that hospitals would
take on indigent patients and
then go bill the county for each
patient instead what happens is
the state you know up close
together different funding
sources counties pull together
different funding sources and
then they just give that kind of
in a lump sum to hospitals often
times so one of the ways in
which they do that is that every
single county in New Mexico K.
into a statewide safety net
careful Fund and then the
hospitals when they have
uncompensated care they go to
that funds and try to claim
money from it it really depends
on how much uncompensated care
they provide and so if they find
and it's also one that
prioritizes small hospitals in
rural hospitals first so those
hospitals would get compensated
for uncompensated care and as
they do now and there's no
restriction on that for
immigration status so those
hospitals can already claim
funding from the state and they
can also claim that from the
emergency Medicaid program when
they treat immigrants to the
emergency room in addition to
that as Representative Martinez
said some of these bigger hubs
like Dona Ana or Bernalillo or
at telus and let me additional
funds or mill levy funds that
help them with their hospitals
are those hospitals also get
payment from from those sources
apart from that there are very
few counties and the association
counties confirm this for us
there are very few counties that
are levying more funds on top of
it to be paying their hospital
so that's not happening right
now instead the hospital that
sorry the counties are really
relying on the statewide funds
to be able to reimburse
hospitals so.
What this bill is doing you know
it's it's it's technology that
these hospitals are getting the
funds they have access to the
funds it's just making sure that
when they give financial
assistance programs that
patients see the benefit of that
so that hospital simply isn't
providing the care you know
getting funds for it and then
the nine people which they
really shouldn't be doing given
the way that the system is set
up.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative looking at my
**** and
is that true peace to restore
three seventeen sorry Sir okay I
know how it is my accent and the
last name is good to go out to
eat lunch that okay so here's
your account explained so I'm
gonna talk about my.
County Hospital County Hospital
just about broke.
they go through the engine fund
every year gone there's it
doesn't survive the year there's
no rollover they're not keeping
it for themselves and that's
just the honest truth and so the
the two that I that I have here
is it's a wonderful idea I think
it's great and yes Sir most of
the funds available trust me
they are gay they're using them
to the full extent I don't think
they're doing that.
The problem is immigrants are
going to I'm gonna enter our
country through Albuquerque or
Santa Fe.
Enter through there Morrisburg
all the southern of worry
counties and so we're in very
small areas that we do not have
the the the.
maybe we don't have the the tax
revenue that alphabet
Albuquerque Santa Fe and schools
to have I'm not saying that
ostracism gonna get me but
there's a lot of smaller
counties to.
You know that again if that New
York to meet this is a great
idea but there's no funding
source outside of just expecting
what we have to provide more.
And when there's there's small
hospitals that are barely
holding on and we have a massive
layoffs here in in Grant County
for instance where there tax
from you is going to shrink.
At least this year possibly over
to the next year.
It's a yet to ask them to do
more in in in service
and you know what there's no
management here I mean if the
funding is all really put on the
backs of the some of the
counties and so I ask you a
question you said no one of
posted except for Madam chair
representative this except for
the association of counties
eggs.
What specifically that they
oppose of it all Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for that question and
before before I answer that let
me just make sure that you know
that I'm clear that the
committee understands that these
indigent care programs are
already very very limited scope
anyway you know this is not
designed to have people from
quite is where I'm actually from
across the border income get
Cadillac health care plans out
of any counties indigent funds
that that's is not the case is
not the case right now for US
citizens who needed to care for.
plus most of most if not all of
these counties are going to have
a residency requirements to get
approved that you live in the
county so you can't really have
that back and forth coming you
know coming over for for you
know for free you know plan and
plan health care on the Obama
exchange I try to be clear about
that to your question the
association counties through Mr
Corp woman raced some concerns
with the original language of
the bill and it was really just
phrasing they felt that you need
to original form the bill could
be interpreted just to expect
the counties to create new
programs and raise new money to
provide the services and so by
working with them and their
lawyers for the course of a week
or so we came to language that
they felt comfortable with and
that they are good with so that
was really their only concern
was the way we had drafted these
or originally I'm in keeping
mine when we first draft of this
we're actually conversation with
all those folks back and forth
quite frankly I think at some
point we moved on with the bill
and dropped it on file that I
should say and then they re read
it got their lawyers about this
and well wait a minute we were
concerned about the way your
phrasing this can we can we talk
about it so we did we fix that
through the amendment that you
all have adopted and you know
now that they they are you know
this will calm their fears
because as language that they
approved.
Madam chair representative ****
I I think that's great I just
would like to see in the the an
endorsement from the Association
accounts to to give us a better
clear understanding of what that
is again let me tell you this I
come from an immigrant family.
Also because some of the medical
so I understand it but but and
I'm not but I'm also.
Very concerned because in in in
and I'll just tell you and I
mean one of my my my facilities
there.
I've tried to hire people there.
I can tell you probably.
Seven out of ten times they
don't have papers.
And so they're living there I
mean that they're living in our
in our communities it it's it's
not them I'm not saying that no
one goes back and forth and and
that's not really the the where
I was going well with that we're
gonna use it by
going back of course crossing
the border for for health care
and most of us here as residents
I myself as a self insured after
my insurance myself I understand
that that it's very expensive I
don't have dental I don't even
have like here and my I'm paying
eighteen thousand dollars a year
in in metal medical care with a
six thousand dollar deductibles
so very much understand that we
all are in agreement I I think
unanimously that we have a
problem with affordable health
care that's for sure I think
that the issue that I have here
can is is there the lack of
funds.
It's wonderful to do that and I
I know we all have our
businesses that we the or or the
the
occupations that we that we go
back home to your offices and so
forth and there's everyone that
you there's a lot of people
could use our services
at at no cost or little to no
cost but how much of that can
you for to really provide I find
a lot of that myself.
Personally with a lot of people
that are we're in four counties
we're we're living up in this
office this office New Mexico we
live in a very forced part of
the state our point unemployment
and we have a large immigration
of non non non resident
Noncitizen
our councils were people to show
up and and and they don't have
the papers
and there's a lot of meat here a
lot and so I personally tried to
help as much as I can but it
again I want to go back to my
original point is are counties
are are County hospitals broke
and how am I supposed to tell
them eight I know you want to
come up with the funding but you
have to provide services
services without money the
nurses and doctors the up the R.
but the
The staff in the and the
supplies
Are are not free and so I'm
really we are
Madam chair representative I
think it's I think we should
always provide care always to as
many people as we can but
there's also a limit and and I'm
very concerned with the lack of
funds to provide it it's not so
much that the idea of not
providing it I haven't first
tensing that I have evidence
that myself and and again our
staff is in and out of hospitals
constantly all
I'm more concerned with.
The the Roadrunner is being.
The way that the at the at the
door of the counties to provide
this with no additional funding
if I saw that there was funding
coming from the state they were
provided we're we we we went out
and appropriated or or requested
more funds to provide the
services even an additional
whether and where there was I
don't know care funds would have
been a part of this but
if we would have some Avenue to
have reoccurring funds to.
To expand.
Expanded.
No one how do you in favor
Representative.
I'm sorry I can't see it so I
can't wait just on that point I
just wanted to make sure you
didn't miss a response from
from serration that that we a
few years ago set up up a US
safety not pool Fund for this
purpose is that it that it's
help support the indigent fund
and and local hospitals as a way
for for a statewide fund.
that prioritizes the small
counties in the small rural
hospitals to find so it's not
all reliant on on the
indigent Fund to help support
these hospitals and so I and I
hope for a solution I'm not
characterizing that wrong but
there is a statewide fund that
gets funded that it is
additional support to small
our county rural hospitals.
I do it in Madam chair
representative is that is that
Representative in on page four
of the three and four.
How it's supposed to be funded.
Thanks for fund that we're
talking about it looks like it's
a it's a portion of our
revenues.
What the sponsor an expert
answer them.
Thank you madam chair and I buy
my my apologies I've got the got
another a gonna with cancer in
the background and it's messing
up my my audio.
Sir appreciate you if you if you
have that please provided.
Madam chair representative so
the indigent Care Act which is
what this bill would be amending
does have a system in place for
the county indigent funds and
for that statewide safety net
careful Fund that was actually
something that was amended back
in twenty fourteen I believe
after the affordable Care Act so
that counties basically were
providing two different ways for
hospitals to be able to get
funding for their for their
uncompensated care for uninsured
patients so one system is the
safety that careful fund I don't
know that it's listed in this
bill just because this bill is
amending specific sections of
that act it's not it's not open
you know opening up the entire
act but in the act itself there
definitely are provisions that
talk about that statewide fund
being available to counties it
talks about the other indigent
funds potentially being
available to counties but again
many counties don't let me those
other funds because there is not
a need for them and I just want
to you know reiterate reiterate
again that there are funding
sources for counties to be able
to tap into for providing this
care and that includes the
safety net care we'll find it
includes emergency Medicaid so
the emergency Medicaid program
for immigrants are unable to
access Medicaid because of their
immigration status there's also
federal funds disproportionate
share hospital funds there's
currently a special.
there are
also at in the past have been
other federal funds as well
there's also statewide funds in
that Medicaid actually increased
it's a rates for hospitals to be
able to account for uninsured
patients as well to that was
part of its rationale for
increasing the rates for for
Medicaid so there are these
funding sources available it's
just that they have to be tapped
into and one of the advantages
of this bill is that by
requiring non discrimination
across the board hospitals you
know can then have some clarity
that they can in fact provide
care to everybody and then be
able to go access those funding
sources for them.
Madam chair representative and
Mrs I want to Supreme to reset
to reset.
I'm sorry you got it thank you
okay so you know are you are you
stating there that there are
some counties that are not even
are available are
That do not realize that those
funds are there because I I'm
pretty sure ours are are doing
that because I'm I'm kind of.
The following are are or
hospitals work quite a bit and
and I had a good conversation
with the CEO of the hospital
just a little while ago and so
are one of the there.
Your honor and I talked to the
US city my the excuse me the
county manager and in our areas
and there were there were
nervous I mean they they're
they're nervous about it on
because there's all I read it
unless you can explain it show
show me on this legislation
where it where it shows up to
the limit of their abilities
financial I'm at work I don't
see it and I think that is
might.
Might look again
Madam chair representative I'm
very sensitive to helping people
I want to help people.
What passing just.
Works on paper and not being
able to find them scares me and
I want to make sure that it
doesn't also leverages coun
and and I know you've told me
Representative Martínez madam
chair that they're not expected
to create no
our programs I get that but if
they're already running out of
funds and they're obviously
giving them all away.
I don't see where here anywhere
I didn't read any of where we're
at limits that that's not going
to have to be provided.
All it says it has to be
provided it doesn't say so you
run out of funds it doesn't say
till you know it doesn't it
doesn't limit that and that
worries me Representative yes
ma'am and I and I apologize
again for cutting you off but
you're not seeing the entire act
that governs
indigent funds now or the safety
net pool funds you're only
seeing the sections that are
getting Amanda and so you're at
a disadvantage admittedly to not
seeing the full us saying that
would
not necessarily guarantee beyond
the resources available and and
I just wanted to also say that
it's not that counties are being
naive there is a federal law
that says unless you have an
affirmative state law that says
state and local programs can be
accessed by non citizens then
there is there is question about
them being able to do that
and there is a difference of
opinion and interpretation from
UNM verses the hospital and Los
crucis this is clarifying and
making an affirmative.
in state law affirmative that
there is at least the
possibility and allowed to
access state and federal
funded programs and that's
that's not creating new programs
is just opening the door and as
miss Monday is said that there
are a lot of funding sources but
hospitals have been hesitant to
access it without this
affirmative
affirmation that they are
allowed to do so under federal
law.
The madam chair if I understood
you correctly what yours what
you're telling me is that going
Jana Memorial Medical Center
there is.
Tapping into those funds.
Your there is not is that what
that's what I that's correct
that's correct that's correct
yeah okay you know you know I I
appreciate you madam chair for
helping me Representative
Martinez like I tell you you
know I'm I'm doing the gate so
you haven't probably seen we ask
many questions what I I one of
the things that I that I
wholeheartedly want to do is
make sure that I'm making the
best decision based on the
information I have a would it's
a sliver pulled up out of a full
context just a portion of it
I appreciate you madam chair
for.
Telling everybody that I'm at
that I I'm just I'm just not
privileged to that information
haven't you know done that up
whether I need to do more
homework or whatever is
difficult to read the whole
thing and then understand what
you're trying to change of and
put all these pieces together
and so I'm just trying to do
that I'm I'm definitely always
in favor of of helping people
again my my biggest concern was
where is the funding in our in
our in our county
it's so I'm going to have
another question but I think the
most I see somebody also their
hand up and so I'm gonna you'll
find out madam chair and then
hopefully the last question let
me just kind of read a little
more in absorb what what I what
I've learned thank you madam
chair Representative Martinez
which of the options thank you
Representative you're quite
you're questions are valid
questions and I I realize that
it's a huge and complicated
funding morass if you will and
not easy to discern and when
you're just looking at
amendments of something so I
appreciate your questions
Representative Matthews.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and.
And it's I'm seeking a little
bit more clarification on the
point you just right so we're
passing the statute to make it
clear that this is appropriate
under state law in one of the
analysis I've read I thought
that it said that by doing that
in addition.
because Texas in Arizona have a
law like we're talking about
passing that that is going to
open up some availability of
federal funding to help us fund
this in my understanding that
correctly or am I
misunderstanding that.
Madam chair Mister Matthews.
Can you repeat the last part of
your of your question that this
is gonna open up and then you
froze out I'm sorry.
That is going to open up some on
access to federal funding to
help us pay for the services.
Is is that accurate or
inaccurate.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews I'll have my experts
answer that question directly.
Madam chair representative
Matthews those funding sources
already existed and many of the
hospitals are already tapping
into those funding sources
you know that the problem arises
when a hospital has a financial
assistance program that exclude
certain immigrants and yet they
can tap into those funding
sources and then they either
don't happen the funding source
or they do sometimes happen to
the funding source but they
don't give that benefit back to
the patient so they use that
funding source to help the
hospitals costs within the
patient doesn't get the
financial systems from an and
the patient ends up going and
getting sent to collections
which is a real harm to the
patient and this just you know
makes it clear that the
financial assistance program can
be for everyone.
Madam chair at thank you so much
for that answer that clarifies
it for me as to why this is so
significant
the second question I had
relates to U. N. M. H. and again
in the analysis I read
Bernalillo county is not
specifically impacted by this
are in there for you in MH is
not specifically impacted though
it will be to the extent to
provide services in Santa Fe
County and I was not entirely
clear from the analysis why in
the biggest city in the biggest
County and probably think it's
just in the biggest hospital
that somehow this doesn't relate
to it or if it does it relates
to it in a different way and
could somebody just clarify that
for me thank you.
Madam chair president Matthews
said actually does affect it so
you know you an MH has an
agreement really County it's
been an agreement for many many
years are there some militant
here that we have to to post on
our property it's to the tune of
about ninety million dollars per
year part of the agreement
between the county and the U.
and major is that the you H.
will run hospital you know for
those of you who've been around
for awhile the our hospital
extremity County you H. took it
over there is this agreement and
that money would be provided by
the county to you an image to
run the the the the hospital in
part of the agreement.
Currently is that there's an
indigent care program in place
when inmates have something call
you in and care
in addition to other financial
assistance program by UNM care
is probably the biggest one and
and I would say plan the best
one.
I work with you to make sure
many many years on this point
and they said it time and time
again we want to do the right
thing we want to open this up to
any county resident right now
the residency and income should
be the only two requirements but
because of the nineteen eighty
six federal pro rata law they
felt that they couldn't he felt
that the federal government
prohibits them from doing so
unless we have an affirmative
state law so if this passes UNM
agent can actually open up their
programs to any resident that is
in concrete come qualified
embryo County without regard to
migration status.
Okay Madam chair representative.
You are muted yourself.
There we go chair representative
Martinez thank you so much those
those answers really clarified
my understanding of the
importance of this statute and I
appreciate and I will yield.
Thank you
Representative tries to do have
a last question what did so so.
Again I just wanna make sure so
are you so you just want some
language so they're not tapping
excuse me madam chair
representative they're not
tapping any of those resources.
Financial resources.
Madam chair said that us as a U.
N. NH.
Well no well that's fine what
we're was provided because you
said that these these issues
were in in and up in Bernalillo
it is where you are well let me
just back this up.
The resources are they my
understanding is that.
UNM.
Whatever capacity to is
currently not tapping those
financial avenues is why we're
doing this legislation is that
correct.
No madam chair representative
that that is not correct to to
Miner point you in a major
already has a particular funding
source I'm and I'm not sure what
else they tap into will have the
experts get into those weeds but
U. N. H. has one particular
funding source through our
county part of the agreement is
to provide indigent care
the most robust or other
indigent care programs is called
you care you care is open to
bring your county residents are
income qualified but because of
the federal nineteen ninety six
law that I cited the beginning
of my testimony they feel that
they can not provide access to
that program to people who live
in the county are income
qualified but are not.
US citizens or legal permanent
residents and there for passing
this law would actually allow
them.
To open up in that particular
program to those folks
so you know as as to what else a
tap into our I'm not sure that
you need to happen to all kinds
of different sources as well
perhaps not for that program
perhaps for other things that
they do.
Madam chair representative Mr to
your point can I ask you a
question how much of those funds
are left over our at the end of
the year.
of which funds madam chair
representative
chair representative the the the
funding you're discussing that
are set aside specifically to
provide
the care and needs that you just
specified just right before we
start talking about that last
statement the may you said
they're getting all that but the
walk cannot use it
toward on non documented
People are immigrants so my
question is how much money is
left I mean IT
you Senator ninety million
dollars is what I the figure I
heard is that correct.
She Representative also so it's
a ninety million dollar per year
funding source It is not
expedite it is not specifically
for indigent care for our that
is to basically run the hospital
that's part of an agreement
that's fifty years in the making
but part of that particular
agreement is that U. N. NH
provide indigent care services
in bring your County how much is
left over there I have no idea
but I'm sure that something we
could easily find I have three
more questions and I'm done in
the short the more the the of
those ninety million how much is
being set aside for indigent
care as I'm sure that they have
to budget so that the there has
to be a certain amount what did.
Madam chair actually I don't
think it is budget that way and
I know this first hand because
I've had these bites without for
gosh almost ten years.
The agreement is to run the
hospital and the mill levy helps
the university run hospital that
is the agreement UMH through
it's relationships with the
county and other stakeholders
anymore on this call have agreed
to do a number of things to
provide for the indigent care.
If you ask you image they'll
tell you that they use all
funding sources for in my
opinion I think the mill levy is
probably what they the you know
their biggest tool in the tool
chest because it's so large and
because it's what we're opting
into the system for rate every
single person who lives in this
county whether you're an
immigrant or not whether you own
your home or not is paying into
this fund because it's it's
maybe on our properties so you
know I'm sure we get a full
detailed accounting of this
afternoon H. my my suspicion of
the majority will say Hey wait a
minute you know we funded need
care out of a bunch of different
sources.
But you know to me that's the
biggest.
Sources they have and you know
they want to do the right thing
but they just cannot because in
our political wisdom you know
almost thirty years ago we
decided that immigrants were on
we're still health care and so
we passes big federal law that
is still coming back to haunt us
so they want to the right thing
and I would suspect every single
county wants to do the right
thing and allow their residents
regardless of immigration status
to participate in whatever
programs available but their
hands are tied because of that
federal law.
Madam chair representative this
the the record I have exactly
from the hospital here locally
and I'll talk about our hospital
because that's my district that
I'm that I'm concerned with of
course on New Mexico we want to
help everybody explained when
that comes in but I'm going by
the information that I have
present they said they they go
through the entire indigent Fund
other sources and they just
start writing it off that was
exactly that means that they can
get any funds they just we're
offering the and that's what
scares me a little bit no this
is in a sense and I'm funded
mandate on on on counties for
some work so my last question.
You're like Representative Madam
chair representative this point
thank god is the just a look at.
My question is yes this is the
governor and the C. Harper was
simple.
Tell us yes so Madam chair
representative my last question
is.
Assuming that they run out of
funds and they're unable to
provide the care due to funding
our
lack of funding okay and unable
to find all that.
Can be.
Zoom that allows to be place
because this legislation all of
a sudden.
R. says that you have to find it
and and and and the fuel hate
you're supposed to be taking
care of me
not only in the emergency room
but in other aspects can they
turn around and sue the the
county or the local hospital.
So madam chair representative
the answer is no and and you
know let let's let's assume this
doesn't pass that system this
committee table this bill today
and let's assume that a resident
you know you just it isn't US
citizen residents of you know
you're County one of your
counties
cannot access indigent care
their hospital because funding
ran out and and the hospital
just says no for some body
Cansino if you show up to the R.
but certainly they can say no if
you show up for it also some
fiber some elective.
Procedure if I insured and if
they don't have the funding
would you be able to see them on
those grounds no you couldn't
now what they would probably do
is they would probably try to
find you
coverage whether it's Medicaid
and more likely than not that
person is going to fight for
Medicaid if they're indigent and
they're in your county and
they're U. S. citizens and so
you know I don't I don't see
how.
They would have legal standing
to to file a lawsuit
successfully I guess anybody
could file a lawsuit but to file
successfully as a whole other
story so the answer is is now I
mean I don't think you'll have
an immigrant who comes to your
hospital you know and you know
at the end of the fiscal year
and says wait a minute they
didn't treat me I'm suing them
now if they deny treatment to
the emergency room that's a
whole other story independent of
what we're talking about here
today but based on.
You know whatever indigent care
programs in case whatever
financial assistance program is
in place at the hospital I don't
think a person could file a
lawsuit you know shouldn't money
run out or whatever.
Our Madam chair representative
**** I I hear you but that the
so there you you gave me is
before this you're assuming that
this isn't passed.
I'm assuming if it does pass
because you specifically and it
it says shall provide and so
that is where I'm.
Really I I'm caught up in all
that and and and and I just
again you know.
I mean when for funding.
The post said
Justin up we said and in this
state in in the sticking point
use separates all I I totally
agree that we should be helping
all these people always I just I
just is there any way we're here
Madam chair representative it is
I mean we're talking about
Senator you gave me is before
legislation I'm concerned after
legislation when you put this in
that it that it could give
grounds to some to say Hey the
state law says you have to find
it and and I would like to see
language if that what you would
see this is the primary
amendment.
Four four not just me but for
the sake of the counties that
are responsible for paying the
bill say Hey you know what we
have a projection Sir was funds
runs funds and there are a
communities to the county in the
hospital he cannot be sued
because it can find it under the
bases that the ran out of funds.
Not because they don't want to
because they literally couldn't
afford to do it and you see that
as a friendly amendment of Madam
chair representative I'm full in
full support of this bill but I
just can not open ended I see it
is open ended and I'm not an
attorney but I I've been in
business a long time and some of
these questions in a lot of
trouble.
And Representative.
I'm I'm gonna suggest we're not
going to entertain another
amendment this morning and
whether the US sponsor wants to
continue to talk because I
suspect it's an existing law.
and yeah and not necessary for
an amendment and so
I'm also gonna ask it would be
really helpful for those in the
listening off audience if you're
listening HSD association of
counties and associate hospital
association put together a white
paper that explains how all this
works so that of folks can
it can feel comfortable with
it's a complicated process and
system and so I encourage you to
continue to have conversations
with the sponsor but
I've I believe your concerns is
probably in another area and
another area of law that's not
front of you.
And I apologize chomping in it
was long enough.
I have.
I miss madam you know we need
that that Representative
Martinez if you could share that
with me what come up with the
madam chair just described
there's protections for the for
the county I I would I would
definitely energy just
legislation Sir that the those
are I have pretty much the same
to work it's it's it's very not
only because our hospital we all
have our date all of our areas
of of of of of of of concern my
my my house was about broke and
not and I'm concerned about that
that's why I'm I'm pressed so
hard please don't.
You see it as as spectrally that
I am doing everything it can to
support what you're asking I
just I'm afraid that with this
the our hospital our local
hospitals are to be point and
this may not help home and so I
just want to make that I'm not
putting my will hospital at risk
I have all my residents that I
have to worry too if if it's
something like this were to
affected and they're not able to
get care it it it does of of of
concern so if you could please
start getting that information
I'd really appreciate it thank
you madam jumped up thank you
what's the pleasure the
committee.
Do you have a do pass a second
and a second from Representative
Ferrary doors you want to call
the roll.
The pope Sanderson.
Representative Gail Anderson
Armstrong.
Representative please madam
chair she is presented a bill on
another committee part of their
both excuse.
Representative the cost.
Yes.
Representative Karen bash yes.
Representative Stephanie lord
passed from enrollment please.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Louise I.
No one to extremely low.
You say no Sir.
Yes yes ma'am I said no and I
would like to see we might right
thank you Representative Liz
Thomson yes.
Representative the vice chair
Joanne Ferrari yes.
Representative Anderson and
Armstrong works used.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Yes with the explanation please.
Representative madam chair
Deborah A. Armstrong yes.
We have eight yes one
and two excuse.
Okay Representative house bill
one twelve as amended has
past of the committee and.
Representative rises we want
explain your vote please don't
restate everything you've
already online very shortly no
you are again due to my my my
concerns over my County as
hospital building in the in the
state of bankruptcy you're very
close to it and my concerns that
I that I presented earlier in
I'm not knowing how the the.
funding what we're it would the
funding sources which are come
from or be able to be leveraged
and the concerns of the
possibility of a lawsuit that
that this time I I I would.
I would.
Both no thank you we can get
that information I will
definitely Michael thank you so
much thank you Representative
Lord to explain your vote thank
you very much of Madam as you
can see the reason I'm we do
agonize in schools we try to do
the right.
Thank you all we we don't we as
you can see here one of us come
in and say we're going to
absolute vote on something we
actually try to information and
yes I do still have some
concerns and I'm gonna look into
I'm gonna trust information that
I got I have the same concerns
that we start also has and what
would you get that information
and he and I for the next
committee on more about this
site thank you for all the act.
Thank you and thank you for the
discussion and for all of those
who who spoke up in public
comment thank you
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members.
Okay I'm next we have
Representative
Rubio issue here.
For house bill one fifty four.
Yes yes their ships okay
everyone good morning
Representative do you have
experts that you wish to us to
add to the panel yes so I have
Barbara Webber and Serra man's
they should be both on and then
I believe
at I think that might be it I
don't know if
They might be suggests they
might suggest someone else but
that's why I was we've got
barber and Serra are both
promoted to panelists and this
is house bill one fifty four
prescription drug affordability
act and go ahead representative
welcome to health and Human
Services thank you madam chair
and thank you committee members
and folks are watching I am
caring this legislation it was
actually brought to my attention
over the course of the fall and
it was just a staggering
statistic that I couldn't quite
believe in New Mexico actually
eight in it which is that forty
four percent of New Mexicans
have reported to not filling
their prescriptions or have
skipped the meds because of
affordability and and so.
Having elderly parents and and
if not I would say a
hypochondriac of the mother some
days I I wonder I I I I know
she's she's she takes a
prescription meds and things
like that but the issue around
affordability affordability
hasn't yet been an issue for
them but I was really quite
shocked to find out what New
Mexicans are are dealing with in
terms of this issue and so when
it was brought to my attention I
of course decided to move this
legislation forward I don't I am
not very well versed in the
technical aspects of all of this
other than the fact that other
states have have done this which
is to create a board much like
our public regulations
commission to really regulate
pharmaceutical companies and
make sure that medication that
is being considered for New
Mexicans of that this this this
board would be available to
provide the kind of
But expertise and and how we can
make medication more affordable
to New Mexicans Barbara Webber
answer man's or my experts on
this issue and I would certainly
open it up to them to provide
more details I will say I have
had a number of people reach out
one gentleman specifically from
loving to in New Mexico
literally crying in a voice mail
because of just the but
thousands of dollars that people
have to spend on on a given
month just to be able to to
handle their their their
medical prescription drugs and
and just the pain that comes
along novel just financially but
also just physically and so I'll
hand it over to bar rent to
Serra for their opening remarks
and then we'll open it up for
questions.
Thank you go ahead barber.
Madam chair and members of the
community Committee
this is Barbara Webber and I'm a
director of Health Action New
Mexico long time patient
advocate and Health Action
things this is one of the most
significant bills we've been
involved in and supported over
the years of portability of
medications
goes right to the heart of the
portability of health care if
you have health care but you
can't afford to medications
we're not doing good health care
and it's too often the case of
that is the reality I'll start
off with a short story before
Serra gets into an explanation
of the bill of I have.
I'm sorry psoriasis a skin
disorder and unfortunately in my
case it covers ninety percent of
my body and until the advent of
biologics it was just a
condition I had to live with
and with biologics site they
were Americal I was cleared up
immediately I was in there drug
studies for services for like
four years and went along
Happy as a clam and two or three
years ago I got a call from my
special my pharmacist I used to
take two injections a week and
you said miss Webber did you
know that when you pick up your
next medication it's going to
cost you one thousand nine
hundred eighty dollars and I was
like what do you suggest your
carrier of your insurance
carrier is no longer accepting
the rebates from and the the the
drug company and so that's what
you're gonna have to pay.
I went to OSI being the patient
advocate I want to retire just
to see if I could get one or two
free samples and basically had
to just live with it without the
medication as might disease
returned
my doctor told me I had to go to
on to Medicare because Medicare
would pay for it in in in
patients Yushin setting of but
in the meantime after a couple
months my hands school became
totally swollen my knuckles for
twice their size and and bright
red in the pain was incredible
and when I went to the
rheumatologist she said because
not having your medication
you've triggered a psoriatic
arthritis and the X. ratios is
that the damage to your joints
is permanent and irreversible.
So that's one patient's story
and I'm sure you'll help others
it's an issue that is we talk
about affordable health care we
have to talk about the one
unregulated
price setting that happens in
the system and that is the drug
company setting with no
regulation of prices down the
chain I'm gonna turn it over now
to Serra.
Thank you Robert unfair then
from the campaign director for
New Mexicans New Mexico
consumers for formal
prescriptions Health Action New
Mexico and A. R. P. have
developed this effort to pass
the bill for prescription drug
affordability for and we were
very happy to get Representative
everybody on board with it and I
have her support because.
And the committee has heard
quite a bit I mean last last
week you all had a seminar in
drug prices are too high and the
system is really complicated
so the reason that would that we
will bring this bill at this
time is to try to address this
problem comprehensively.
You all heard a lot about the
from the mail order bill and the
pharmacy benefit manager bill
last week
specific problems with this
complicated system and so I'm
not gonna I'm not going to we
recap or review all that what
I'm gonna do it that was them
out a little bit and talk about
the whole system and why we
believe this bill try to answer
I think it's complicated on
purpose I never really heard
from Representative part four
how does.
Bill on on PBMs that we heard
from the pharmacist in the
pharmacy benefit managers we
heard from representatives
manufacturers we heard from
wholesalers the whole way from
the factory the pharmacy counter
and we heard a lot of stories
from patients about the problems
they were having affording their
drugs even with their insurance
in place.
So the prescription drug
affordability board will help
New Mexico to address this
problem without getting bogged
down in the finger pointing
along the supply chain that we
heard a lot of last week
a lot of policies have been
tried to help people get their
medications from insurance plans
mandating generics limiting co
pays the PBM model where the
middle man because she to
promote pricing for some
patients.
Two ponds rebates patient access
funds we heard about all those
things last week
at the other day which system
for approach to get a life
saving drug people lead into the
hand because drugs don't work if
people can't afford them.
the pharmacist in the
prescribing health care
providers they know their
patients are gonna get better if
they are able to take a
prescriptions as scheduled they
can't fix the system the
previous can't exit the hospital
can't fix that the health plans
get even the drug companies
can't fix it because industry
wide business model to focus on
Wall Street in stock price.
Keep in mind high prices are
illegal in fact they protect the
perceived interests of
shareholders any company that
tried to move away from this
price based business model and
punished by Wall Street and
that's why we're here with this
bill because public policy is
the only solution to drug prices
that patients can for.
So you're gonna hear number
things from advocates on both
sides this issue what we want to
emphasize is the prescription
drug affordability for does not
outlaw innovation it does not
well profit it simply regulates
what consumers suppliers health
plans will pay or charge for
certain high cost drugs.
Medications evaluated by the dad
will meet certain criteria for
price increases every entity
involved in getting drugs to
consumers in New Mexico we have
to sell those particular drugs
under the upper payment limit
the evaluation process by the
board is required in this bill
to incorporate industry data the
cost of manufacture to make a
particular drug and to focus on
certain high constructs.
The board will set up a payment
for only the costly structures
balcony the manufacturer's
revenue and the need for New
Mexicans will pay for the drug
twenty and use up our payment
limit to actually increase sales
these drugs relative to the
sales line of the expansion
project we're not.
I will be made available for any
technical questions because that
both the at that FIR had
different things in it that I'm
sure the committee is going to
want to ask about and I'm I'm
happy to try to resolve.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative are you ready to
go through to the audience yes
absolutely thank you.
And no amendments.
I'm I believe we did have one
amendment
I think we sent that in the
I don't.
Well while you look for that and
we look for that will go to the
I don't think I don't think
there are any amendments madam
chair all right we had huge
amendments on the two previous
bills this morning is just
double checking that we so are
in the audience we're going to
go to a poll first about those
in the audience in the attendees
to either support or oppose
house bill one fifty four.
Okay looks like people stop
voting yes sixty four percent or
thirty of people in support
thirty five percent or sixteen
are in opposition.
and it will go to those who wish
to provide testimony this
morning and first asked for you
to raise your hand if you're in
opposition to house bill one
fifty four.
And we'll start with
Caitlyn and I I'm gonna of I'm
not even gonna try your last
name because I'm going to mess
it up so.
Caitlyn go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
having me here today my name is
Caitlyn the Carrillo and I'm the
director of state policy for the
pharmaceutical research and
manufacturers of America or
PhRMA we're here today in
opposition to H. B. one five
four we're concerned that the
bill could jeopardize patient
access to prescription medicines
feels to recognize the role of
other actors in the supply chain
and bypasses solutions that
could bring patient patient's
savings immediately we often
hear relatively loose
comparisons made between the
prices of medicines in our
country and other countries and
the reality is that in every
other country that allows the
government to set the price for
medicines patients have access
to fewer new medicines and
medicines take longer to reach
patients in here in the US it's
B. one five four could also
result in a lack of availability
and innovative therapies in the
state and repair Canseco fully
negotiate to obtain the therapy
at the state's upper payment
limit or pharmacy or hospital
can't stock the drug because
they can't meet the upper
payment limit.
This bill doesn't address the
issues within the supply chain
that do determine the price of
patient pays when you look at
brand drugs as a whole and not
just a hand picked number of
drugs the net prices for brand
medicines actually declined in
the first and second quarters of
twenty twenty of course we
recognize that patients
certainly do not feel that way
that's because rebates are not
making their way to them and
instead they're taking on a
larger burden of costsharing
again this is why looking at the
whole system is so important not
just manufacturers alone I'm H.
B. one five four is really I
think falsely characterized as a
tool to lower prescription drug
costs for patients there's no
evidence that well because
states that have implemented
affordability boards actually
not implemented in upper payment
limit the reality here is that
this sets of orders creates part
of Serra said to limit the price
of payer purchaser piece for
medicine and ultimately puts
money and insurers pockets it
doesn't put money back into
consumers pockets
what H. B. one five four really
doesn't address I think it's
patients biggest concern here in
New Mexico and that's the cost
that they pay when they pick up
their prescription at the
pharmacy we certainly do want to
work with legislators on
solutions that will actually
lower costs for patients at the
pharmacy including guaranteeing
that rebates that manufacturers
are providing are being passed
through to patients insuring
patients benefit from
costsharing assistance so they
aren't subject to that
deductible surprise at the
pharmacy the Barbara mentioned
I'm looking at the entire supply
chain so that we really can
determine market centric
solutions I encourage the
committee not to rush into
passing a policy that could have
unintended consequences for
innovation and for patient
access and hope that you'll vote
no today on one five four thank
you all so much.
Thank you on next will go to
Ashley Wagner and I will have a
lot of people gonna talk on this
bill to sign encouraging you not
to be repetitious.
Keep your
comments as brief as you can
thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
I'll keep my comments brief as
you requested I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we appreciate the
intent of what the bill's
sponsors trying to accomplish we
are concerned that the measure
would likely limit or eliminate
access to essential and
potentially life saving drugs
for New Mexicans for instance if
a pair cannot successfully
negotiate to obtain that there
be at the state prescribed right
or for pharmacy cannot stop the
drug because it to cannot meet
the state prescribed right over
six thousand medicines could be
restricted in particular
prescription drugs for asthma
and just non small cell lung
cancer and rheumatoid arthritis
will be impacted New Mexico
acting alone with our Richard
arbitrary price caps will
redress will reduce drug
treatment options for New
Mexicans thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak today.
Thank you Ashlee our next we
have a Dennis are.
Thank you madam chair Dennis are
representing Merck I'd like to
say we heard you and others on
the committee loud and clear on
Friday that drug pricing at all
levels of the supply chain must
be examined we also completely
agree with the statement that
often manufacturers distributors
PBMs MCOS are their own worst
enemy in terms of getting this
information out there however we
believe that H. B. one fifty
four provide such a broad
mandate to be carried out that
it needs to be vetted during an
interim process this the tasks
that would be given to this
board are enormous and there's
no appropriation there's no
staff there is also a few legal
issues we'd like to point out we
believe as noted in the F. I. R.
that would be highly unlikely
that any price cap would apply
to Medicaid we know that they
would not apply to Medicare and
the bill also acknowledges they
would not apply to recipients my
understanding for recent data
that I pulled is that forty
three percent of the state's on
Medicaid twenty percent on
Medicare and between twelve and
fifteen percent onerous a plans
which means that the actions of
the board and the price caps may
have no benefit to seventy five
percent or more of the state's
individuals we are pledged to
work with you and work with the
sponsor in an interim to address
these issues but we respectfully
oppose the bill at this time.
Thank you Dan.
Our next we have our whole.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is our call
and I'm speaking today on behalf
of Glaxo Smith Kline.
I don't want to digress too much
but H. Beth H. B. one fifty four
is an incredibly complex idea
that as many previous folks of
stated.
We don't believe has had enough
time spent will all of us
together to hammer out
solutions around the complexity
and the need for transparency
throughout the supply chain we
think that H. B. one fifty four
being delayed to the end from so
that we could have a more robust
input and conversation with all
the participants in the supply
chain.
Would help us ensure that all
New Mexicans have access to both
innovation and affordable
medications and for those
reasons madam chair we
respectfully oppose this bill
and asked that it be sent to the
interim thank you.
Thank you our next we have Brian
Warren.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes go ahead okay thank
you my name is Brian Warren and
I with the biotechnology
innovation organization or bio
we are trade association for
biotech companies we oppose this
bill because it will not save
patients money but it will harm
the market for innovative
medicines
as has been previously stated by
a some of the supporters
themselves out patients Hey at
what they do with the pharmacy
based on their insurance whether
they pay a five dollar copay a
two hundred dollar copay or
they're paying full cost that's
determined by the health
insurance plans setting price
caps will not charge what most
patients not change what most
patients Hey
it will potentially interfere
with the rebates they're
negotiated between manufacturers
and health plans it's unclear
how local hospitals and
pharmacies and doctors who are
supposed to comply with this
bill will be able to purchase
under cap based because prices
are set on a national basis and
if it says you can't pay more
than a hundred dollars for this
medicine but that the national
prices a hundred and twenty
dollars I don't we're not really
it's not clear how those
hospitals pharmacies and doctors
are going to comply
also a price cap.
It was senator it's been said by
the proponents of the bill that
this would target the highest
most expensive
medicines however if you had for
example a fifteen thousand
dollar innovative cancer
medicine and the price cap was
set at twelve thousand dollars a
patient with paying a six
thousand dollar deductible is
not going to benefit from this
legislation such as it's already
been passed by this committee we
think would help pass those
savings to consumers
and.
While we doubt it would benefit
most patients were certain they
would make it harder for
innovative companies to attract
investment they need
I'm ninety five percent of our
members bios members are small
companies that operate off of
the sea and other investment
money developing new medicines
is unfortunately expensive time
consuming and rescue which is a
bad combination when you're
trying to attract investment
dollars
most of our members do not have
any products on the market
so government price caps will
mess with the risk versus reward
a question that investors
consider when they're making
investments just going to make
it harder and more expensive for
small companies to attract the
capital they need to operate and
it's going to make it harder for
large companies to justify
riskier R&D product out projects
so the result is there we fewer
new medicines and particularly
those that are rest year which
is usually unfortunately those
without out where is these is
what we have fewer patients or
more targeted therapies we
fought we believe that that is
unacceptable policy
or or a policy that would result
in fewer medicines is one that
is an acceptable one so for
these reasons we ask your note.
Excuse me you know what.
Thank you next I have Greg
burns.
Need to on mute yourself go
ahead thank you very much
as you mention of Greg burns I
run the New Mexico biotechnology
biomedical association I also
served as vice chair of the New
Mexico bioscience Authority and
we're of both organizations
would certainly support of lower
drug prices and and better
medications for patients I want
to let you know that are
bioscience industry.
Is.
It's growing here in New Mexico
as part of a group that probably
eighty ninety percent of our
members are start ups we believe
this will hurt their ability to
raise funds to do research which
generally takes in the case of
drugs up to twelve years and
well over a billion dollars to
bring to market now on the other
hand we have a lot of what I
would call firms that are on the
verge of the success and grow
this is now probably the leading
growth sector in New Mexico we
would hate to see it take a a
shot basically that would to
harm its ability to continue to
grow.
What I will try to point out is
because a lot of good things
have already been pointed out
two things
the the bill really focuses only
on one part of the entire drug
supply chain it does not include
insurance companies and pharmacy
benefit managers and that
accounts for about fifty percent
of the current spending on drugs
I also like to just bring us two
quick items that still rose gave
me if you're not familiar with
so he still he's Mr bioscience
New Mexico created the bio
Science Center.
He's also involved with about
twenty companies that he has
started or invested in and he
worked in the pharmaceutical
industry for thirty years and
here were his two thought city
suggested to me to bring to you
this morning New Mexico as we
all know is a relatively small
market the reaction from
supplying companies is very
likely to be on the order of
okay we'll just to move you to
the bottom of the supplying
priority list if we pass this
that could mean that we will
soon see supply shortages in
virtually no budget second even
if New Mexico managed to
implement this it could lead to
other state states taking
similar action that could lead
to fifty different sets
practices and policies on
pricing.
The company's would react they
would have to raise prices to
cover the cost of compliance.
I'll leave it at that.
Thank you next we have Leland
all.
Thank you chairman can you hear
me alright yes go ahead.
We'll end up with the healthcare
distribution alliance H. is the
national trade association
representing primary
pharmaceutical wholesale
distributors and unfortunately
we are inspect opposition of the
legislation also distributors
really play a unique role within
that pharmaceutical supply chain
companies purchase product from
any fractures and then they
store those products in national
and regional warehouses and in
turn then they ship those
products to pharmacies to place
orders with them and ensure that
that product is on their shelves
so patients have access to that
in that supply chain really in
the problem the physical supply
chain of that product we
purchase the product at the lack
of price and then for a brand we
will sell the product at the
walk prices well to the pharmacy
placing the order we then in
turn will charge the manufacture
what's known as a bona fide
service fee so really the
wholesale distributor itself is
not impacting what a patient
pays when the into the pharmacy
those but I services are not
passed on to that subsequent
purchaser that is only between
the manufacturer and the
wholesale distributor in light
of that we have opposition to
house bill one five four to the
inclusion of wholesale
distributors in the in the
funding of the program we don't
believe that that Sen should be
supported by entities that
really are not impacting the
cost of what the patient pays on
the edge of the pharmacy for
their medication so in light of
that requested that legislation
removes that fund portion from
wholesale distributors we also
wanted to note that the
definition of manufacture what
is narrower it does include
other entities outside of the
actual manufacture the product
that similarly to a wholesale
distributor don't really affect
the cost of the product so we'd
recommend that that legislation
look at that definition and fine
tune it to ensure that it really
is on that the entity that sets
that the price of the product I
have submitted comments to the
committee they should have those
so I've.
Will and fair and.
Answering questions thank you
our next we have an asset
allerede.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Vanessa lady to and I'm the
registered lobbyists for Pfizer
pharmaceuticals for the reasons
previously stated we stand in
opposition to house bill one
fifty four thank you.
Thank you Vanessa now we will go
to those who are in favor.
If you will raise your hand.
Those in favor we will start
with some Marshall Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Marshall Martinez and executive
director of equality New Mexico
the statewide LGBTQ civil rights
and advocacy organization.
L. G. B. T. Q. people are highly
impacted by the cost of
prescription drugs for example
we are on the verge of ending
HIV and aids in our generation
we know the building on
treatment for HIV successfully
suppressing the virus to an
undetectable level means
ensuring that people living with
HIV aren't passing the virus to
new individuals in addition
craft pre exposure prophylactic
medications allow those of us at
higher risk to take a medication
to make this ninety nine percent
protected from the virus via
sexual transmission for
protecting people from new viral
transmissions means ending HIV
and aids is within our grasp but
to get there we must make these
medications more affordable and
accessible to LGBTQ people and
all New Mexicans we cannot get
there if the people who need
these medications are not able
to afford them for that reason
and many others we see this bill
as an imperative for clear
entrance New Mexicans and for
all of our communities across
the state and respectfully ask
your support thank you thank
you.
Next we have Andrew Baker.
I can hear me yes hello my name
is Andrew Baker and I'm a
registered lobbyist with Health
Action New Mexico I would just
like to say that I'm a little
bit confused and concerned about
the arguments that the
pharmaceutical industry has
brought against us
it seems to be I've heard the
arguments that that law actually
lower prices for people but at
the same time that this is going
to hurt the bottom line of
pharmaceutical companies
and so I'm just a little bit
confused about how that
How that resolves
this bill.
Lee does a lot to create
meaningful legislation that
lowers prices for all New
Mexicans we know that forty four
percent of New Mexicans had
challenges in affording
prescriptions and I believe that
this does a lot to.
Improve the equity and justice
of the health care system here
in New Mexico and I would urge
you to vote in favor of this
bill thank you thank you next we
have Bill Jordan.
Need to go ahead bill.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan representing New Mexico
voices for children.
I suspect that right now we're
all in a bit of a love hate
relationship with drug companies
we love their amazing work to
get these vaccines developed so
rapidly and safely.
When we go to fill a
prescription the outrageous cost
just don't seem to be justified
especially when we read the
people in other countries are
often paying much less for
prescription drugs than our own
copay.
This bill is simply a way for
you to let your constituents
know that you are doing your due
diligence to get them the best
possible health care at the best
possible price this bill is both
good policy and good politics
and we urge your support thank
you thank you.
Next I have Andrew Baker did we
already hear from you I
apologize on yes I just spoke
with that's what I thought thank
you.
So we are to occur regular.
Good morning again madam chair
members of the committee as I
shared earlier occurred record
on the director Richard advocacy
ministry New Mexico we also
speak on behalf of the New
Mexico conference of churches
for the reasons that have been
previously stated we also
support H. B. one fifty four
very strongly and as I said
others have shared already I to
have had or been in a position
in my life where I was not able
to per to take prescribed
medications because I could not
afford them so for the reasons
stated already and that will be
contested after me and my
personal reason I strongly
support this legislation I
encourage you to as well thank
you.
Muted myself next we have gene
Hammett Hey mark.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jean
Hamrick I'm a volunteer advocate
with a a RP New Mexico I live
with multiple sclerosis MS I
take a drug to help manage my MS
and that drug costs nearly a
hundred thousand dollars each
year I'm responsible for about
ten top ten thousand dollars of
that cost.
I know the struggle many New
Mexicans faced trying to pay for
their prescription drugs.
Representative certainly work if
you can afford that it's time to
hold big drug companies
accountable A. A. R. P. is
working across the country in
that effort with this and other
initiatives to stop are excrete.
I am a a RP New Mexico stand in
strong support of age being one
fifty four and urge you to pass
drug pricing reform to keep risk
direct prescription drugs
affordable with a do pass but
thank you.
Commuting myself next I have
Holly Beaumont.
See what the second go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm the Robert how the
Beaumont organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico and we support this bill
for the following reason one of
the lesser known contributors to
the high cost of drugs in the
United States in New Mexico are
the billions of dollars that are
spent every year by the
pharmaceutical industry to
promote their products in the
media.
I emailed a copy of a study done
by the Harvard Medical School to
you today that addresses this
problem and demonstrates that
from twenty twelve to twenty
fifteen the money spent on
advertising by pharmaceuticals
increased from our.
Three point two billion to five
point two billion which marks
about an increase of about a
minute billion dollars a year.
Also quoting from that study the
United States is one of only two
countries where drug makers are
allowed to market prescription
drugs directly to consumers this
ad blitz of expensive brand name
drugs is often cited as a major
factor contributing to the high
cost of drugs in the United
States and it also allows big
pharma to control the content to
the programs that they sponsor
with their ads for those reasons
and other reasons previously
expressed we support this bill
thank you very much thank you.
Next I have our Christina
Caffrey.
Thank you good morning
Sorry can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Members of the committee thank
you for having me here to share
my story today really
interesting the Capri I was born
with a very rare genetic
disorder called Duchenne is
disease and even though it was
publicly funded research at the
national institutes of health
that led to the development of a
treatment for this disease
nineteen ninety one the patent
was given away to a drug company
called Genzyme and today after
Genzyme has made small changes
to the original treatment over
the last twenty five years
Genzyme markets a derivative of
the original it's now culture
delta and it costs five hundred
dollars a pill now I take two
pills a day which means that the
annual cost of the drugs more
than three hundred fifty
thousand dollars a year and it
has been since nineteen ninety
one this life saving medication
which is a drug I must take to
function in my everyday life
cost the same as a house or
fifteen cars and it costs that
year after year after year and
this is all because I simply
lost the genetic lottery.
Companies like Johnson would
like us to believe that
excessively high prices are
merited because they need to
recruit research and development
costs but my story shows why
this is simply untrue it was
taxpayers and not Genzyme that
funded the riskiest earliest
research for my truck and has
now found much easier and less
expensive ways to manufacture
these drugs since they came to
market they also run the patient
population taking the drug and
increasing the number of people
to whom they can charge five
hundred dollars a hello Genzyme
has recouped its investment many
times over but I am still paying
the price and they do this only
because they can't because no
one has ever demanded to know
why they're extorting people
like me and this is why New
Mexico needs affordability board
made a experts you can peel back
the curtain of arbitrate
pressing that has nothing to do
with the cost of production the
cost of development or the value
to patients and I want to point
out the bird the burden of high
prescription drug prices is not
just monetary it is absolutely
unemotional bird I have made so
many decisions out of fear of
fear of not being able to obtain
or afford medication I have
state and jobs I should quit I
have chosen a career that in
some ways does not suit me and
I'm all done all of this to
simply stay safe and stay a lot
and there are so many more
people like and then New Mexico
who are crippled by the cost of
their trucks this bill is not a
complete fix I'll be honest it
but it is an essential first
step and so I urge you to vote
yes on house bill one fifty four
to fight for New Mexicans like
me.
Thank you Christina and last I
have all CEO.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is at the
A. R. Z. I come from McKinley
County I also.
Number of that forward to get
the action.
my story is you know I've seen
people go through this all the
time I am one of those patients
to.
they were trying to put me on
generic pills just because they
couldn't afford my medication.
My I also take Enbrel which is a
steroid and.
Right now they're trying to
figure out how they're going to.
Do my insurance on how they want
to pay for it now because it's a
lot of money and they want to
put me on a generic one I really
don't know how one is going to
work for me.
I really support this one fifty
four.
I also think we said my mother
was you know hit with the COVID
last year and now her builder
also medication.
It's really hard for us to take
care of our bills and also my
mom's bills also.
Thank you.
Thank you Althea.
Okay now we will go to the
committee that was our last one
and I have Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Rubio for.
Sponsoring this legislation so I
just I
I totally support your
legislation and it it really
gets kind of tiresome to hear
the drug companies say oh my
gosh we're going to go out of
business we're going to want to
you know it's going to be
horrible if you do if you're
trying to control our prices but
then you watch you watch any
show or any and listen to any
radio station and you hear drug
advertise at big dollars for
these very very rare conditions
and I'm thinking you know what
how many patients are they
actually getting out of this
advertised I mean the one that
really stop start me thinking is
that non twenty four for people
who are totally blind and and
that advertisement ran outwardly
for months and I just kept
thinking there's got to be a
more targeted wait to reach an
audience of people with visual
impairment that on national TV
that would be much less
expensive you know and then the
that the federation for the
blind magazine of kinds of
things so that what that what
I'm trying to say is that we
know they have plenty of money
to try and make more money so I
I would think this study and.
But that and it's a little bit
off topic but not really that
eighty
an increase of thirty three
point six percent in out of
pocket price that is eleven
eleven percentage point change
in coinsurance or ten dollars
and forty cents per drug because
it's a twenty two point six
percent drop in total drug
consumption and thirty two
almost a third thirty two point
seven increase in monthly
mortality.
Second when we trace this
mortality affect to cutbacks in
life saving medicines like that
means and I for anti
hypertensive anti hypertensive
for which clinical trials show
what large mortality mortality
benefit and so essentially
price increases cost eighteen
percent more patients to fill no
drugs so if if if appraise
prices raise that one drug
eighteen percent of people stop
taking all their drugs because
they just can't afford that so I
I think that really points out
what this is what this bill is
intended to do and so a ten
percent increase a ten dollar
prescription increasing
costsharing led to a twenty two
percent drop in drug consumption
and a thirty two point seven
increase in monthly mortality so
what that tells us is that our
people are ready can't afford
drugs and we need to do
something about it and it's such
a complex system I think this is
a great way to go about it.
And just just for the last
commenter who was talking about
being placed on a on a generic
and madam chair and
Representative Ferrary I sure
will remember the
the step therapy bill that I
worked on for years and years
actually Representative
chairwoman with the co sponsor
sometimes.
And.
What that did just for the
audiences that it kept to your
insurance company from forcing
you to go on a different
medication just to save that
money you know if you've been on
a medication before and not and
then you went off it because it
wasn't working and they change
their formulary they can't force
you to go back on to that drug
that didn't work or had negative
effects on you and I also have
not officially but that the
office of the superintendent of
insurance does support this bill
so thank you madam chair.
Thank you next I have
Representative Lord.
That you're on mute.
Okay thank you for thank you
madam chair
wanted for servicing
clarification because I got some
emails from people including
some my constituents who are you
know I'm eighty four years old
I'm on Medicare Winchell this
lower my pharmaceutical costs so
I just want to make sure
everyone understands this is not
cover Medicaid this is not cover
Medicare this is not cover any
insurance plan that are covered
by recess is correct Madam.
Madam chair and Representative
thank you for your question all
open it up to the ceremony who
can help answer that three.
I thank you madam chair thank
you representative
thank you for asking that
question Representative that is
actually a pretty important
aspect of this so
Medicaid is a pair of the state
will get a discount on any drug
has not for payment limit for
the board
Medicaid care
will at the the upper payment
limit
will it what we're not it it it
it it won't it cover it won't
it affected chair consumers any
differently than any other
consumer.
Thank you that I just want to
make sure that all the people
that are present that are on
Medicare know that this has no
bearing on them at all so the
Medicare does is something that
this board is not going to do
anything to lower the cost I
just wanted to clarify that
right off the bat thank you so
madam chair.
The job was or something else.
Maybe it I'm sorry I I I want to
quickly there the.
Good particular it does the drug
the drug that that the board
determined.
Our can be given up for payment
when it under this bill.
That appeal when it applies to
everyone it doesn't matter who
the consumer it doesn't actually
yeah that that.
On that point
I'm gonna ask you'll have about
that one because I don't think
that's true I don't think you
can affect chair because it's
federally set and I don't think
you can affect the rest of plans
because of federally set and
Medicaid has their own pricing
system I don't think it affects
Medicaid so be careful and make
sure yeah and I could be wrong
on the Medicaid but I don't
think I am so
you we can't affect those plans
that are set by federal law.
Thank you so much madam chair I
I believe you are correct I did
some research on this and I've
also done insurance billing
forever and everybody has their
own rates Medicaid SS and
Medicare is that so we really
don't have any at this board
will not have an effect I just
want to make sure that that is
clarified it's not gonna have
that because those are federal
programs or the programs that
have their own rates and we
can't have any say so and those
and I think that's very
important that people understand
in our state of New Mexico we
have a huge chunk of people huge
that are already on Medicaid so
they will not be affected by and
chair I just don't want them
coming back to me and saying you
know you go to start with the
spelling this affecting on
medication just doing this for
clarification okay so thank you
madam so madam chair knowing
that I want to there's a
question that came to mind.
Wall people were talking and
it's very important question.
Let's say New Mexico does a
price cap and they say
drug acts you can only charge a
certain amount of money for.
What we cannot negotiate that
price does that mean they're no
longer going to offer that drug
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you Representative for
that question us Serra if you
want to go ahead and.
Thank Representative I'm well I
I think that that hasn't
happened
I think that we
we we wouldn't expect that to
happen I think you would cost a
lot of money an enormous amount
of effort for drug companies to
walk out particular drugs from a
state so that hasn't happened
and and one of the things that
that someone mention earlier is
that that this hasn't been done
in in fact have been done a
couple state and being
implemented in other states
shortly
and that that haven't been found
to have happened and we wouldn't
expect that would happen because
we're talking about a list of
high priced drugs that there is
that is that a short list and
that what we would expect is
that
That the other women that would
be set by the board would take
into account all of the expenses
of the drug company what it
costs to manufacture the drug
and all those things so there's
really no reason for them not to
sell these drugs in New Mexico
because there there's gonna be
room for them to still make a
profit in there but but also
Bill Bill B.
but they'll just be limited in
what the most they can charge at
every point in the supply chain.
So that there should be a reason
for the top selling.
Sorry I needed myself politics
think that answer I'm gonna push
a little bit harder in that I am
I'm very analytical I try to set
the most supports the side and
deal with facts and figures so
if I were to call one of these
other states.
Would you say then that they
would guarantee that they'd
never have that issue because
I'm looking at you're gonna say
acts they're gonna say this and
if you can not negotiated that
means that drug is no longer
going to be available so can you
guarantee me that if I call
these other states have done I
won't get that answer.
Well I could have happened yet
however I think really the the
principle that you're trying to
drive it here and I appreciate
very much represented that you
are I wanted to get this.
I your question is answered
firmly on the ground of the
finances of this bill because
that ultimately is is what we're
talking about is what patients
pay for their drugs are having
said that there's really not a
reason to believe that any
pharmacy company would refuse to
sell particular life saving drug
to patients and take away their
access to that drug.
because another payment what I
I'm not surprised that we heard
that this morning I just don't
think there's any reasonably.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair I I don't I don't
deal with that very well with
expect or I I I do very well
with yes we did talk to all
these other states and that is
never happened or we can get a
guarantee so.
Well quick if I can just mention
as well what we're trying to do
here with this with this board
is something that many states
are looking into they haven't
there's only just been
one or two one specifically in
Maryland that has already begun
to operate and.
So much will be learning over
the course of the next few years
and so I think.
Part of what I the I'm I'm
hearing you ask our questions
that I think we are not quite
sure yet because so many of the
state's like ourselves are
attempting to address this
accountability when it comes to
pharmaceutical companies which
have never been really regulated
and so I think the question that
you're posing is valid
unfortunately because this is
such a new concept for many
states particularly New Mexico
We can't necessarily give you a
yes or no because people other
states are still trying to
they're still formulating their
whole process getting it up to
speed and as of now
pharmaceutical companies what
you're asking hasn't actually
happened yet.
Thank you Representative for
taking time and that thank you
madam chair so madam chair
representative
Can I ask you so this is dealing
with the manufacture are you
also planning on putting a cap
on how much the pharmacies
conseiller drug for.
Representative Representative
would you let me take that go
ahead Sir okay you thank you
Representative the the
What I'm just really emphasized
to have everyone the committee
understand is that the upper
payment limit would apply across
the supply chain so whoever the
patient is at the counter
whatever coverage they have
this this would be the maximum
amount that they could be
charged there but it's also the
maximum amount that the
manufacturer can can be paid
period for any failed The New
Mexico so last week we heard a
lot about the supply chain
issues what we've got that the
PPM in there the manufactures
about cultures there which we
got this whole complicated
structure the right and so the
reason for this board really is
to try to short cut the
complications of that and take
it from the system where there's
a lot of finger pointing about
Ruiloba manufactures could
charge this in the PM targets
that rebate coupons and all the
to come together to this is how
much these particular high
priced drugs can that how much
anyone can be charged for the
New Mexico where ever they are
enough supply chain and actually
critical piece here is that that
that other payment limit applies
to manufacturers that also
applies to the PDF for a I all
the way down.
Thank you for taking the time to
answer that question madam chair
representative so my question go
back to this so what you're
saying is if we said we this
board the state board advises
that the clients the person
getting the drug can only be
charged acts that means do the
rest of the people of the food
chain that have to argue and
fight over who's going to take
what kind of that for how they
can work that out because we go
through so many people the
people that make it in the
handle of the distributed.
And you know all the way to the
farms in reaching a talk about.
How how.
You tell the person I'm gonna
pay this and there's a cap what
about all these other people how
are you going to mandate how
they run their operations what
they charge.
Madam chair representative that
that is the the entire point of
the upper payment limit applying
across the supply chain is it
applies to everyone so when it
comes to those negotiated
relationship yes a particular
plan agreed to pay
it whatever it is they agreed to
pay for every particular drug.
This amount is the limit on this
drug and.
The whole point is that they'll
have to work out because
different higher system is not
for the benefit of the patient
if not for the benefit of
consumers it's not for the
benefit of hospitals or doctors
or pharmacy and we haven't even
talked about or independent
pharmacies particularly well New
Mexico that I bet that struggle
with the problem of how they get
medications to their patients
right
All of those entities
participate in this complex
supply chain.
And the idea here is that we say
for these particular drugs this
is the most any transaction can
be in the state of New Mexico.
And they will work it out.
On that point can I just on that
point Representative how much
someone pays at the counter in
the pharmacy is going to be
there costsharing amount that
set by the insurance company
that's covering it and assumedly
if the insurance company has not
hasn't had to pay as much
because of the lower or are they
offer limit costs you know up
the supply chain then they can
put them in a tier of
costsharing that's that slower
and then anyone who doesn't have
insurance and is just paying out
of pocket they can't be more
than that upper limit.
Thank you thank you I appreciate
your expanding on that thank you
madam chair Madam chair
representative I guess some of
my concerns are still that I see
this long chain insurance
companies included in their
farms pharmacies included in
there that I'm thinking of one
lake breaks.
And they decide they're not
going to sell a life saving drug
in New Mexico I see the
repercussions of that that we
may not be able to get that drug
but that is my opinion that
that's what I see and that's for
me years dealing with insurance
companies and trying to get them
on board and this long chain to
get on board I'm I did speak to
another question chair
representative.
As I was thinking about this I
was thinking about how
incredibly frustrating this can
be more statement actually and
then a question I'm pretty sure
I'm finished on this although I
make come back with more
questions what is really
concerning this is so I'm
thinking about a small
innovative companies that let's
say.
Which is to be so great we find
a cure or vaccine for cancer or
aids we now our agency we now
have a cure for HIV so this
company comes forward and you
say wow we got the same night
they have to get investors to
have to get funding they have to
do all this stuff.
Small company come out and say
well.
This drug is going to cost ten
thousand dollars a shot it's new
one is coming out and this is
what we need eccentric etcetera.
I'm thinking about this that
they now the investors and
funders look and say there's no
way we can get the change in the
this board in New Mexico to
Evergrande that price and I see
two things happening one if they
are coming New Mexico they're
gonna lose all their funding a
looser dresses you say no
there's no way you can get this
to the cat through the
elimination upper limits and I
worry about them not being able
to bring for eight chair for HIV
or cure for cancer whatever
wonderful amazing thing that we
could be getting.
Because we have this upper limit
charges on there so I see too
many things can go wrong with
this I see people all the said
not being able to get their
medication I'm not gonna sell in
New Mexico we get some
California.
I see where researchers will be
punished over this I also see
and what else is going to happen
this is only for member twenty
five percent of our population
New Mexico all the junior trying
to make it also see I don't have
with me I pay for my own
insurance their for profit guess
what they're gonna do well
stuffy pays for her insurance.
Let's raise our rates unless
raise her copays so I I don't
see this is a good thing I see
there's other ways that we could
handle this and this is
definitely not the way to go and
thank you everybody for your
time.
Thank you.
Next I have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I
apologize I was putting a bill
on in another committee
thank you hi Rep Angelica Rubio
all my friends I appreciate the
so legislation I've read over it
I have a few questions to ask
and so ultimately what we're
trying to do is is have.
People that are picking up their
prescriptions have a cap on what
they have to pay so ultimately
it's about the patient and so
can New Mexico actually set the
price for a drug that is sold
over you know across the US and
is is that it is that even legal
to do or would it be just for
New Mexico are is the setting it
across.
The state lines.
Thank you representative and
it's also good to see you I'll
I'll hand the question over to
my experts
sermons
And and and provide you with
whatever insight we can give you
on that question.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative are the the very
simple answer for that and I'll
try to be brief is this upper
payment limit what only applying
New Mexico and it would apply to
all entities in the supply chain
from the manufacture the
pharmacy counter that.
Okay very I love that certain
sweet answering very to the
point thank you madam chair and
and thank you Serra and so does
this actually save the patients
that are paying for insurance.
Money.
In.
Thank you could you expand a bit
on what you're asking there
because I'm.
It.
It's okay I'm I'm I'm of the
same point as representatives
lord I don't think this is
actually going to save patients
money they're actually paying
for insurance so we talked
Friday about needing
transparency
throughout.
the supply chain does this give
transparency to the entire
supply chain.
Madam chair representative.
I thank you that is a wonder
that is an important question
and thank you for raising it
the operation of this board is
transparent there's a public
there's a stakeholders committee
that gives input to the board
about which drugs are going to
be asked to evaluate
manufacturers will be invited to
supply any data they can for the
board to support their price
thing so there's that there's a
transparency there that did it
you know everyone who's involved
in that the current transaction
for these particular drugs
they're all to be invited to to
tell the board what are you
paying or what are you charging
and why so in the process of
setting up a payment limit
they'll be able to use their
expertise to focus with the
amount that will allow the drug
to still be sold our state but
also protect patients at the
pharmacy counter and let them
get the drugs that he.
Okay thank you for that and I
was a little bit late when the
bill was introduced I wasn't on
the line but
I from what I understand this
has not been implemented in any
other state is that correct.
Hi Madam chair representative
the board of Maryland is in the
process of they have implemented
the board and they're in the
process of of doing some kind of
technicalities to start
reviewing drugs and it this type
of approach is taken of course
in Europe it taken in Canada to
try to get a handle on drug
pricing and so we do well
Representative of course point
that that I can't find her
guarantee that that we wouldn't
get different results because we
don't have another state that
has had you know ten or twenty
years of experience with this we
do have the experience of Canada
saying you know there's not
really a drug you can't that
that manufacturers have refused
to sell.
We we do know that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that answer and is it
socialized medicine in Europe
and Canada is am I correct in
thinking that.
I I'm sorry I can't answer that
that that I was given my
expertise.
Okay I'm pretty sure that it is
M. anyway thank you madam chair
and thank you for your answers I
think I have a problem also
thinking that this might push
the manufacturing and the
testing and other things outside
of the U. S. and so I'm I'm a
little bit concerned I am I
understand where you're going
with this and I appreciate that
and I'll have to still mall that
over and see see how I decide
about thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
This is Barbara if I can it make
you Madam in answer
first that there are two key
states that have stood up the
their P. dad's including their
staff center as a service that
they're getting ready to move
into action mode
there are seventeen states who
are looking at it this year in
Legislation so I think you're
gonna see a critical mass of
state starting to say we need to
at least protect this consumers
in our states on some drugs and
she had more it's a it's about
accountability so right now
there isn't the only part of the
health care system that is not
regulated are there drugs
company setting prices that's
the only part every other part
is regulated in some way for
accountability for cost so the
fed federal government has tried
to do this for two decades and
has failed to do so so I think
once again the states have had
to step in and say until there's
some federal at least the
state's need to protect their
citizens I'll give you an
example right now we have a cure
for Habsi but we have tens of
thousands of people in New
Mexico without access to help
see drugs because of the cost
including those in the Medicare
Medicaid system just because
they can't afford the medication
more than they have they have a
certain budget for it so it
breaks my heart to think that
we've got people who could be
cured of a horrible disease but
they can't afford the medication
we can't get it to a.
Thank you.
Thank you next I have
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Representative
Rigby.
You just clicked off.
Very.
There go I not sure where I was
madam chair members of the
committee and Representative
Rubio I was just saying that I'm
really glad that you brought
this legislation I'm a very
simple question in looking at
the administrative structure I
was struck by the fact that it
looks to me like
this is if you're on the border
them that broader board of this
is gonna be a lot of work to do
this evaluation I wondered if
there shouldn't be of some
staffing or some funding for
staffing so that's my question.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative I think that
the legislation is providing
up.
I mean in terms of the
accountability test I mean I
think that it is a structure
that all will require resources
my feeling moving forward with
this legislation though is that
the mechanisms in which
the accountability piece for the
the concept of what we're trying
to create
should have at least.
It should be it should be put in
place because I think that
as you know the way that the
budgets work within our
legislature and and I was trying
to develop policy when budgets
have already been finalized for
my hope is is that over the
course of the of the year as we
begin to implement the Pete out
that that this will be a source
in which
the state will make its
investments moving forward into
twenty into twenty two.
Representative this is Barbara
Webber if I could just add for
example and Maryland there are
total budget is funded by the
assessments which are not
burdensome they do not exceed a
thousand dollars per license for
the supply chain and that does
include staffing and executive
director which they just hired
someone specialized in drug
pricing that includes their
general counsel that includes
there are policy analyst and the
administrative support also in
New Mexico of the Attorney
General spent support and he has
made sure his offered that he
will
for the enforcement support of
the bill and as well as some
administrative support as well.
Madam chair the representative
that Rubio and Barbara thank you
for those answers that's
reassuring because we sure sure
don't want to create this and
then I would not be able to work
but that's that sounds very
optimistic and and positive so
thank you very much.
Thank you Representative now I
have Representative trusses.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
Rubio again I'm looking forward
to meeting you.
hopefully for these days but the
thank you for begin the
conversation on this
this is the when we heard some
of this legislation last week
that address some of the same
issues and.
I mean I'm in agreement with you
that we
will support we need to figure
out a way to lower a lower cost.
I just
this is so complicated even Mrs
Mrs matter said it several
people in here have stated how
complicated is.
And I don't think there's a
single person on this committee
that would what.
Not want to lower drug prices I
think I mean I'm I don't want to
speak for the people but I'm
sure that's our intent and you
know but in order the way I see
things to to make a real impact
Madam chair representative Rubio
is this for us to actually peel
back layers.
And really see what's what's
going on wonder stand.
Actually how to tackle this.
And from what I've heard because
I want to go through some of the
same questions what what I've
heard there's still no guarantee
that we're going to actually
save a person money at the
counter and that's that's
important to me because I mean
at the end of the day
I want to make sure that person
when they go to the counter
going to be less and so I
thought we just I mean I think I
I know we just listen to and and
heard legislation on one twenty
nine each B. one twenty nine.
Who what what we're from what I
understood was going to do
exactly that was gonna start
coming back with some of the
stuff back and give us a real
idea of how to make a real
change.
I think what what what what.
You know it's you're on point
Representative ruled Rubio and
and and trying to resolve this
this
Our issue and I'm sorry madam
chair actually were to address
to but
I just I'm afraid that you see
it's so complicated there's so
many entities involved so much
in such a big aware that
sometimes when we when we it's
it's cut it when we say Hey
we're just going to we're just
gonna do this particular thing
and and limit This.
They're gonna just reformulate
that and it's going to get
reformulated and and we're going
to still see it and they're just
going to get it out of a
different either different for
the insurance company like one
of the representatives
expressed earlier there's a way
to manipulate it and I'm not
saying that and please don't
take that are the wrong way are
to all the company because I'm
not seeing that that's what
their intent is but when you
don't understand where we we
don't understand how.
This whole thing works it makes
it tough to to say Hey if I just
do this it's on super simple but
it's not that simple I'd like to
know okay from inception of the
idea of a group of a drug of
creating a drug.
How much does it take for them
to.
Not just discovered from.
Thank you from the beginning of
the I the research and
development that it takes the
next step of going to all the
different research at in in in
in testing to see how it's going
to actually work and then.
After that how the advertise it
and how they how they
distributed in who was making
what on the way all the way to
the counter and there's a that's
like a wet and that that's what
it sounds like to me and so it
makes me because I'm I'm I'm I'm
concerned about that the other
day it's it's as simple as a
what are you gonna prep counter
if we can't guarantee to reduce
that by yes just need to study
it a little further to make that
happen.
I I on.
If you just woke with that that
he.
Please a lot of money for
insulin I have another friend
that he's a lot of money like
some of the stories that I heard
four years for medication to
keep him alive six hundred
dollars a bill.
So it's yeah I mean we have a
problem how do we get to it and
how much you know I was thinking
and then I'm thinking of the of
these drug companies okay it
takes how much money does it
take to develop that drug the
drug and how many of those drugs
fail and don't make it to to the
counter because they're not
They're not implemented because
they don't pass if you I think
those are a lot of questions are
just as some of the questions
just for from what from what
I've heard
our that that just make me just
step back and say Hey this is
super complicated this is
something that I'm gonna be able
to to understand support just of
thirty minute discussion because
there's a lot of unanswered
questions and
and so it it just that's what
sets me back but I I think you
know we we all agree Madam chair
representative Rubio that we we
have a problem and I I I admire
you for trying to tackle it and
and tried to to implement you it
sounds like a lot of states are
trying to do the same thing and
I I would like to see a little
more research and a little and
if we could see another state
that had already
Let me be the Guinea pig of this
of this issue but hopefully we
can come up with the right
approach and I I I mean this to
sincerity of this and this and
this committee that that's what
we're trying to encourage
I I really don't want to go to a
lot of questions I think there
was is this so many on an answer
for me and and and I have a lot
of them have been addressed or
some of the better dress your by
the by the by the committee
thank you are Madam chair
representative who Rubio thank
you Representative and if this
bill moves forward you have some
opportunity maybe to speak more
with the sponsor or learn more
about it before it would get to
the floor for a vote there so on
I appreciate.
Appreciate the questions on the
discussion
I will say Representative Rubio
because I've sent it to others
I've set it when we heard about
mail order I said it when we
heard it all represents the
heart of this bill on PBMs last
week
At the there is a whole supply
chain from manufacturers to PBMs
their insurance that it and
prescription drug pricing is
impacted by all of that and I
believe the complicated way that
they price David do discounts
and then debates and different
ways of setting prices are their
own worst enemies in getting us
understand this and trying to
probe we sat prescription drug
prices and frustrated that we're
we take a piecemeal approach
rather than comprehensive the
entire
a Cust chain of of pricing.
I'm frustrated that it's not
being done federally on that
Medicare is blocked out I'm
frustrated that we have to
resort to do it at the state
level because that's hard
and maybe this is how we get
there by doing the piecemeal I'm
not sure I'm I'm hopeful that if
you are or I should say this if
I may sit through.
Make it's let me put president
that's why I assure you and I'm
happy you brought it forward so
we really start to question and
start the discussion but I
intend in the interim to make
this a big topic for study in
the interim about the entire
supply chain and pricing
arrangements for prescription
drugs and so I just want to
assure you and I know sometimes
we bring legislation that we
that may not make it through but
it's a really important because
it starts the conversation and
it highlights the the issues for
for a multitude of legislators
and so I just wanna say
regardless of of where it goes
or how it goes through the
process I intend to make
prescription drug pricing.
a topic for the interim so that
we can all understand better how
it works and where we have fixed
or not fixed where we can't can
have an impact and where we go
so I I just wanna
thank you for bringing it
forward because it's this is
another piece of the pie of
trying to figure this out and
make it alternately more our
whole health care system and our
insurance and what we pay out of
pocket more affordable
because it's really important
that we have access to
appropriate prescription drugs
far less expensive all
ultimately for prescription
drugs to be able to chair
managed something then end up
with a chronic disease and in
the hospital and and so forth
and I'm my family's the benefit
of of research and development
my daughter spent on all on a
clinical trial
for the last year and a half it
has stabilized for cancer it's
cured it by any means but it has
stabilized it.
And
you know that's that some in the
twenty years we've dealt with
her cancer there wasn't enough
interest in developing
as something to address her type
of cancer until just a few years
ago.
And so I respect the entire
industry for what they're doing
on vaccines what they're doing
on cancer drugs and how we can
provide lifesaving treatment but
it's not life saving if it's not
affordable and people can't get
it so
That that's my soapbox on
prescription drugs of Polish yes
but I think it's an important
issue and I thank you for
raising it and it's important to
point out as we listen all these
bills there's a whole lot of
steps in the process and and we
don't have clarity transparency
or control over all of those
steps and so thanks for raising
this one was the pleasure of the
committee madam chair I move for
a do pass.
Hi a motion for do pass on the
second.
doors you want to call the roll.
And he's excused.
Rep Gail Armstrong.
You know and I would like to the
short explanations at the end.
Representative Britney hi costs.
Yes.
Representative Karen dash.
I'm sorry.
Your mu that your muted.
Yes thank you.
Representative step in the lord
now.
Representative Marian Matthews.
That's.
I'm sorry.
Yes okay.
Representative Rogers Montoya
yes.
Representative Louise cut off I.
Like to scream I will.
I didn't know about her I said
no okay and I'd like to explain
why vote okay thank you
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Chair Joanne.
Yes.
Madam chair Deborah Armstrong.
Yes.
Yeah.
and one excuse.
Thank you and our Representative
Armstrong to explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair I'm
juggling committees today so my
apologies but I do just want to
make a statement that I think
you're going in the right
direction I think I just bring
up a short I remember trying to
pass the right to try and how it
was just no one was really ready
for that and this is close to
that you know being able to to
find medications and try them
out even though they're not FDA
approved so thank you keep on
Truckin along and I will would
love to be part of the group
madam chair to help us find a
solution thank you.
Thank you Representative trust
us to explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rubio again I
appreciate your legislation
again exactly what
Representative Anderson just
that R. or excuse me Armstrong
apologised.
You are you you're you're you're
creating movement and you're
creating a conversation the only
reason I'm not supporting it is
I just like to I'd like to just
be able to dissect it more to
really.
Can point those issues that that
are necessary and you know in my
business and experience that's
what I've done I've I just
basically everything and get a
better understanding so that I
can really make a real impact
and so you are going in the
right direction I also would
like to be part of the of the
conversation so good luck and
I'm glad you you know I'm I'm
thank you for bringing this up
again and good luck in your
legislation cutlass.
Thank you so representative you
have a seven three do pass out
of the committee and I thank you
for heard lots of lots of
comments about lots of work yet
to do in the whole issue but
Thank you for so bringing it
forward and whether it passes or
doesn't pass we're gonna talk
about it in the interim so thank
you thank you madam chair and
thank you committee members and
I look forward to those
conversations so I appreciate
you all are taking the time
today.
Okay thank you
So we have two bills left on our
agenda and it is twelve thirty.
and Representative Anderson is
still gone
on his and I think we are about
out of time representative
Thompson do you have any sense
of how long your bill may take
and of public comment and so
forth I don't want to start on
one that we have to stop again.
Still are we.
Well I one sixty seven madam
chair that's of the total not
not I'm sorry times
Senator ari usually this bills.
And if you put you put my blood
pressure up to about three
hundred.
Like my thought I missed it.
Madam chair actually are lead
sponsor is representative of
tier lu Han and she is in the
on.
Farmers.
Okay also are
experts
Linda Segal and Dr page promo.
She is there I'm not sure I
couldn't find her before.
I don't see a page.
We have Representative lu Han
and we're going to hopefully
this isn't a long public comment
and discussion where we're
running really late but we're
gonna trying to squeeze you
through.
Okay go ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
Is Representative lu Han ready
to share go ahead
Representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and thank you committee
members for.
hearing us today I'm glad to be
here today Representative
presenting a piece of
legislation that has the
potential to greatly lower
tobacco consumption in our state
well raising general fund
revenue.
House bill one sixty seven which
I'm co sponsoring with
representatives Joanne Ferrari
Roger Montoya and Christine.
Chandler proposes to raise the
cigarette tax by two dollars and
other tobacco products by a
commensurate amount.
We can and we must lower smoking
rates in our state
today we spend on two hundred
and twenty nine million in
annual medical costs caused by
smoking related illness.
The annual total healthcare
expenditure New Mexico directly
caused by tobacco use is eight
hundred and forty four million.
Ten percent of New Mexico high
schoolers smoke or vape tobacco
use is highest among native
American black and LGBTQ members
of our communities this is
obviously a disproportionate
Issue.
You just Surgeon General report
on smoking concluded that
smoking rates to go down in
price of cigarettes go up most
adults start smoking before the
age of eighteen and higher
tobacco taxes are an effective
way to prevent youth and youth
adults from ever starting higher
prices for E. cigarettes in
other states have shown to
reduce consumption among
teenagers again nationally New
Mexico is ranked fifth highest
in youth smoking and twenty
fifth in the adult smoking rate.
Today we know that people who
smoke are at a higher greater
risk of severe illnesses as we
continue to confront the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
This is another thing that's
it's been heightened I would
like to call now on my expert
witnesses to further discuss the
bill with me
in the audience if we can move
over is as Linda Siegel and I
don't know if doctor page a
comma was able to join us but Dr
page come was also an expert
witness.
Madam chair representative lu
Han I was just able to a parent
drive home to the panelists.
Madam chair at Gabrielle thank
you.
Hi this is doctor page come on
I'm I'm hearing starring having
video issue is
I didn't quite hear you guys
side do you are you ready for me
or would you like me to and you.
Matt you can go ahead thank you.
Well good morning good afternoon
now madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
inviting me to speak with you
this morning and afternoon
madam secretary Paige Bowman in
the General pediatrician
practicing in Farmington New
Mexico I'm an active member of
the New Mexico pediatric society
supports house bill one sixty
seven and I service the American
academy of pediatrics chapter
champion for you the cigarette
prevention and cessation in New
Mexico I'd like to thank
Representative you're inferring
Representative lu Han
Representative Christine
Chandler first in house bill one
sixty seven.
Nearly an advocate for the
safety and well being of all
children and I want to start by
sharing application story that
underscores some of the health
consequences of tobacco use in
youth I was recently caring for
a seventeen year old male who
presented to my clinic after an
emergency room visit respiratory
infection one person was found
to be markedly elevated in the
emergency room with a reading of
one fifty over ninety for
reference enrollment pressure is
less than one twenty over
eighty.
During a follow up visit with me
I was gathering more information
to determine what might be
causing high blood pressures and
asked if you screening questions
surrounding tobacco anything
writing emitted a baby multiple
times a day over the last couple
months student coping with
distress after with his
grandmother who had been very.
Thanks for understanding of the
dangers of the bank and over the
course of several weeks is and
you actually decided to stop
eating altogether and our
subsequent follow ups a couple
weeks later his blood pressures
and formalized and he was
feeling much better.
Story in particular highlights
just one of many devastating
consequences of tobacco use
among youth which could include
dangerously elevated blood
pressure is chronic cough and
shortness of breath school
truancy failure to graduate is
sadly addict nicotine and other
got.
Included in the twenty sixteen
report and the Surgeon General
E. cigarette use among youth and
young adults use any tobacco
products is unsafe including E.
cigarettes New Mexico read more
no it's just be cigarettes
contain nicotine which is highly
addictive and harmful to the
developing adolescent brain
which we know continues develop
until age twenty five it can
also increase the risk of future
action to other drugs.
Mexico is currently ranked third
highest in high school student
using the cigarettes out of
forty four state and national
test range at highest in U.
smoking rates in fact in
nineteen New Mexico youth risk
and resiliency survey
demonstrate thirty four percent
one in three New Mexico high
school you are currently using
E. cigarettes and some of our
counties in New Mexico have
rates as high as fifty.
We know that New Mexico's
minority minority majority state
and we know that tobacco
products disproportionately harm
used in communities of color the
tobacco industry knows this as
well strategically targets young
people please low income
communities marketing at.
Equities is highest among native
Americans act no need to members
of our communities if you are
already faced with poor health
outcomes.
Okay raising project is change
moving Iverson youth.
Fourteen report and the Surgeon
General stated regained
cigarette act as pope and the
most of it back control
interventions New Mexico because
we know that increasing prices
proven to reduce smoking
especially among kids for
example a ten percent increase
in cigarette prices is estimated
to result in a three to five
percent reduction in overall
cigarette consumption among
youth and young adults who have
proven to be more responsive
than adults to higher cigarette
prices New Mexico is currently
ranked eighteenth in the United
States with our two dollar per
pack tax rate doubling New
Mexico's tobacco tax would cause
fifth in the country and a
leader in the southwest and
tobacco prevention moreover
increasing tobacco taxes would
raise significant revenue
estimated at twenty nine million
dollars for the state to fund
programs that our families and
communities me.
I reducing smoking rates tobacco
tax increases also reduce
secondhand smoke exposure on
nonsmokers especially children
and pregnant women.
The harmful impacts secondhand
smoke can make each application
with health problems ranging
from respiratory infections as
my tax in development please.
Stay in the Senate and that
syndrome.
The young people of New Mexico
are the future leaders of our
communities we owe it to them to
protect their health and well
being so they can continue to
thrive and reach their full
potentials raising tobacco
product taxes in New Mexico is
the first step in ensuring that
this next generation of New
Mexicans isn't negatively
impacted by the harmful effects
of tobacco indicate.
Thank you madam chair and the
representatives of this
committee for allowing me to
speak today I'll be glad to
answer any questions from the
committee on issues related to
harmful effects of tobacco use
and children.
Thank you doctor Linda's single
did you have something to add.
Yes yes Madam I was actually
going to take you through the
bill to say exactly what it does
very quickly.
So madam chair members of the
committee I'm here representing
the American cancer society
cancer action network and what
this bill would do is it raises
the price on various tobacco
products first of all as you've
heard we raise the price by two
dollars on each package of
cigarettes which actually right
now the law says that the tax on
one cigarette is ten cents we
would make it twenty cents on
the it also raises the tax on
other tobacco products like like
chewing tobacco right now that
that right in the right of all
the other products is based on a
percentage of the wholesale
price so at this moment other
tobacco products are taxed at
twenty five percent of the
wholesale price we would raise
it to eighty six.
Three percent I'm gonna explain
that why in a minute the tax on
little cigars would go up the
same as cigarettes or would be
twenty cents per little cigar E.
which was the cigarettes which
are now at twelve point five
percent of the wholesale price
would go up eighty three percent
and the closed cartridge systems
for E. cigarettes would go up
from fifty cents to three
dollars.
Percent thirty two cents cigars
remain at the current level of
twenty five percent of the
product price.
Ordered not to exceed fifty
cents so why are we taking these
are this is a huge amount of
eighty three percent.
Well we know that as far as
tobacco prevention and cessation
goes as to as far as trying to
keep kids from starting to smoke
that is very important when we
raised the cigarette tax we need
to raise the taxes of all the
other tobacco products to be
comparable to the cigarette tax
because if we don't equalizes
the tax rates across the board
then people shift their
consumption so if we just raise
cigarettes then and we don't
raise the cigarettes kids who
are particularly price sensitive
are going to go to the E.
cigarettes so it is important
that when when doing tax policy
that has an impact on health
that we really look at
consistency in the price of all
of our products so.
We had estimated the campaign
for tobacco free kids does these
estimations that this would
generate about twenty eight
million but we're understand and
then from the FIR that was just
posted this morning that that is
more in the line of twenty
million dollars this new money
would go to the general fund and
it would help us decrease not
only consumption but also eat
away at that eight hundred and
forty four million dollars a
year that we spend on health on
health services directly caused
by tobacco now I wanted to show
you other parts of the bill
because there will be concerned
about the percentage decline in
the distributions so we
distribute a percentage of of
the tax to the cancer center the
UNM Science Center The New
Mexico finance authority in the
rural county cancer treatment
fund and you'll see that in the
bill on on page one and two that
those percentages have been
decrease that does not mean that
the amount that.
That the money the amount of
money that they're getting has
been decreased because when you
increase the price of the
products you have to decrease
the percentage amount to hold
them harmless so that they keep
the same rate the same amount of
money that they are always
staff.
I have because we wanted the
extra money to go to the general
fund.
And that formulaic adjustment
also applies to the price of the
tax stamps we give a discount to
the manufacturers for
for putting on the taxpayer and
when again when we raise the
price we have to reduce that
percentage now the question will
come up about the tribal
language in the statute because
in two thousand and ten there
was language put in the bill
that.
That once the tribe's Mecca
threshold of that seventy five
cents that whenever the state
would raise the tax in the
future there would be no
increase in their tax but they
could choose to raise that in.
The amount they want so that is
totally up to them we have
attached that that act and I
think that we do have a concern
on the tax stamp about an
amendment that we will need to
do in the tax committee
certainly not here to address
those tax stamps that people
already have that they've
already purchased before the
bill went into effect and so we
don't want to double taxed so
we'll have to put some kind of
exemption and more that that
describes what the bill actually
yes thank you madam chair thank
you.
so
Sir anything else Representative
lu Han before we go to the
audience.
Madam chair three minutes not at
this time okay so we will start
with a poll of those in among
the attendees who are in support
or opposition of house bill one
sixty seven.
Give you.
Give you a little bit of time to
register your support or
opposition.
It looks like that's looks like
that's it so we have fifty three
percent or ten people in support
and forty seven percent or nine
people in opposition and now
we'll go to and comments from
the committee I mean from the
attendees public comment
starting with those in
opposition.
Those in opposition who wish to
speak with already saying the
number that support or oppose
and I'm going to ask you to
please keep your we are way
behind time please keep your
comments
short and on non repetitive
thank you will first go to Ruben
Baca.
you myself you're good thank you
very much Madam chairman members
the committee.
Good morning afternoon I guess
Opposition to this piece of
legislation always have.
In opposition to raising taxes
this much this is a huge
increase in the taxes they they
already just put in in place
last year or twenty twenty so I
stand in opposition to this and
I'll be real short that we can
get on thank you.
Thank you relevant next we have
Missy of Pilkington.
Good morning good afternoon
madam chair committee members my
name is misty Pilkington I'm
with the New Mexico smokefree
Alliance I am in opposition of
the bill one sixty seven due to
the fact that at the current the
current rate right now we pay
twelve and a half percent on our
liquid tax which is due on the
twenty fifth of every month
we just passed through a
licensing bill last year for all
businesses to be licensed in the
state of New Mexico if you're
gonna sell any kind of tobacco
product
that hasn't even been able to
get into a jet plus you're going
to get seven hundred dollars off
and every single one of those
applications I know the state is
hurting for money right now but
if you taxed at eighty three
percent vaping liquid in
particular you're gonna kill
those businesses and you're not
going to get any of that money
so it's going to be wasted
we have.
We have a twenty percent tax on
cannabis right now an eighty
three percent on this bill it
just doesn't make very much
sense on the on that for one
because you're gonna I mean
cannabis you to be able to tax
credit thirty forty percent and
make a heck of a lot more money.
your age to buy is twenty one
twenty one is the age to buy it
a seventeen year old the doctor
mentioned earlier is getting
they drugs we're seeking them
from because they've shops are
not selling to anyone under
twenty one it's against the law.
That was done by president trump
in twenty nineteen in December
of twenty nineteen.
So it's been that way for over a
year so I mean you know you need
to need to pay attention to
where where did that can get
that from because the vape shops
in New Mexico are not selling to
underage.
Please tweet please wrap up your
comments with yes I'm now if we
do this we're gonna thousand
percent show all of our business
to tribal lands tribal lands
will eat this up the provision
of so there that's not gonna be
a problem for them.
So I mean you know let's let the
bills that we just passed go to
work and see you know who gets
licensed and who doesn't and
then let's go from there thank
you thank you.
Our next we have John Thompson.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes go
ahead good morning madam chair
members of the committee my
name's John Thompson I
Representative to local
independent store owners are
that that are are not big
tobacco with all due respect to
my colleagues and they've been
good partners madam chair they
they worked with the
administration last year to pass
the regulatory act agreed to the
aging crease and agreed to a tax
manager we rise to oppose this
bill at quite frankly madam
chair because it it is on
reasonable to go from a twelve
point five percent tax to eighty
three percent of coverage to
five hundred and sixty four
percent tax increase which with
all due respect is is that is
not a commensurate increase Mr
Jack madam chair I apologize
additionally madam chairman I
was previously mentioned this
this committee will consider
legislation on cannabis the tax
at twenty percent the baby is
probably the leading form of
cannabis consumption right now
so I ask you to consider that
miss madam chairman and lastly I
will point to to the tribal
lands madam chairman Albuquerque
is bookended by two sovereign
nations that retail tobacco in
substantial quantities and
they'd be more than happy to
pick up the business that would
be lost your by our local
companies we would ask that you
table this bill then allow the
that the pieces of legislation
were passed to to go into effect
in work thank you for your time.
Thank you on next Gregory
Conley.
Good morning or afternoon my
name is Gregory Connolly college
eyes for not having my video out
for some reason I am I run a
nonprofit called the American
vaping association which
advocates for sensible policies
on lower risk smoke free
products with the name of
dramatically lowering America's
adults smoking right and with
over a hundred or rather what
with over two hundred fifty
thousand adult smokers still in
the state of New Mexico we want
to strongly encourage opposition
to house bill one sixty seven.
Fire speakers have talked about
the effects on businesses but
it's important to also talk
about the effects on adult
smokers are written testimony
which will not belabor there has
been extensive research on
Minnesota the state of Minnesota
has had a high cigarette tax and
a very high tax on vaping
products the end result of the
months and years of research
from the national bureau of
economic research which has no
connections or financial
incentives from big tobacco
their conclusion was that a high
vapor Tax even in combination
with a high cigarette tax led to
more smoking and less quitting
among youth and adults are
testimony also includes an
article out just last week from
the Wall Street journal for the
Wall Street journal sounded the
alarm bells smoking is no longer
following in this country thanks
to comment keeping people at
home and confusion around the
risks of vaping products lastly
we heard earlier to talk about
the heart and the potential
effects of nicotine on the hard
just last month the American
heart association came out with
a new study that found
participants who bait
exclusively their inflammatory
and oxidative stress levels of
bad things in the heart they
were nearly identical to that of
non smokers so smokers were
seeing the brunt of health
effects were as the would be how
the hearts of vapors were
identical virtual virtually to
those of non smokers the FDA is
stepping in actively regulating
this industry it's changing a
great deal we hope that you'll
put a pause on this and allow
New Mexico's current rules to go
into effect thank you I'll be
glad to answer any questions.
Next we have demander.
Tim Andrews are you
there to speak in opposition.
Can Andrew is.
Do you like to go ahead and
speak.
I'm sorry I wasn't given
privileges to I'm usually I can
you should be able to give me a
yes we can thank you very much
and thank you very much full of
fuel service to members of the
committee for giving us the
opportunity to speak today I
would like to speak against both
provisions to increasing the a
cigarette tax and with the
regular cigarette tax because I
believe that they to driven by
the DA's have on by the evidence
and the policies should be
informed by the states when
looking at the increase in this
conventional cigarette tax that
is being proposed people city
below the smoking rates this is
true that there is some impact
at a lower level of tobacco tax
increases however at the level
that is proposed evidence shows
that it has no effect upon low
income earners who are unable to
quit it has no effect on the
most vulnerable populations
rather it will simply cut them
at a time they're already
struggling because of all of the
economic effects of the pandemic
and it will increase black
market and other criminal
enterprises who will come in and
take advantage of these the best
way according to science to help
smokers quit is the reduced risk
tobacco alternatives that's why
the FBI of the thirty of the
medical bodies have come out and
said the cigarettes are white to
help adult smokers quit the best
measure analysis of all of the
hundreds of studies published
was done by the at public health
England which found that that
ninety five percent safer than
combustible cigarettes because
nicotine is and what actually
causes harm it's the burning by
which by eliminating the
combustion what you see is that
these products I'm limonite
virtually all of the chemicals
they say I and that twice as
effective as of the nicotine I I
am cessation aids such as
patches and gums the Georgetown
University Medical Center did an
analysis which found that the
majority of the US smokers
switched to vaping six.
Six million lives in the United
States will be CYFD.
We should be encouraging
products that are proven to be a
safe alternative that proven to
be effective in helping smokers
quit they have And rather than
taxing them and discouraging
when this when the state of
Minnesota increased that a
cigarette tax the a study found
that over thirty thousand more
smokers existed as a result of
that so these incredibly large
tax increase on a product that
is safer than smoking will lead
to more people smoking
combustible cigarettes and it
will lead to greater tobacco
mortality this is what the
evidence shows there is a lot of
anecdotes and a lot of emotions
about these issues such as long
illnesses or a volley want cold
by people smoking and E.
cigarettes under with dictate
this is a great bait and switch
that some people show up at the
CDC has come out and said this
was caused by illicit bootleg T.
H. say all marijuana thanks
laced with vitamin E. acetate
which is what course these
issues so in creating more black
markets you'll go to be creating
more problems bidding in
preventing adults from quitting
smoking you'll going to New
Mexico to help them as well so
in every single aspect this bill
will no doubt well intentioned
the evidence that we cited all
of the scientific studies in our
region testimony will show that
this bill will not have any
positive public health impacts
and state despite being well
intentioned people actually
increased cancer and other
mortality rates in the state of
New Hampshire.
Thank you and we're in New
Mexico at New Mexico sorry thank
you the Luke Otero.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me yes go ahead look
great so members of the
committee madam chairman
Representative runs American
have been for over sixteen years
and and all those times that
I've been representing them we
seeing these increases and under
the.
The guys that it's going to
reduce
The consumption reduce
usage I have not yet seeing that
we have yet we have.
About eighteen twenty percent
kind of judges every now and
then of percentage of smokers in
New Mexico that number hasn't
changed.
And
this this bill will do exactly
what so many others have just
said is going to drive them to
the other point of sale and.
Unfortunately New Mexico will
not get the X. amount of money
that was quoted earlier because
if they're not doing the sales
they're not get get great
gathering at.
Then there's no everyone loses
in New Mexico so.
I stand in opposition madam
chair thank you.
Thank you look.
I'm now we will go to those who
want to speak in favor.
And we will start with.
hash go ahead.
Yeah can you hear me Madam yes
go ahead yeah.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is my aunt's
seep up with the American heart
association so
you know we would we strongly
support this bill that there is
ample evidence when you increase
our taxes you know the smoking
rates and the cigarettes rates
go down I think of the reason we
have one of the highest you
cigarette usage among you.
I think it's worked out in the
country
and you know first in the
smoking.
All of the youth smoking.
That's because you know R. E.
cigarette rates are twelve point
five percent.
That's like one of the lowest in
the country and then you can see
why we have such a high you know
E. cigarette usage by our high
school.
So it's it's a it's a direct
correlation why we are so high
because R. E. cigarettes rates
are so low and you know I.
Also arguments from you know the
folks about you know some study
of.
You know.
Heart association has conducted
so I don't know where the
gentleman got those facts from.
There is no study we've
conducted that supports you know
what he said and we're gonna
heart association always has
believed you know nicotine is an
addictive substance causes lot
of you know how disease stroke
you know and so we we we
strongly stand in support of
this and you know thank you
madam chair.
Thank you next we have Charles
good marker.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward this is really important
and I'd like to make a couple
comments with regard to.
some statements that have been
made first of all about the the
aping
noticed that none of the
testimony said the vaping is
safer and OP the Senate safer
than the harm caused by direct.
Smoking tobacco products but a
lot has been said in the
characterizing the tax and spend
reasonable well let's think
about what's reasonable for a
minute.
Is it reasonable that the entire
state
that every single taxpayer and
citizen in the state contributes
to paying for eight hundred
forty four million dollars of
health care expenditures caused
by tobacco use so all of us are
paying for that while only some
of us are using the tobacco is a
reasonable that our Medicaid
program total health
expenditures caused by tobacco
use or two hundred twenty eight
million a year.
Now it is not reasonable I think
it's unreasonable frankly that
this tobacco
Is backed our in proportion to
the damage that it causes our
society
Also from second hand smoke
alone there's forty six million
dollars to the estimated health
expenditures in our state so
this tax is reasonable it's it's
a great leap in terms of the
percentages certainly but does
it even match with the state
needs to undo the harm caused by
an activity that provides no
healthy contribution to our
citizens now thank you very much
we support this bill thank you
Charles next we have Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I want to thank
Representative lu Han and the
other Sanchez for bringing this
bill forward this issue is
personal for me as my father
passed away from emphysema he
was a heavy smoker.
Tobacco use and vaping are a
serious problem for our young
people and therefore for New
Mexico if we're learning
anything these last eleven
months it's the importance of
good health habits and good
public health policy this is
good public health policy it
will incentivize good health
habits because we know that the
most effective deterrent for
young people using cigarettes or
E. cigarettes is the price
point.
We know the big tobacco will
fight to get their products into
the loans of as many New
Mexicans as they can they target
people of color and they target
young people with creative
flavors and packaging year after
year we have seen these tobacco
tax bills watered down.
More attention was paid to
protecting smokers then our
young people we're hoping that
this year will be different and
we urge your support thank you.
Next we have Carla prove offer.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'll
keep it simple I am here on
behalf of the half of the center
for civic policy and we stand in
support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Carla next we have
Dominic.
Dominic Silva.
There you go.
Members of the committee my name
is Dominic Silva I'm also at the
register lodges American heart
association I just want to go
ahead and make a couple points
as far as the.
The point of sale.
And we could just look at the
gas tax alone you have a there's
an eighteen cent difference.
Between the tribal communities
and what the state is allowed to
charge but if you look at the
price point.
There's only probably at a
discounted rate for I mean I
cent difference what can tribal
communities are able to provide
so I think if I increasing this
tax.
The tribal communities are going
to be able to keep in line what
with the state.
So they can find some.
Health coverage for their
communities thank you.
Thank you Dominic the next we
have Joanna Strother.
Yes good morning chairman
members of the committee my name
is Joanna Strother I represent
the American lung association
and we want to thank the
sponsors for this very important
public health bill and I want to
repeat a lot of the what is
already been said I just want to
address that when we make good
decisions and good public health
and we raise the tobacco tax
that significant enough for
tobacco tax we see adults quit
smoking we see use not start and
of course we see the old agency
goal is to create revenue much
needed revenue right now for the
state I just want to say you
know there's false claims made
by the industry all the time
they're the same claims and all
states that we're going to drive
sales to other to the sovereign
to tribal properties we're going
to drive across state lines
those are completely false
arguments on and on my last
Senate just also want to mention
there's many states around us
right now also looking at
increasing their tobacco taxes
including Texas Nevada and
Colorado just passing the
tobacco tax on the November
ballot so we stand in support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you Joanna next we have
Claudia wrote us.
Very okay yes hi good afternoon
madam chair members of the
health services committee thank
you for this opportunity to
testify today again my name is
Claudia rotis number presenting
the campaign for tobacco free
kids with leading advocacy
organization working to reduce
tobacco use and its deadly
consequences in the United
States and around the world just
want to mention some statistics
in terms of usage right in New
Mexico sixty percent of adults
and nine percent of high school
students smoke cigarettes but
one in three high school
students our current you
currently using electronic
cigarettes although somebody
testified earlier we don't sell
them to use they are certainly
getting in the hands of the
because they are in their
communities where they have easy
access to it we know what works
when it comes to preventing
tobacco use we know that of
regular significant tobacco tax
increases investments in tobacco
prevention cessation programs
and comprehensive smoke free
laws make huge public health
impacts as you all know you
today you're discussing one of
those solutions solutions are
raising the tax on various
tobacco products in your state.
Want to mention one of quick
statistic for every ten percent
increase in the price of
cigarettes you can realize
reductions in consumption by
about six and a half percent in
youth smoking
you can see reductions in youth
adult prevalence rate go down by
three and a quarter percent and
you could also see prevalence
rates of adults decreased by two
percent on the today were asking
for the committee to please
support house bill one sixty
seven and make a commitment to
the health and well being being
of the residents in New Mexico
thank you thank you Claudia and
Melissa on to various.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is most passionate about us
expected director of the New
Mexico Public Health Association
I come to from a public health
perspective but.
Most importantly I come to
because this is personal when I
start with my nieces during
Christmas and there's five of
them and they they also they
also smoke you six and the
friends do
my concern group
for them and for their friends
I'm asking you today and I'm
urging you to consider house
bill one sixty seven please
support this bill and and so
that we can decrease the usage
of the six and on tobacco use
thank you.
Thank you and I think our last
speaker is don Upson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm speaking in
support of the bill Terry.
Based tobacco taxes across the
board.
We know that reason tobacco.
Those taxes is one of the best
tools we have to decrease
tobacco consumption.
I'm not going to repeat what the
expert witnesses said earlier
but I'm speaking as an adult
mineralogist
I've been practicing here in New
Mexico for over twenty five
years I also speak on behalf of
the American lung association
and the American thoracic
society and I'm on the tobacco
action committee of the American
thoracic society.
So we heard earlier about the
great impact on youth smoking
and vaping.
And it's absolutely true.
One of the speakers mentioned
that nicotine is not dangerous
that's absolutely false we used
to think that nicotine was
simply the very addictive
substance that got people
addicted to other to to track of
products what we're learning now
especially since reducing
the continues by itself without
the other
drugs and tobacco.
Is that it causes a lot of
damage
namely is the expert witness
earlier mentioned it harms brain
development in our kids up to
the age of twenty six we're
learning more and more about
brain development and those
changes are mostly permanent.
It also harms developing fetuses
thank can cause early birth
weight.
And premature births.
Thank you dean also causes
diabetes and here in New Mexico
we have a tremendous.
See our doctor your sound cut
out.
You're on mute it but we can't
hear you.
Okay I think we got the gist of
her comments as an adult
pulmonologist we'll go to the
we'll go now to the
Committee and Representative
Thomson thank you madam chair
and my heart rate has gone down
from your scare from before so
so also by but I do want to say
that co chair of the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee for six years I'm
we've been hearing this
over and over and over and a lot
of what was said about base
building is patently untrue it
is not just the station device
if it weren't the FDA would
approve such and it has not this
the studies that are usually
quoted are out of England and
I'm not sure what's wrong with
the wind but they are in in
exact opposite to what are what
what the research that's coming
out right now.
One of the first things I
learned as chair of that
committee madam chair was that
the one way we can keep kids
from starting to become to use
tobacco products is price and we
cannot as a government fixed
price but we can fix taxes and
that I think that the
Representative to our support
who are sponsoring this know
that and that's what they're
after their after.
Keeping kids from ever starting
because any of you who are
smokers know or who are nicotine
addict know that that's a very
addictive substance so we are
targeting the youth
to prevent.
Lots of costs going down I also
madam chair spent on a task
force a few years ago that
looked at the hidden costs of
tobacco use and those those are
not like the health care costs
that we can go to but what one
of the big ones that really
struck my mind was the lost
productivity of a tobacco user
versus a non tobacco user in in
that they take more frequent
breaks because they have to get
their fix and that when they're
not taking a break to get their
fix of nicotine they are not
concentrating on what they're
doing because they're planning
when they can get their next
break to get their nicotine fix
so it's not just health care
costs that we're talking about.
That you know this is something
we hear all the time you know if
if we raise the price that
everyone's going to go to the
reservations well you know what
when you're a.
And and people say well kids
can't buy tobacco products
they're not supposed to but we
see him all over the place so
they're getting somewhere and
it's it's easy to stand in front
of a I would say seven eleven
but I think those are almost all
gone now in front of a
convenience store and what
someone going in a ten dollar
bill and ask them to buy you a
bait product or whatever and
many people will
kids are not gonna be able to go
to the reservations we know when
you're when you're after school
on your way home we stopped by
the convenience store and have
someone by you your fix I'm.
Let's see.
And I will another thing we
learned on the committee is that
before E. cigarettes tobacco use
was going down particularly in
you and just like the soda
companies when they thought that
they were losing market share
came up with bottled water can
you imagine going to someone
thank Owasso people water in a
bottle and to replace donors
than I would have said you're
crazy but look where we are now
so this is the same thing when
the big when big tobacco thought
that that we were cutting into
their profits by outline
traditional cigarettes not
outline but taxiing regulating
them more they came up with
another alternative and it took
us many years to even it I
believe it was just this year up
until January first of this year
we had no idea what was then
vape products anybody could open
up a store put anything in a
little container and spelling we
that worked there was no
regulate I mean to put straight
formaldehyde in there you could
put straight nicotine New Mexico
put whatever you want so we have
closed that loophole but but the
big tobacco always finds a way
to work we don't we leave a ****
of tiny little loophole and they
turn it into something big
enough for a semi truck to drive
through.
So madam chair I just a just one
more thing and all the research
shows that that tobacco
companies target you because
that's where they're they're not
next our generation of customers
is going to come from they
target people of color they
target target people living in
poverty and they target the LGBT
Committee cute community and
those are some of our most
vulnerable populations that we
need to protect so I'm if you
have any questions specifically
about that we the staff like I
said I've been because he did it
for six years so I probably can
answer them
and not I urge my colleagues to
please support this it really is
about protecting our children
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative next I
have Representative Ferrary
thank you madam chair and
representative lu Han for
bringing this forward and I'm
glad to be a co sponsor and all
the points that were made by all
the supporters were exactly true
but the reason we need to raise
this so dramatically is because
that's the only way you really
make a difference especially
with youth and a low income that
We need to do this to help
reduce the health disparities
along income and racial and
ethnic lines because younger
people and people earning lower
incomes as Representative
Thompson was just saying they're
both discourse
disproportionately people of
color and are the most likely
groups to read to reduce tobacco
use in response to these higher
costs and just to give you an
idea
at four of the low income
Medicaid user insured it uses
twenty eight percent and lower
income education adult are is
twenty six percent and smoking
is high among adults who are
LGBTQ at twenty seven percent
and people with disabilities of
twenty three percent
and also compared to the general
population of sixteen percent so
all of this will really make a
great impact on you know helping
these
disparities between the
different groups so thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Terrazas.
Sorry managers from the one
your.
Real quick
I don't like smoke at all
smoking I'm not a.
From my kids woke response to a
school and thank you people but
what is the legal.
In those what is the legal age
limit Madam chair
representative.
To purchase a house cigarettes.
Madam chair Representative S. as
as we as mention are the the HSD
change to at twenty one.
Madam chair representative sat
twenty one and then I was also.
Madam chair I missed
Representative says I didn't
hear you kind of leave hours let
me let me do this whole okay.
I off.
Are you able to hear me better a
little bit yeah.
Yes it Madam my question was.
The the price what Madam chair
representative what product of
cigarettes on tribal lands.
Madam chair I think to
Ask
the other witnesses here that if
they could come on
if it on to the panel if we can
do it really briefly because
Representative that's not what's
in front of us and I I sorry to
push on this but a number of us
have afternoon committee meeting
starting in about seven minutes
and so on.
Share click on it you to focus
on the on the bill that to me is
very important because I mean
are the I don't think it's
twenty one.
His name the other I I think
that's important.
I.
At the very least what what I'm
asking madam chair at the
federal law is twenty one.
goes up it is the federal
implemented on tribal lands
madam chair yes then thank you.
So.
This grandma all.
All kinds of madam chairs it's.
I district look my district it's
it's it's not like I'm hearing
kinds of stuff and I we're
trying to move on them
might I think is this.
I live read again work happens.
Our it's sixty three vessels to
purchase up to six New Mexico
and I.
Thirty three best songs
Representative some change our
the back for their okay drugs
are always with a pack of
cigarettes marbles so I I know
that because I know people would
go over there and and and some
people are pretty are doing that
now we're looking at I just I
just but because I don't smoke
but I want to communities
yesterday my coming to see how
much the stuff is it's eight
dollars and fifty staff.
You too and then I got a raise
the.
This store carries a little bit
more so now we're looking at
probably eleven dollars a pack.
There are people that.
I don't know what I'm gonna do
but I do believe our our state
is surrounded with neighboring
states my district is very close
to the border.
Easy for them to call across
purchase orders and bring them
across the on the black market
the point I'm trying to make
your madam chair and
representative on you're trying
to save people's are you know
because that but I don't think
that it doesn't sound to me like
this issue is trying to make
money from the state are we
trying to stop smoking I'm it
works disabled kids from
smoking.
Good I'm I'm a hundred percent
in two years the problem not the
stores are selling two little
kids but you can go you know if
you don't go to hello my which
is close to my.
In Los crucis you can go to our
past old schools to my district
and the and the pasta groups for
a lot more I I just think that
one of the major things that
were missing here is in full
swing.
Our penalties to people who are
spurring speakers to for.
That's the issue because I don't
think it's convenience stores
doing this I know ofpercent it's
not doing it was gonna risk
themselves doing that I'm not
saying that that a hundred
percent but it IT nine percent
I'm sure I do not so if it's
possible for us to have location
that would.
Import not just not just passive
enforce it I really do I I know
for a fact and go from a
seven dollars a pack six two
being able to purchase it for
three dollars over in New Mexico
I'm sure we're going to create a
black market area because to
last of of what I would change
being that we just change that
are not from law order it just
wanted to affected back industry
must change that law this very
minute affect about forty days
it's it's not it's not not much
okay we haven't seen the effects
of that I I sure would like to
see some penalties to people our
own state service two children
That's all I have your thank
thank you Representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
and I will be quick and to the
point I don't really have any
questions but I do want to just
make the statement that I make
every single time this
legislation comes around I have
people in my community I own a
convenience store yes I voted
for the license for it to be
able to sell tobacco just got
that from
the environment department or
the people we buy cigarettes
from our tobacco from I can buy
tobacco cheaper.
The on the tribal lands then I
can
wholesale.
It is illegal to do that but my
husband is a tobacco to work and
so I by Copenhagen long cut up
at the tribal land because it's
too expensive at my gas station
even if I bought it wholesale so
it is a lot less expensive on
tribal lands that's one point my
second point is the same reason
that I have fresh fruits and
vegetables in my convenience
store because I don't have a
grocery store in my community is
the same reason that I have
tobacco products it's supply and
demand I'm not a tobacco user my
mother died of COPD.
of course I want to limit.
Tobacco getting into the hands
of under age people I to I voted
for.
Being able to be fined ten
thousand dollars if my employees
sell to underage people which I
think is ridiculous but I also
think that it's something that
needs to be handled
weaves and and to one of the I
just have to make this comment
we spend so much more money in
in fighting drug illegal drug
abuse than we do on tobacco
legal tobacco products so
someone who called and that said
so something different is
ridiculous the other thing is
is that I really believe that.
People we cannot protect
everyone we've taken a stance to
to have the license to enforce
that to enforce the new tax that
just passed last year and for
those reasons I will be opposing
this bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative and
what's the pleasure of the
committee.
Would you.
To roll over built for further
this.
madam chair I want to have
probation we have we have a
motion for do pass second and
the second.
and
doors would you call the call
the roll.
Rep Phelps Anderson.
Representative Gail Armstrong
no.
Representative Brett.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative can bash.
Yes.
Representative Stephanie lord.
Representative Marian Matthews.
Roger Montoya.
Representative Louise off us.
No wonder wrote.
Representative Liz Thomson yes.
Mr John Ferrary yes.
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Excuse yes.
Representative Marian Matthews
yes and Representative Montoya.
Thank you.
Madam chair Deborah A. Armstrong
yes.
No and three excuse.
Hey Representative blue Han you
have a five three do pass out of
health and Human Services
Committee Representative arises
very briefly please there's
more quicker just I'm opposed to
it because my district the the
how close we are to being able
to purchase set in more for
their the and I hope that we
make the same our.
Statements when it comes to
cannabis we're we're concerned
with small and I really want to
protect children as much as
possible thank you very much
madam chair thank you
representative and that is it
for agenda today but I do want
to make an announcement to to
the committee and the public
that still listening we will not
be meeting on Friday so we had
to roll over couple bills today
or their gender will come out
this afternoon for Wednesday we
will not be meeting on Friday
will also be publishing the
agenda we will be meeting on
Saturday to hear house bill
twelve and seventeen these of
them the cannabis bills and will
be meeting at ten thirty on
Saturday to hear those bills and
thank you everyone for our for
your participation today thank
you to the most especially to
the public who has hung in with
us to the end and whose made
public comment much appreciated
thank you all and we'll see you
Wednesday thank you
representative madam chair thank
you.
Thank you Representative god
bless you.
By.
Find.
Mr.
