Vincent.
Madam Vice chair present. Madam
chair. I'm here.
We have some. We have six We do
have a quorum. I will announce
again that HB 95 has been rolled
at the request of the sponsor,
So we will start with HB 185 and
just to remind you to please
silence your phones.
Sure.
Right?
And Madam chair. There is a sub
We're on hospital 185 step
therapy guidelines and I
understand there is a sub
As the sub been passed out.
No.
Okay?
I'm confirming that everyone
here has a copy of the sub now.
Well, uh, chair you may proceed
to explain this up. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So, um, actually,
the sub is
The original bill.
Head some significant technical
errors in that things that we're
new. We're not underlined. So it
was very confusing for
everybody. And rather than
trying to go back and, um, fix
that one. We just decided to do
a sub. Sorry, Madam Chair. Uh,
maybe stop for a moment. We have
a procedural matter. Uh, may I
have a motion to adopt the sub
for discussion.
I make the motion to adopt the
sub for discussion. I'll second
it. Is there any objection? No
Objection, Madam. Tear. Please
proceed. Thank you. So, um so
basically, I will just explain
what this bill does. Um And and
for those of you who may have
forgotten there are four
sections of health law. So when
bills are long like this, and it
says
Amending the Healthcare
Purchasing Act, The Public
Assistance Act, the New Mexico
Insurance Code, the hate health
maintenance organization, Law
and the nonprofit Healthcare
Plan. Law. Um, those are just
the same things in each of those
five sections, so it looks like
it's a lot, but it's really just
repeating the way that we have
our
Our laws set up so this this is
about step therapy and
essentially, um, what issue
we're trying to address is prior
authorization. Uh, we have, um,
my expert witness will tell her
story briefly, but frequently
when you have
Autoimmune disease or cancer or
something that drugs are quite
expensive and you are have to
jump through many, many hoops
many, many times to get to get
the medications that you need.
and this is just making it
easier for patients and their
providers to be able to. I mean,
for instance, my son every year
they have to. We have to justify
why he needs meds.
Because did the autism go away?
Well, no. The autism is never
going away. So making us go
through something every year
Kind of doesn't make sense. So,
um, with that, I will let my
expert witness Vanessa Salaried.
tell her story and then we'll
get a little bit into the bill.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Vanessa. Salaried. And I
do want to state that I am a
registered lobbyist in New
Mexico for this particular piece
of legislation. I am not
representing any sort of entity.
This is, um, a piece of
legislation. I've worked on with
the various sponsors because of
an ailment that I have, which is
severe plaque psoriasis.
So first of all, do want to
thank all of the various
sponsors on this piece of
legislation. We have chair
Thompson, representative
Hernandez whips Capan Ski leader
Casey, representative Jones
representatives Borrego de la
Cruz and Wuhan. So as you can
see, it's a wide variety of
different individuals. And
honestly, I can tell you most of
these folks have had something
have had to deal with step
therapy in some capacity or
another.
For me. I have severe plaque,
psoriasis and what that means,
as it is or what severe plaque
Psoriasis is an impacts the
interior and exterior of one's
body.
For me in particular. Um it took
me quite some time to actually
have access to medical doctor.
My doctor left the state of New
Mexico and it took me five
months to get to a doctor before
I could receive a referral to a
dermatologist before I could
start trying medication that
could help me.
In that time, and when that
waiting period I had been
prescribed some appointments
after my five months of waiting
But the thing again with
psoriasis with severe plaques
rises is internal and external.
So although I was receiving some
appointments for the external
aspect, it was not doing
anything for internal
With regards to the exterior.
There were moments when I would
so severely scratched my legs.
It got to the point of bleeding
and passing.
And the inability to sleep and I
don't know if you all have dealt
with sleep sleep deprivation
before it is one of the worst
things you can deal with.
Couldn't sleep. Couldn't think
couldn't be apparent. Couldn't
be a wife couldn't even function
in my job.
And also with severe plaque
psoriasis the way that impacts
your body. I couldn't even
perform basic bodily functions.
This summer I presented before
the Health and Human Services
Interim Committee on November
28th and I actually demonstrated
how it impacts a person's body.
And if you could just imagine,
um
To 20,000 mosquito bites all
over your body and consistently
itching and passing and
bleeding. That's how it is.
Real inability to
Participate in daily daily life.
But the reason that I'm here
today is not because I didn't
get my medication. I ended up
receiving my medication and I
received my medication because I
understand the system and I've
been a lobbyist for 18 years. So
I understand how the there's
hoops that one must go through.
And, um, I started working on
step therapy legislation in
2014 and then 1617 and 18 with
thank you very much chair
Thompson.
And we passed the step therapy
People in 2018, which provides
access to medication for folks,
um insurance companies work.
They have plans that they
identify formulas on the back
end and decide which sort of
medications people have access
to and why, and what they try to
do is and what I understand.
It's a mechanism for
For finances is you start on a
lower dose or medication that
doesn't necessarily addressed
what your element is, and you
continuously fail in order to
get to the medicine you want.
For me. It took me four days to
get the medicine that I needed
in order to become healthy again
four days.
I would say it. On average. It
takes multiple months, various
people have taken it's taken two
years for for the same
medication that I have.
During Thanksgiving accidentally
called a friend of mine from
college.
And we spoke and we hadn't
talked in quite some time and
explain to her what was going on
in my life and what I've been
doing and really just caught up
from a friend from college.
And I talked to her about
plaque, psoriasis and what I
have, and she explained that she
has psoriatic arthritis, and
she's had it for quite some
time.
And she literally said Vanessa.
I had a gun to my head two days
ago and but for my daughter
coming and knocking on my door,
I would have killed myself
because it's that much pain and
it's that so I have been working
with her. She now has her
injectable as well. And I have
committed with my doctors to
work with them to do, um, the
process of prioritization.
And explain what they are
entitled to with the statutes in
the state of New Mexico and what
their patients are.
Because of that work. My friend
has her injectable. She is
living a better life. The folks
in my doctor's office have been
utilizing the information that I
presented to them.
And people are having just a
much better quality of life.
With this particular piece of
legislation. What we are
focusing on Madam, May I Okay?
What we're focusing on our is is
fourfold. First. It is that
folks that have access to a
medication.
And have gone through all the
various steps if they change
providers or doctors or plans
They may continue to be on that
piece of medication, and this
legislation says for the
lifetime of that individual, So
if you've already been
prescribed and you switch you
don't start from the bottom
again.
The other aspects are really
important in the meter of this
legislation is if you have an
autoimmune cancer or behavioral
health.
You automatically jump and get
access to the medication you
need.
This is really important because
so many of these people in new
Mexico are suffering from the
same ailments these same
diseases and
We just need to make a better
for your constituents because
they don't understand how to
navigate the system in the same
manner. And with that
representative Hernandez, I'll
turn that to you
for that.
Thank you, madam Chair and
better. Not better. There we go.
Okay. Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
I need to stop doing that, Um
I signed on to this bill because
I also have, um several
conditions that require me to go
through this step therapy, and
I, like many others have faced
difficulties in getting my
medication. Um
Every year. I have to go through
the same process last year. It
took me five months. Um, a
medication I've been on for
years and years. Took me five
months to get my medication. Um,
five months of
Yeah, Missing that. Um, I also
suffer from a PhD and having to
go through this to get my basic
Adderall to make me functional
during the day. Um, it's
painful. I haven't had to. I
haven't had a problem with that
one yet, but, um all in all, I
have three medications that I
have to go through this process
with every year.
And it is daunting. This bill,
unfortunately, will only affect
one of those, um and I. It is
part of the process, but
Um
Someone in the conditions listed
in this bill should not have to
go through this process of not
having medication for months and
months and months so that I will
give it back to Madame Chair.
Thank you, Madam chair and just
quickly I will go through. Um
What? What? What the change it.
What this bill changes in
current law. So on Page five
Mm.
Basically, this is the one that
says, um, shall continue
coverage for the life of the
enrollee for the prescription
drug.
Um, that group health plan shall
include in its evidence of
coverage language describing in
a role enrollees rights pursuant
to this subsection.
And then on Page six.
We struck out line, 17 J.
because this was for when we did
the original step therapy bill
back in 2019, and obviously
we've already past that date. Um
and each of these changes is in
each of the sections of the law
on page 11.
Um
We added, in the words on page
11 line to E. We added, in the
words continuing
Coverage for the life of the
patient.
And then on page 19.
We We listed out the conditions
an autoimmune disorder, a
behavioral health condition,
cancer or a substance use
disorder, which was already in
there.
Um and then on page 23.
Um, actually, I already
discussed that the carrier shall
include in its evidence of
coverage language, describing an
enrollees rights pursuant to
this subsection. So, Madam
chair. It looks like a really
big bill. It's really not. It's
just adding lifetime coverage
for those three additional
classes of medications,
essentially and with that will
stand for questions.
Oh,
Sorry, madam chair and members
of the committee If I can add
one more thing, um, I do want
you guys to know that we did
work with the office of the
Superintendent of insurance over
the interim to draft this
message. Um, And in doing that,
we also did receive a governor s
I n so just in case that was
anyone's question. I think now
we stand. Excuse me. They can't
hear you in the back.
You warned me. Sorry. I wanted
everyone to know that we worked
with the office of the
Superintendent of insurance on
this on drafting this bill over
the interim. Um, And with that,
because we did that We got a
message from the governor on the
bill. So, um, this is a priority
bill. For both of us. I and the
governor, so I just want
In case that was anyone's
question. I'm gonna stop playing
with my Mike now.
We just wanted to make sure that
the people in the back can hear
you.
So we're gonna go to the
audience now. Are there any Is
there anyone who's
Stands in support of this
committee sub
Saying no one raising their
hands are standing. Is there
anyone who stands I'm going to
the zoom. Is there anyone on
zoom who is in support of the
sub?
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee sponsor and
advocates. My name is Nat Dean.
I'm a person with multiple
disabilities and a disability
advocate. I'm not a lobbyist, my
own personal lived experience.
It is that this is very
important and as essential you
Can you hold on a second and see
if we can get the sound testing?
Testing.
We can hear you. We can hear
you. Please state your name now
and, uh, and your statement.
My name is Nat Dean. I'm a
disability advocate and a person
with disabilities And I'm not a
lobbyist. Thank you, madam Chair
members of the committee sponsor
and advocates.
I scanned and support of this
substitute bill.
I have lived experience,
accessing, um, step therapy
medications, and in the interest
of time, I will just leave my
comments there. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
We have one other person.
Uh huh.
Good afternoon. Good morning,
madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Gabrielle
Dietrich and I am the executive
director of NAMI. New Mexico
nominee Mexico stands and
supported this bill. Many people
with behavioral health
conditions are in need of their
medication to be consistent and
to not have to go through step
therapy. Um, we see in the
support of the substitute bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Seeing no other saying no
further hands on zoom. I'm going
back to the audience. Is there
anyone here in opposition to
this legislation?
Please stand and you will have
one minute.
Please introduce yourselves
before making this statement.
We get a mic. You have a mic
above you, okay?
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
I'm not the Schenker practicing
position.
Summer of New Mexico Healthcare
and chief medical Officer for
Blue Cross.
Good morning.
I wholeheartedly empathize with
all of you and we are with all
of you.
We are committed to providing
our patients with medically
necessary drugs, timely, the
expense of patient safety.
We recommend a robust workgroup.
To discuss further. Why two
quick examples set a quill,
which is a drug
Within the bones of this bill
recently, there has been a 90%
increase in overdose and abuse
related.
Emergency department visits. God
really have a role to play
Second example reviews of
denials of the minimum
modulators review decision
making into any 22 short 77% of
the time denials are related to
the following not following FDA
dabbling or national national
guidelines or compendium
instructions.
Diagnostic clinic criteria are
not met Contra indications to
the drug timeline of the FDA
approval elapse. Thank you. We
are with you. Thank you.
Jerry. My name is Jonathan
Broxton. I'm with Pharmaceutical
Care Management Association. Mr.
Lobbyist For them. We are the
National Association
representing PBMs. It's great to
be back with you all this year.
Uh, we do stand in opposition to
this bill. We are grateful that
the sponsors admitted and
offered an opportunity for
stakeholder meeting today we
continue to be committed to
working with them.
There are ways to remove
friction in the step therapy and
the prior authorization bill,
But throwing the baby out with
the bathwater is going to do
nothing but put patients at risk
and we stand in opposition,
Their cost implications. But
also, most importantly, there
are patient risk.
Issues that need to be addressed
and how this bill is currently
drafted and how it roots the
prior authorization process in
the state of New Mexico, staying
committed, ready to work with
you all in the sponsors to find
a solution that actually protect
patients keep costs low and make
sure they get the drugs that
they need when they need them.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Brent,
more registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance
plans, and we stand in
opposition to this piece of
legislation, and in the first
instance I would say America's
health insurance plans and their
members are committed to
providing coverage to, uh people
who need health insurance
coverage.
One of the issues that we face
here is the rising cost of drugs
and step therapy is a way to try
to address the increasing costs.
When you have step therapy, you
have a medically, uh,
therapeutic treatment that
someone has to try first, but
there are ways to get exceptions
and there are ways to move
through that process quickly.
It is an attempt to try to
address costs. But there's also
a patient safety aspect to step
therapy and prior authorization.
He does not want people to have
to go fail a drug over and over
and over and we believe that we
can address that. One of the
more problematic pieces of the
bill is you're taking these
three categories of disease and
taking them and separating them
out, committed to working with
the sponsors and talking about
solutions and
new talking about the bill.
We've seen it all of
Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. I'm
pat blocking on behalf of Prime
Therapeutics. I rise and
respectful opposition to house
Bill 185.
Among our concerns are several
overly broad provisions in the
bill. Examples are the undefined
and general medical conditions
included also the requirement
that a drug be covered for the
lifetime of the enrollee rather
than allowing for periodic
review to ensure both patient
safety and cost effective
treatment.
In an ideal world. All the
health plans can provide
coverage is as if money was no
object. Unfortunately, it is and
it has to be one of the factors
we consider when we find balance
in setting public policy like
this, as you see in the IR
before you. This bill will
increase costs not just in the
public sector, but across all
health care plans were also
concerned that these changes
have the potential to compromise
patient safety.
This bill potentially undermines
evidence based, clinically
vetted programs put in place to
make sure that you're always get
the right medicine at the right
time at the lowest cost.
This is a big change requires a
lot of engagement were willing
to keep working. Brett talked
about the meeting today I will
close by asking you all before
you vote on this again to talk
to your colleague, Dr Hickey. I
think he can provide some
enlightening commentary on this
bill. Thank you.
We're going to the zoo. Is there
anyone on zoom in opposition?
To this
Sub
I see No hands raised. I'm going
to the committee now. Is there
anyone with a question?
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And thank you, representative
Thompson, representative
Hernandez and Vanessa Appreciate
your
Your presentation.
Um
As you know, as you mentioned,
I'm I'm signed onto this bill.
It doesn't show it on the
printed coffee, but but I did
sign on to it and have been
discussing it with you from the
beginning when you you presented
to US and Health Interim
Committee.
So you know, as you all know,
I'm a registered nurse. Most
recently. My experience before I
semi retired, was oncology, So I
have an unique perspective on
this. It's really personal, and
I see it from a patient
perspective. But
I see the whole picture. I
really do. So I'm I'm curious
about a few things. Um, I heard
somebody just mentioned
undermining patient safety. Can
you guys address that for me,
please?
Madam chair when we first
started talking about this bill,
I thought about the same thing
and I thought
The middle man that the insurers
are not the experts on the
patient or the disease. It's the
providing. It's the provider
that knows so even though it's a
lifetime coverage, if if the
provider decides for some,
whatever reason that that is not
the correct medication, they
don't have to write a
prescription. It's not like the
prescription is good for 100
years.
That prescription will have to
be renewed every year and that
that is between the provider and
the patient. And in my mind,
that's how we look at patient
safety. The the the insurance
companies don't really have the
same level of engagement and
knowledge of the patient.
Personally.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So is this
one of the issues that will be
negotiated? I understand there's
a meeting later today to discuss
these problems with the bill.
Madam Chair and representative
Jones, Um
I think we're very far apart in
that.
The purpose of this bill is to
make sure that patients get the
medications that they need when
they need them. And I'm betting
that there aren't many people in
this room who haven't had a
battle with their insurance
company over something
medication they've been taking
for years. That all of a sudden
is I mean, I I got prescribed
Symbicort for, um, obstructive
asthma, and they turned they
just flat out, turned it down,
so I kept coughing for six
months until I got into see a
pulmonologist.
Who on the second appointment
with him said I'm leaving. So,
um, this is your last
appointment with me. So I myself
went through six months of
horrible coughing because I
couldn't get the medication
because the insurance company
wouldn't pay.
Yes, I I've heard the stories
over and over again. Trust me.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. So, um um
So I guess from the conservative
side
With that in mind that it's it's
a problem across the board with
getting medication, sometimes
from the conservative side. This
there is a limitation to who
this bill applies to. And and
who does. Madam Chair Who does
this bill apply to which
patients, Madam chair and there
was there was a thing about that
poorly just defined. It's an
auto immune disorder.
Behavioral, health and cancer.
And I think those are pretty
well defined diagnosis.
Thank you, representative.
Um, there were also concerns
about prescriptive authority.
Would one of you address that,
Please? Madam Chair and
Representative Jones. It doesn't
change Prescriptive authority.
It's the prescriber is still the
prescriber. What it changes is
what the insurance company has
to do with the prescription they
received from the provider.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative.
So is there a plan to meet with
insurance agents, insurance
companies and negotiate
Madam chair, and representative
Vanessa will meet with them. You
all know that We don't have a
lot of extra time for anything.
So Vanessa's kind of been
The lead on this and she reports
back into me What's going on,
and we we discuss things, but
she's taking the lead in terms
of meeting with folks.
Thank you, representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair, And so I just
I just want to say a little bit
more about my personal
experience with oncology
patients. There's some things
that you can't measure.
When you look at the problem
associated with prior off and
one of those that I saw was the
time it took to go back and
forth and back and forth, trying
to get authorization for
medication.
Not only did that affect the
patient negatively, they there
was a lot of suffering.
Sometimes patients die because
of that, Um, it was tragic to
watch that process, but
eventually after you have a
navigator that goes back and
forth through the hoops, um they
have to take the physician away
from other patients.
Swamped with patients trying to
provide patient care. Um and
that physician has to come away
from taking care of his
patients her patients and
discuss this with and try to
justify a medication for a
patient and and it just takes
time. And I know you can't even
measure that and so.
Um
You know, from my From my
nursing experience, there's no
way I can deny that this is a
problem and I hope we can come
to a solution. I hope this bill
is it and that perhaps we can
come to a little bit more of a
middle ground, but I definitely
see the need and I appreciate
the bill and I'm going to
support it. Thank you.
Manager.
Thank you.
Representative Jones will now go
to representative Vincent. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
And
Thank you. Chair.
And thank you presenters.
And this, um this piece of
legislation hits me kind of
hard.
Because I'm gonna I'm gonna tell
the story. If you don't mind,
Vanessa.
Um
I met Vanessa last year. Um
During the interim.
There's certain things that
impact you in certain things
that don't
And legislation. We see it every
day, and it comes across our
desk and we studied the best we
can, and we make the best
decisions that we can when I
found out about Vanessa's
disease that she has. It was in
an interim
Committee meeting and a few of
you guys were here.
And, um
There's certain things that
sticks with somebody.
And
We get to see a visual.
Of what she was going through.
And it bothered me and it still
bothers me.
And this is not a Republican or
a Democrat thing. This is a
right and a wrong thing for me.
And as you know, I don't I don't
want to see anybody suffer.
Period ever.
And
I also know how
You know the insurance people
have a They have a business to
run as well.
And listening to the nice
doctor.
Um
Are we going to be prescribing
somebody something prematurely
that's going to cause them
problems.
And I'm sitting here trying to
weigh all this out because
In my helping you
Or in my hurting you.
That's that's what I'm dealing
with right now.
So part of my questions.
The autoimmune disorder.
And the behavioral health
conditions and cancer.
I get that? Are we leaving
Anybody behind? Madam Chair
representative.
Madam Chair and representative
Vincent Yes, we are and the
original The big the big. We're
gonna go. Do you know save the
world was to get rid of prior
authorizations. We knew that was
not really an option, although,
if my magic wand we're not on
the fritz that would be
happening, But so we decided to
narrow it. There are of course,
there's going to be
Thousands, if not hundreds of
thousands of new Mexicans that
we're missing out on, but we we
wanted this to be palatable to
the insurance companies to
assert, you know, so so we're
starting small and see how it
works. And we we figured these
were the most urgent and in
terms of prescribing it, As I
said, before, it's always going
to be
The prescription is between the
provider and the patient. They
insurance companies don't come
in and tell the provider has
determined that that is the
appropriate medication for the
patient. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, representative on
the provider.
The provider him or herself. Do
they know what they're
prescribing? Is this a
specialist? Could it be
Say, Say, um
We heard earlier that
represented Hernandez needed
some
Adderall could have dentist.
Give him Adderall.
Madam chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
representative.
I don't believe so. Um and and
we're this bill is not
attempting to regulate
prescribers. I mean, we're not
saying so. It could it in
cancer. I would guess it would
almost always be a specialist it
we are so short of behavioral
health providers. Many, um,
primary care general
practitioners.
Are providing prescriptions for
behavioral health medications,
but they I mean, we have to
assume that they know what
they're doing, because they are
licensed and they are
credentialed and all of those
things, so it's it's not. I
can't see how how it would be
that a dentist would be mean
outside of the law or inside of
the law, anyway, would be
prescribing Adderall.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Representative presented
just wanted to add one thing to
that. So for my behavioral
health, um
From my behavioral health care.
Uh, in order to my primary care
doctor, which I've been through
five this year and now don't
have one would not give me the
medication. I need we It was so
long to get into see behavioral
health specialist that I had to
go and you it's called Circle
Medical that you download an app
on your phone. They have, you
know, you do video visits.
And, um, it I had to go to that
length in order to get the
healthcare. I know that That's
not what we're talking about
now, but I think
Is that for behavioral health, I
had to find an alternative way
instead of going to a doctor's
office and and being able to see
a specialist, so I think it just
goes towards the whole
healthcare conversation. We're
having.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative.
I keep hearing one of the
questions that I had, as I keep
hearing about the waiting
periods.
And to be able to get your meds.
And
If if a person was to do
everything, just right.
I've heard five months could
could it be more expedient?
Could you get it within one
month?
And one month
After seeing what I saw one
month is not acceptable.
One day is acceptable.
One month is not acceptable,
Madam chair
Representative Vincent and Madam
chair. Um it's actually when,
when Representative Hernandez. I
had the same issue. I had to all
of a sudden I was very paranoid.
Just I was afraid to drive and I
tried to and I have lost primary
care after primary care as well.
And I, too had to go on on the
Web and get someone to prescribe
something for me so that I could
Continue. My daily life and and
and five months is too long. One
month is too long, but many
people have have had years of
fighting and and as someone
stated, um
We are worsening the problem by
having all the providers having
to do all this paperwork. I
mean, I know of a doctor who has
an additional three people in
his office to do nothing but
prior authorizations and that
person in the the provider also
has to get involved in that. So
if we took out some of this busy
work
Um then we would have more
services because the providers
would
Be spending less time trying to
get their patients what they
needed more time seeing more
patients.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
I listened to the doctor and the
testimony and
Something caught my eye with
which meds and why.
So
She mentioned a med.
That could be given that my my
harm the patient.
And does this fast trash fast
track the process.
Or
Does it make the process better.
And are you getting the right
man?
Madam Chair, Madam Chair and
representative Vincent
The prescriber is the one who
will know what the right meds is
the insurance company.
And not necessarily so I I put
my trust in the provider who was
making who was writing the
prescription that it's the right
medication, and they are much
closer to the patient than some
bureaucrat in North Carolina or
somewhere who doesn't even know
how to say Albuquerque.
Thank you, Madam Chair and just
so I can understand this, would
you just a small version? Give
me the process of
pre authorization so I have I
have a condition.
And I go into the doctor and I
want to get taken care of right
now.
Explain the preauthorization so
I can understand that please,
Madam Sharon representatives so
again something I have to go
through every year. Um, the
first time I got put on like the
hardest med that has been able
to get
Um
Go in, get seen.
Ah, several blood tests and
follow ups after that, then, um
you know which gets submitted to
the insurance company then
waiting, Um
Phone calls with somebody that
I'm assuming is sitting in a
cubicle asking a whole bunch of
questions about why you need
your meds.
Ah!
You know, essentially doing
And over the phone doctor visit
with with a bureaucrat.
Um
And then you either get a text
from or green saying you're
Prescription is ready or you get
a letter saying why it was
denied. And this is how you can
appeal which I've unfortunately
got a lot of those over the
years. Um
And so I mean that process I
have to go. So my renewal is in
September. That's my one year
mark.
Um, I have to go in July and
start the process and it is
about a 4045 day process every
year of multiple blood tests,
multiple phone calls, and
sometimes it's just you've been
denied. For whatever reason, um
some years one year so far since
I've been on this particular
medication, I've gotten a
Come pick up your prescription
is ready and then you're good
for a year.
Um, but every other year, it's
we need a ton. More info. We
need more phone calls, or you've
just been denied. And so it's
when you're just trying to
Get your medication to continue,
you know, living your life. It's
really frustrating. It takes a
lot of time. Um
And a lot of effort to get this
thing that you rely on on a
daily basis.
So, um, you know, my the other
medication has not been so hard,
but it's also you know, a
quarter of the cost, and so
Um
I also have an injectable for,
um I get off of migraines, which
is another thing that I have to
go through step therapy for
Um, that one. I've only been on
a year. That one hasn't been so
bad, but my other medications
have
You know, In some cases last
year, I waited almost five
months. My dates in September. I
didn't get taken care of until
we were here in session.
So it takes a while.
Thank you, Madam Chan. Thank
you, representative. And I think
that paints a good picture for
us to be able to understand when
you are denied.
Let's just take a migraine.
Why are you denied? Or you
denied? Because the doctor don't
think that you need migraine
medicine anymore. Or you denied
because the insurance don't want
to pay for it. Madam Chair Madam
Chairman, Representative, um so
I go See my neurologist? She we
went through the steps. Um, I've
suffered with awful migraines.
They've gotten worse as I've
gotten older, but I can remember
being about 13 or 14. The first
time I had one had no idea what
was going on, couldn't see had
the full or a fact blinding
pain.
Um, And so when I was a little
bit older, 1718
When to the doctor started
seeing a neurologist have been
through countless ones in my,
you know, I guess that's almost
20 years now.
Um
But I got to finally go see the
one that I've been with for a
couple of years. Now she's been
wonderful, and it went from.
Well, if you feel one coming on,
take this rescue pill and it may
or may not help.
Um two. Here's a daily.
Um, a daily medication that you
can take and they weren't really
working. I was still getting
three or four migraines a week.
Um
Blinding pain can't deal with
sound can deal with light.
Um and the injectables had been
out for about a year.
And they were like, all right,
let's try it.
And it has been
A tremendous help. Um
I went from 3 to 4 migraines a
week to
About one issue a month.
Um, tremendous help. We just
increased the dose again on this
last this last visit. Um and I
haven't had a migraine now in
three months, which is a game
changer for my daily life.
So
I feel like when I got
Denied it was the insurance
company, not the provider. My
providers have always been.
Let's try and figure out, you
know, you may not hit on the
first time.
But there are sitting there are
sitting there willing to figure
out what works his everybody
Every person's body is
different. They're going to
react to medication differently.
Um, and some of the meds worked
great. And some of the meds have
not worked so great. So I think
that the provider is where this
needs to live.
They're the person who is
sitting there talking to you
working through the process with
you trying to make you feel
better.
Um, not. Somebody has Madam
chair said, sitting in North
Carolina in a
In a cubicle trying to figure
out what's best for the company.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair and I've got 22. I
got one more question one more
statement.
So, um, real quick.
Want me through and it can be
really fast. Walk me through
step therapy, so I can
understand step therapy.
Madam chair and representative
Vincent Essentially, that's
starting at the bottom and
working your way up. So starting
with the least expensive
generic. Um and then if that
doesn't work, then you move up
to the next, you know, either
different brand or a different a
different medication altogether
and can and that frequently that
goes on, especially in
behavioral health. It goes on it
can go on for a while, till you
find just the right just the
right mix and with
My son with autism. We have been
Doing that for decades, you
know, trying to find just the
right mix of him not being too
sleepy, but not being overly
aggressive, either. So it's
basically steps you go from the
cheapest. Easiest all the way up
until you find what works best
for that individual patient.
Absolutely, Madam chair for me.
Um, we'll go with the migraines.
It started with sumatriptan. Um,
about eight cents a pill.
I went to Reza tripped and went
to a different tripped in
triptans, or there's a whole
family of them for migrants went
through four of those before the
injectables the injectables yes,
are much more expensive but are
dramatically different. So it is
going from the most easily
accessible cheapest to you know,
through a whole slew to figure
out what works best. But you do
have to go through.
Kind of the
The process that the insurance
company has put out before you
can get to those more top level
More expensive ones. Um, you are
required to go through the steps
before the insurance will pay.
You can't go from step one to
step eight.
Without going through the other
steps of the insurance won't
cover it.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. So what?
I'm trying to what I'm trying to
do is get my mind wrapped
around. I can understand, Um,
something that comes on
periodically like a migraine.
But for somebody that's living
with something day to day.
If you start out with the least
How long does it take to get to
the end? Do you do you make it
to the end where you get the
greater
The greater side, or do you have
to stay in pain for hopefully
not decades.
Hopefully, it's just gonna be a
little while.
Could you paint that for me,
please? Absolutely. Madam Chair
and representative, Um we'll
take my migrant one again. But I
do want you to know that the
other two medications that I
have to go through step therapy
for are a daily. They are
something I have to take daily.
I'm just not comfortable in
talking about my whole health
history right there. Um,
So for migraines. It took me
three years to get from the
bottom to the top. And in the
middle somewhere, I changed from
Presbyterian to Blue Cross blue
shield because my employer did,
and I had to start again from
the bottom. So the year and a
half for almost two years that I
had already put into climbing
the ladder.
The second that I changed
insurance. I had to start back
at the bottom, even though I
knew and you know, because of my
medical history that transferred
my new provider also knew that
they were not working to the
level that they needed to be.
So, um, yeah, I mean, for me to
get from point A to where the
finish line where I am now or I
guess hopefully the finish line
where I am now.
Um was about a four year
process. Um and I have very
little confidence that it would
have taken a whole lot.
Shorter of a period of time if I
wouldn't have changed insurance
companies, Blue Cross did it a
lot faster than Presbyterian
was, but the fact that I still
had to go through the three or
four, you know medications for
several months apiece.
Um
Was still just
Annoying if nothing else, and
and that just sparked one more
question that I have Madam
chair.
Just so I can I want to ask this
so that I can talk to the
insurance and the doctor after
we're done.
Is that
What you think is best for the
patient.
Madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
Noh. Its bottom line is
Unnecessary suffering and in
some cases, as as as Vanessa
said someone was close to was.
You know this close to suicide
because they couldn't get relief
from
My numbing pain, So it in my
opinion, and I think in the
humane opinion
If we have things to help people
have a better quality of life
less pain, more chance of
surviving cancer Whatever the
longer we wait, the more
suffering and the worst. The
outcomes can be.
I would like to add something
here, Madam Chair, Um
Especially for behavioral health
as someone who suffers with
behavioral health issues. Um I
also suffer from crippling
anxiety at coins as I think a
lot of us do. Unfortunately, um
But some of the mean some of the
thoughts that go through your
head. Um, even mind sometimes
I'm glad that I'm not. As far as
I know. A lot of people are but
Especially with behavioral
health issues. I do not. I
absolutely do not believe that
that is the best route. I think
that
With behavioral health. You know
something that we are
Still learning a lot about every
single day and how it affects
different people and
We need to get people the
medication prescriptions that
they need to
You know, get their behavioral
health in a good place. It can
take a toll like nothing else
can. I can go run 100 Miles.
And
Be physically exhausted. But the
second time my mind kicks in.
It's a whole different beast to
deal with, and so behavioral
health is is something that is
super important. And you know,
we need to
We need to make sure that people
get the meds that they need in
order to be in
You know, operating optimal
behavioral health.
At all times because it it is a
different beast to deal with. I
will. I will tell you stories
someday. Um
But yeah, that one. That one in
particular is the one out of
these three that I am most
worried about. Thank you, Madam
Chair in your closing.
Something happened really
spectacular.
On the House floor this week.
And the Republicans passed an
amendment.
And I've never seen that happen
so far.
So I'm super optimistic and what
I heard was you're gonna be
working with the insurance
offices today, Correct?
And I
I like the fact that we can sit
around the table like ladies and
gentlemen, and come up, see if
we can come up with a solution.
So, um, I'm gonna listen to the
rest of the the folks and I
haven't quite made up my mind
What I want to do. I don't know
if I want to prematurely vote on
this or if I want to wait and
see.
What happens with
You and the insurance.
But you know where I see. You
know how I feel on this on this
particular legislation. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent. We're now going to
representative Cates. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you.
Presenters. Um I just wanna
overview a quick overview. So
currently
Um, what is it is requirement
through insurance is that
they're requiring medical
providers to go through this
step process. Is that true?
Madam Chairman representative,
We passed the step therapy bill
years ago, and I I don't exactly
remember what all was in it, but
we did put provisions in place
that, um things like if you have
failed what representative
Hernandez was saying, You know
that when he changed insurances
that actually shouldn't happen
based on the law that we passed
those years ago. If you have
been on a medication, and it was
unsuccessful
If if, um
If it made you worse than there,
There are things in current law
that say that kind of exempt
step therapy if you change
providers or you change
insurance companies, you don't
you shouldn't have to go back to
the beginning. Um so there there
is a lot in law, but as
hopefully you all have figured
out
Um, because we do a lot doesn't
mean that people do what we what
we put in the law, so I'm sure
there are still some issues
around step therapy, but it is
in the law to to make we had
tons of of witnesses and and
people who did public testimony
with diseases like M s who who
were forced. You know they were
doing well on a mid and then the
Their insurance changed and they
had to go back to something that
was actually harmful to them
that they had been previously
harmed, and we we tried to take
care of those in our previous
step therapy bill, But as I
said,
It's amazing people don't read
everything that we do and say
like we're going to do it today,
so
Thank you, madam Chair in and
thank you, chair and presenters,
So I just want to understand
that the law the bill in which
you're presenting today does not
require medical providers to
give you medication that you
have proven it gives them the
option, knowing that there has
been no changes, such as well,
Take the example You've already
discussed about your son needing
oxygen.
If the medical provider notices
Oh, he's lost £50 or there's
something that has changed they
as medical providers. This does
not hinder them to be able to
provide the best possible care,
which may require the
investigation of a step program.
Is that correct? That is
correct, Madam Chair
Thank you. And thank you for
bringing this to our attention.
Um, I, uh you know, we we trust
this is not a bill that hinders
medical providers but supports
them. And, um, and and so I will
support Thank you.
Representative Cates will now go
to representatives. Opinsky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for bringing this bill
forward. I'd like to make a
motion. Um
If you're ready, you hold on
Just one moment. I will give you
that opportunity. I just like a
clarifying question on the use
of for the rest of your life. So
if I if a patient, Madam
presenters
It's only a prescription drug,
but then stops going to see the
doctor and the prescription drug
is for, uh, auto, auto, immune
therapy, behavioral, health or
cancer.
They can continued with this
medication for their life
without having to a doctor
intervention, so just clarify
that for people in the audience,
so Madam chair, you still will
need an annual prescription. I
mean it. What this says is it's
covered for life from the
insurance side. But from the
prescription side, the provider
can decide that that's not the
correct drug or whatever. So
it's It's not gonna be like you
get prescribed something for
behavioral health today and for
the rest of your life.
If you just have an open book
prescription every year, you
will have to get an annual
renewal of your prescription.
And would you explain one other
item? There was a comment made
that to implement this.
This piece of legislation would
cause an increase in in the
drugs that are being described.
But what I can see from what you
all explaining is that it
prevents having doctors to go
right paperwork that this can
continue to, Um
Make a smooth transition when
individuals run out of
medication, But not only that,
if a person is gonna be on this
prescription for the rest of
their lives anyway, how is that
increasing the drug except if
the manufacturer decides to have
an increase at some point in
time. Could you explain that
Madam chair? I don't I don't
Understand that I agree with you
that if course, we all know that
pharmacy prices go up all the
time for any reason or no
reason, so I don't see how
there's going to be
I trust the providers to prove
to prescribe what it is that
their patients need most. I
don't I'm not worried about
prescribers just saying, Okay,
everybody on my caseload is
going to get out of role for the
rest of their lives. I mean,
that won't happen, And if it
does, it's illegal, So you know
there's another way, so I don't
understand.
Their reasoning there. Thank you
very much. We're going to
representatives of pants key for
the motion.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Sharapova do not pass on house
Bill 185 and a do pass on house
Health and Human Services
Committee Substitute for house
Bill 185 2nd motion.
Alright. The motion on the floor
is that do not pass on house
Bill 185 and a do pass on
On the house and health.
House and House Health and Human
Services Committee. Substitute
for House Bill 185.
Would you please take the roll?
Representative Cates.
Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative hire a meal.
Representative Jones.
Yes, Representative Lord.
Representatives of pants key,
Yes.
Representative Vincent No, It's
an explanation.
Madam Vice chair. Yes, yes.
Madam Chair? Yes.
And represented by a vote of 8
to 1. You'd have a do pass on
how Health House Health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for house Bill 185. I
do want to make note that
representative Lord is excused
today and represented Vincent.
You have one minute to explain
your your vote. Thank you, madam
Chair.
The main reason that I voted no
on this is because I know it's
going to pass in here, and I'm
excited to see what happens with
you and the insurance.
Um, companies and I want to
really get my mind wrapped
around this even more.
And I'm gonna make you a
promise. I will get my mind
wrapped around and completely
and hopefully when it makes it
to the floor.
And and we have some some good
common ground, Then I'll give
you my support Their thank you,
Madam Chair just for the record,
I am going to correct the vote.
There was with representative
Lord being excused. The boats
were seven in favor and one
against you still have a do pass
Madam chair.
Next. We have, um, health
related reimbursement rate.
House Bill 203 representative
Vincent and Harmony.
Whenever you're ready,
representative
Thank you, madam. Chair and
Committee. Ladies and gentlemen.
Um, with me here today is Stacey
Johnson.
That is a chemi. She's an hmd
specialist, and Joaquin Graham,
which represents am our
ambulance.
Yeah. And, of course, my
esteemed colleague.
Terra Alta Miho.
And, um, we signed on we
sponsored this Bill House Bill
203, which appropriates 2
million.
From the General fund to the
Healthcare authority.
To establish a mile a mileage
reimbursement rate for providers
of ambulance services,
environmental modification
services and durable medical
equipment for Medicaid patients
and paying the state share of
these Medicaid services.
For each category.
Of of provider. The mileage
reimbursement rate would take
into account the following
items.
Licensure and registration of an
ambulance.
Fuel.
Ambulance maintenance repair.
Tires.
Insurance.
Mechanic wages.
Benefits and payroll taxes.
Loan interest rate related to
the ambulances.
The cost of weighted allocation
overhead.
The cost of depreciation.
And reserves.
For replacement ambulance
vehicles and equipment.
Madam chair. Thank you for
having us today. Really? This
bill is looking at rural New
Mexico and we are here
bipartisan to look at how we can
support rural New Mexico who is
suffering with their ability to
provide ambulance services and
emergency services within New
Mexico. Many of our areas will
have to transport individuals
from 200 to 400 miles to
Albuquerque to provide this
service.
Which is then having a hardship
on our communities they're
having to replace ambulances or
to pay for those costs often
times when we cannot get durable
medical equipment. Um uh,
Driven to communities such as in
Alamo than the ambulance
services responsible for coming
and bringing oxygen and for
doing those assessments, and
that is not reimbursable. So
this is really in support of
rural New Mexico and, um
Really moving forward with a
parody of equal equality within
New Mexico when providing
healthcare services. Thank you.
And with that, madam, terrible
Standford questions, Okay, we
will go to the audience. First.
We will go if you are on zoom in
opposition. Please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you
in the room. Is there anyone in
opposition?
K seeing No one in the room. Is
there anyone on zoom?
I don't see any hands raised. So
if you are in support of this
bill on Zoom, raise your hand
and we'll come back to you in
the room. Anyone in support of
this bill?
There goes your most exciting
bill of the session.
Okay. Anyone on zoom, Okay. It
looks like we don't have any
public comment.
Representative case. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you so
much presenters for bringing
this very practical and logical
bill during this session. Um,
what is this money already in
the budget that we it? I see
that, uh
Um, the appropriations is
Um, has it been already set in
the budget?
Yes, that's correct.
Great. Thank you so much. And,
um
And and it will be under in
distributed through the
healthcare authority, and it'll
be under Medicaid, so it's
eligible for federal dollar
match. Correct correct.
Thank you very much.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Um, sponsors for bringing
this, Um
The the, uh It's my
understanding that the
department says that it already,
um rolls transportation costs
into the providers bid and into
the total cost for most of these
services.
Um Is there a disconnect in why
we still need? Thank you, Madam
Chair and representative. Thank
you for asking that question And
I'm speaking on behalf of the
durable medical equipment,
environmental modification
providers.
There is language within the
knee Mac rules that indicates
you can build for mileage for
durable medical equipment. Um,
if you deliver more than 75
Miles
The rules indicates that you can
build for for mileage if you
also are building all patient
types, meaning Medicare and
commercial, and we are not able
to build Medicare and commercial
lives, so therefore we're not
able to build Medicaid, so a
simple rule change actually
would allow for that to happen.
I would also say that 75 miles
one way is
Very large distance to travel to
deliver oxygen. So I would like
to propose maybe looking at the
mileage. It's allowed within the
rule as well.
And then for environmental
modifications. It is stated that
we can include it, but it goes
again and I've been in front of
this committee this session a
few times talking about
environmental modifications. But
if we were to roll mileage in it
would come away from the
patient's budget of that $6000
we've talked about, so we have
not been incorporating all of
the miles because it actually
takes away from the benefit of
the patient.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
And I'm gonna do something. I
why didn't you And this is
really not a Why didn't you but
just a bigger example of I
worked as a physical therapist
in grants and Laguna and a comma
and did not get mileage and did
not get paid for my driving time
So I could easily spend a nine
hour day with two billable
hours.
Um, And when I did my taxes, I
realized I was actually losing
money by working and
It took me a while to figure out
that that wasn't a good plan,
but it was very passionate about
helping the kids. So, um
So
Good on this. And if any of you
feel like this is your calling,
then include, uh
Providers as well.
Thank you. I will entertain a
motion.
I'd like to make it a motion for
do pass.
Second
I'll second it.
Is there any opposition seeing?
none. You have a do
We're working on a few.
Clear
We're ready. So whenever you're
ready
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. I'm grateful
to be in this conversation with
you all today. I expect that for
a couple of minutes we'll be
joined by chair Lenti, who's one
of our co sponsors.
And potentially representative
Hochman. Be hell as well. So
thank you for the indulgence to
have some of us coming in and
stepping back out.
First of all, we really want to
appreciate the incredible
advocates, including members of
this committee and leaders from
all over New Mexico for their
commitment and clarity and
persistence and making sure our
legislature is talking about the
harms caused by alcohol and
other substances.
For so many of us
We hold these issues close to
heart.
When I started to hear proposals
as a member of this body.
I listened closely, because I
know our families need and
deserve more than what they're
finding and able to access
today.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Um
I remember once in my years of
organizing and trying to learn
and listen to people navigating
poverty and trauma and substance
use and dependency.
I remember once a person I met
named Tony
And they had experienced many
years of being a housed and they
struggled with substance use
disorders and corcoran
disorders, mental illness as
well.
And I remember once a
conversation that never left me
in which Tony shared and talked
about what it meant to be on the
streets.
In the depths of that addiction.
And Tony talked about how for
them the worst feeling.
Was being made invisible.
How so many of us when on our
way to work or on the way home
or in our hustle and hurry
somewhere.
I didn't even see people
anymore.
When they've fallen so low
And that's that with me forever,
Madam Chair because since then
and hopefully before then
I had worked to better
understand.
How we keep people from being
invisible.
How we recognize what it is.
They're holding.
And how we imagine something
different a future in which so
many more of us have an
opportunity to thrive.
So again to start off today. We
want to appreciate you all and
so many across our state that
have been making sure this is a
conversation at the top of our
legislative session.
HB 213 the bill we're presenting
today.
Presents in a different
alternative or approach to how
we tax alcohol in our state.
As it happens today, we tax
alcohol at the wholesale level.
By volume so today in today's
laws, which haven't been updated
since the early nineties.
At the wholesale level. We do 41
cents per gallon of beer.
45 cents per liter of wine and a
dollar 60 per liter of spirits.
Like so many have named. These
numbers have not been updated
since the nineties, and they've
fallen behind the value they had
then compared to the value of
our dollar today.
So we agree and appreciate that
this mechanism for taxing needs
an update.
Where we diverge is
understanding how that tax works
made it one of the most
regressive taxes on New Mexico's
books.
That meant that proportionally
people with less means and less
economic stability. We're paying
a much higher share of the tax.
As leadership in the tax
committee joined with our brand
new, um, colleague.
We continue to want to have a
conversation about changing that
flawed tax policy so that it
becomes more progressive so that
the people that have the least
are not carrying the burden of
any potential increases. We do.
Bringing to 13 forward is our
attempt to do so.
So in this proposal, we
eliminate the wholesale tax.
As we think about the supply
chains, um, all over for alcohol
but including New Mexico.
There's a maker of alcohol.
There's a distributor that buys
that alcohol and then they
distributor sells it to the
retailer who we might think of
as the grocery store or the gas
station or the bar, the
restaurant and that retailer
ultimately sells it to the
consumer. The person the new
Mexican buying the alcohol.
So long that supply sheen. What
we've done is eliminate the
wholesale tax. That's what the
distributors were paying back to
the state based on the volume of
alcohol they sold. We eliminate
that and we move the tax to the
retail level, so the person
buying the alcohol is paying
that tax in a simple, direct and
clear way.
In doing so, Madam chair and
committee.
This reflects what chair Lenti
and I have heard over the last
few years.
That in order to have a
conversation about who's paying
this tax and potential impacts
to their consumption.
We don't want to stick with with
a muddied, regressive policy
that assumes tax will be passed
on, especially when most
economists will tell you the
taxes passed on from 1.5 to 2%
more than we even impose it at
the wholesale level.
So if we want to have this
conversation directly, our
approach, eliminate the
wholesale go to the retail, so
everybody knows exactly what
that taxes and what their tax
what their tax will be.
So as it stands, and we've
provided a couple of materials
for you, our proposal names that
we would tax spirits at 4% wine
at 3% and beer at 2%.
Because this is no longer the
wholesale. We are making it a
good tax policy because the tax
someone is paying will be
proportional to the cost of
value of the actual product.
They're buying.
So as it stands, that means if
you are paying more for alcohol,
you will pay a higher tax if
you're paying less for alcohol,
the tax um you're responsible
for will be less another ways as
we start to describe it, if you
are a top shelf drinker or
purchasing top shelf alcohol,
you will be paying top shelf
taxes.
If you are someone in rural New
Mexico, where people
overwhelmingly by package If
you're somewhere someone
navigating poverty if you're
someone holding addiction and
dependency, and it's just buying
the cheapest bottle of vodka,
you can get your hands on so
that you might live through the
night and not die from
withdrawal. Those are not the
folks were doing and dropping.
The increases on We are in fact,
making this a progressive tax
policy.
Secondly, before I turned to my
co sponsor.
We are in this proposal,
eliminating what is in place
today with the local Wi grant
councils, programs and funds. We
certainly have been receiving a
lot of questions and feedback
about this piece.
Knowing the conversations that
haven't happened over decades,
and the need to reimagine what
it means to actually show up for
our families.
We took this as an opportunity
to look closer at how those
disbursements have been
happening since the nineties,
which my co sponsor,
representative Matterhorn will
speak to in more detail.
We are not in any way attempting
to eliminate programs and
services that exist instead, we
want a fresh look to think about
what new Mexicans need and
whether or not we have an
opportunity to do much better
and level the resources we bring
in with much greater impact, So
with that I will turn it to
incredible co sponsor
representative Borrow one
Thank you, madam Chair and
representatives.
I still remember the day um,
that I came to school on Monday
when the halls were quiet, even
though everyone from my school
was there.
That my friend had been behind
the wheel and my other friend
was no longer there.
And if you've ever lost someone,
you know that the next day what
that's like, and that's why I
care so much about where the
funding for D w Y goes.
In conversations with the
county.
Um, association. We've learned
that this funding right now is
not being distributed fairly.
And our counties work so hard
every day. They're doing their
best to provide these services
prevention treatment. But we as
legislators, we can do better.
We can reimagine the way that we
distribute two counties.
Currently we distribute in four
ways.
25 million comes off from the
General Fund. And then since
before I was born 20,000 has
been going to farming to Neman
Flee for street inebriate
program.
In 2015 5% was added to go to
drug courts.
And then the remaining goes to
the Wi program.
The way that the D Wi program is
distributed.
2.8
Million is distributed off the
top to detox programs for six
counties, not necessarily the
counties with the highest
alcohol, death mortality rates.
And then the rest is distributed
through formula that takes into
account population, drunk
driving crashes and the grocery
seats tax of your city.
The formula uses data from 4002.
We wanted to be in community,
really with US experts in this
health world.
And having the language repealed
for this act that we would be
able to allocate these funding
sources more efficiently.
And the proposal that we are
bringing today is really more
for your feedback.
For the new parameters and how
those resources would be
distributed.
So as of today, our proposal
keeps the General fund hole.
And then 3 million is awarded to
the drug courts.
The Harms alleviation fund is
created.
10% would go to Indian nations
or counties and municipalities
that serve Native American
populations.
40% would be distributed to the
counties on an updated formula
that takes into account the
alcohol related deaths per
country and from our
conversations with the county's
we've learned that this these
funds don't always go to the
projects that are really needed,
such as you can't use these
funds for capital projects.
If you wanted to be build a
detox center, for instance, you
would have to find other funds
for that.
And then Lastly, we really
appreciate rap, Parkman Be Hill
and Rob Harper for bringing
forward legislation that
establishes, um up a way that we
could increase our funds and so
50% or more could be allocated
to the health care authority for
the Medicaid Match Fund for
treatment facilities. And
finally, what we have found in
our research is that a lot of
the research on the excise tax
does not take into account race
and ethnicity.
And so in our state that is a
majority minority population
where we have Hispanic Native
Asian black families. We want to
ensure that 50,000 comes off the
top and goes to research on this
topic for the next five years.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna turn quickly to one of our
co sponsors, representative
Hernandez, representative help!
Madam chair and members of the
committee. I am extremely
supportive and side note to this
bill. It is time that we do make
real changes to affect addiction
that is ravaging our state.
The harms alleviation. Finding
the additional money is that
will be brought in as well as
the potential Medicaid match
will be a game changer.
For addiction in our state.
Um, I
I won't take up anymore of your
time. But I urge you to vote
Yes. Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee, um,
hard to add to that testimony is
clearly incredibly well
researched there. This is an
issue that has been, um, that
we've been needed to address for
quite some time. In New Mexico.
There are brilliant ways to
change his allocations and bring
in Medicaid match funding and
money, And that's going to
change people's lives. This is
an incredible bill.
And there's been so much thought
and research put into it. And we
thank you for your consideration
of it today.
And madam chair just to clarify
as we wrap up the potential
spends of the distribution out
of the new funds that
representative Baron shared is
our early thinking. None of
those are yet in the bill or
brought before you as formal
amendments today, in part
because we wanted to come here,
hear your feedback here. If
there's something we've missed,
or not yet considered.
That we could potentially bring
to light and and wrap into this
proposal should we have the
opportunity to move forward? So
those pieces she's named our our
early thoughts about
reimagining how we distribute
these dollars with more impact,
but we bring them forward today
to be part of the conversation.
Um and that would with that Mr
Madam Chair will turn to you Do
expect representatives may be
popping in any minute. So if
that happens, I'd love to give
him a minute or two to add.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we will go to the
audience if you are on zoom and
opposition. Please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you
in the room. If you're an
opposition, please raise your
hand. If you would like to
speak come to the center. We
will take 10 comments.
All right. Good morning, Chair
and representatives. My name is
Chanel. Delgado and I oversee
the Santa Fe County DW program.
I am here to testify of the
great work of the DWP program.
Wi programs are critical players
in our communities. We support
our schools by providing
substance use education, both
within the classroom and through
youth led initiatives by 23
3205. Students within Santa Fe
County were served through the L
D Wi Fund.
Wi funding is critical for
substance, use education for
Children and youth in our
communities and increases our
opportunity to deter future
generations from alcohol harms
and substance misuse.
We support our courts by
providing compliance supervision
to 479 wi offenders in Santa Fe
County, and that's just so far
this year.
In FY took in FY.
24 alone. 104 clients have
received clinical assessments to
ensure that their unique
treatment needs are being met.
24 609 clients have been served
throughout all d d f w I funded
detox services.
The program also provides 142
clients with treatment that is
unique to their needs. Thank
you.
I mean, it goes fast.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wish I
had more than a minute to
address this, but I'm Melissa
Kenny Geir mph. Um, I served in
the Oregon Legislature for 10
years, focusing, particularly on
behavioral health and poverty,
was vice chair of Healthcare
Cherif human services and
housing and on the revenue
committee. Um, Mexico has the
worst is the worst state in the
nation happened for alcohol
related deaths and costs related
to alcohol.
This has been true since 1997
and it was has been number 12 or
three. Worst ranked since 1981
Mexicans die of alcohol related
causes that nearly three times
the national average.
The biggest impact.
Is on marginalized communities,
including by race and ethnicity.
Abuse is highly correlated with
trauma, domestic violence, gun
violence and homelessness issues
that New Mexico struggles to
reduce.
Mexico will remain worst in the
nation in many indicators until
we finally grapple problem in a
serious and bold manner.
Which unfortunately, HB 217, as
it currently stands does not do.
I totally agree that we need to
put way more money into
treatment to a variety of, um
Trauma informed services. Thank
you. That's it. That's it. Okay,
well, I've sent you a lot of
emails about this. I do
recommend an amendment that
would increase the revenue
seriously increased consumption
and open up the opportunities
for new programs. Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair,
members of the committee and Pat
Block, speaking today on behalf
of the New Mexico Alcohol
Alliance, an alliance of small
business restaurant bar liquor
license owners, Uh, I rise today
in mild opposition to this bill,
and most of that opposition is
based on uncertainty there. I I
commend the sponsors for
thinking outside of the box.
This is a proposal like we've
never seen anywhere before.
And so by the same token, it
makes it hard to perform an
analysis and get a real good
idea What the impacts of this
bill will be so much so that
your f I R says that Texan Rev
didn't even venture a guess as
to what the financial impacts of
this work. We have some other
concerns about the costs and
level of every required to
operationalize a change like
this on
Businesses that don't have
robust point of sale systems. A
lot of our membership is small
and not real, technically adept,
so that's a concern, also
attacking attacks onto the top
end will increase the swipe fees
that are somewhat out of control
for small business owners. But
we appreciate
We're also concerned that the
bill is not quite baked yet,
according to the sponsors, so we
look forward to following it if
it does move on from here to see
if we can get to a place where
are mild Opposition maybe even
goes away. Thank you, Mr
Madam chair members of the
community.
Charlie Marcus, representing the
county of Daniele.
Donny and is concerned that the
appeals the DW, I, um and
And that
These funds are used to
supervised probation.
And try to rehabilitate
individuals that are convicted
of D W I, and it's only for
those reasons some of the others
that have been stated previously
that the county standard in
opposition at this time. Thank
you very much that Scanlon
registered lobbyists for the
city of farming Tonight and San
Juan County, and we continue to
have concerns about the funding
mechanisms for local
Thank you. Um, we will go to
zoom, and since we had fewer
people in we will take all the
hands that are currently raised,
so we'll start with Sarah.
Sara UN mute yourself and go
ahead.
Thank you. Sorry about that,
Madam Chair. Um good morning,
Members of the Committee. Madam
Chair. I'm Sarah Fitzgerald,
senior vice president at the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce.
We have to respectfully opposed
this bill. The F I, R suggests
that changes proposed here. What
resulting higher taxes for
consuming alcohol on site which
would absolutely have an impact
on the local businesses that
make our communities so unique
and distinctive.
Well, we should be very
motivated to address our state's
persistent D wi problem. Our
restaurants and breweries
shouldn't pay the price.
The chamber opposes any and all
tax increases for businesses,
especially during a 30 Day
session when public input and
careful consideration can often
be rushed.
We asked the committee to vote
No on this, bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Stephanie.
Stephanie, please on mute and go
ahead. Stephanie, are you if
you're there on mute?
We're gonna skip over Stephanie
and go to Leland.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Leland Gold and I represent
the New Mexico Petroleum
Marketers Association.
Many of our members, which
number in the hundreds are small
business owners, and many of
them are in rural areas,
Sometimes we're the only grocery
store or convenience store or
even possibly fueling locations
for these new Mexicans. These
small businesses have not really
fully recovered from the
pandemic. They're also dealing
with record inflation, high
interest rates and now the
potential cost of implementing
the family Leave Act.
Kent and can and will be too
much for some of these small
business owners, especially
those that are family run with 5
to 8 to 10 employees.
The bill, which, um
Has a challenge we to understand
it with by reading it too many
of us, but it's certainly going
to add labor and hardware
technology cost to our small
businesses.
On top of that these businesses
have have been dealing with
these challenges for four or
five years. So, um and madam
chair and members of the
committee we absolutely believe
that DW iPhone and the support
systems do need restructuring,
but we don't believe it needs to
be back on the back of our small
business. Retail. Thank you.
Next We will go.
Robert
Richard Richard, Richard
Richard.
Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Richard Scolnik. I live
in White Rock. And I'm, a
lecturer at the Yale School of
Public Health. I opposed the
bill for several reasons. First,
it is not evidence based, but
rather it's based on notions
that are quite contrary to
evidence.
Second, The bill is regressive
country to what's been said It
will make alcohol related
outcomes much worse for the
poor. It will not make them
better.
Third is currently written. It
will increase alcohol related
deaths in New Mexico. It would
also fail to raise revenue
needed to help address the
alcohol problem in New Mexico,
And finally the governor and the
Legislature will not be able to
address the problems of violence
without effectively addressing
alcohol, which this bill will
clearly not do. In my view, you
have an ethical and technical
obligation to vote against this
bill, which I trust you will do.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next. We have, um
David
Thank you. My name is David
Jernigan. I'm a professor in the
Department of Health law policy
and management at the Boston
University School of Public
Health work on alcohol policy
issues for 35 years and served
as an adviser to the World Bank
and the World Health
Organization. My comments today
are my own views and don't
represent the official views of
my university. Given New
Mexico's highest in the nation
status from mortality due to
alcohol, the state needs a
dramatic solution.
And this bill is definitely not
it. Please do not be confused.
This bill would not result in
more revenue for the state that
could be spent to reduce,
prevent and mitigate the harm
caused by alcohol use. It will
not benefit your poorest
residents. In fact, it will
incentivize them to Kim Soo more
alcohol at the same time that it
will not provide badly needed
services to medicate the harm
already being caused. It's the
worst form of material of
paternalism to say that
providing cheaper alcohol to the
poorest of the poor is a
progressive act.
Four people drink less than
wealthier people, which is why
volumetric taxes are much less
regressive than many people
think. If your porn you drink,
you're more likely to drink
heavily, and the context of
those will be greater to you,
your family and your community
because the social safety net
already has huge gaps. So what
are low income communities need
in terms about
Taxes that completely next.
And I am sorry about the minute
but Jenny
Madam. Hello, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Dr Jenny
Way a physician in Gallup for
the past 12 Years board
certified in internal medicine
and addiction, medicine Leader
McKinley County Alcohol Task
Force, and I oppose House Bill
213 as written in its current
form, there is truly no way to
exaggerate the challenges that
we face around alcohol and our
state and in our county in
particular, where we have the
highest rates of alcohol related
death.
Um, and these alcohol related
deaths are overflowing and
backing up our emergency
departments, hospitals and
clinics as Dr Jernigan mentioned
and as the World Health
Organization has said in in
reports on alcohol taxes.
Percentage page taxes like this
one have a significant weakness
because they make cheap alcohol
even more affordable. They
encourage consumption and
drinking it initiation,
particularly among young people,
particularly among residents
like those in my community. So
many come to us wanting to get
sober, wanting to get help. Yet
we struggle to find enough
resources to refer to in our
state and this bill will not
raise the new revenue that is
absolutely needed to purposely
allocate these funds for
programming in prevention and
treatment. I would support house
Bill 213 if it were strong
enough to save lives, if it
would
Really reduce alcohol related
deaths and excessive
consumption. Unfortunately,
based on all the evidence and
alcohol policy experts, this
will not help my community and
us doctors on the ground trying
to tackle this already
overwhelming problem. Thank you
so much for your adoption.
Um Marlene.
Thank you, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Marlena Lira. I live in
Santa Fe and then the substance
use researcher. I grew up in a
family burdened by alcohol use
disorder, and my dad died in an
accident after he had been
drinking.
750 mL bottle of liquor that
costs $10 hb 213 would reduce
the tax from a dollar 19 cents
to 40 cents.
HB two and three would make
inexpensive alcohol even
cheaper. Our mortality crisis is
not driven by $500 bottles of
champagne. It is driven by low
cost alcohol.
Furthermore, it would cut
existing do Wi program and not
enable the expansion of funding
for vital public health programs
that are desperately needed.
As a result, I feel strongly
that HB two and three would
increase alcohol related
mortality and exacerbate health
disparities. Progressive tax,
which the sponsors are hoping to
enact, would make cheaper
alcohol more expensive.
generate at least 250 million in
annual revenue, decreased deaths
and expand programs. As a
result, HB 213 is not
progressive. Please do not pass
this bill. Thank you.
Athena.
Hey, Good morning. Thank you,
madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Athena.
Huckabee. I reside in Dona Ana
County. Um, I am a person in
recovery from alcohol use
disorder. My uncle died from
alcohol related.
Um, issues I have had many
friends and family members die
from this and I am a person in
recovery myself from alcohol for
11 years. Um, I also have a
masters in public health and
work in the addiction and
alcohol space here in Dona Ana
County and statewide, Dona Ana
County receives 1 million for
funding for DW I'm and money
annually the director of Dona
Ana County Health and Human
Services Division said that
cutting the program would
Dramatically impact them and not
in a good way. I hope that rep.
Cadena does not want to see
increased D wi deaths here in
Dona Ana County.
Um I further want to make the
point that, um the health
departments have identified a
need for nearly $300 million in
services. We desperately need
more treatment in the state.
Each B 213 would not raise this
new revenue. Finally, I want to
make the point that an alcohol
tax by nature is
Um, never a regressive tax, no
matter how it's applied like a
food, taxes, fruit, vegetables
and food for your family as a
necessity. Alcohol is filled
with toxins that can kill us. I
respectfully disagree with the
sponsor that taxes on alcohol
needs to be lowered on cheaper
forms of alcohol. Um, thank you.
Now we will go to the if you're
on, zoom in support, Raise your
hand and we'll come back to you.
If you're in the audience in
support, please raise your
hands.
If you would like to speak. You
feel free to come up to the
desk. There are microphones in
the ceiling You don't have to,
but if you want to go ahead
Okay. Good morning, madam. Chair
and committee. My name is
Christian. Red Bird. I'm
Cheyenne Arapaho. Kiowa. I'm in
my fourth year of recovery from
alcoholism. I'm in favor of
providing taxes for treatment
because I had tended matched
care detox multiple times in
2018.
And I had many difficulties,
difficulties accessing care once
I was hospitalized for traumatic
brain injury was finally put on
a two depressants and was
interested into the healthcare
system on a full time basis. It
took me five years to She's
sobriety, and it wasn't until I
left the state, uh, for
treatment that I got sober.
Awesome is a health issue, and
it's a generational disease that
was running in my family until I
met me.
I believe finding should be used
based on our communities,
cultures and evidence based
practices and must include
include compassion and care.
Please allow us addicts to have
a bit of dignity when finding
treatment centers in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chad. Members of
the committee today I am here in
support of HB 213.
Heard a couple of days ago that
our proposal was being heard to
up the tax on alcohol. And in
doing so this was going to lower
the addiction rate.
But I'm here to tell you an
addiction is a disease price
does not matter. A person with
an addiction will find what they
need, regardless of the price.
our number one where you should
be getting our families, the
resources and help that they
need texting us will not change
a thing. So I'm asking you today
to please stand in favor of HB
213. What's your name? Ma'am?
Natalia. Okay. Thank you.
Hello. Thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Adrian Barbeau from
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I'm
here in support of HB 213.
Alcoholism is addiction. It's a
disease. I want to repeat. It's
a disease and treatment is
needed. Recovery is possible and
there is hope in recovery. I'm
that traditional new Mexican
that grew up on the smell of wet
dirt, camping the weekends and
family always around. Diaz. Dios
cousins, grandparents and also,
unfortunately, a father, who
suffered
Created in these of addiction,
and many locals who have passed
from it.
He died.
My father died at the age of 54.
I was 18 just this past July
buried my friend of 20 years
from the same disease And in
October, my daughter in law lost
her father. This is not a new
thing to our communities. But
trying a new approach is so
important and largely needed. I
can't believe that McKinley
County is not even on the wi
funding for the current Wi
recipients. We really need to
relook and address innovative
approaches such as in this bill,
Thank you so much.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria. Taylor and
I'm standing here today as an
individual as a licensed master,
social worker. And as someone
who has lost someone I love
dearly to substance Use
disorder.
Um, in his honor our family has
committed to advocate for
recognizing substance use for
what? It is a disease and enter.
Take the lessons we've learned
from our families lost to
acknowledge that access to
treatment with dignity and
respect is a policy issue. Our
family is working with the
governor of Maryland governor
Westmore, who recently signed an
executive order to create a
comprehensive holistic plan to
address substance use disorders
that get at the
The route.
With this lands and commitment.
I ask you to support this bill.
Anyone who has loved and
supported someone living with a
substance use disorder knows no
matter how hard you make it,
they will find a way to use our
focus needs to be on root causes
and treatment. Thank you. Thank
you. Um, I see two hands on
Zoom first we have n And if you
could mute yourself and please
tell us your name, you have one
minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Members of the committee and
sponsors. My name is Net. Dean.
I am a person with multiple
disabilities and disability
advocate.
I am not exactly in opposition
nor in support of the bill as it
is, I am in support of the
continuing conversation to flesh
out the numbers that just
statistics, the costs and the
potential resources that could
go towards reducing the impact
of alcohol injuries on every
front. As we look at the impact
that you're good at impact of
House Bill 39, which removed
many fees.
There was not necessarily an
adequate follow through and
implementation of applying
resources into budget creation.
So I think that the very robust
conversation that the sponsor
one of the sponsors mentioned
about flushing out those details
is extremely important. Thank
you very much respectfully to
the committee to the sponsors,
and, um
To the interest areas where we
need to create and facilitate
change. Thank you.
Thank you, Nat. Next we have
Leroy
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Leroy so and I live in
L. A guy to Mexico, a small
community about eight miles
north of Gallup in McKinley
County. I am a recovering
alcoholic.
I am here in support of HB 213,
alcoholism. Alcoholism is a
disease addiction is a disease
disease need needs treatment
recovery is possible.
There is hope and recovery.
Ah Oh,
There is hope in recovery.
I've been sober for 15 plus
years and I believe one can
sober up through the help with
treatment and communication with
family and community members.
McKinley County needs more
treatment centers are people
come from different parts of the
reservation, and they get caught
up drinking around town.
And don't want him to go home,
leaving family members all alone
back home.
I have lost too many families
and friends.
To alcohol abuse. Thank you.
Support. Thank you.
Okay. That's all the public
comment. We will go back to the
sponsors to see if you have any
Further.
Information to add or if we
should go to committee, Madam
Chair. We're ready for
committee. So I have on my list.
Ferrari Cates Harmony. Oh,
Um Jones and Herndon.
So go ahead, representative
Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you sponsors. We I appreciate
your concerns that you know are
shared in, um, preventing
underage drinking, excessive
drinking in our state because it
is such a big problem.
Um
And
I'm concerned about HB 213
because it would make low cost
alcohol cheaper, and the DWP
programs are already out in the
community.
Doing great work, we might need
to help shore them up. And then
also, um, to cut the Farmington
program. These are things that
these communities and jobs are
depending on and also to do the
work that we need to expand.
And
HB 13 to 13.
Because of your concern with, um
People who are in low income or
have different, um, issues. The
concerns of our, um
Communities around the state is
that, um, we will not be able to
expand the programs that need to
be done by not increasing more
significantly, as in your bill,
it will only increase couple
million dollars, um to
Like $25 million are, um, that
these community groups are
already utilizing.
Um 48% of people don't drink at
all. So the
Poor people in our communities
that don't drink or having to
bear the burden of over $1000
per person.
Because it costs so much in our
state for all of the different,
um, health concerns are loss of
wages are loss of, um
Uh, jobs, things like that. So
Actually having
At least what we have now in
increasing it more
significantly, we can make sure
that the prevention so that we
don't have underage getting
cheaper, uh, alcohol.
And also for people who
excessively drink, Um for them
to go to the less costly
Alcohol.
So by changing alcohol taxes
from a volume based system to a
percentage of the price.
Um
HB 213 would make cheaper
Cheap alcohol even cheaper, and
research indicates that the
price based taxes incentivize
the purchasing of in expensive
alcohol and encourages
encourages both excessive
alcohol use and the underage
drinking.
Um, While there would be a new
fund, um for prevention and
treatment, it would basically be
repurposing the money.
Because you're just eliminating
all of the Wi programs.
And we don't understand. Um why
can you tell us why you want to,
um, eliminate the D W Y programs
that local L D. W y programs
that do behavioral health. They
do court monitoring, uh,
support. They have lots of
programs that are
Um, evidence based
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative for those really
great questions. Um, there were
multiple, so I'll try to address
um, the the two last ones. You
indicated.
Um
The
Praise the
The price of the alcohol will
not drop with the 4% tax that is
levied. In fact, it will. It
will go up marginally to the
costs. So if it's a $6.48
bottle, which you can see on
this scenario modeling it will
go up to $6 and somewhat more
sense.
Uh, the calculation that it
would go down is based on the
idea that the current wholesale
tax that is on the bottle will
be removed, and therefore the
price of the overall product
will drop.
Um, However, madam Chair
representative analysis from LFC
has indicated that distributors
will not drop their prices of
their alcohol and will instead
retain the price that they are
currently selling at where they
have a market, which for the
cheapest alcohol here that we
modeled caliber smooth premium
vodka at Walmart.
Um, that again, the price would
go up the second part, Madam
chair and representative, Um
About research. That research
does not exist on this form of
policy. Um
There is research on this form
of policy. Multiple states have
this kind of policy where they
are taxing alcohol at the point
of sale, Um more than seven to
name a few. DC North Dakota,
South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas,
Um, and in 2011, Maryland, put
in a very similar tax to the one
that we are proposing.
Um Maryland has a wholesale
excise tax that is extremely
low. It's about 10 cents per
per, for instance, like the
barrel, um of beer, and instead,
they levy a higher sales tax at
the point of sale and and
research has been done on the
policy of Maryland in 2017, a
study was published that
indicated that drinking and
driving rates actually went down
because of this policy in the
Addition to gonorrhea rates, so
STDs were also um and analyzed
in the elements that went down
because of the implementation of
this tax.
Madam Chair, representative, Um
thank you, Madam Chair. Um
If before I answer the rest of
the questions, my offer our co
sponsored a quick Madam
Chairwoman, committee members.
Good morning. Thank you for the
opportunity to put this bill on
this morning. Let me let me
preface my statement simply by
saying, I want to thank those
that sponsored last year's
alcohol tax bill with the
encouragement that that
empowered of these two
individuals represented part of
home representative
Ah, Cadena in regards to how we
respond in a more equitable way
in regards to this issue that we
know that we is plaguing our
state, and that is alcoholism.
And so I am so extremely proud
of the work that they have done
in regards to how they have
looked at this independently in
a way where it's not being led
by industry. It's not being led
by advocates. It's being led by
the brainpower of these two
individuals. And how impressed I
am of them.
And what they have done so far
and also in regards to the
process to which they have come
to develop this point. Uh, I
think that they have they have
made it a point to make sure
that their their calculations
their data, their their
sentiments about where they're
going with this have all been
sincere, true and to the point
that is being led once again to
make sure that how we are
looking at taxation on alcohol
is being done based on
progressivity and equitable
bility in this state, and so as
we get to the point
Where we begin to have even more
discussions about this. I'm so
Looking forward to again hearing
all of the all of the proposals
that go to the point of trying
to alleviate alcoholism in our
state. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Representatives.
Thank you. Chair Linta. And if I
might just wrap Madam chair by
answering those final questions,
I appreciate you for raising the
kind of resources that places
like farming to need. Um, as
representative about a Hun
shared in our introduction
before the money gets to the Wi
Grant fund, as it stands today,
it feels the General fund goes
to drug court and goes to the
city of farming tonight.
What we realized and what we
learned over the course of
several weeks now is that
farming today is doing their
best to meet immense needs. But
we also know is that farming 10
is not the only jurisdiction not
the only municipality not the
only county that is serving
indigenous people.
As representative by the hon
shared earlier. We'd like
actually to expand the resource
and open a new way of seeking
distributions or new formula
that would be applicable to all
those entities that are serving
high numbers of indigenous
people We are trying to bring
and tighten the parameters of
that, including that we would
like to
Require tribal consultation and
different metrics to make sure
that services designed for
indigenous people are actually
led and held and shepherded and
stewarded by indigenous people
who have the agency and
sovereignty to speak for
themselves. So we hope that
through this possibility, if
that's something you all, um,
also support and have excitement
about
There would still be adequate
resources for farming tonight
and others like Cibola County,
like McKinley County, like
Vernal Leo, who currently in
their detox program serves over
80% of indigenous people. So
besides the point on the city of
farming tonight, once the
resources got to this fund, six
counties were sweeping 2.8
million off the top. There was
no rhyme or reason for that.
See below and McKinley. We're
not on that list. So we imagine
in reimagining how the dollars
go out, they'd likely receive an
increase in dollars for these
much needed services. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Madam Chair. Um
Thank you for making those
points. Um, but, um, the
Add blue or, um, taxes, um, can
be added, but should not be the
only ones. The percentages that
you're projecting won't raise
the funds that we need. And I'm
glad you mentioned about, you
know, working with tribal and
Pueblo communities. We have
already done that. And we know
that their needs are and
Have a listing of all of the
different, uh, community. Um,
proposals and things that
they're already doing that need
to be continued. Um, and we also
have spoken to all the different
agencies and so a combined list
of all of the different needs to
reduce alcohol use in our state.
As number one in the nation and
bio lot. Um, we have
Come up with a list that would
need almost $300 million worth
of programs by only having your
Pricing addition or G R T at
the point of sale wouldn't raise
Only but another $2 million by
taking away the distributor. Um,
tax. It is now being imposed.
So maybe a combination of the
two would be good.
Would be appropriate and we'd
love to work with you on
You know the two bills together
because I think we have the same
concerns. We've already been
able to talk to a lot of the
different communities and, um,
make sure that, um their needs
are met and also to expand what
programs are already out there.
and then what the different
state agencies including
Medicaid match
Would be able to do, uh,
together and so with that, I
just would hope that we could
work together on this. Thank
you.
Thank you next to have
representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Presenters. Um I first want
to thank everyone here. This is
very exciting. It tells me that,
um, because we have multiple
bills regarding this issue. We
all have the same shared value
that we recognize an opportunity
to address our behavioral health
needs.
And that is very exciting. So
many times we've not had any or
only had one, so I feel we're
all heading in the right
direction, which is a great and
I understand it. Representative
a day Hawkman v. Hill has left.
Can you ask the answer? Um, Are
you willing to put
Uh, Currently she's carrying a
bill that would move a portion
of alcohol text tax into the,
uh, Medicaid programs so that we
could maximize that with federal
dollar matches. Um, are you
willing to sit at the table with
all three groups of sponsors or
three bill sponsors, including
hers.
To roll that into this bill.
Madam Chair, representative
Kids? Yes, I think it's a
conversation that we've already
committed to. I'm grateful that
representative Bachmann be Hill
showed her presence and support
today. Um, as we've continued to
look possibly at what these
numbers are, I think the other
piece just to name in
eliminating the fund that exists
and moving it all to the new
fund, which again to to give
credit to representative
Ferrari and Senator Um
Antoinette City of Lopez. This
this was their idea to create
this new harm Alleviation fund,
One of the things that we bumped
into is that with potentially
two separate funds that we would
fall into the same state of New
Mexico government problems where
we don't have alignment. We
don't have a shared strategy.
There's questions about what
would be possible to pull down
from one fund.
Compared next to the other. So
our our ideas that if if we were
moved, if we were to move, all
of the resources were playing
into the new fund, we could have
more impactful conversations,
including that a significant
part of that potentially 50.
part of that could be put into
the Medicaid match fund.
Um, what would be in play at
that point is that counties with
high incidents of alcohol
related harm and mortality would
potentially have three sources
to pull from if they serve
indigenous communities. There
would be that much money would
be available to them. They would
then have the Countywide formula
that would distribute to all 30
counties with an update like
representative Han explained.
And then, lastly, for the
programs they are running, or
have always wanted to that are
Medicaid eligible, they would be
able to leverage and grow that
that dollar significantly so on
on our estimates, and and, um
depending on how we did that,
potentially we see that it
would. Actually it would
actually leverage what we can
pull into this fund by an
equitable progressive tax.
To upwards of $100 million, so
it would be more than we see on
this F I. R once we actually get
the Medicaid match piece in
there, and I'll just wrap
basing Madam chair and
representative
During public comments and
The conversation we're having
here. It's been stated that this
policy is in fact not regressive
but progressive.
Um as leadership from the tax
committee and folks that have
been leaning into our leadership
to learn what these
conversations and language
actually mean.
The weather, something is
regressive or progressive is a
measure of how you collect that
revenue. It is not how you spend
the revenue and in our state
when, in fact things have only
gotten worse over decades. Why
we're imagining a clean sweep
and a fresh start is to actually
change who we consider tax
policy experts. For me, that's
not necessarily the PhDs or MDS
that zone in some from somewhere
else. It's the new Mexicans.
Like the indigenous and brown
and black people that stood
today to talk about their own
expertise as people who have
navigated substance use, um and
their commitment to helping us
shape how resources like this
could be spent in the future.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
and thank you very much. I I do
appreciate your intent and in
trying to make or create a bill
that is equitable. And keep that
in mind. Um, Just let me clarify
something. So is the and I
appreciate that. You see, this
is a discussion draft. Um, I is.
Do I understand that your
proposal
Will remove the whole current
wholesale tax. But yet
distributors, saying they will
not be lowering the price. They
will maintain the same price.
Madam chair and representative.
We also have some of this
documented and expressed in the
ER. That was in front of you.
Um we live in a capitalist
America and a capitalist world.
So while there were questions,
including some raised by
representative Otto Hahn about
potentially a price drop what
the evidence seems to show is
that someone will take up that
profit if they have a consumer
market based at this price
point.
Either the distributors will
hold their prices because
somebody else is now responsible
for the attacks or if there were
slight drops based on markets
and where they were finding
consumers likely the retailers
would pick that back up.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative. So, um, I
just want to to review that we
are. What is our shared values
here? We see that we are in a
behavioral health crisis that,
um, has strong linkages to
substance abuse. We are
underfunded in that those
programs and desperately need a
revenue funding stream. We see
an opportunity.
With alcohol, and we I hope
other substances in the future.
Um, who the alcohol is not been
justice attacks for or any
significance for 30 years as a
way as a funding stream, much
like our oil and petroleum fund,
our roads programs. So, um I
very much appreciate that you,
um are looking at this and then
I feel confident about bringing
it forward.
Um, I will tell you just for
myself. That is the element that
I am the most concerned of is
where is it going to to invest
in those behavioral health
programs? Um and um and I
understand, uh,
The need for some of it to be in
the general fund, although I
don't like it.
I can understand. And I do
trust. Um, the chair in the in
the in the code in the in the
vice chair. Um, uh, knowledge on
how the taxes should be
structured.
But I, but I am concerned about
it is not a fully fleshed out
idea, Madam Chair my in the I
don't know if I'm in the how
many speakers you have man to
man. Make a motion to roll this
so that we can, you can get back
and maybe, um, uh, work with
other bills that are out there
to be able to present a more
fleshed out.
Proposal.
You can make that motion and we
will continue on with the
questioning.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to make a motion to roll.
Actually, we don't need emotion,
okay?
Thank you for your patience,
Spanish chair. We're all
learning all the time, so we
will go to representative
Thank you for bringing this
forward. Equity. Um, is always
something that I want to look
at. And, um and who is paying
the cost for?
For, um
For health care.
And addiction.
Is, um
Is certainly something that is
very serious. Within New Mexico.
It is a disease. I don't know if
we can tax our way out of that.
We can certainly support
treatment through that tax.
Um, but I would be remiss if I
did not share the concerns of
Sikota County who is saying that
this would affect their d W Y
task force, and, um, and effect
400 individuals We do actually
have indigenous indigenous
population within our county.
Um, with that being said, I
appreciate the fact that this is
a framework that you're working
with and that this has has
opened up a conversation That
has been my concern from the
beginning is who will be paying
for this? And is it equitable
across the board for everybody
and thank you for bringing this
forward so we can have this
conversation.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have
Jones Herndon Pants key
Thank you, madam Chair.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representatives.
Um, I just want to add. I'm not
going to go on, you know, just
just want to
I agree with everybody who said
I know this is a real big
problem when we all agree with
that we need a solution.
To to address alcoholism in New
Mexico and certainly
It's one of my concerns. I'm in
desperate need of money money
for DW programs right now.
And so I appreciate the work
you've invested in. What we all
know is a real problem.
But I have to wonder if this
bill is going to help my
district for several reasons.
Um
I heard. I did hear you say
that. Maybe you can clarify this
madam chair.
Heard you say that the
Funds will be given to counties
who have greater number of
deaths.
Is that her population?
Yes. So the new formula Thank
you, Madam Chair,
representative. The new formula
would essentially take into
account. Um, alcohol related.
That's by your county over the
population. And if you have the
F I r from the LFC, you'll see
that the top 10 include
McKinley, Cibola Brio Reba, San
Juan Socorro.
Um, those top are not
necessarily the ones that get
In the L. D. W Y Grant fund.
They do not get. Um necessarily.
They're not the first six that
get the $2.8 million
distribution for detox, the six
that get it are Berna, Leo San
Juan Santa Fe, Rio, Reba,
Standard Ball and Socorro.
You'll notice that somewhere
like McKinley that has a really
high alcohol related deaths by
county proportionately doesn't
receive as much funding.
Madam Madam chair to add to that
and clarify. I appreciate your
question here, and we're
grateful that the Association of
Counties has spent so much time
with us, Um
Especially as the session got
started to help clarify what's
happening today. Um right now,
after the first six sweep off
the top, there's the county wide
distribution and yes, we are
working with the counties to
figure out what today's formula
should look like. But just as a
note in the 2023 d wi
distributions
Of the money that my county Dona
Ana received. 0% was spent on
treatment and over 70% was spent
on enforcement.
When I saw those numbers, I was
pretty disappointed. So when we
move forward like we've said,
we'd hoped that we could have
different expectations and
parameters about how our
counties actually use those
dollars. Still trusting that the
money could get two counties and
then holding ourselves closer to
that conversation, so we can
just as as advocates from home
are ready and able to do keep
those dollars spends more
accountable.
But right now for last year,
Dona Ana County received 1.3
million again. Zero of that was
spent on treatment he thought
received. 81,523 and Luna
received $172,000. I want to
give a shout out to Real New
Mexico. What we've seen is
actually some of the smaller
counties like Lee County, where
they have an incredible Wi
coordinator have done innovative
things like move away from
prevention.
That doesn't actually work. They
don't use prevention dollars
anymore. Instead, they talk
about community wellness. So
instead of trying to shame or
scare someone into not drinking
they are talking about what
people need checking in on them
and trying to meet them where
they are. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. Appreciate that
answer very much, Um
Was there much thought put into
how this will affect small
businesses. Madam Chair and
representative before I brought
this idea to Santa Fe, I was
grateful to spend time with, um
restaurant owners, bar owners,
Um brewers and distillers at
home in Dona Ana County to get
their feedback. Originally, this
bill is conceived to get you all
closer to a narrative that we've
heard out loud that in order to
change alcohol consumption, You
have to have something that
looks like feels like sounds
like a serving tax.
The wholesale tax was never that
it never will be that so I
actually brought this bill
forward to have, um, an honest
and accurate conversation about
what it would mean to tax the
alcohol purchaser the consumer
directly. I thought that my
folks are going to have a big
push back, and I was going to be
reassuring them that like this
is for the sake of debate. Like
if we want to talk about serving
tax, we should actually be
looking at a retail taxed.
They were pretty open in this
legislation and house Bill 213.
You do see a delayed
implementation date. What
they've said, is they need to
update software technology on
those point of sales systems to
make sure they're ready to, um
Levy the tax beyond the G R T.
Um it is real that that's going
to be much easier for the bigger
businesses like the Walmarts and
Albertsons.
Um I hope to hear more and
continue to learn more with the
smaller grocers, the smaller gas
stations, the smaller mom and
pop restaurants about what they
would need. What time they need
what the cost would be for them
to move and transition to a
change like this, But so far
again, I represent
District that includes Macia,
where many of us go to to enjoy
a delicious meal or dining and
parts of Las Cruces and they
were actually the folks that
first told me there might be
something to this. Let's look
closer. Let's think more
comprehensively. Thank you,
Madam Chair and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. That's a real
concern for me. I'm glad to know
that you've been
Talking to them about that,
because what I've heard from
some of my constituents is that
they would have trouble with
software updates like you said
that would
Charge different percentages per
unit. So that is something I've
been hearing.
Um, another thing That's a
dilemma. And I mentioned this
Madam chair representatives.
I've mentioned this and other
conversations about this issue
that being right here on the
border and you have a little bit
different situation in Dona Ana.
But But, you know, right down
the road, we can go across to
Mexico. Top shelf fires might
really do that.
And I and I I don't know that
the
Uh, cheaper alcohols. I don't
not so sure that
Like you said they may not be
deterred because of the lesser
tax. But I think the top shelf
folks might be on the road and
when they're down there, I
guarantee you. They stopped at
the pink store and they have a
few margaritas. And so I know
that that's unique to my
district. But I have to consider
that, as I consider what's good
for all of New Mexico so
I am glad that you brought this.
I'm not sure that I can support
it yet, And I hope that that
conversation continues and
appreciate it very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair, representative
Herndon.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair and Madam Presenter is a
lot of the discussion today has
focused on the alcohol tax going
into a d wi program.
I am clarification. Is there d
wi program in all 33 counties,
Madam chair and representative,
as I understand that, Yes, we
can count and see if all 33 are
represented here, But all 33
counties are eligible if they
have an active DW I counsel
Whether or not they all have
that, um in place every year to
pull the money every single
year. I'm not sure and thank you
and Madam chair and Madam
Presenter. It's alcohol tax, the
only form of funding that goes
into the to these D wi programs.
Madam chair and representative.
It is the only source of funding
that goes into the state. DW I
grant program and fund and act.
Um, but no, certainly at the
county level. These county
governments are leveraging other
funding sources in order to
complete and implement the kind
of programs that they may have
in front of them.
And and thank you with respect
to that, So that was exactly my
question. Is there are there
other sources of funding that
were that these counties and are
not just looking at the alcohol
tax for purposes of running
these programs, But more
importantly, one of the things
that you pointed out
Was the fact that there is no
coordination of these programs
of the counties are individually
running these programs if
they're running them at all.
There's no coordination with the
state, the counties
municipalities in the cities and
that's what's missing
coordination, a coordinated plan
looking at substance abuse and
and addiction. And so that's
exactly what house Bill 34. I
will let you know. We'll do once
that Bill passes this
legislature legislation
Legislature are
That work today.
All about the water so but in
any event, I'm just your point
is well taken on that, and
that's something that does need
to happen. And just looking at
one source for purposes of
addressing the Wi issue, uh,
does have to be a much broader
concept. And thank you, Madam
Chair for that.
Thank you. Representatives pants
key.
Thank you, Madam. Chair. Uh and
representatives. Um
You know, this is a This is a
very complex issue.
Um and there have, you know,
there's been a lot of
Discussion today about, uh
Alcohol use is a disease. Um,
alcoholism is it is a disease.
But you know for me, I think in
looking at this, you know
poverty is also an affliction.
Um, And this
Yeah, I I think
Your legislation. Um
Is really addressing the issues
of equity.
That we have really?
Needed to have been brought
forward into this discussion.
Um
And to me, you know, this is
this is the Health and Human
Services Committee, and we are
Looking for what is the impact
This is going to have on the
public health of New Mexicans.
And we know that
Poverty is one of the social
determinants of health.
It is something that
Ah bleeds into
Many, many, many health issues,
whether it be access to health
insurance access to healthcare
access to treatment. Um, access
to
Uh, sidewalks and physical
activity. Um, you know, sort of
the broad spectrum.
Um so
For me, I think, uh, I'm really
pleased that you all have made
such an attempt to address
The equity piece of this cost
that is imposed.
On purchasers of alcohol.
Um
I think
I would love to see And I would
love for you to, um
Discussed madam chair and and
sponsors.
The uses of the fund.
Because I think one of the
things that I
Um, well, two things, actually
the uses of the fund but also
the revenue going into the fund
and the amount of revenue we
know the need for treatment,
Harm reduction prevention
services.
Um, the whole spectrum is huge.
Um
I personally do not feel that
the any attacks we impose on
alcohol should be the only
source of funding for programs
to address alcohol use. We
should be committing to that.
Um, as a state in in other use
other revenue sources of
revenue.
Um
But I would love for you to just
address
And and look at, Um if the bill
Does move forward. Um, to look
at
How we can specify in the
legislation.
Some equity in the distribution.
Because that is one of the
problems. I think that you have
correctly pointed out and the
existing allocations to the
local Wi Councils. Um and I am
anxious that moving forward
without something in in this
law.
Um, that that
Lack of equity will continue to
prevail because you will have
existing programs that
Are working well, that need
maybe need to continue to be
funded. There will be a lot of
demands on this fund.
Um, So so Madam chair that was a
long lead into a question about
my questions are, um, Could you
talk about the potential of
including that? And could you
talk about the potential of
Increasing the amount of revenue
that would be available for
health programs.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Madam. Chair
representative, Um so I will
quickly name what? Potentially,
we could look like look at as a
timeline and then represented
bottom Han again. Walk through
the ideas we've come up with. To
put some of those equity pieces
into the section related to the
distribution of the new fund.
Madam Chair representative
again. We did not bring those as
formal amendments yet because we
wanted to hear your feedback.
Hopefully sit with those of you
that we're interested.
And then be able to potentially
bring amendments that clarify
the use of that fund to this
committee. Sometimes we hear we
hear that, um, that comment
about where's the Committee of
jurisdiction? We feel that for
the tax policy piece, we're
pretty clear on what that looks
like, and where we'd like that
to stick for how the
distribution happens and a much
more equitable and impactful
way.
We feel that's your
jurisdiction. So representative
Matterhorn will walk through
some of the proposals that we've
come up with. Um, if if we
could even imagine or wave of a
magic wand, Madam chair, it
would mean that we potentially
would be able to come back to
your committee even Monday. If
you had a room for us put some
of those amendments onto this
bill, and then move this bill.
Forward Chair knife as of now
are saving Wednesday of next
week to have an alcohol day in
the tax.
Mitty.
So if we had the honor of moving
this before word we would like
to firm up and amend this to
relate to the distribution and
where those equity pieces would
become law. And then, um, I
would like to continue the
conversation tax. But
representative
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative, Um
Essentially what we were
thinking is that, um, we
continue to hold the General
fund. Whole 25 million. Um
Madam chair. If I can pause you
on this. I think we've shared
with some of you individually,
but I think it's worth saying on
the record today. Our decision
to keep the General fund hole is
political strategy.
Fundamentally, we introduced
this bill to have a conversation
about fixing a flawed tax policy
and not a fight with capacity
somewhere else. If you all are
advocates pushed to send all the
revenue collected to the new
fund, we would consider that a
friendly amendment, especially
as we would hope you could help
support us in conversations with
the appropriators and the
governor's office about finding
that 25 million capacity. We are
not opposed to sending it all to
the new fund, but we first
wanted to start talking about
fixing the fly.
And tax policies. That was our
primary purpose. My apologies
represented one
Thank you, Representative. Madam
Chair. Um
Yes, and we were to move that 25
million into the remaining fund.
we would come out with with the
Medicaid match something closer
to 100 Million for for our
programs. Um, so the 250 million
continue, or 250,000 continues
to go to drug court. Um, the
500,000 over the course of five
years continues to go to the
research.
On this on this topic, ensuring
that that we are partnering with
entities that have unique
subject area expertise in
analyzing these policies on
gender, racial and ethnic, um,
geographic age, sexuality and
social economic background
demographics to continue the
study of this, which is lacking
in the literature.
Um
Expanding on that we, uh, on
that piece, we did do a review
of some of the most cited
alcohol literature that exists
in, um, that was published in
academic journals and very few
talk about race and ethnicity.
To quote one of the more. Uh um
cited sources little is known
about racial or ethnic
differences in price effects.
That's researchers do not know
whether the beneficial effects
of the tax increases on alcohol
abuse will be
Shared equally by all population
subgroups or whether policies in
addition to tax increases must
be pursued to curtail abuse and
certain in certain groups.
Um, so because we are New
Mexico. We want to be able to
study this and understand how
this tax would affect our
families. The remaining portion
of the fund
About 50% would then be
distributed into the healthcare
authority for the Medicaid match
fund that representative day
Hochman be Hill and
representative Harper have
brought the remaining 50% would
then be distributed to the
substances and alcohol
alleviation, Um, fund that would
be part that could include the
33 counties. The mechanism of
the distribution would be based
on
First that 10% would be
distributed to Indian nations or
counties or municipalities. That
service significant Native
American population.
And then, um, the remaining 40%.
of that 50% would be distributed
to the counties on the formula
that would include instead of
your gross receipts, taxes of
your county. It would be your
alcohol grocery seats tax
because we will have that that
data now and then it would be
the alcohol related deaths of
your county in proportion to the
state of New
Thank you, madam Chair.
Representative. So, Madam chair
again. These are this is the
framework that we'd be bringing
forward again with some
humility, saying Maybe there's
considerations we haven't gotten
to yet or things we've missed,
But it's that framework that we
want your feedback on and
potentially to amend this into
it. We have a lot of trust in
local governments and no people
closest to home can be making
these decisions. We want to pay
a little more attention to how
those dollars are spent and just
to wrap saying one of the most
critical pieces of feedback
we've heard from the counties.
Is that as the dollar's get
distributed now, they're often
received after the taxes are
collected. Because right now
these distributors are getting
their taxes in. It's coming in
late in the fiscal year.
Sometimes these counties
received their dollars in June
and are expected to spend them
down within a matter of weeks.
So what they've shared back is
they also don't have a
mechanisms to use them on
capital projects. They don't
have mechanisms to invest in
more of the substantial
community based ideas they've
always dreamed up of. So one of
the things that we've talked
through.
Who is potentially making this
non reverting so that they could
actually plan more
strategically.
Because this would also be a
retail tax paid every month.
We'd also like to work at
figuring out the pay schedule
back to the counties so they
could budget and spend more
efficiently. Some of what
they've said is we ourselves
don't want to be spending last
minute dollar in these ways, but
it's our only way to do that
Without the reversion. They want
to have more long term solutions
in front of them.
And we think as we look to the
new formula, we can also
addressed some of their concerns
about spending money today.
Thank you. Thank you for that,
madam Chair and representatives.
Um, you know, I think there
there would be likely some
interest in a number of us.
Working with you on the details
of the distribution and the
proposals. The other
And I and I'm really happy to
know that you are you are
working on that and putting that
into
This legislation so that we're
not having to come back in a
year and have another
Um
Prolonged.
Um, debate over. What? What?
That equity looks like, um
I. The other thing I wanted to
raise was, um, in this
committee. We have spent a bit
of time delving into
The public health benefits of
the tax itself in terms of the
specific populations that are
price sensitive.
Um And I don't mean that in in,
um
In any way other than what than
the What is the research? Um,
around the impact of the tax
rate on actual alcohol use?
Um, we've looked at that in a
number of ways, including the
numbers of outlets, the density.
the location, the types of
outlets that can do sales.
Obviously, when we did the large
liquor license reform bill,
there was a lot of discussion
about what is an appropriate
venue to purchase alcohol. What
are the hours where the located
Um, and there was a health
overlay on some of that
discussion. Um, so I just wonder
if, um
You know two questions, are you
You know, open to looking at
that, Um
As you are looking at
amendments, and perhaps those
are appropriate for the tax
committee to look at the There
is a health interest in some of
those as well. Um
And what and what? Quit briefly
because I know we need to get to
the floor, but it briefly if you
could say sort of what what you
have seen about.
The impact of
Chair representative, Um as
mentioned Previously, Maryland
has a similar tax and again
there is a most of the research
is based on the excise tax. And
there is less on this new form
of taxation that has come up
since 2011. That is a percentage
of the beverage. What does exist
is that in the state of
Maryland, they were able to
reduce drinking and driving
because of their tax. Um
5% and I can pull that up or get
you the article and that was
research that was done in the
American Journal of Preventative
Medicine, as well as John
Hopkins, who studied the effects
of the
From 2011 to 2017 the other
states that have a percentage
based taxes don't necessarily
have academic research that has
been done on them. And that is
why I think it is really
important that that allocation
that we have currently in the
distribution that the part of
the funding goes towards
research and our universities
here that can really study this
tax.
Ah, even the research that has
come out of New Mexico done at
the University of New Mexico for
this committee in the past in
2014 did not address race or
ethnicity, and it found that 75%
of the burden of the tax would
be held on 18% of the of the
high drinking population.
Um, what we know, then from
that.
Is that other journals that have
been sighted indicate that for
every 1 million of dollars of
taxes that are applied to a
white population $100 million of
tax revenue are raised for every
$1 million that are applied or 1
million. Um people who are
Hispanic who had the tax applied
to them. $188 million are
raised, therefore possibly
indicating that, um
That for people who are
Hispanic that this tax may not
be as effective and so I think
that the the wholesale tax and
so that is why we have put that
50,000 in to really study this
issue to be able to better
understand it for our
communities.
And your proposal, madam. I
think it's 500,000 a year.
500,000 year did I say
500,000,050 0? I wish it was 500
million.
500,000 year, which we would
imagine Sunsetting after the
fund and, um uh, Madam Chair
representative. I'm not quite
sure I picked up on which
question you were asking about
potential amendments on tax. I
think we're open to having a
conversation. Our hope,
especially with the flush out
the distribution piece. I failed
to mention that one of the
things that we thought was
important and so far not in the
bills introduced.
Is that we would impose,
potentially impose our own five
year sunset, basically forcing
the Legislature to come back to
review the research again. We
can't say with certainty What is
there isn't going to happen. We
don't imagine the prices
dropping. We don't imagine
consumption going up, but we
want to look closer. Once we
have new Mexico driven
indigenous people of color, um,
focused research to see we'll
have very clear data.
Because well, now have. We would
now have the alcohol G R T. We
can see if consumption is going
up month to month. We can watch
that monthly. We can watch a
quarterly. So that is one of the
other pieces. Should we be able
to advance the legislation like
this? We'd like to impose a
sunset giving us room to learn
what evaluate and then see if
this was right. The right policy
or or if we need to look at
something different. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you, madam Chair.
I just have a couple of, um
comments of my own so
I've been on the tobacco
committee for many years, and
what we have learned is that the
price is the only thing that
affects youth beginning to use,
whether it be alcohol or
tobacco. So when we talk about
raising the prices, we know that
we are not going to affect the
hardened alcoholic for lack of a
better word.
Um, but we will affect youth.
And so that's why, um, looking
at the price is important
because we we It's a whole
different story. And of course,
we need treatment for the people
who already have a substance use
or alcohol use disorder. But the
aim of raising the price
Is to keep young people from
From binging and from from being
able to afford it. Uh, so just
just to keep that in mind and
then
I can't seem to find a side by
side of what we're collecting
now.
What we would collect with
other bills and what we would
collect with your bill. I've
heard from lots of folks that
they are terrified that the
funds will go down. And that's
the last thing that we need to
do. So just if you could provide
that information, and, uh
Representatives. Did I hear that
you were willing to roll it
until Monday. Madam Chair
representative if you were
willing and had capacity to give
us some time on Monday, we would
like to really flush out that
potential amendment about the
general fund distribution and
the distributions over the
weekend. If you thought you
might have a chance to hear us
again on Monday, amend more
clearly that equity distribution
and then potentially get out on
Monday
But I will promise that we will
not have, um we will stick
solely to the amendment. We will
not do any public comment. We
will try and keep it as brief as
we can. Yes, I'd like to add
that we also look at the, um
Amount of funds that will be
raised and how we can do that.
So that we can, um over the
program. That's what I was
asking how how much total money
will be available for, um, for
DW I for treatment for all of
that stuff, just a side by side
of this, and it seems like as
was stated before that we don't
really have a good handle on
what this will do, because it is
so new, so it's going to be
hard.
To determine I think the last
thing any of us in this
legislature wants to do is
decrease the funding for what we
know is that
Incredibly difficult and
problematic situation. So, so
with that we will roll you to
Monday. You will be first on
Monday, and as I said, no more
questions. No more public
comment no more.
Going on the bill. We're just
going to look at the amendments.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
madam Chair that we are
adjourned and we will. We will
be back in here tomorrow morning
at nine o'clock.
