Rolled house built 434, so we
will start with House Bill 465
protections for safe harbor
nurses, Representative Torres
Velasquez.
Um, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Oh, just a reminder with the
mics never move them or touch
them when they're on, you can
turn them off and move them, but
when they're on, they may yell
at you. Got it.
Um, this is a very simple bill
in 2019, the Safe Harbor Act was
passed and it is intended to
allow whistleblowers and um
The nursing profession to um
alert whenever something has
come up that might put um
someone in danger and um what
we're adding to it is just a
piece that allows for the
committee who is reviewing
whatever action happened to also
review that there was no
retaliation.
of any kind.
Um, this is my expert witness,
Jason, and remind me, Jason,
your last name, Bloomer.
Bloomer, thank you.
And we stand for questions.
Jason, who are you with or?
Madam Chair, member of the
committees. My name is Jason
Bloomer. I'm the vice president
for the New Mexico Nurses
Association and I was on the
original task force as a
representative for Safe Harbor.
OK, thank you.
So we will go to Zoom, um, if
you are in opposition, raise
your hand.
Anyone in the audience in
opposition either place on Zoom
and support, raise your hand and
in the room and support.
If you'd like to speak, come
forward.
Morning, Madam Chair, members,
and Safe Harbor is a great
protection for patients and
nurses to make sure that their
assignments are safe. This has
nothing to do with staffing but
rather resources, and the care
that is rendered by the skill of
the nurse. So on behalf of the
New Mexico Nursing Association
and the New Mexico nurse
practitional Council. We
encourage.
Thank you.
Any hands on Zoom?
I don't see any, so I will go to
um the committee.
Representative Jones. Go ahead,
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Have you
found that it's been a problem
that nurses have been bullied
when using safe.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, um, this was
actually brought to my attention
from one of my constituents.
And um for that person, it had
been a problem, and since then I
have learned that it has been a
problem for others, some,
sometimes it works out just
fine, but for the people that it
has been a problem, it helps to
have a little bit of added
protection, added communication,
and basically this is a little
communication after the fact to
make sure that everything went
fine.
OK, thank you. That answers my
question, and I'm just curious,
would you mind if I signed on to
your bill?
Oh, I would be honored. Thank
you. Thank you. Yes, thank you
for bringing it. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward.
So what is can you specify? I
know I can read the words here,
but.
What is the added protection
that you are providing.
Um, basically, um, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative, basically,
if you look at page 3.
There's an added checkpoint.
Where the person who had invoked
Safe Harbor is asked.
If there has been any received
uh perceived retaliation after
invoking Safe Harbor, um.
That is a
That is the basic um protection.
And then also looking at um
section uh part D there, um,
where we added or a healthcare
facilities personnel, and just
the concept of bullying.
As part of retaliation.
That it's not OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I too
have had several constituents
who come in I've I've we've
talked about this bill and we
brought that forward to them. I
just want to make sure that
they're understanding. So the
current law says that the health
care facility cannot retaliate.
You're expanding that to make
sure there's not a personnel
within the healthcare facility
that may or may not be able to
say I don't represent the
healthcare facility.
But they too are not, um, to
retaliate. So that is a way of.
Broadening your scopes, it's to
be to protect the the
whistleblower. Is that correct,
Madam Chair Representative?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is one way, yes. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm finished.
Senator Benaya.
Madam Chair, if there are no
other questions, I'd like to
move it to pass.
I'll second.
We have a motion for a due pass
on House Bill 465 by
Representative Anaya in the 2nd
by Representative Cates. Is
there any opposition?
Ferrari, I'm sorry, I just heard
a voice.
And I'm not awake.
OK, so by
8.
8 to 0, you have it to pass.
Making the announcement starting
Wednesday, we will meet at 8:30,
not 8, because we've been such
a.
vast committee were even taking
on bills from other committees
who are overloaded, so.
OK, thank you. We'll see who
gets here first, or should we do
a joke of the day in here.
Anybody have one?
So if you're listening on Zoom
or waiting for a um a.
Presenter, a sponsor to come.
And as soon as one gets here, we
will.
start back up.
go with 437 were nothing if not
flexible.
Sorry
So whenever you're ready,
ranking member Jones.
Oh, and we understand there's a
substitute.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members,
members of the committee before
you, before you as SB 304,
creating a qualified foster care
charitable organization tax
credit.
You should have all the
committees or you should all
have the committee sub. It's.
Do, do you want the number,
Madam Chair? No, I think we're
OK, but I, I need a motion to
discuss the sub, so.
Oh, in unison.
Representative and I am like.
OK, go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair. HB 437 would create a
qualifying foster care
organization income tax credit
that would offer um that would
offer that instead of paying
personal income taxes owed back
to the state at the end of the
year, a taxpayer could donate
instead directly to a qualified
foster care tax organization in
their own community.
11 other states have similar tax
credits. Arizona has had this in
place since 1995, and currently
has more than 500 or we know
that our CYFD system is in
trouble. We believe this is a
creative and proven approach to
ensure direct support to the
organizations in our community
making positive impact.
The committee sub works to
address all of the concerns
raised in the FIR including
Adding a delayed repeal,
addressing concerns about
minimum donation or that a $1
donation could get a 1.
And with me here to explain more
is the expert tax attorney and.
Madam Chairs, members of the
committee. My name is Andrew
Thornton. I'm in a tax attorney.
I work occasionally with
nonprofit organizations, and I'm
here today to express my strong
support for Senate Bill 304, the
qualifying foster care
organization tax credit.
Although I represent
organizations we have.
437.
That's right, I'm sorry, OK.
There's a mirror bill in the
Senate, and I did not change my
speech. I'm
so sorry just making sure we're
not all crazy, so go ahead.
Uh uh.
Although I do represent
nonprofit organizations. Uh, I'm
not being compensated for my
time here today, I believe
strongly that this could be a
solution to help bolster the
CYFD and the foster care system
in New Mexico.
Before I delve into the
specifics, I'd like to give you
just a little brief background.
Uh, I hold a bachelor's of
accountancy from New Mexico
State University, a law degree
from the University of New
Mexico and a mass of tax law
from Georgetown University. I'm
a former IRS auditor, uh, and
I've been in practice since
2007.
This experience has given me a
deep understanding of both the
tax code and the unique
financial challenges that
charitable organizations face.
This bill proposes a crucial
solution to one of those
challenges. It establishes a tax
credit of $500 for single fiers,
$1000 for joint filers.
Heads of household.
Uh, Ghost Mary finally joining,
uh, for contributions made to
foster care organizations.
The seemingly simple provision
does have some far-reaching
implications. In my work, I've
witnessed the firsthand
difficulties of uh.
Applying for grants, uh,
complying with junior money, uh,
one of the organizations I've
represented it had to have uh.
Part of the junior money grant
revert back to the state because
of contracting issues. We
couldn't get a contract with the
city of Albuquerque finished in
time to implement the funds that
US legislature, uh,
Awarded for a program.
The benefits of this bill extend
beyond just the financial
though.
Uh, we must remember the
profound challenges faced by
foster youth, those children are
often exposed to multiple
adverse childhood experiences,
violence, abuse, neglect.
Parental substance abuse or
family separation.
Before they even enter into the
system.
The higher number of the ACEs,
the greater risk of long-term
mental and physical health
problems. Foster children are
twice as likely to experience
PTSD compared to their peers and
those in.
Uh, and we're more likely to
become involved in the criminal
justice system both as victims.
And as perpetrators.
By increasing the resources
available to foster care
organizations. This bill can
help mitigate the long-term
social, economic, and
psychological impact of these
early traumas. It provides
crucial support for those
organizations that work directly
with these children, offering
them a path towards healing and
a brighter future, and in light
of the uncertainty of continued
federal funding and federal
grants for these types of
organizations. This would be a
really beneficial step to the
state of New Mexico to make sure
that these organizations remain,
um,
Supported. Uh, before I close, I
would like to address one issue
from the FIR, uh, it had an
issue that 50% of the budget
allocation, or 50% of the
nonprofit's budget needs to be
allocated to foster care
services. Uh, the FIR pointed
out that most nonprofit
organizations spend at least 85%
of their budget on that.
The purpose of this was not to
provide a floor, it was to
expand the number of
organizations that may be able
to support and qualify for this,
uh, for instance, uh, I haven't
seen their books, so I don't
know for sure, but I would guess
that with the 50% floor uh Cosa
Q in Albuquerque who primarily
provides resources to homeless
LGBTQ youth, uh, would qualify
because most of the people that
they serve are also connected to
the foster care system.
So even though foster care is
not their direct because at
least 50% of their services
would apply to that. They would
also thank you for your time and
consideration, and I'm happy to
answer any questions you may
have. Thank you. We will go to
um Zoom, if you are here in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
And I'll come back to you,
anyone in the room in
opposition.
None
OK, if you were in support on
Zoom, raise your hand.
And I'll come back to you,
anyone in the room and support.
Anyone want to speak in the
room, OK, we will go to Maryland
Beck.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee
members. My name is Marilyn
Beck. I'm the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network, a nonprofit
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care. We
support this initiative. Um, it
was actually brought forward by,
it's called the Foster Alliance
out of Arizona, who's merging
with the New Mexico Friends of
Foster Care, and they have had
this bill since 1995, um, the
Mexico friends of foster
children provides essential
needs, and when Foster Alliance
was looking to New Mexico to
expand their and critical.
Efforts, they asked a bunch of
nonprofits why we don't already
have this. This would create
unencumbered funds, um, and it's
just a really great solution and
we stand in strong support.
Thank you.
Thank you and I will accept a
motion to adopt the substitute.
Who was I
I don't know who was for a
Senator Cortez with
Representative N Chavis with the
2nd.
not
Well, actually, that's on the
final motion. No, that's OK. So
you have a, you have a
substitute.
Uh, um,
So I will go to the committee
for questions. Representative
Anaya and then E. Chavez.
I just have a.
Quick question, Madam Chair, um,
on page 5,
section B on that page. I'm just
wondering why um.
Why,
uh, they need to provide foster
care services to at least 200
qualified individuals just out
of curiosity, what's that
number? Is it relevant in tax
information.
Well
On page 5 line 10, um, just one
of the uh qualifications for
being a qualified foster care
organization says that they uh
provide foster care services to
at least 200 qualified
individuals, and I was just
relevant to tax code or anything
like that, Madam Chair
Representative Anaya, that
number was copied from Arizona.
We didn't, we didn't have a
specific number. It worked in
Arizona, so we were trying to
copy them as close as possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I, um, do we by
chance know how many?
Um, organizations here in New
Mexico.
Madam Chair, Representative
Anaya.
I don't have books and records,
uh, but I have a list of
organizations that I believe.
I qualify.
That I could guess. So, uh, New
Mexico can, New Mexico friends
of foster care, the Heart
Gallery of New Mexico, New
Mexico Casa Association, New
Mexico kids matter, Red Mountain
Family Services Inc. High Desert
Family Services, Mesa Valley
Casa, Mayfly Project, New Mexico
Child First Network.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
Representative, I ask this
because I am thinking of folks
like AMan. I'm not necessarily
sure um how many or how little
folks they serve, but if you
then
Martinis. Um thank you, Madam
Chair.
So I'm trying to find the place
here, it talks about some, I
think it's on page 5.
Foster care services. Can you um
tell me what that means? What
kind of foster care services
your representative involved
that Andrew.
Representative Chavez, Madam
Chair, uh, those are services
that are designed essentially
for normalcy or providing direct
service to children in foster
care, those aging out of the
system, uh, those subject to the
fostering connections program,
as well as providing education,
training and support to foster
parents. So it's, it's
essentially services, um,
recruit, retrain foster recruit
and retain retain.
Recruit, retain and train foster
parents, um.
Providing
Funding for housing assistance
for those aging out of foster
care, for instance, uh, I
believe I mentioned Red
Mountain, uh, they provide, uh
or the uh the behavioral health
that those types of services so
that it helps bolster those, so
maybe you could get some more
capacity in that area as well.
It's, it's designed to be broad,
but if it's supporting and
directly going to those
identified individuals, uh, the
type of support they need is
what's available, and that's one
of the big advantages of having
it go direct.
to the organizations because
their hands aren't tied, they're
then able to move more nimbly,
uh, easier to uh act in
situations where there may be an
emerging need. And thank you,
and and that was um I guess what
I was really looking for in
terms of, you know, how broad it
is because one of the
organizations that you mentioned
provides um therapeutic foster
care, right? Um, and so the
other question that I have, I
think there was, uh, you
mentioned transparency in your.
Um, so what they
Would they, would the
organizations that received the
donations, would they be
obligated to tell us how they
spent.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Chavez, uh, they're not required
to directly report to you, but
every organization's 990 is a
public record and is available
to view, um, that's another
check on the 50% threshold so
that.
people still have to make the
decision that they want to give
this money to a a qualified
foster care organization, and
they're going to donate to
organizations that they believe
are helping, uh, they're not
going to give their tax dollars
to somebody who isn't doing the
work. OK.
And then my other question in
terms of the number 200, that
doesn't mean that they would
necessarily have to provide
services to the same 200, it
could be 200.
Children that came through their
system in that given year. It
doesn't have to be this, does
that make sense? Doesn't have to
be the same kid.
Madam Chair, Representative
Chavez, that's correct.
So then my last question, Madam
Chair, is.
Would organizations that provide
congregate care.
Also be on this Madam Chair
Representative Chavez, so long
as they are providing a service
to children in foster care and
are a not for profit
organization, they would
qualify. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Martinez.
Um, actually, I have a couple of
questions, so, um.
So what, why, why did you do it
this way as opposed to um just,
is it as a tax deduction since
they are 501c3. What do you see
as the advantage here, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair.
The, the reason for their tax
credit is the tax credit is a
bigger benefit. And part of this
bill is if you take the tax
credit, you don't get to take
the deduction.
A tax deduction is essentially a
percentage is that you
ultimately get to claim as the
tax benefit, uh, because it
comes before you calculate the
taxable income. This is
calculate the taxable income and
you get a dollar for dollar
instead of a limited percentage.
So
How does, how do we not think
this is saying that.
Foster care agencies are
different than all of the other
nonprofits in terms of getting
the tax credit, getting some
sort of tax credit.
Madam Chair, this is absolutely
saying that they are different
organizations and that we want
to support them to help support
the children in foster care as
our most vulnerable population.
I'm not sure there are most
vulnerable, but, but, and then
looking at the bill page.
Um, page 5 line.
6, it, it, it maybe it's just me
and it's Monday morning, but a
person who is under 27 years of
age and whose reason for leaving
foster care is reaching 18 years
of age, adoption or legal
guardianship after reaching 15
years of age or reunification
after. So where's the 27 coming?
Madam Chair, that number comes
from the fostering Connections
Act, where we have allowed uh
children who are aging out of
foster care to continue
receiving support, uh,
Specifically the, the children
who are aging out of foster care
or having trouble finding homes,
jobs, financial, so this is to
also apply to the fostering
connection the the.
The, the youths who are uh
covered under the fostering
Connections Act.
So, um, so fostering connection
goes up to age 27.
Madam Chair, I am not an expert
in fostering connections, but I
do believe that to be the case.
OK. Um,
And then uh you said that your
your substitute took care of um
Um, the, the text, I mean the
501C3 regular. So if you look in
the FIR on page 3.
The 2nd, um, paragraph under
significant issues, it is
unusual for donations to a 501c3
organization to generate a tax
credit without instructions on
whether those donations that
generate the tax credit can also
be claimed as the federal and
state charitable tax deduction
for individuals that itemize.
So, have you addressed that?
Madam Chair, that was a glaring
omission that we had in the
first bill, and that has been
addressed in this, that you
either get to take the tax
deduction or the tax credit, no
double dipping. OK, thank you
for that. So we have a motion on
the table from Representative
Martinez, I believe, in the 2nd.
From, OK,
from
so let me make the correct
motion. Oh yes, please, thank
you. So I make a
Emotion for do not pass on House
Bill 437.
And they do
um.
I don't the first one I heard
was Representative Anaya.
We all know how much glory comes
with seconding emotion.
a buzzer game, Madam Chair.
So is there any opposition?
Seeing that you have a due pass.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of.
OK, and representative um
Armstrong is here.
So we will go ahead with uh 479,
and if by chance you didn't hear
4:34 has been rolled
indefinitely at the request of
the sponsor. So go ahead.
Minority leader. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and and committee,
um, my apologies for being late,
you guys were rolling this
morning.
So proud of you. Um, Madam
Chair, uh, committee, I bring
this bill forward, um, as from a
constituent.
Um, who felt, uh, she was
wrongly informed.
Uh, as she took her husband into
the hospital and
People were talking to her, um,
about her options and someone
said they were a doctor, and
they weren't a doctor. She took
their advice, and the, the most
horrific thing ended up
happening.
And so I'm bringing this bill
forward um for her. Uh, she's
had a really rough time.
And so I want, I want to make it
clear of why I'm bringing the
bill. I also want to make it
very clear, Madam Chair and
Representatives committee that I
have the utmost respect for
anyone who has their doctrine,
who is a doctor and so it's,
it's no disrespect whatsoever,
um, in that form or fashion. So
this is relating to licensing
enacting a new section.
I have the uniform licensing Act
to prohibit a non-physician
healthcare provider.
With a doctoral degree from
using the title of Doctor in any
form of advertising or
communication in a clinical
setting without identifying as a
doctor or a specific profession.
And that really is is the uh
crux of the bill and um I, I
know this is a tough one for a
lot of people. I just wanted to
give you the backstory of why
I'm bringing it forward, Madam
Chair, and with that, I'll stand
for questions. OK, thank you so
on.
if you are in opposition, raise
your hand, and I'll come back to
you in the audience in
opposition. If you'd like to
speak, please come to the
center.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Linda Siegel, for a
number of healthcare providers,
nurse practitioners, nurse
midwives, psychologists. And,
and I totally understand why um
Representative is bringing this
bill. We had a bill that would
have, well, it wasn't our bill,
but we had made it better so
that anyone who was a doctor
could identify as a doctor with
their name and with what kind
they were.
If that's uh uh prescribing
psychologist or a nurse
practitioner or whatever, and I
so um so understand why the
woman was upset and we don't
want people saying what they're
not. We want them to clearly
identify on that badge or in
person when they meet that
patient, what kind of
practitioner they are, but the
way this is written, I think we
have to oppose it. Thank you.
You seeing no one.
On Zoom, um, in support on Zoom,
raise your hand in support in
the room. Raise your hand.
Seeing anyone in the room, Karen
Kushner.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
My name is Karen Kushner. I'm a
patient, patient advocate, um,
lifelong disability of spina
bifida, and I just wanna say
that I stand in support as a
consumer of medical services, I
have had many times being
scheduled with the nurse
practitioner when I'm told
they're a doctor, and then when
I get to my appointment, I find
out they're a nurse practitioner
and there's no supervising
physician in the clinic. So I, I
stand in support of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to the
committee for questions I have
Representative E N Chavis.
And Anaya and Martinez, OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, leader. I just have one
question. How would the state
monitor and enforce compliance
with this requirement among the
various professionals across the
state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative, that's part of
the problem, right? Um we pass
laws all the time. How do, how
do we actually police it? And um
I, I uh respect Miss Siegel for
what she was saying. And, and I
think it's really about
identifying yourself and and not
really wanting to police, but to
just be respectful in the manner
of
Stating exactly what you what it
it stands for on a name badge or
something else. Um, I really
don't know how they would police
it, but that's a really great
question. And I would love to go
back and look at um Miss
Siegel's bill and see if we can
do something in that.
Range as well.
Linda, it's your bill.
I'm just, I'm just kidding. um
representative Anaya. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I just had a
clarifying question then. So, uh
The way that I read it, I
actually thought that you could
do both.
Is that not true, Madam Chair,
and Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair, do both by what
do you, sorry, sorry, I was
looking at the language and I
didn't say it out loud, um, that
you could that you could use
doctor, if you identify. I, I
would be perfectly fine with
that if you identify what kind
of doctor you are and not just
say doctor Armstrong, yeah.
But if I'm not mistaken, I mean,
I'm looking at, of course, page
2, line 7, and my understanding
of it, although this, it may not
be clear, is that you can do
both.
Is there, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I believe
that is true. It's really just
about stating the whole.
The whole thing and not just
referring to yourself as a
doctor.
OK. Representative, Madam Chair.
Basic, basically deals with.
The medical field.
You don't want somebody unless
they're a medical doctor. Um,
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you
Um
We'll, we'll come back to
Representative Kate's
Representative Chavez, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. So as the bill
was written, I'm sitting here
thinking about other folks who
use the title doctor.
Um, I'm thinking about
psychologists. We use that
title, Behavioral Health folks
use that title. Um, if you have
a PhD as a social worker. So I,
I think that for me, um,
Again, policing it number one.
How do you do that? But then
number 2, I think that there are
people who have rightly gained
their PhDs and have the right to
call themselves doctor.
I would feel more comfortable
if.
There was language in here that
uh that provided.
For an explanation of what kind
of a doctor you are. I think
sometimes it's obvious if you
walk into a um behavioral health
clinic or, you know, if you're
at the school of social work at
one of our
Uh, universities that might be a
little different, but you know,
in other ways, I think that
there are um times when
Rightly so, all the time,
rightly so, people are, um, do
have the right to use that title
because they've earned it. So I
think a little bit more tweaking
would be helpful. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I agree with you
and and really what I would
honestly like to do, um,
For just to your instance.
If you walk into a hospital or a
doctor's office and they
identify as a doctor.
You think they're a doctor.
Because of the setting.
And so they may, they may be a
physician's assistant, and they
have rightly so can use the.
use the doctor, but, um, so
really, I would really, what I'd
really like to do, Madam Chair,
is I'd like to roll this bill.
I'd like to pull what uh Miss
Siegel was talking about and see
if we can't make it better and,
and more clear, if you don't
mind, Madam Chair.
It's up to you. I would like to
do that, please.
there's there
they're bickering over here over
he stole who's agenda. OK,
So, thank you for, for, um,
taking that step. It's much
appreciated when you see that
there are some issues if you
will willingly decide to roll it
and we'll get you on.
First thing on Wednesday.
Thank you, Madam Chair. As long
as you're ready. OK, I'll, I'll
communicate with you. OK. That
sounds good. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Just more work for you, Linda.
OK, now I've lost my agenda,
who's my agenda?
Um, so we will go to HB 486,
Morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning representatives.
So last session when we were
interim committee, we were in
health committee, we were in
Albuquerque.
And while we were there, there
was something that stuck with
me, and it is burned into my
brain.
And that somebody that was on
the panel had said it was a
holiday weekend.
And CYFD had returned a child to
their father who had raped them
for the entire week. Sometimes
health is really hard to deal
with because you hear a lot of
things with CFD that just tear
at your soul, and that was one
of them.
So when I drafted this bill, I
had that child in mind.
Which was before we released the
child back because in all the
reporting CYFD says that they
don't always.
But some of the times do
background checks and they do
for certain times, which I would
love to have CYFD explain that,
but they don't always do that.
And in that time period from
when they take a child into
custody.
And then return the child back.
Things could have happened.
For example,
The child is in custody and you
run a background check and you
find out that this parent.
Beat the other children.
Or you find out that one of the
parents was placed on the sex
registry because they raped a
child.
Or you find out.
That there are circumstances
that should be considered before
the child goes back.
Now the problem I saw with a lot
of the analysis is that they
seem to say this is a mandate
and it's not.
It's asking that before you put
this child back in with the
parents.
Or if they go to the
grandparents because we have
that bill HB 252 about
supporting grandparents to raise
a child, or before we go to
fictive can or before we go to
kinship, that we at least just
do some basic background check.
We do a sex registry check.
to see if that child is gonna go
back into a home and the
possibility of them being raped.
To mount your representatives.
This bill is just saying that
before the child is released to
the person,
Including child's parents,
guardians, custodian, that we do
this basic look and it's not to
say that the parent should not
have the child is not to say,
well, look, this person got
picked up for a DUI. It's saying
that we should at least look at
everything in its totality.
Before we consider putting a
child back.
Because I think about this child
constantly. I talk about this
constantly.
And that that child, maybe there
was a possibility that we could
have prevented that had somebody
done a simple background check,
and somebody just checked the
sex registry before giving a
child back to someone, what a
propensity for raping children.
This is not saying that any any
way, shape or form that they
shall not be given back.
What it's saying is that we
should at least look before we
give those children back.
Because in New Mexico, as you
all know, we have a very high
rate of children that are
abused. They go back into the
same household, and they end up
beaten to death.
Matter of fact, I can't remember
how many cases I've heard now
and when I was in health about
children are beaten to death.
And heard from cases that we all
see in the paper.
I mean, shoot, we just had a kid
that was locked in a chicken
coop.
I mean, we have some really
horrific things that happened in
New Mexico and what I'm trying
to do is save our kids.
And trying to stop anything.
From preventing another Victoria
Martin's case.
To where we look and say maybe
this parent is not well enough
to have that child.
There was nothing in here that
says,
Because of anyone's economic
status or anything like that.
I'm just trying to say.
Let's just do this basic check
on people.
Before we give them very
vulnerable children.
And
Madam Chair and representatives,
I stand for questions.
Nothing like public and.
So, uh, I will go to Zoom if you
are in opposition, raise your
hand, and I'll come back to you
in the room in opposition.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee, Mikea Betzini
with Bold Futures New Mexico,
and I urge you to um oppose HB
486 as it expands unnecessarily
surveillance unnecessary
surveillance and policing of
families involved in the child
welfare system, rather than
addressing the root causes of
family separation by mandating
criminal background and sex
offender registry checks before
reunifying children with their
parents or relatives. This bill
creates unjust barriers to
family reunification,
disproportionately harming low
income black, Latino, indigenous
families who are already over
policed.
New Mexico's indigenous
population is approximately 12%
of the state's population, while
nearly 10% of kids in CYFD are
identified as enrolled tribal
members. This is important as
this bill could impact Indian
Family Protection Act by
undermining tribal sovereignty
and placement decisions while
also failing to distinguish
between minor past offenses and
actual risks to child safety
instead of investing in
community support services,
housing and economic stability,
HB 486 relies on punitive
policies that extend child
separation, increased trauma.
and reforce, reinforce
systematic inequities. Um,
please, um, oppose HB 486. Thank
you.
OK, thank you. Um, and I don't
see any hands in opposition on
Zoom in support, if you'd like
to speak, please raise your
hand, um, and in the room and
support.
OK, um, I see Nat Dean on Zoom.
Go ahead, Nat.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
and sponsor.
My name is Natine. I'm a
disability advocate and the
point that I would like to make
in support of examining these
issues is that there are times
where someone may not be a
foster child, but as a child who
may be being returned to their
guardian, and their guardian
might have been the uh offender.
I am
Very, uh, it's still very fresh,
a case where a parent
was assaulting the child and it
was an adult child over the age
of 32, and the parents attempted
to purchase a straitjacket, and
if not for the medical supply
company calling for a welfare
check on the adult child, the
adult child would have been
further restrained through a
mechanism that is not legal to
do. Training is very important
and training should only be,
should be the only reason to be
able to use the device that
restricts
someone's freedom in that
manner.
The adult child was in a
behavioral health crisis.
Luckily I did get their help.
They were returned to the parent
only 8 months later. Thank you.
OK, I will go to the committee
for question. OK, Jones.
and Chavez Cortez.
And Ferrari and Anaya.
I should have written down who
doesn't have questions, but so
we'll start with um minority
whip Martinez.
Thank you. Thank you.
Fryer.
This is a chance for
This committee in this body.
P
We need to think about that. I
understand that the need
The reunify families. This is
not about every child. This is
about children that will be.
Placed in the homes where they
will be continually
victimized.
We need to quit playing politics
with that kind of thing.
These people, these poor
children.
It victimized over and over and
over and we need to take a
stand.
My questions, Madam Chair
Representative.
How long does it take to run a
background check, Mr. Speaker
and
No, sorry, Mr. Speaker, I'm
calling you.
I'm, I've elevated you, you're
like, no, I don't want the man,
right? I would, I don't know if
I'd want that rich promotion,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative when I rented a
house out to do a background
check takes about 5 seconds. I'm
no expert, but it's, it's more
effective with fingerprints as
DPS has pointed out, but you can
do a simple background check.
And especially look for somebody
in the sex registry that's
opening.
Madam chair represent. It, it
doesn't unduly delay the
reunification of.
Madam Chair and representative.
I'm no expert on that, but I
would hope that it would just
take a few minutes because all
I'm trying to do is prioritize
the needs of these children.
And we do want family
reunification, but we want to
make sure that we're not putting
somebody into a Victoria
Martin's case where that child
ends up dead.
Or that child ends up raped.
That's all this is about. It's
just doing a simple task. I
mean, sorry, doing the simple
background check and check to
see if they're in the sex
registry, to see if things
change, to see if they're
beating the children, the other
children in the household to see
if now there's a DB where the uh
one of the partners has beaten
another child so that we can
take the.
Take that into consideration.
And there's so many other
avenues that we can put
children. We now have that HB
252, this is probably going to
pass where we have grandparents
to help subsidize them. We have
next of kin, we have victim of
kin, we, we have all kinds of
ways that we can help these
children and put them in other
situations, because I certainly
don't want them in C with Dean
and I've said that extensively,
but I want to make sure we're
just not putting a child in a
situation where they get beaten
to death.
Or get further abused, Madam
Chair and Representative.
Madam Chair Representative.
Uh, does this deal with just
parents or
Uh, Madam chair and uh.
Representative, let me see, is
there anyone in the audience
that's with CYFD today?
Well, that's important. Oh, we
do.
Can you answer some of
Thank you, by the way.
Uh, Madam Chair members in the
committee.
My question is,
Would it just be for parents,
could you please introduce
yourself? I'm sorry.
I apologize. My name is Valerie
Sandoval, the deputy secretary,
um, with CYFD over protective
services and juvenile justice
divisions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. What
type of background check would
it only be for parents?
Or do other
If you're placing somebody in
foster.
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, um, we do complete a
background check upon placement
of any child in CYFD custody.
Yes, sir.
In that Madam Chair, members of
the committee, yes.
Excuse me, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill. um Representative
Martinez asked most of my
questions, but I, I, I did want
to know specifically how long
does it take since the
opposition was perhaps this
would
Back up the system and delay
reunification. Um, it sounds
like it would take minutes to
check these public registries.
Is that correct?
Man Representative, yes, from my
experience doing a background
check does not take that long,
and my understanding is that
that could be done very quickly
and what matters the priority is
to make sure we're not putting
children into a put that child
back into that family.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And I, I
heard something that I, I feel
is shocking.
Um
Is, is it true that that this
might allow CYFD to target
certain individuals.
as tribal members or
People of color, is that, do you
think that that this bill allows
that, Madam Chair and
Representative, I don't think
anybody in CYFD is racist and is
going to consider those things
before placing a child in any
home. I think when a background
check is done, it's not looking
for somebody's race or anything
like that, it's looking to see
if that person is going to abuse
a child,
period. Thank you. I,
I feel the same way that it's
irrelevant, um, and I, I don't
see that anywhere in this bill.
I'm just happy that you've
brought this and that we have
the opportunity to, to give one
more protection for these
children that desperately need.
Us to help them. Thank you very
much. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you next
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, thank
you for bringing this to our
attention. Um, I think child
safety must be a top priority,
and we know that reunification
just reinforces trauma
sometimes, especially for
children who have been abused
and sexually assaulted by a
parent or guardian, so I'm a
little disturbed by the fact
that we have to bring this bill.
So my question is when there are
children that have currently
been abused, sexually.
consulted by their parents or
guardians, are we currently not
doing anything when we try to
unify unify them with their
families.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, and if I can bring the
expert up on how to explain that
when a child has been abused by
the reunification process
happens if you'd like to step
forward and answer.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, reunification is
complicated. If it is a sex
abuse case, well, let me rewind
just for a second, um, Madam
Chair, I apologize.
If um
Reunification is the first
preferred federal measure,
right? But if it is a sex abuse
case that does not always have
to be the first preferred
method. So it depends, I mean,
it's not a one fit for all for
all, um CYFD cases, so.
I mean, it's sex abuse can be an
immediate, we don't have to
reunify, we choose.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Representative expert
witness. I guess that doesn't.
Answer my question. So if a
child has been sexually abused
or raped by their parents or
guardians. What is the first
process or the steps cause you
say it's not always the first.
What is the process that we're
doing right now before giving
them back to their parents or
guardians, if this did take
place.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the child would be
unsafe in the home and we were
removed the child from the home
and place that child into foster
care.
At that time, then we would
staff with our legal team, with
our social workers, and see what
the best plan for that.
Thank you. I guess that still
doesn't answer my question, or
are we waiting months, years, is
their behavioral health as their
counseling is what is the
process before we just give
these poor children back.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, there is a long
process and if the court is
involved, behavioral health is
involved, um, um.
Uh, mental and behavioral health
professionals are involved. We
cannot just reunify a family
without the and currently right
now say it is a
Uncle or aunt or grandparent
that wants to take the child if
this did take place, um, with
the child. Are we doing
background checks and checking
um the sex registry for those
individuals in the family or
guardians before giving them
back right now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, we do. We do a
background check before we place
any child, even if it is a
relative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you
for bringing this sport, this
is.
Just
very disturbing, and I hope that
we all vote in favor of this
bill. Thank you. Cortez.
Madam Chair represented. Thank
you so much for bringing this.
Um
I'll make a comment and then
I'll ask my question in my, my
past life, I spent 20 years
working with higher risk
students and as an outcry
witness and as an advocate.
There are times you can only do
so much and.
I believe that everyone in this
room could agree, Madam Chair
and representative that you want
to see the family reunited. You
want to see these kids happy and
safe and healthy and loved and
Accepted
And it's even more devastating,
Madam Che representative, when
the people that are related to
them or their abusers.
And I've seen this among my own
people as a minority where
they're put back in homes with
abusers and you can only do so
much and as a lawmaker, Madam
Chair and representative to add
another layer of protection to
do whatever we can to keep these
kids safe, then it'd be an honor
to be able to do that today, so
Madam Chair Representative, I
have one question.
And the question is does CYFD
have the resources and the
personnel to implement these
additional checks so that it
doesn't have delays a lot like
Representative Martinez was
asking.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's a very interesting
question, because when I came
before judiciary to ask to give
$200 million to see what it was.
Moved to tabled.
But it turned out there was 200
million of all the exact numbers
that was kind of misplaced in
CYFD.
So when I look at that and then
look at the people that they
already have.
Uh, I'm hoping that they would
have enough resources. There was
something else I want to point
out, Madam Chair Representative,
on the CYFD report.
See where the report says that
most investigations, not all.
get a background check.
That's not sufficient for me.
It also says in here it says all
the emergency custody holds.
However, it also says
That
The department does not conduct
a criminal and sex offender
registry check prior to
reunification.
us from CYFD.
This is the gap that I'm trying
to close.
I'm trying to close that gap of
OK you.
Maybe
did a background check and
checked on most investigations.
Hope you did them on all
emergency, but I want to make
sure that there's another check
done before that child goes back
as like the final step of we've
done all these things, we've
gone through the process. We
just want to make sure before it
goes to anybody.
that we're looking for things in
case there's a DB where the
child was beaten, the other
children, the other children
weren't sexually assaulted, um,
that we looked in the sex
registry to see nobody went in
that time period while they're
in custody, because she for CYFD
report that I have in front of
me, it's not done right before
the reunification done in the
very beginning, but not at the
end. So Mr. Speer and gentle
lady, I'm sorry, Madam Chair.
And
Uh, representative.
I want to make sure that we're
protecting our children before
they take that final step and
our place in a household where
they will be abused because.
How many times we hear about it
in the news.
How many times do we hear where
children were given back, and
they were abused.
And it t's, again, there's no
mandate to say they don't
because CFD has their own
process for doing that, it's
just one final step to say, you
know what, maybe this isn't the
best idea to give it back to the
parent, maybe we need to look at
more of the family members or
maybe this uncle stepped up and
he's on the sex registry.
We just want to make sure we're
not harming our children
further.
Manure representative.
Thank you for answering that,
Madam Chair Representative, and
just as again I'll close with
this as an outcry witness and as
an advocate for 20 years. Never
thought I'd be in a position to
be a lawmaker to add an
additional layer of protection
for these babies and so.
If there's anything that we
could do today, this would be
meaningful work to vote on this.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative Ferrari.
came out of the chair and um
thank you representative.
Yes, um,
to be where you're trying to
address certain
Um, conditions, but
I think it's going too broad,
where even a child who's taking,
taken to a medical facility.
They're involved in a crash and
law enforcement takes custody
for them to go um to the
hospital or um
You know, if they're caught with
other kids doing something.
Any time that law enforcement
has a child in custody, you're
staying with this bill, I
believe that
Whoever they're being released
to their parent or guardian has
to have a back representative.
share and I disagree with what
you, your analogy just gave.
I think it's
Just heard from CYFD, they make
the decision and if I understood
correctly, that's even if
there's a case of sexual
assault, they're making the
final decision. They're going to
look at everything that's in
there and look at anything that
changed from when they first did
their report to when they give
the child back to say, wait a
minute, this may not be the best
decision, or yes, this is fine.
That's not it for us at CYFD
that makes those decisions. So
Madam Chair representative, they
could be looking for anything,
but it has nothing to do whether
it's mandating whether that
child goes back or not, it's
them to take a final look before
they give that child.
Situation and hopefully look for
cases where there was a DV in
the child's being abused to look
for certain things in there that
might affect the house that that
child is going into, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Madam Chair Representative.
That's not what your bill is
saying. CYFD isn't involved with
every, you know, child that
goes, you know, for medical care
to the hospital and they then
needs to be released to their
parent that comes in. Madam
Chair Representative, those
cases that you're talking about
are cases where there have been
abused. It would have nothing to
do with a child being removed in
those situations. Madam Chair
Representative, what I'm saying
is, anytime.
that there is a child that is
removed from the house.
They don't just go off to law
enforcement, stay there. They
don't go to jail.
They're taken or removed into a
custody situation where there is
hearings and and the parent does
get their due process to go and
speak and their situations that
happen, it's not just a cop
decides.
This is going to be up to social
workers and behavior health
people to look into this and
say, OK, we got the initial,
we're looking at the last case.
And we're taking everything into
consideration on the household
that their child is going into.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
that's not what your bill is
doing, your bill is overreaching
and saying anytime a child comes
in, uh, to the custody of law
enforcement.
could be involved in a school
fight could be involved in lots
of different things like going
to the hospital.
And um also if someone happens
to have a be in this sex
offender registry.
That's insufficient on its own
because they could have been
rehabilitated and all kinds of
things and also um.
Uh, Department of Public Safety
says the fingerprints of
background check is what should
be done if you are going to go
through that, not just name base
searches, uh, which are less
reliable.
Also, um, this is uh being seen
as unconstitutional, uh, for
parents and um.
Making sure kids can go back to
their family, um.
And have that reunification. So
with that, I will strongly
oppose your bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I have
a few questions based on the
conversation a little bit
earlier and um if the CYFD
expert would also mind maybe
answering some of these, um,
Madam Chair Representative, I uh
I know the experts said that
there was a background check
that background checks that are
done currently. Um, Madam
Chapresentative are these the
fingerprint background checks or
are these the name background
checks? Um, can you just
enlighten us for a moment?
Madam Chair, before the expert
speaks, I want to make sure that
you understand the CFD report.
It's initial check. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee, um, yes, we do do
an initial when, so when we
received custody of a child and
our first um always option is to
place with relative or kin.
Um, we do a
courts check, uh CYFD system
check. We do the sex registry
check if it's 2 in the morning
and if all of those clear and
are OK, we would place with
Grandma and Grandpa within 24 to
48 hours, Grandma and Grandpa
then have to go get a complete
full fingerprint and background
check.
Um, so it
Initially we do a check and then
within 48 hours, we do a further
check on, um, IRA and kinship
placements.
OK. Thank you, um, Madam Chair
and Representative. I'm
And me chair representative I
can add on to that. I, it was
interesting that uh one of the
analysis said it was
unconstitutional, but then the
next step it says that COFFD
does those background checks, so
if we're talking about
background checks being
unconstitutional, they're
already being done. And also I
would ask, I wish I had a chance
to ask the representative where
in God's green apples have sex
offenders been rehabilitated
cause I have a degree in
psychology and there is no such
thing. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
the reason I ask this is just as
differentiate between whether or
not we're actually taking the
next step to do the fingerprint
background checks. Um, I believe
that's really important. Um, but
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
wondering if there have ever
been cases in which you do both
types of background checks and
the child still ends up.
In a, in a bad position and
maybe being
Abused.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, um, in the
initial placement or are you
saying if we have full custody
and then we're reunifying either
or, Madam Chair. I'm sorry.
Either or either or, um, you
know, I don't know off the top
of my head, I can go research,
run some data for you and reply
back. Thank you. I then your
representative, um.
What matters is is we're just
trying to do one more step just
to make sure we keep our
children safe.
I'm sure. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. Um, the
reason I ask this is because I
know there are also a lot of.
Um
There's a lot of abuse that
occurs, even if somebody's not
convicted of something, and so I
just wanted to bring that to
light. Um, I know that's
something um that is pretty
prevalent in our communities
generally. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, on the
background check again.
Um, I actually had to look up
what is in a background check
because I wasn't too sure.
And from my understanding, Madam
Chan and Representative, in a
background check, um,
A bunch of, you know, if
somebody has minor offenses that
can also come up or if they have
pending litigation against them.
Adam Chair representative is,
I'm understanding that something
else that can arise in the
background check. Is that true,
Madam, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, we look at the
severity of the uh uh the
charges within that, but I just
also want to clarify that if we
do have a kid in custody, and
the parents are working their
treatment plan.
And the plan is reunification.
They must complete all of their
legal obligations in order.
Um, to be reunified. So that is
also part of the process, um,
when we reunify.
Thank you, Madam Chen,
Representative, and I'm glad you
made that distinction because
that was kind of where my next
question was going was, you
know, is there consideration
taken into what comes out on the
background check, right, like.
If you were the victim of
domestic violence, and there was
a domestic violence case, you
know, it could be interpreted
as, oh, you might put the child
back in a, in an unsafe home
when it might have been a while
back. Maybe you don't live with
that person anymore. Um, so I'm
glad to hear that there is
consideration taken. Um, Madam
Chair Representative, uh, the
reason I ask this is because on
the top of page 4, lines 1 and
2. it's not very specific on
How the department shall
determine the release of the
child. It just says based on the
results of the background check.
And it doesn't really go into
any detail, Madam Chair and
representative just
Like, what is that
consideration, um, I know
there's, there's clearly
currently a process right now,
but I'm a little concerned that
if we just kind of willy-nilly
say based on the results of the
background check.
Um, that, um, it could be
interpreted in many ways if
we're not a little bit more
specific about what we are
considering in the release of
the child.
Madam Cha, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee, um, I
think there's two different
circumstances of release, I
think when we receive a hold and
just for clarification, law
enforcement gives us a hold. See
why D doesn't, cannot remove
children without law
enforcement.
Um, so if we release the whole
back to the parents, that's one
circumstance. The other is when
we release when we've had
custody and um and reunify after
months or however long it takes
for the family to um complete
their plan. So I, there's two
different circumstances
immediately when we get custody
or during the reunification.
Thank you, Madam Cheng,
representative, then perhaps um
the question might be directed
more toward the act this
particular legislation.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, if you would
mind, um, going into a little
bit more detail about
Um, the phrase based on the
results of the background check.
It's, to me, it's kind of it's
actually pretty broad because it
can be interpreted a lot of
ways, but Madam Chair
Representative,
I'm imagining your intent was
to.
Um, ensure that there was
actually um endangerment to the
child. Is that correct, Madam
Chair Representative? Madam
Chair and Representative uh
CWOFD already has their process
of how they do that.
And we pass bills all the time
where I ask what is a specifics
and it's always said those rules
will be made after the bill is
processed. So Madam Chair
Representative, there's already
a process.
About how they look at records
and make a determination. One
moment. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. Wrap it up
here, Madam Chair. Um, but Madam
Chap representative have other
states done this, um, the, the
process that you're proposing
right now, Madam Charesentative.
Madam Chair, I understand that's
one thing I did not research,
but what I care about is trying
to.
protect our children and also in
speaking with the expert, they
do have a legal team that they
work with and they make those
decisions and it's on a case by
case instant, Madam Chair
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I'll just
end with this. I would
definitely feel um a lot more
secure in something like this if
it weren't as sweeping, um,
specifically the language on the
top of page 4, -1 and 2. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative E
Chavis. Thank you, Madam Chair,
um,
I have quite a few things that
I, I want to respond to. The
first one is with regards to the
background checks.
Background checks, the
background checks that I believe
that CYFD is doing take more
longer than 5 minutes.
Um, I went through a background
check when a child was placed
with me from the office of
refugee resettlement in that
background check probably and it
was a very thorough background
check.
Um, took at least a week or
more.
Um, it's been a few years now,
but to me it was taking a very
long time.
Um
Background checks are not gonna
necessarily
Um
Provide information that you're
looking for in terms of whether
or not a certain person is a
danger to a child. The only
thing a background check is
gonna, is going to um show is
whether or not someone has been
convicted of something. I don't
know how many, um,
People who are accused of child
abuse are actually convicted.
Um, I would, I also have a
comment in terms of the one of
the questions that
representative Anaya raised
because, you know, what a
misdemeanor.
Also count against a person who
is, uh, attempting to have a
child placed with them.
Let me just say that in my
background check, I've got two
misdemeanors.
As a union organizer.
One of our job hazards is being
arrested because you are at a
political event or some other
kind of um political activity
where I was expressing my
freedom of speech and also
protesting the fact that workers
were being denied their um
constitutional right to
organize.
I also have concerns about the
constitutionality that's been
raised in this bill.
The other thing that I wanted to
also um speak about is that
If there is someone who has been
convicted of a sex offense
living in a home, or if a parent
has sexually abused a child,
CYFD is not going to place that
child back in the home.
Um, and I speak from experience
as a
Former protective services
social worker working in the
CYFD system, actually before it
was CYFD I worked there. Um,
that's not something that that
anyone, anyone would do.
Um, I, I can remember a few
cases where the boyfriend, dad,
sexually abused the child, that
child was not ever placed back
in that home.
The other piece that I also
wanted to address is
In cases of severe abuse.
Children are also not placed
back in the home.
Unless the parent has gone
through some pretty serious
rehabilitation. And then
finally,
Some of the other points that
that I wanted to raise up
already been raised, um.
I wanted to go back, let me go
back to my point of, uh, that I
made in terms of, you know, what
a background is gonna is is
going to um show.
Again
If someone has a tendency to
abuse a child, your background
check is isn't going to show
that. I'm going to give you an
example.
When I was a social worker
working in protective services.
There was a child on my
caseload.
Mom
As hard as she tried, couldn't
stop abusing drugs.
Wasn't taking care of the child.
The child was removed from the
home.
I left the department probably.
A month after the child was
placed in foster care.
The child was placed with
Grandma. All of the appropriate.
Background checks, all that
other kind of stuff we're done.
Grandma ended up ended up
abusing the child. So there are
times when
For whatever reason.
Social workers can't predict the
future.
They can't get all of the
information that they need.
Grandma ended up hurting this
kid.
Badly. That's something that
should have never happened.
But that's also something that
nobody.
could foresee.
My last comment is, um, in terms
of the comment that you made,
Madam Chair Representative, with
regard to, you know, you ask
questions and people say, well,
um, it'll be in rulemaking. This
bill doesn't provide for any
rulemaking.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I have a few
questions, um, so, uh,
representative, you said that it
wasn't a mandate, but the first
line is requiring, so what, what
were you referring to that isn't
a mandate. Oh, that's a simple
question, Madam Chair. What I'm
saying is that mandates that
they do the background check,
and then as I stated, they have
lawyers, they have behaviors,
they have a team of people that
have been working on the case
while that child has been out of
the parents' custody and then
they can further make a
decision. What I'm looking for
is in that gap.
And I agree with Representative
Chavez, we should never ever,
ever, ever in this lifetime
place a child back with a sex
offender, but if there's a long
enough gap and in between that
time, let's say, I hate to pick,
let's say the parent, when the
parents abuse when the other
children sexually, we need to
take that into consideration.
I'm not saying mandated that
can't, I wouldn't want them to
ever in this lifetime, but we're
saying they should do the
background check before they
release that child for the final
step, but the bill says.
Requiring
so you're you're saying they
should if according to this
bill, they must.
Madam Chair, yes, absolutely. Do
you want children to go back to
sexual predators. It's not the
question.
The question is, you are saying
it is up to CYFD and what I'm
saying is requiring does not
leave it up to CYFD saying it
leaves it up to CYFD whether
they're going to put the child
back in the house. I'm mandated
that they do these final checks
before they put their child in
the house, whether they decide
to do it or not, they already
have their rules and regulations
on how they do that. They
already have lawyers, etc.
Look at all the cases. This is
saying you must look.
They looked already, you must
look again before you put that
child back into that household.
That's what it says. So it is a
mandate. It's not a mandate on
whether the child goes in the
house or not, madam
Representative, it's a mandate.
It is not a mandate. It is not.
Would you please not interrupt
me. Uh, no, I can interrupted
all the time by you and other
committees, Madam Chair,
you guys.
anyway.
It doesn't matter you show some
decorum for this committee,
please.
Madam Chair represent your
argumentative with me. I'm
saying it's mandated.
To do that. I'm not gonna listen
to your gavel anyways. It's
mandated in them answering your
question. It is mandated in
there that they have to move to
table.
We have a move to table because
you want children to go back
into homes abused
To do that. I'm not gonna listen
to your gavel anyways. It's
mandated in them answering your
question. It is mandated in
there that they have to move to
table.
We have a move to table because
you want children to go back
into homes representatives
represents what I figured you
were going to do because you
don't care about.
This is not the place for you to
actually to audition for a TV
show, so thank
you. There's a t so
shocked by that. Talk about
decor.
Jesus Christ.
That's.
OK, let's take the to the role
of Representative Herndon.
Representative Anaya? Yes.
Representative Kate, Yes to
table.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes, to table.
Representative An Chavez, no to
table.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes to table.
Representative Jones, no to
table.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Santa Cortez not
a table.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
6 to
46 to 4 years putting children
back
into houses there is no place
for that. Could you please
representative. This is not the
place for that
representative, you are out of
order.
You are out of your commentary.
And next we will go to House
Bill 503, Representative Lujan
is right here.
Madam Chair, thank you for
trying to maintain decorum. I
appreciate my job.
Go ahead, Representative Luhan,
whenever you're, and oh, and
And Madam Vice Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee.
Uh, today, uh, presenting, uh,
house Bill 503. Um, the key
purpose for this, uh, bill is
it's two men current law to
provide the parents
participating in domestic
relations mediation programs
shall have the right to be
represented by council and have
council present in an advisory
consultations, priority
consultations, evaluations, or
mediation, Madam Chair, the
purpose of me bringing this bill
forward is because I
I have myself engaged in family
court, which many of us may
have, may or may not have had
that experience, but many of my
constituents, even those, um.
Voters across the states I've
met through with uh over the
last uh few years in regards to
family court when it pertains to
child custody and priority
consultation.
Um, currently during the process
of priority.
Sorry, ma'am here, I feel like
we just need to take a deep
breath right now. That's
probably a really good idea.
To your wishes, Madam Chair.
Go ahead. Thank you, ma'am.
Um
And so, as I stated, even from
my own experience and, and many
across the state, well in a
family court during divorce
times in regards to um child
custody issues.
There is a process through the
court system which.
You would go through a priority
consultation which you meet
with, uh,
court specialist.
Who will then uh take your
account into
Uh, place and make
recommendations to the court and
during that process, Madam
Chair, you can be denied, um,
counsel.
Um, so what, what happens, I
just let him set this up is the
two parties that are divorcing
and have discussion over.
Child custody.
Would um meat.
With this, um, specialist
individually.
And both have to agree to the
other party having a counsel
with them to participate in
council during that
consultation. Now, Madam, I'd
like to say that that is one of
the most vulnerable vulnerable
times in anybody's life. You can
go, you can go through, um, and
without your counsel present, I
believe that it's, it's a, it's
a high.
Um, risk for those individuals
going through the process, um, I
do have, and I'd like to.
bring this forward from one of
my constituents, um, who remains
who remain anonymous because of
their fear, um, that they're
still going through, um, to the
family courts.
So you can get an idea of what
happens, Madam Chair.
And I'll just read what they
wrote me. I went to priority
consultation and was interviewed
by head of program. I brought
evidence from more than 30
witnesses that I was primary,
the primary parent I brought
evidence.
From
Social media on regarding the
other parent of hundreds of
posts under.
Which there was regard to a rage
in other public posts that were
made of.
About anger, revenge, very
graphic and depicted.
I brought evidence from third
parties, daycare workers, team
coaches, school parents, none of
them friends or family,
documenting observations and
concerns with the angry and
question questionable behavior
uh regarding their daughter. I
was told none of this mattered
and, and he, the other parent,
would not even look at, or I'm
sorry, he, the consultant, would
not even look at it, much less
considerate.
Then when he, the consultant,
asked me to sign documents
allowing him to contact my
daughter's play therapist who
works with her on her ADA
diagnosis, and I was questioned
what would be done with
information to protect my
daughter and therapist. He told
me that I didn't need to sign,
but he would note it in final
report that I was uncooperative.
He was very threatening in
manner, and I signed.
He called therapists, the
therapist and was told for hippo
reasons, he would not disclose
any details of my daughter's
therapy. He noted this in the
final report and did no other
inquiries, research, review, or
considerations. Less than 24
hours after I met with him, he
finalized his report and gave a
cookie quote unquote cookie
cookie cutter plan. It was my
other.
Other divorced parents, which
other divorse parents have
received as well. He did not
take into account any of my
daughter's needs, such as stable
routines limited limited
transitions, etc. and I had to
file an objection to the plan
just to fight to have those
considerations, but
In the order and.
These are the things that are
happening with.
With um parents every day, I
would say, and without your
counsel present and you're in a
vulnerable state, I believe that
there's
There, we need to do better. Now
that you would see maybe some
questions in the report, and
I'll have you.
Maybe answer some of those.
This, this piece of legislation
does not
Advise or require that we have
um.
Ports
Um
For the courts to have council
present, it just for those cases
where it would be uh already in
place. Thank you, Man. And with
that stand for questions.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom.
How come I have to sneeze every
time I talk. Um, if you are in
opposition, please raise your
hand and we'll come back to you
in the room in opposition.
They see none in support on
Zoom, raise your hand in support
in the room, raise your hand.
If you'd like to speak, you can
come to the center, but it's not
required.
OK, so I see Nat Dean followed
by Alexandria Taylor. Go ahead
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee and the sponsor.
Mediation is a very essential
tool, and I utilize mediation to
deal with a domestic relations
case of my own, and when I
brought in the mediator as a
effort to um
Help with the communication
challenges that I experienced.
The administrative office of the
courts and the justice accused
the mediator of practicing law
without a license, unquote, and
shut down that hearing.
That's a difficult experience. I
think that we need to recognize
the skill sets of a mediator and
that that can be a definite
bridge to bring things to a
peaceful and understandable and
compliant resolution. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you, Alexandria Taylor.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Coalition sexual
assault programs. We support
this bill, um, for several
reasons. One, mediation is a
major risk factor for um
survivors of sexual abuse and
domestic violence. And so in the
case that mediation should be
ordered by the court, where
there's already a power dynamic
that exists, um, it, we believe
there should be a right to
counsel to.
protect um families and
children. Thank you to the
sponsors for bringing this bill.
Thank you. OK, any, any
follow-up?
Madam Chair, no, we'd stand for
questions. Any questions?
Represented Martinez.
Thank you Madam chair, a few
questions.
Um
Is, is this
Program. Is it gonna be a state
funded program where we'll use
general funds or
How is that gonna work? Madam,
this, this is already in place
in our court system, so there
would be no, um, the FI, there's
there to be no additional
funding needed. What the issue
is, um, Madam Chair
representative, is it if two
parties go to uh uh a uh if it's
ordered that they have of
consultation, parental
consultation and in mediation
that both parties have to agree
on having representation council
present with them if one
says no, then the other party
cannot have counsel with them,
and so I want what this is
remedying is that counsel would
be permitted, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
You said that this is already
happening.
So if it's already happening.
What's the purpose of the bill.
Madam Chair, representative,
thank you for the question. Uh,
for the purpose of having the
right to have your council
present and not it not that
decision being dependent on the,
the other party, um, agreeing to
it.
So
I'll give you my personal
reference. I was ordered to
parent a consultation. I had my
counsel with me and um the, the
representative of the courts
asks the other party my now
ex-husband, if he agreed to
allowing the council to be
present with me while I went
through this questioning
process, and he said no, and so
I had to go and I had to present
to my timeline in a very
vulnerable time in my life and
which
I feel I was um.
Uh, wasn't completely in my uh
uh emotional frame of mind that
I could have uh had where I
needed my council to be present
with me. I felt judged. I felt
that the report that was given
to the court was then reflected
on that because I was because I
was emotional during that
process, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair, um.
This is
Probably one of the most
Um, emotional turbulent types of
cases and I've, I've had
opportunity to talk to
Uh, several of the judges that
deal with family court, uh,
Not only in the second judicial,
but in other
Judicial districts.
I, I
This the purpose of this bill is
requiring the need for
I my question.
Madam Chair Representative is
what if that person
Cannot afford.
Madam chair, um, representative,
I'm gonna allow, um.
My, my co-sponsor to address
that because this is a step by
step process that we're, um, um
integrating these these uh
These requirements for the
family court.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Martinez, one of the things that
happens in a, in a uh mediation
is that uh
Attorneys are not necessarily
present. And so what she's
asking for in this bill is to
have attorneys present. There's
a second bill that I'm putting
forth that requires, uh, that
says that in every single case
where there's a domestic
violence situation, that the um
uh that the survivor be
appointed an attorney,
particularly in in instances
where they're low income. So
this particular bill will remove
the stigma of saying that no
attorneys can be present in the
mediation. The second part of
this is, uh, that now says you
can have attorneys present. And
then the second part of the bill
will be in every single domestic
violence case that will be an
attorney appointed if a person
cannot afford one. So, Madam
Chair, um, representative, this
bill does not address the the
the court, um, um, assigning
that uh attorney, uh, be present
in paying for that. This just
says that if a party has.
an attorney, that they are
allowed during these processes,
I'm sure.
Sorry about that. Um, Madam
Chair Representative.
So there a court rule?
That if one party.
Does not have
Counsel the other party.
is prohibited from having
counsel.
My, uh, Madam Chair,
representative.
What happens to the process? I
don't know that it, it must be a
rule somewhere. I, I, you
couldn't find that. I did ask
that.
But it is the practice of the
courts to ask both parties to
agree upon having council
present for one or the other
parties, and if, if agreement
isn't reached, then it's denied.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Because unfortunately, I
I've been in a situation.
Similar.
And my, my ex-wife had
Represent representation. I did
not, and I don't remember the
court saying
If one doesn't have counsel, the
other one is, is not allowed to.
So my question, Madam Chair
Representative.
Is it, is it a local thing here
in Santa Fe?
Madam Chair Representative, no,
I believe this is a, this is a
common practice and so either um
party can be represented uh.
Excuse me, represent themselves
prose independently, and it's in
that's just through any uh
course and that's why I have an
attorney with me sitting with
me, so you can rep I I currently
am pro se. I do not have an
attorney, but at the time when I
was going through my divorce
proceedings and child custody,
um, hearings, I did have an
attorney and my attorney was not
allowed to be present with me
when I went to the priority
consultation process, um, which
I feel was
Um, not appropriate, um, but
legal. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um.
Luckily, I don't have
Vast experience with them, but
it, it's a question if you go to
court, you should be allowed to.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, remember we're talking
about a mediation proceeding.
And so what it, that's taken out
of the court, uh, room itself,
but it's asking for the parties
to sit down and have a
conversation about whether or
not they can come to some
agreement with the mediator
present. So that's a very
different situation than being
in the courtroom and said you
can't have an attorney. That is
not true because you can't have
an attorney in every single
court situation, but in the
mediation, the court is trying
to get the parties to agree to,
uh, to determine if they can
agree, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez to an
agreement, and sometimes it's,
it works out a lot better if
attorneys are not present, but
if, but if you want attorneys,
they should be present and right
now, that doesn't always happen.
And manager, I would add to
mediation is one process,
priority consultation is another
in priority consultation, it's a
one on one with the court.
pointed, um.
Representative, usually a social
worker, um, sometimes I, I'm not
completely sure what the
credentials are there, but.
It's a one on one with the with
um each client in in the coin
appointed uh sponsor, um,
through mediation, it's more the
parties together, so two
different processes, but I'm,
I'm saying in this but what we
are asking in this bill is that
parties are allowed to have
representation present with them
if they want I'm gonna ask folks
to be a little briefer in their
questions and their answers.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
before I was interrupted my
question.
It was gonna be
It's, it's a mediation, but it's
Usually court-ordered mediation.
Um, so,
I don't
If it's a, it seems to me like
it would be covered by the
Constitution that
It doesn't matter if the other
person has a lawyer.
It would seem to be your right
to have counsel if it's part of
the court system, Madam Chair
Representative, that was exactly
my question. Thank you for
asking it. I questioned that,
but um because these are um.
These are processes taken
directly out of the court, then
I believe that's where we, we,
we, we are in this um this
different, um, place.
That they're not direct, they're
ordered, but you're not directly
in the court. So therefore, yes,
um, that is a good question.
That was my question, and that's
why I brought this legislation
before you today, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
I know that they usually try to
get the two parties into
mediation cause it.
It kind of frees up the
bottleneck, and unfortunately,
family court.
It's probably one of the busier
courts that we have in the
system.
But once again,
I, I'm wondering if
If it's, you said it was common
practice.
So
I know the rules are written by
the Supreme Court of New Mexico
for the my question is,
Are you aware if this is a rule
put out by the Supreme Court or
is it just
Accepted
Madam representative, I, I
would.
I would go back and um try to
investigate that with you if you
would, because I don't know at
this moment. I just know that it
is the common practice, and I've
talked to different um
individuals across the state,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
If, if it is a court rule, I
think it's, I think it's
important to
Remedy that situation.
Representative, thank you, thank
you for the answers. Thank you.
I appreciate that.
Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
thank you representatives for
bringing this forward. Um, I've
been a supporter of the victims'
rights projects, which helps
with especially um domestic
violence um victims, and I was
wondering will um crime victims
reparation be able to under that
project or other funding be able
to support this.
Madam chair, members of the
committee, the answer is yes, we
hear it from Alexander Taylor,
for example, is one of the, who
is the uh I think the executive
director of the sexual assault
coalition. So yes, they do.
Support this.
Madam Chair, I mean funding
support. There's no, there,
there isn't any funding required
at this time since it's already
um practiced in. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, Representative.
Eleanor Chavez. Madam Chair,
move would do pass. I'll second.
We have a most a motion for do
pass on HB 503 by Representative
E. Chavez in a second by
representative Ferrari, Karen,
can you take the role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E Chavez. Yes.
Representative in Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez.
And a vice chair? Yes. Madam
Chair, yes. 8 to 0 by a vote of
8 to 0, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all committee members. Thank
you. And since I see
Representative Bloch and not
Representative Armstrong will go
ahead with 460.
Which chair is the lucky chair?
Should I move over here or?
Oh, back there.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thanks for popping me at the top
of your agenda. I'm very happy
for that. So,
I have House Bill 460, and this
bill is pretty straightforward,
so I come to before you today to
present this bill designed to
empower local communities in New
Mexico by giving them greater
control over their taxation
policies regarding alcohol. So
this legislation repeals the
liquor excise tax on the state
level, allowing for shift away
from the blanket state-imposed
tax structure and instead
granting local jurisdictions.
The authority to determine if
and how they would want to be
taxed within their own
communities. And so I think
that's probably a better, better
way to do it. So the argument
that higher alcohol taxes
inherently leads to lower
alcohol-related harms is
actually objectively false,
according to peer-reviewed
studies. According to peer
reviewed research and scientific
studies, uh, a UNM study, for
example, just a couple of years
ago on alcohol policy.
It found that while there may be
correlations between alcohol
consumption and various societal
harms.
There is no definitive
statistical significant evidence
that increased alcohol taxes
reduce alcohol-related
fatalities or harm in New
Mexico.
Additionally, the study found
that migration of liquor taxes
within the state had no
statistical significant effect
on alcohol-related fatalities on
the local level, and that's page
3 of UNM's report, which I'm, I,
I'd be happy to email everybody.
So, this calls into question the
effectiveness of a broad alcohol
taxation strategy in addressing
public safety concerns.
It's important to note that this
bill does not advocate in any
way for increased alcohol
consumption, nor does it absolve
individuals of their
responsibilities associated with
alcohol use.
Instead, it allows local
communities to tailor policies
to their specific needs rather
than relying on local
communities or.
Rather than relying on one size
fits all approaches that show no
clear benefit in reducing
alcohol-related harms.
New Mexico has some of the
highest alcohol-related fatality
rates in the country.
Despite having excise taxes in
place that are on the higher
end.
For example, New Mexico has one
of the highest excise tax rates
on wine, which is 5th in the
nation.
And it has the 10th highest
alcohol excise tax rate in the
nation according to the tax
foundation.
The evidence suggests that a
more effective strategy would be
focusing on treatment,
prevention and education rather
than continuing to rely on a
taxation model that is not
yielded the intended results.
Syntaxes clearly do not work,
and they have no effect on
decreasing alcohol harms
whatsoever in any way, shape, or
form.
I urge the committee to support
HB 460 and a return
decision-making power to local
communities.
And uh I would just note number
one right now, local communities
currently do have the power to
levy these taxes, the only
county in the state that has
levied these taxes is um, I
believe it's
McKinley County and they put a
5% tax rate on alcohol. Despite
that, they have nearly double or
triple the number of
alcohol-related deaths in the
entire state. So there is no
correlation with higher
taxation. So I will just leave
it there and I can't wait to
answer all of your questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Um, online in opposition,
please raise your hand in the
room in opposition.
OK, seeing no one in the room
will go to Joan Dickerson.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is Joan
Dickerson. I'm with the Veterans
and Military Families Caucus, a
caucus of over 560 members
statewide.
We respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill. Uh,
this tax, uh, provides
significant funds for County DWI
programs, and as has been
stated, New Mexico is highest in
alcohol-related deaths.
DWI is a contributing factor to
many of these deaths, and the
DWI programs uh do help
alleviate DWI in the state of
New Mexico. We respectfully
stand opposed to this bill and
hope that you will as well.
Thank you.
Thank you
Anyone in the on Zoom and
support.
Anyone in the room in support.
Case
Singan, I just um just did a
quick Google, um, let me see if
I can find it.
Basically, ah, where is it?
Um, this is an article in the
American Journal of Preventative
Medicine.
It says meta-analysis of 50
publications found that doubling
the alcohol excise tax would
reduce alcohol-related
mortality.
By an average of 35% traffic
crash deaths by 11%, sexually
transmitted infections by 6%
violence by 2% and crime by
1.4%. So just, just noting that
there are
That you, there's data and
there's data and there's data.
So with that, I will go first to
Representative Ferrari, then
Kates.
Then Martinez, then Senna
Cortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, um, this,
um, opposes everything that
well, like Madam Chair, just
pointed out the CDC and DOH and
other epidemiologists studying
alcohol-related deaths that it
is the number one way to reduce
um alcohol harms in our state
and since we are 2.5 times the
national average and also close
to 2.
1000
people die every year to alcohol
related, um,
Uh
Causes
That this is, you know, going to
set us back instead of helping
us go forward. It's very um.
Going to help businesses just a
tiny bit, but it the loss of uh
income to the local DWI groups,
um,
which we hope to expand and get
more funding as um alcohol harms
alleviation counsels to address
some of the other things you
said were important
environmental issues are very
important too, but um the tax
itself does have a reduction of
consumption to a degree and then
also provides the funding that
we need um to pro um provide
those programs. So with that,
Madam Chair, um, I
Strongly oppose this bill.
Thank you, Nick, we have
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this forward. Um,
Where does the excise tax go
now? Does it go to local
communities?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Good question.
So, currently, it's kind of
chopped up in a few different
places. Most of it though, it
goes to something that was
instituted in 1999.
And that goes mainly to certain
programs relating to DWI
prevention and some court
services, and since those have
been put into place since 1993,
rather, uh, we have seen a huge
increase actually in
alcohol-related harms. Since
1993, I have a graphic here. Let
me find it. And the graphic
shows that since it was
instituted a few years back,
well, maybe more than a few
years, maybe about.
30 years back that we've
actually significantly increased
our number of harms. So
according to this, Madam Chair
and Representative, uh, we were
at 39.3 deaths per 10,000 in
1994 after the enactment of
that. And since then, uh, in
2020, it peaked to 86.8, despite
these programs, and that was a a
large trending factor upward.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. Um,
and that is a very
narrow interpretation of
statistics, such as it doesn't
tell me how the population has
increased or any other factors.
I could say this pencil keeps
elephants away because there's
no elephants in this room, but
is that really a correct line of
uh of of uh logic. I wanted to
make sure is the majority and I
really don't know the majority
of the access, the excise taxes
go into these programs, or does
the
majority go into the general
fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So it's split
up. So, I believe a majority
does go into these programs. I,
I believe according to the bill
that was passed in '93, I
believe it was about 2.5 million
annually than there were a very
small amount that went to
counties. We're holding counties
harmless on this, so the rest of
that would go to the general
fund, and I believe it's
somewhere around 30 to 50
million, if I'm not mistaken,
according to the FIR.
that I read for the bill, but
let me find that real quick for
you. I don't want to answer your
question with incorrect
information and thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you where you're
looking at up.
I'm just trying to figure out
that, you know, we've have taxes
on gas to pay for roads.
And your bill is, is having the
counties decide the excess tag,
but the counties aren't
receiving.
The taxes. So I'm not really
sure how why are they making the
decision on attacks that is a
broad.
Um
A broad statewide issue that we
use that tax to address such as
these programs, like we use the,
the, the, the taxes I pay on gas
in my neighborhood. Don't go to
just my neighborhood roads. It
goes to the roads throughout the
state.
correctly, I, I'm so sorry,
madam Chair representative. Did
you work with this with a, I
don't know, somebody from the
tax, are you on the tax
committee? Somebody on the tax
committee or somebody who
attacks expert, Madam Chair
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative, uh, no, I
do not sit on the tax committee.
I did speak with some
economists, and I did speak to
the drafter who helped me draft
the bill, uh, but.
I didn't speak to the entire tax
committee and as in that point
regarding the the actual
counties. So instead of the
state levying these taxes, we
will be empowering counties to
levy whatever taxes they so
require, and they're they
currently are allowed to do
that, but instead of the state
taking that portion, it would
empower the counties to be
getting all that tax revenue and
then targeting those programs
directly to their counties to
ensure that the alcohol harms in
the counties are actually being
benefited by alleviating those.
With local, very, uh, very.
Very localized.
Programs, which I think probably
would be a better option in my
opinion.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. Um, this is
a very complex issue that I look
forward to having many
conversations with you,
Representative, but at this
version, I can't support it this
time, but thank you.
Minority whip Martinez, followed
by Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you, Madam chair.
Representative block, um, I
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
And I appreciate the
introduction.
Very informative.
Uh, do you know?
A few years ago, this body voted
to outlaw what they call
miniatures.
And
In your opinion, has that
stopped?
Drinking
Because the information that I
have from local law enforcement
is that people just buy
The next larger size.
I I was in the building when
this argument was happening.
It's going to solve the problem,
people were not going to drink
and drive.
I've heard from the other side
that drinking and driving us
through the roof.
Um
You can't tax your way out of a
problem.
Madam Chair, Representative, do
you agree with that?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, I agree with you
and I have a few scientific
studies that I would love to
share with you quickly. So
according to the New Mex or I'm
sorry, the National Institutes
of Health. There's a study that
was done in 2013 that shows that
across the entire country,
they've looked at these.
different taxes that have been
levied. After these taxes were
levied.
There was no significant.
Statistical information proving
that they had any effect
whatsoever. In some cases, they
actually had the opposite
effect.
For example, Madam Chair and
Representative in the state of
Rhode Island. They have some of
the lowest taxes on alcohol in
the entire country, and they
also have some of the lowest
alcohol harm rates. And so when
we're looking at taxation to try
to fix a problem, we also have
to understand that when it comes
to, for example, banning
miniature bottles of alcohol.
People are just probably from my
thought process going to just
buy the bigger, cheaper bottle
of alcohol, and so it actually
potentially could exacerbate the
problem, and there are other
studies that I, I, I would love
to talk with you guys about. I
have some from the tax policy
Institute. There's another one
from economy analysis and
Policy, and all the, all these
studies that I'm referencing,
these are peer reviewed studies.
And so there are scientists,
economists who look at the data
and have seen, there's no
significant
statistical helpfulness of any
of these bills that have
increased taxes, and so when it
comes to doing that, we look at
New Mexico, 10th highest tax
rate in the nation, excise tax
on alcohol, and we have the
highest alcohol harm rates, and
especially in that county,
McKinley County, that has a 5%
extra tax on top of that. They
have double and triple the
average New Mexico county's harm
rate. So it's clearly not
working. And so,
taxing our way out of the
problem, not only harms.
The bottom line when it comes to
businesses, but actually it it
taxes and hurts the poorest New
Mexicans who may just want to
have a beer once in a while, and
I'm sure as heck not going to
keep that luxury, unfortunately
now from my constituents, Madam
Chair Representative.
I chair representative block,
thank you, you, you are always
very prepared, and I appreciate
that.
Um, in, in your opinion,
Madam chair
Um, if your bill does not pass.
Or, or let me rephrase that,
Madam Chair Representative.
You feel that the, the raising
taxes on liquor across the board
is regressive. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, and I
do. I believe it is regressive.
And so in preparation for this,
I, I've done a lot of research
to see
Where we are as a state versus
the country, because I know when
it comes to New Mexico.
Our state is very different,
where the land of enchantment,
of course, but
We're not monolithic. All states
are not monolithic. So you have
to look at the data, and the
only data that I was looking at,
that I could see from UNM. They
had a recent study in 2023, and
according to that study.
The, the alcohol-related crime
is not necessarily affected with
alcohol. There may have been
alcohol involved, but it wasn't
actually associated with the
alcohol that caused that crime.
And so that study said alcohol
is associated with a num
numerous other types of crime,
including grand larceny, sexual
assault, but, but it's it it's
only one factor is what UNM
says. So, that is not conclusive
evidence. We always hear, well,
there is total evidence that
says this happens when this
happens. And
So when we also look at other
studies from across the country.
Uh, and the UNM study again
talks about binge drinking. So
regarding binge drinking, it
says it has absolutely no effect
whatsoever, according to the UNM
study that was just done in
2023. It also talks about when
we're moving these alcohol
licenses from one county to the
next, and there's more licenses
in one county, that study found
Inconclusive that there was any
effect whatsoever to any kind of
increase in alcohol harm. So
when we're looking at the actual
data that we do have, and we're
looking nationally. We have to
be very holistic when it comes
to what that data says.
What it doesn't say
And not finding conclusions that
just are not there.
Madam Chair representative.
Um
It's always a learning
experience talking to you.
Um
Madam Chair Representative.
If we raise taxes, we continue
to raise taxes.
Um
Representative, this is about
cutting taxes, not raising. So
if we could stay just on the
bill.
That's it, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I have some
questions.
My first one is, so would
repealing the liquor excise tax
lead to more excessive drinking
and alcohol-related harm.
That seems to be the big
Debate here. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative, and yeah, I
think that is kind of the crux
of the debate that we've been
having over at least this
committee hearing. So the
argument that that increased
alcohol taxes reduces alcohol
related harm is just not
strongly supported by the data
and specifically to New Mexico.
So the UNM study explicitly
states that despite recent
increases in the total number of
liquor licenses I'm quoting
right now. Uh, there has not
been a statistically significant
increase.
An alcohol-related traffic
fatalities at the city has to do
with.
The tax with repealing the tax,
not number of liquor licenses.
OK, and so I'll continue on
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Appreciate you for swerving me
in, in the right direction. So
the study also found other
things that I can definitely
talk to you more about, but
I would just note once again, in
the case of McKinley County,
they have that 5%.
Added tax that retailers pay,
which then goes to the consumer,
and it has the highest
alcohol-related death rate in
the state at 205.4 per 100,000
people. And so we're talking
about per capita, so what we're
looking at when we lose
population, for example, it
still is, is shifted. The
numbers are shifted by per 10 or
100,000 people. So there is no
statistical significance
whatsoever, at least in the
state of New Mexico, and then
nationally with those other
studies.
that I referenced that show that
there is any kind of increase in
alcohol harms when you uh remove
such taxes. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative, and
with this bill make alcohol more
affordable and increase underage
drinking.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So,
I, I actually had that same
question, and I was looking it
up because I wanted to know, OK,
with this out actually increase?
The this drinking of underage
kids, and the studies that I
found, they, they showed no,
absolutely not. So, uh, Andre's
drinking is primarily influenced
by parental control.
cultural factors and enforcement
of drinking laws rather than
taxation, so that UNM study says
binge drinking rates are lower
than national averages, but
continues to have the highest
per capita alcohol-related
deaths in the nation. So I think
it's, it's definitely one of
those issues that we can't
pinpoint to a specific thing,
but it is all kinds of other
factors that go into it when it
comes to cultural and parental
controls and enforcement of
drinking laws. So, uh, this
suggests, according to the
research.
uh, that other than price, such
cultural drinking habits and
enforcement are primarily
contributors to alcohol-related
harms for youngsters.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. I do have
another question. So how do
other states handle alcohol
taxation and regulation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. That's a really
good question. And so I have
lists here that I, I, I'd love
to go in, but I'm gonna be as
short as possible, Madam Chair.
And so when it comes to these
other states that have these
taxes, we see a majority of
these states.
A lot of them have lower taxes
than we do.
So, when we're talking about
specific states, I have a list
here.
So if we see New Hampshire,
Maine, Rhode Island, Vermont.
And a few other states, they
have some of the lowest taxes,
but they also have some of the
lowest fatality rates and
alcohol harms rates in the
country. So New Hampshire,
they're, they're ranked
forty-fourth when it comes to
that. Uh, they also have the
forty-eighth lowest tax rate in
Maine is forty-ninth lowest tax
rate. They have the
forty-seventh lowest alcohol
harms. Rhode Island 50th in tax
rate and forty-ninth in alcohol
harms. So some, some people
would claim that we are not,
there's there's no.
correlation, which equals
causation, but the data, at
least from my perspective, it
does indeed show that the higher
the taxes, do not make
necessarily an effect on the
lower the alcohol harms are in
those respective states.
Representative Senator Cortez on
page 33 of the FIR, there is a
state ranking table at the top
of that page so you can see what
we look, we can, how we compare
to our surrounding states.
Perfect. Thank you so much. I
just have one more question,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Would eliminating the tax hurt
any of the lower income
communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So no, it
wouldn't. It actually would
empower these lower income
communities by not having this
arbitrary tax on them. So the
bill, it does strip some
statute.
Language. So I, I would be happy
to go into what the specific
taxes are per drink, because I
believe we use leader in New
Mexico, and so there's different
ones for wine, there's different
ones for for beer. There's
different ones for spirits, and
so when it comes to this
legislation, this would actually
make it less expensive or lower
income people, and it also would
be something that could help
benefit economies, because we
don't want these arbitrary taxes
and also your county would.
Be the sole authority on how
many taxes are being levied on
you. So the actual citizen in
those counties would have an
even stronger voice in talking
to their local communities and
saying we want either lower
taxes or higher taxes. And so
those low income families, they
would have a better seat at the
table when it comes to actually
making those policies for
whatever that tax rate may be.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
representative. That concludes
my questions.
Thank you. I just have a couple
of statements, so, and you
stated studies, I could go study
to study with you, that, that
it's just the opposite. Having
sat and cheered on uh tobacco
committee, we have learned
through the years, through a
dictionologist that uh that the
one thing that affects you use
of tobacco as well as alcohol is
priced.
The more expensive it is for
them, the less likely they're
going to do it and the less
likely they're going to be binge
drinkers. So indeed raising
taxes is the only way that we
can have any control over price
and correlation, you, you talked
about the studies where certain
things happened or didn't
happen, correlation does not.
Me causation. Two things happen
at at the same time doesn't mean
that one caused the other. So
with that I will
uh check the motion would I be
able to just respond to that.
Oh, thank you. So according to
the NIH study, which I'd be
happy to email you. So it said
here, um,
Only 3 out of 18 studies that
they were looking at a youth
reported a significant negative
effect of prices on measures of
binge drinking, and only 8 of 19
studies of young adults reported
significant results for one or
more genders. Also, I will note
that alcohol is not legally
purchased currently by youth, so
I don't understand how that
could in any way affect it,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair moved for a due
pass. I mean, I'm sorry, moved
to table.
Second
Representative Anaya.
Yes, to table.
Representative Kate.
Yes detail.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes the table.
Representative in Chavez.
No.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes to table. Representative
Jones, no to table.
Representative Martinez? No.
Representative Santa Cortez, not
a table.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
6 to 4 you bill has been taken.
Thank you for the riveting
discussion, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Uh, next we will have
Representative Dao, who's here
on House Bill 446 parental leave
and fund. So whenever you're
ready.
OK
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members of the
committee. Um, I think you're
pretty familiar with the bill
because we did debate it for 3
hours during House Bill 11. This
was the substitute that had the
smaller rollout, so basically
this bill um creates uh.
6 weeks of paid maternity leave
for all families at the birth of
a child when they adopt and for
first time foster and rather
than having a tax on employees
or employers just as the IRS
defined it, um, this takes.
Based on the sponsor of House
Bill 11's estimates about 19
million from the early childhood
fund of which we are earning
$500 million in interest a year.
So this is a couple of reasons.
We, we know that the employees
and employers when they talk to
us about House Bill 11, and it's
not either or we can do this as
well, their main concern is the
figuring out the workforce gap.
The qualified workforce gap and
where, where to find those subs,
how to have them trained on call
and on standby.
So this gives us an opportunity
to do a pilot rollout
recognizing that children learn,
uh, the the the bonding and the
critical time that parents have
with their children have with
their parents when they're first
introduced to a home as a
critical time of growth and
development. So it allows for 6
weeks to come from the early,
early childhood fund, an
additional 3 weeks from the
family if they choose to
voluntarily opt in. Anybody who
wants to choose to opt in, and
then it allows for, uh, you
know, paid, paid sick leave can
be used.
on top of it. So it gets us to
the 12 weeks, which is what um
Has been suggested as best
practices. And so I know that
House Bill 11 is headed to the
Senate. We don't know the how
that will, will, um, pan out if
there will be amendments, but I
still believe that even if uh a
compromise is made in this way,
that using the early childhood
fund for the maternity paternity
adoption and fostering is a
better option than taxing the
families, the businesses, the
employees that are
participating.
So if this bill moves forward,
it's probably likely it will be
tabled in appropriations that
will, it will show that this
body is committed to paternity
maternity leave and uh wouldn't
require an emergency, uh, dummy
bill to be introduced to
proceed.
And with that, I'll stand with
questions.
And we will go to Zoom if you
are in opposition, raise your
hand.
I'll come back to you in the
room in opposition.
If you'd like to speak, please
come to the center.
I will take up to 10 for 1
minute each.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Tracy McDaniel, and I'm
the policy director with
Southwest Women's Law Center.
My parents moved to be closer to
me in 2019, around the time I
began working on a comprehensive
pay family medical leave
campaign. The day after Memorial
Day in 2024, my dad called and
told me that he was going to
going to call an ambulance
because my mother wasn't doing
well.
I met them at Presbyterian,
where she was admitted while we
were there, I continued working.
I would step out into the
hallway to take a Zoom meeting
and tell my dad to text if the
doctor came in. We were a team.
9 days later, the nurses were
prepping my mom for transport to
hospice. She told me, I wanted
to move here because I knew I
wasn't gonna be around long, and
I knew that you would take good
care of your father. I made a
promise that Friday. By Monday,
she was gone. 12 days from
admission to death and.
Every minute, every second of
that was precious, but when I'm
here keeping my promise to my
dad, there won't be somebody
else to text me when the doctor
comes in.
Please vote no on HP 446.
have to have a comprehensive
family medical leave to support
all families who need this time.
It's the most important times.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Marshall Martinez, the executive
director of Equality New Mexico.
And uh we must respectfully
oppose this legislation. Well,
we agree fully that new parents
deserve significant amount of
time to bond with their
children, the reality is that
creating a leave schedule or
structure wherein a new child
supersedes the need for spending
time with the dying loved one or
caring for a trans family member
after a gender-affirming
surgery, which by the way takes
more than 6 weeks to recover
from, is an inherently
inequitable approach to protect.
ing workers, all families in
their various structures,
shapes, forms, and decisions
deserve the dignity of paid
leave, no matter the
circumstances which bring it on.
And regardless of whether or not
they are choosing to birth or
adopt children. Thank you.
Jerry Thompson, members of the
committee, uh, when I was, uh,
14.
My father.
Yes, my name is Kathy Mosley.
I'm a retired public health
nurse and I'm speaking on behalf
of the Pa Family Coalition in
opposition, um, chair Thompson,
member of the committee, uh, my
father had MS, uh, developed it
when he was 41, and did not have
paid family medical leave and
the uh staff.
I just learned how to vote to
cover his, uh, salary.
Until he received disability.
When he was about 55 and I was
24. I took him home to die and
stayed with him as long as I
could, but I was a nurse in an
ICU and I had limited sick
leave. On the way back to the
hospital.
He passed en route back to work.
Um, many people
Take leave, in fact.
majority, and this bill is not
adequate.
you. Thank you. OK, so on Zoom I
will take 5 land, Stephanie
Alexandria, Janet and Tatiana.
So go ahead, Lan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Lance and policy
director for the Center for
Civic Policy and a cancer
patient that's been battling
cancer for the last 15 years.
The harsh reality of the bill is
that it ignores those already
enduring the terrible real world
consequences of cancer,
especially as we potentially
face financial destitution. With
this bill, it affirms the notion
that those in support of it only
value birthing bodies and not
the sick, the dying, and the
bereaved. HB 446 is deeply
harmful when many cancer
patients.
have had their ability to be
parents stripped from them due
to their cancer like myself. I
welcome the sponsors to the
cancer center treatment to sit
alongside patients like me to
talk with us on what we face
every day and how the bill
should be expanded to care for
all New Mexicans. I urge you to
oppose House Bill 446 because
cancer patients and their
families must be valued.
Thank you, Lynn. Stephanie.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Stephanie
Welch for the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty. We oppose
this bill because New Mexico's
families deserve better. All New
Mexicans deserve to care for
themselves or their loved ones
without sacrificing their
financial security. Most of us
will experience a serious health
condition or extended caregiving
responsibility, and we'll face
impossible choices between our
families, our financial
security, and our jobs. 75% of
New Mexicans do not have paid
family leave.
through their job. House Bill
446 falls far short of solving
this problem and actually
undermines other supports our
families have fought for years
to establish. It takes money
from the early childhood trust
fund to subsidize a benefit to
employers and does not meet the
needs of New Mexican workers
because it only covers leave for
a new child. The early childhood
trust fund was created by the
legislature to increase access
to critical early childhood
programs, the
one needs to continue to benefit
young children and their
families as intended, and New
Mexicans who have serious
medical conditions and who care
for loved ones beyond just the
child beyond just the 1st 12
months of their relationship
with the child should have
access to
Alexandria.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Coalition of Sexual
Assault Programs, which is the
statewide organization
supporting prevention,
intervention and treatment
services throughout the state.
Sexual violence directly impacts
over half of the individuals in
New Mexico, and we are deeply
concerned that House Bill 446
does not provide for safely for
survivors, allowing an employee
to apply for safe leave
compensation if they or a family
member were a victim of domestic
violence, stalking, sexual
assaults or abuse. Safe leave is
a critical critical component to
supporting the health of
families without it, we are
falling short for New Mexico's
families. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, I'd like to
point out that most of the
opposition is focusing on a
different bill, and we clearly
heard the presenters say that
this is not an either or
situation. It's not HB 11 versus
her bill, and so I'd like to ask
that we focus on her bill, not
HB 11.
Thank you.
Uh, I believe that the people
who have been speaking are
speaking about what.
Why they are in disagreement,
what's missing from the bill.
So, uh, Janet Williams.
Yes, this is Janet Williams. I'm
president of the local chapter
of National Organization for
Women, and we strongly oppose
this bill. We don't believe that
it will cover enough of what we
need.
So thank you very much. uh.
A strong, strongly oppose. OK,
and finally we have Tatiana.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee um
Tatiana Prieto with the ACLU of
New Mexico, and I'll be brief,
um, along with the other
advocates, uh, we share the same
concerns and we respectfully
oppose this bill because it's
not as expansive as other bills
that have been proposed that uh
include parental leave, but also
include medical leave. New
Mexicans deserve a
comprehensively back that would
allow them for them to take care
of their families, their
communities, and themselves for
a variety of different reasons.
Thank you.
Thank you. Now we will go in
support, so if you are online in
support, raise your hand if you
are in the audience and support,
raise your hand.
If you'd like to speak, come to
the center, and again they'll um
a maximum of 10 for 1 minute
each.
And please watch the clock.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Jim Copeland, executive director
of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities
Community Providers, we stand in
support of House Bill 446 until
we know the full extent of any
possible Medicaid reductions on
the federal level. House Bill
446 would provide a limited
benefit to allow New Mexico to
evaluate the uptake percentage
of access to the program.
And calculate any necessary
increases in state general funds
to offset any decreases in the
federal match for Medicaid
programs like the DD waivers.
House Bill 446 removes the
employer contribution based on
House Bill 395 Developmental
disability providers paid direct
support professionals $248.5
million in 2023. The employer
contribution based on House Bill
11 would cost providers $372,750
whether we call the employer.
contribution a premium or a tax,
it would be an unfunded mandate
for the contracted providers
that provide these crucial
services to the over 8000 New
Mexicans in their families who
received them, we would ask for
a due pass for House Bill 446.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater.
Welcome to Monday morning.
Are there, OK, you can probably
stand up straight, JP, you can
if you can, you can hear me OK,
yeah I'm in a lot of pain.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, the subject of paid
family medical leave, of course,
has received a lot of attention
lately with the passage of House
Bill 11 on the floor.
Unfortunately, uh, for the
chamber, that bill is a bridge
too far for them to support
primarily because of the
concerns over taxation and
uncertain fiscal soundness. In
contrast, this legislation House
Bill 446 is more limited in
scope, and it allows more time
for experience.
Before expanding to a larger
program and its cost is a modest
$19 million per year. This bill
avoids a tax increase and fiscal
uncertainty. It provides paid
parental leave of 6 weeks with
the option of a parent
purchasing an additional 3
weeks, and this is a proposal
that the business community will
enthusiastically support and
this bill should be allowed to
move forward, thank you.
I'm afraid to touch that. Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Kristen
Thompson and I represent the New
Mexico Restaurant Association.
We support House Bill 446, and
thank you to, uh, Representative
Doo for working with the
business community to craft a
responsible family leave policy
that supports New Mexicans
without raising payroll taxes.
This legislation is fiscally
responsible, beginning with a
solvent fund and allowing
employees.
To opt in additional benefits.
It's also important to recognize
that many businesses already
offer.
Um, already provide short term
disability insurance, which
covers time away for medical
needs.
Pregnancy, birth, and adoption.
This is an affection, an
effective, affordable option and
one I personally benefited from
when I needed emergency
surgeries a self-employed
individual. It covered 70% of my
wages, and I was glad I opted
in.
We ask for your support. Thank
you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director at
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce here to express support
for hospitals 446, notably the
funding mechanism, where costs
are shared among the state
employees and self-employed
individuals, this minimizes the
direct financial burden on the
employers.
Structure not only fosters a
healthy workforce, but ensures
that businesses can maintain
stability and predictability in
their operations. The clear
scheduling requirements, and to
fine leave durations allow
businesses to plan effectively
for temporary absences, keeping
our New Mexico businesses,
particularly our small
businesses thriving. For these
reasons, we thank the sponsors
and support.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Kelly Fajardo,
I'm here on behalf of the Mexico
Farm Bureau, and I want to thank
you, thank Representative Dao
for bringing this, um.
forward by utilizing current
state resources, the House Bill
446 provides essential support
to new parents without imposing
additional financial burdens on
employees or employers. This
approach a contrast with other
proposals may be may be required
with new taxes making HP 44 HB
446, a fiscally responsible
alternative. Moreover, the bill
includes an optional
supplemental program which
allows employees to contribute
for an additional 3 weeks of
leave offering flexibility.
to those seeking extended care
for their children. 446
leverages existing funds to
provide paid parental leave,
supporting families without
introducing new taxes and offers
optional extended. Thank you
Zoom will go to Jody and Sharon.
Go ahead, Jodie.
Hello, thank you, honorable
committee members. My name is
Jodie Hendricks, and I'm here on
behalf of New Mexico Family
Action Movement, urging your
support for House Bill 446, the
paid parental leave Act. At the
heart of this bill is a
fundamental truth, strong
families, build strong
communities. Parents deserve the
opportunity to bond with their
newborn or newly adopted child
without the fear of lost income
or workplace retaliation. This
bill provides 6 weeks of paid
maternal paternal leave, a
crucial time.
For a child's emotional and
physical development while also
ensuring economic stability for
New Mexico's working families.
New Mexico ranks among the
lowest in family well-being, yet
we have the opportunity to lead
the way in prioritizing parental
support. Studies show that paid
parental leave strengthens
families. It reduces reliance on
public assistance, and it
enhances workforce retention,
supporting this bill means
honoring family values,
investing in healthy child
development and affirming the
dignity of work and parenthood.
The truth is, we don't know what
will happen with hospital 11.
it's feasibility, it's long term
sustainability. But New Mexico
needs to prioritize families.
House Bill 446 provides a
beautiful way of.
Sharon Luna and then Angelique.
Good afternoon, chair and
esteemed committee members. My
name is Sharon Luna and I would
like to extend a sincere
gratitude to Rebecca Doll.
And
representative Armstrong for
introducing the significant
alternative to house Bill 11 as
a small business owner and truth
or consequences, we strongly
support this legislation,
recognizing its potential to
create a balanced and equitable
environment for both employers
and employees. It helps families
when research knows families
need it the most. I urge you to
consider positive impact this
bill will have and to vote a do
pass. Thank you for your
thoughtful consideration.
Thank you. And finally,
Angelique.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members, and
Representative Dao. My name is
Angelique Tafoya, and I'm the
executive director of Altamera
Specialized Family Services. We
are a Medicaid waiver provider
providing supports for children
and adults with intellectual and
developmental disabilities in
supporting children with risks,
delays, and disabilities and
their families, um, this bill is
very important to me. I'm also a
mother of three amazing little
ones. They're 86, and 4, and
have experienced premature labor
and two NICU states.
I personally understand the
importance of maternity and
paternity leave, and allowing
families time to bond with their
children, whether that includes
emergency services or otherwise.
I am in full support of House
Bill 446 as a mother and an
employer, I want to echo
concerns shared by our IDD
providers. It has been said by
my colleagues in multiple
committees that are waiver
providers are rate takers and
not rate makers, and because of
this, we are beholden to the
reimbursement rates to not only
retain our amazing staff, but to
also cover
funded mandates that's and stay
afloat to provide our critical
services. This bill will remove
or minimize the burden from our
providers by eliminating the
cost of covering this employee
benefit on all. Thank you.
Thank you, OK. So on the list I
have um no one so far. Oh, you
do, OK.
OK, so, um, I'm sorry, I, I put
it above something else.
Resentative Nicole Chavis and
then Representative Jones, and
then Senna Cortez.
And OK, go ahead, representative
and Chavez. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Dao, um, for bringing this bill
forward. I know that um there
are significant concerns
regarding House Bill 11 and the
mandates themselves, um,
especially regarding temporary
workforce, I think with New
Mexico employers, um, and this
is not including the tax burden
and the employer employee, but.
How do we replace an employee
that's out, um, how do we hire
temporary workforce when there's
a shortage of workforce is what
I've heard and then including
that there were a lot of
questions on is my unemployment.
Going to go up, um, am I going
to have to pay unemployment when
I hire a temporary employee to
replace the employee that's
currently out. There are so many
questions and how I know so many
New Mexicans, um, would benefit
from House Bill 11. This is a
completely separate bill, so I
just want to point that out. Um,
this is in case we don't know
what's gonna happen with House
Bill 11 when it moves over to
the Senate. Um, so this is a
completely different villain.
And um I would just like to say,
you know, my daughter Kennedy.
She's due with her first baby in
April, and this bill would help
her significantly because right
now she has to take, um, you
know, whatever PTO she may have
and then a week without pay
before her short term disability
kicks in, in short term
disability only pays 70%, you
know, she's 26 years old.
Her, um, fiance is also 26 years
old, so they don't have a lot of
income, so I think that this
would help those individuals
that are starting families, and
I want to thank you for that so
much because um they need that
assistance, and I, I would hope
that she has the income to
replace the income income that
she will be missing because this
bill isn't going to take place,
whichever bill passes is not
gonna take the place, um, within
2 months from now. Um, and
again, I wanna
I want to let everybody out
there know that.
In no way are we being heartless
by trying to replace a bigger
bill, um.
We want the best for everybody.
If anybody knows, you know, I
was raised by my two sets of
grandparents, and I was
thankfully there in hospice with
all 4 of them when they passed
away. I'm thankful that I had
the PTO to do that. Some people
don't. Um, most importantly, uh,
you know, I lost my son. He was
killed, very traumatically, and
I only had the ability to take 4
weeks off, and I had to go back
to work.
So I am not heartless. I
understand people's needs, but I
also understand that we can't
shut the doors of New Mexico
businesses in this state, um,
most of our businesses in this
state are small business owners.
They will not be able to afford
Continuing to keep their doors
open, if the bigger bill passes.
However, today we are talking
about this wonderful bill, and
again, I just want to thank you.
It's gonna help new parents that
need the help that can bond with
their children and be able to
take that leave with pay. So
thank you so much for bringing
this forward, Representative
down.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Doo, um,
really appreciate the fiscally
responsible approach. I think we
need to do that more often. And
um
You mentioned during your
presentation that you said this
is not an either or type
situation. We can do both,
correct? OK, could you address
that just a little bit more,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and
I've served on health committee
for many years uh with the chair
and I remember many times she
would say,
This is on the merit of the
bill. This is gonna go to
appropriations. They're the,
they will deal with whether it's
in the budget or not. We vote
for these bills on the merit of
the bill. So rather than roll
it, I thought, you know what, we
don't know what's gonna happen
to House Bill 11. I've heard
that they're the executive wants
some changes. I've heard
different people want changes,
but this is something we can
afford. This is a slam dunk for
us to pass out of this
committee, because everybody in
this committee wants the 6 weeks
paid maternity leave. It's 9 if
you want to contribute
voluntarily and easily 12 to
even 2 months.
If you use your, your, your paid
leave and or your sick leave.
This includes
The the parents in the
household. So, and, and we added
adoption, we have fostering, so
it's, it's paternity, maternity,
foster grandparents and you know
whoever, whoever, whatever New
Mexican, um, I was very
appropriate of the majority's
language and respectful of the
majority's language in this
bill.
It is for residents.
And it does not, uh, it doesn't
reference gender. I mean, I, I
have been as respectful as I
possibly can, and you could each
of you have signed on to this
bill.
We found a way to be respectful
to businesses. We found a way to
be respectful of all. And I'm
here.
Because I've, I learned from
this chair that we bring bills
forward and if it ends up in
appropriations and that's where
it die, it's what we do. We pass
a bill out of here on intent and
I know every woman on this
committee and the, the gentleman
on this committee believe that
this is something that families
need.
And if the other one gets
amended, so be it.
Thank you very much for that,
um, and I'd love also like to
ask you, just tell me a little
bit more about the early
childhood fund and how this
comes out of there so the early
childhood fund was founded in,
it started in July 20th, uh,
July 2020, and it comes from the
excess oil and gas revenue, and
then it's invested as well. So
we are getting good investment
on that. It is earning, uh, half
a billion dollars a year. We
don't put the purpose of the
bills they're now being uh for
those of you who are newer, the
of the bills are being removed
from bills as they're amended
and they're no longer added, um,
but it was very, very clear
during debate that it was beyond
universal childcare or pre-K,
and you see that we are using
that fund to raise the
reimbursement rates desperately
needed for home visiting and
desperately needed for fit. I
feel like, you know, it should
be used to lower the ratio for
um in in early childhood
programs so that they can
accommodate special needs
children. We're one of the few
states without a differentiated
rate for, for, um, children with
special needs. What it is for.
Prenatal by definition prenatal
through 3rd grade. That's the
purpose of this fund and it's to
strengthen families. I mean,
I'll read the purpose of the
book. Money in the fund is
subject to appropriation by the
legislator for early childhood
education and services and
programs. That's the directive
of the fund. The definition of
early childhood is prenatal
through 3rd.
If you go on, you know, when we
were doing it, we were looking
at adverse childhood
experiences, we were looking at
strengthening, um, families,
that fund is now paying at, you
know, it transfers to early
childhood. I think there's 18 or
19 different things that we're
funding out of there, including
Dolly Parton imagination Library
and some uh infant mental health
and parent-child psychotherapy,
but all the indicators say that
that time that a child has with
their family when they first
introduced to that home is
critical for bonding, um, and
for their
future growth and development.
So to give that to folks without
it coming out of their paycheck
unless they want to voluntary
opt in is the purpose of this,
and I, I, I admit that it has a
dual role. If it, if the the
substitute would have been
adopted, but it doesn't preclude
that this is the best use of
these funds, and it doesn't
preclude that we're dealing with
in the large, larger bill that's
been referenced by people in
opposition that we don't know
where that bill's gonna end. And
I think it is prudent of us, and
I know the people's heart in
this committee.
There's no, there's no um this
or in passing this to
appropriations where we will
probably spend the rest of its
life.
Thank you, thank you very much
and, and uh thank you, Madam
Chair. That's all.
OK, I have Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair
Representative. I just want to
say thank you for always
fighting to build strong
families and strong businesses.
Um, it doesn't go unnoticed.
Madam Chair Representative, I do
have a couple of questions and
the first one is what
stakeholders were consulted on
this bill. Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, goodness
gracious, the coalition of, of
folks that are asking for this.
is so broad
It includes parents.
I'll put myself in there. I've
got my mother lives with me.
My father passed away a couple
years ago.
6 weeks
To suggest that this is a
disrespect for people who would
get 6 weeks in the other bill.
This is, this is the result of
compromise, and prior to
introducing this bill, of which
the majority of the conservative
caucus signed on to.
We
I pitched it to every Democrat
that would take a conversation
with me.
And it was discussed in many
different versions.
To
Mothers want it, fathers want
it.
Birthing families want it,
adoptive family want it,
grandparents want it.
Definite family how you want.
They want it.
There's no one, I cannot believe
that the nationalization of
Women is opposing paid maternity
and paternity leave at the birth
of a child, the adoption of the
child.
And for fostering.
I cannot believe.
That the Women's Institute.
And ACLU is opposing.
Paid leave for families, the
birth of a child, the adoption
of a child, and fostering.
Apparently advocacy groups
oppose this bill.
No one else does.
And apparently people who are
Not willing to compromise,
oppose this bill. No one else
does. I hear the word compromise
all the time. This is good for
families, it's good for New
Mexico. It's fiscally
responsible. We have the funds
for it. The mechanism is there
and we don't shut down the
family owned and operated the
LGBTQIA owned and operated.
The Hispanic Democrat owned and
operated the tribal owned and
operated small business. This is
a win-win.
I'm not making it at this or
that. The people opposing it
made it this or that. The people
who support it want to support
their employees, they want to
support their families, and when
they want their businesses to
thrive.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representatives. So what I'm
hearing you say is this not only
supports families, but it also
is a piece of legislation that
would also support the small
businesses.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that is an absolute fact. There
are over 40 business coalitions
signed on, and now you now hear
home health providers.
People who provide disability
services, those folks that we
are asked, are they supporting
it? I'm not going to name them,
they could be here in support,
but I've received lots of
feedback. The question was, is
this being endorsed by people
with, who support um that serve
vulnerable populations and
provide those services to folks
when they're in crisis, and the
answer is yes, as some have
testified today and others feel
intimidated to do so.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, and for your
advocacy, I fully support this
bill.
Madam Chair, I move it to pass.
can't.
Madamme too, I moved the table.
So a tabling motion, um.
takes precedence.
Excuse me
So we will um we will take a
vote on the tabling motion.
Representative Anaya.
Yes to table.
Representative Kates.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes the table.
Representative Nicole Chavez.
No.
Representative Ferrari. Yes to
table.
Representative Jones.
No to table.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Senna Cortez
noted table.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair, yes. 6 to 4.
By a vote of 6 to 4, your bill
has been tabled. Thank you. And,
and announcement for the
committee, we will, um, because
we've worked so hard, we will
start at 8:30.
Hopefully, we don't fall behind
