Your.
Representative Armstrong.
present.
Representative bash.
Representative.
Representative Ferrary present.
Representative Lord
she's trying to get on okay
Representative McQueen.
He wore out if not present at
Representative Montoya is not
present Representative todos.
Or where you are present.
Yes Representative Lord joined
yet another.
Yes I see more and to be made
interest.
I will mark.
That settlement.
And madam chair.
By the way if you can hear me.
You Representative yes yes and I
have.
Emily I just promoted
Representative been cut to a
panelists social there Is.
And I'm marker present you okay
back form with nine okay all
right Emily will you.
We can use this morning I was
expecting a winter Wonderland
and we got that a few flakes
essentially so I'm I think we
will go ahead and start and
first up is Representative
Ferrary with H. B. thirty three
and who are your experts
Representative.
Thank you madam chair it will be
Linda Segal and a hatch.
Yes.
We find Linda okay.
You're too fast for me Emily.
Okay whenever you're ready
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
house bill thirty three
was endorsed by the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee and the Legisla- and
also the Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee and
what we're trying to do is raise
the tax rate on cigarettes
and the including nicotine and
also change the definition of
tobacco products in the tobacco
tobacco products tax act
the reason this is so important
is because by raising the tax
well we it's the number one and
and best way to to Turkey youth
smoking and we have seen such a
high increase of dating and
seeing the results of how
Critical that is to young
people's health and so if we can
stop that even though we raised
the age you still seem to be
able to
Get hold of a tobacco products
so with that I'd like to go
ahead and let our experts speak
a little bit about you know some
of the advantages of this.
Madam chair representative
Ferrari we do have an amendment
remember yes thank you
I don't have the amendment in my
hands and is up we're getting it
real quickly
the amendment is to
of sort of card out of the
premium cigars of because we
found that increasing their tax
seventy seven percent on of four
hundred six hundred dollar
product was going to be
Hurtful to a lot of the stores
that are
At.
Specific to selling that and
We are I think that's it was
there another a portion of that
that we were changing wells
madam chair.
Representative Ferrary it is a
significant amendment because
that's what we had to do was
For clarity this is a very.
Confusing.
Kind of hold.
Statute that has some technical
issues with it so we removed
several sections
section for and then our drafter
we wrote them for greater
clarity so that we know a
tobacco product is everything
except state arrests and that
that was that was really not
clear in the past so it's really
clean up and then of course we
put the our.
Well that's in the substance of
the bill so naturally with the
amendment is.
What.
Do I hear it.
Representative Ferrari you've
made it can you make a motion to
discuss the the amendment.
Your muted.
Was I needed that whole time L.
I don't know how much we heard
some of you okay so I just need
you to move the amendment for
discussion I would like to the
amendment for discussion please
okay okay and and Linda
explained it
Are there question well.
I'm trying to.
Are there questions on the
amendment I will just go ahead
and adopt that and then we'll
move on to the to the substance
of the bill.
Madam chair.
Representative Anders.
Yes Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair of the
sponsor I I do with the the
amendment was previously
received.
So I I feel for you not having a
copy of to start with but I did
have a copy and specific to the
amendment.
it is.
It really gets to the heart
doctor of the premium cigar
products.
And that a seventy seven percent
tax would be to have a a tax
increase on that product.
Of in the end and I I in my mind
that is because it is a high
priced product use is that
correct.
Madam chair and representative
interesting yes.
Thank you for that
Representative that answers my
questions.
Your muted madam chair.
Okay it's it's too early still
Representative office do you
have a question on the amendment
or on the bill.
Chair actually.
On the amendment all together
period amendments all together
are we going to have any sort of
what we're gonna follow as far
as amended treating amendment so
there's gonna be a twenty four
hour rule or anything like that
solution falls.
Stick with the twenty four hour
rule for eighty as sensitive
amendment if it's something
that's minor and at a you know
catching a misspelling or or
that number was off with we we
will go ahead with that without
twenty four hours but this
ammendment did get emailed out
I'm not sure when it was but but
it's bit with its more than five
o'clock just I'm just bring it
up just for the okay and we're
we're we're okay with this money
thank you.
Anyone else on the amendment of
the programs appreciate it.
Okay seeing no more discussion
on the amendment
Someone might want to make a
motion to approve the amendment.
All move to approve the
amendment okay.
With that you Representative
Anderson did I hear.
Correct is there anyone in
opposition.
Okay seeing then you have an
amended bill and so go ahead
madam chair yeah I'd like to
clarify if this amendment two to
one ninety six point one or two
two or one ninety six point two.
Nine
point.
Thank you thank you for that
reminder and okay so
Representative Ferrary in your
experts we're back on the bills
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
would you like to continue Linda
or hash.
Yes sure I'll just briefly
describe.
What the bill that's.
It raises the the tax on a
cigarette
my twenty cents which raises the
pact the price of a pack of
cigarettes by two dollars so the
tax on cigarettes would be four
dollars it raises the other
tobacco products.
To be comparable with the
increase in tax on cigarettes so
it raises them by seventy seven
percent of the wholesale price.
And that includes all all the
different tobacco products
chewing tobacco the E. liquids
that are all all of the other
products that are used in staff
out of cigarette smoking.
It does raise the tax on the
premium cigars by twenty five
percent of the product value
raises little cigars to be
comparable with cigarettes
twenty cents per cigar and the
clothes System cartridges which
are the E. E. cigarette juice
that is raised to three dollars
and thirty two cents.
So why are we raising needs by
seventy seven percent it's it's
if we're going to raise the
price of cigarettes and I know
not everyone agrees with that
but if we're going to do that
every other tobacco product has
to be comparable because
especially young people will go
to the cheaper products and from
the.
Telling them with the American
cancer society cancer action
network and we have been working
for years to reduce tobacco
consumption of any kind of
tobacco
primarily towards kids because
those are the new tobacco
smokers those are the people
that are starting high school or
even middle school and we have
one of the highest rates of E.
cigarette use
among kids it's thirty four
percent in of high school
students are smoking using E.
cigarettes so by raising the
prices on these products it is
specially discourages the
consumption of of tobacco
products and as public health
people American heart
association American lung cancer
society that is our goal to help
help people stop smoking
We know that in New Mexico we
spent eight hundred forty four
million dollars on health care
expenditures directly related to
tobacco consumption and it's
it's over two hundred and twenty
two million that we stand in
Medicaid when I first started
representing a cancer society
and the
late nineties the settlement
amount of money spent on
Medicaid was only about a only
about a hundred and eighty two
million and now we're up to over
two hundred and twenty two
million expanding Medicaid on
tobacco related products.
So this is from our perspective
is a public health issue we know
that from the perspective of
state revenue that this well if
you look at your FIR
dramatically increase our almost
double our current
income from tobacco our products
and so that whenever you raise
the price tobacco even though
you reduce the consumption which
of course is our goal because of
the price increase you you you
still get more revenue from the
state start.
that's all I have right now.
Your muted.
Joe Hamm.
I'm sorry thank you of mass did
you want to add anything or wait
for questions.
Thank you representative madam
madam chair members of the
committee
My name is my expertise I'm with
American Association hi I just
briefly wanted to mention why
were amending you know the
tobacco control act to include
synthetic tobacco products
because that's the new
generation of synthetic drugs
that are in the market and they
are cheap and they are the pack
a lot of nicotine content in
cigarettes and you know well.
I just want to add what the you
know my colleague Linda said was
you know also the survey
conducted in twenty nineteen by
D. O. H. as you know found that
thirteen point two percent of
the middle school students are
are waiting.
And you know hello on terms of
the synthetic tobacco like you
know what what the industry is
doing is that they're claiming
you know this synthetic tobacco
is not derived from tobacco.
but it's manufactured in a lab
so it should not be considered a
tobacco product of and should
not be taxed but the nicotine
you know has has the same you
know content.
In in our.
That is made in a lab does not
you know even though it's not
derived from tobacco product you
know the chemical structure is
the same it is made to mimic the
same effects and it has the same
you know health effects on
humans.
You know and and you can go
online and check for like
nicotine pouches and you know I
I just bought you know one.
Can.
of nicotine pouches it was like
four dollars and fifty cents and
each you know how to contains
eight milligrams of nicotine.
While a pack of cigarettes
contains twenty milligrams of
nicotine so we're talking about
twenty pouches
which tracks about a hundred and
sixty milligrams of nicotine and
and that's almost eight tax
influence of nicotine so these
drugs new drugs on not taxed and
you know and they are you know
you can go online.
They're they're selling
column and cheaper so we we
wanted to you know get a handle
on this you know before before
it's too late.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
All.
Your muted.
Thank you doing and I'm doing it
madam chair will stand for
questions okay we will go to the
audience with the whole so
please don't raise your hand yet
because it may depend on whether
you want to speak in support or
in opposition so and so public
go ahead and vote on this it
should be on your screen.
I'm.
Okay.
It looks pretty stable so and
this is what we have we have
thirty two out of forty nine
point sixty five percent in
favor and seventeen out of forty
nine or thirty five thirty five
percent I'm in opposition so
thank you the opposition it will
be the shorter side left side if
you want to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
And you will be called on and we
will have a one minute timer and
I ask that you not
that you not repeat what someone
in front of you just said
I'm just so we can.
We can get through this so we
will start with
we get.
Okay we will start with the
Scott Scanlon.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning madam chair I'm Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
New Mexico government affairs
representing altri a we're
opposed to this bill this this
tax was increased about two
years ago to its current level
and and this bill purport
reports to to double that that
tax that was just increased this
is a regressive tax regressive
tax contribute to the systemic
disadvantages of work working
class New Mexicans who choose to
use tobacco products the current
levels of inflation make this
thirds situation even worse
finally this bill gives a tax
break to the wealthiest adult
New Mexicans who choose to smoke
and frankly I don't understand
that in the context of this bill
and prior testimony thank you
madam chair I appreciate your
time thank you committee.
Chris Paul Dano.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Chris balls on a registered
lobbyist for use as vaping CBD
we are in that the cigarettes
CBD in cannabis sector where the
most common form of recreational
consumption is vaping which is
the fact that this moment madam
chair up twenty percent this
bill will tax rate products.
Of the person which represents
five hundred.
Right.
From the current level.
Both products madam chair
requires the consumer to be
twenty one to buy yet cannabis
which is and no it's no as a
toxicant would be taxed at a
quarter of the rate of tobacco
products for the same reasons
that most previously stated by
Scott we stand in opposition of
house bill thirty three madam
chair thank you.
We have Jared nation our.
All.
Members of the committee
chairman is our behalf of
Swisher
just briefly what we believe
that the youth usage issue has
already been sufficiently
addressed given the recent
increase in the minimum eight to
purchase tobacco products to
twenty one
also with the we card program
which convenience stores are
enforcing regularly
a child can't walk into a
convenience store purchase
tobacco products given the
record surplus in our state's
budget and the tax that was
recently imposed an increase on
tobacco products we believe that
this tax is not warranted thank
you.
Martin.
Yes.
I meant to mention for the
express section alliance.
Is to submitted written
testimony so we'll keep our
mosque brief but.
Also lost increase in tax on
tobacco and vapor products
lawmakers trying to count
smokers and former smokers again
well spending so little all the
already existing spectrum honest
funding yes Representative to
better control program
prevention event prevents
initiation help smokers quit.
New Mexico is currently spending
in twenty twenty less money on
tobacco control programs despite
having an increase in taxes that
is this bill proposes
legislation is not about public
health and protecting children
busy smoking affecting rights
declined significantly between
twenty twenty and twenty one
this is about douching smokers
or former smokers fund any
purpose other than tobacco
prevention thanks for your time.
Look Otero.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Louco
Tero registered lobbyist
Reynolds tobacco company thank
you for your time this morning
I'd like to try not to be
repetitive to many of the good
points my colleagues party set
but back in two thousand
nineteen.
Legislature passed this bill to
raise the limit to twenty one it
is working back then it was
probably around twenty four
percent youth usage and now it's
down to thirteen so it is
working given the chance to work
this is a regressive tax on the
poor
It
In the face of a one point six
billion dollars surplus and here
you are trying to raise taxes
perhaps you should six and
revenue for your cessation
programs to the budget and so on
the backs of the poor people The
New Mexico thank you madam
chair.
John Thompson.
Chair members of the committee
good morning John Thompson
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico smokefree Alliance which
is a nonprofit trade association
of New Mexico owned vapor stores
madam chairman as previously
mentioned this this bill
represents a five hundred
percent tax increase that's
twelve point five percent to
seventy seven percent is a five
hundred percent increase madam
chair as was mentioned if
limiting under age access is the
goal I I would suggest that
members of the committee
examined the online sales
secretary and and a simple
Google search will review
limitless options for for those
to purchase products and online
market place where there is
little to no age verification no
taxation and no state regulation
all the while this tax increase
is put upon our local locally
owned establishments and putting
a further advantage to online
vendors who have no obligation
or duty to this state and with
that we ask that you all oppose
this measure thank you for the
time.
Tim Andrews.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to mindless
Americans for tax reform while
we applaud the committees decide
to reduce.
The academic evidence and the
studies clearly show a doubling
the cigarette tax will not
reduce smoking rates any of the
the and will come at
considerable cost to low income
families to make matters worse
increasing taxes on drugs
approved by the food and drug
administration as appropriate
for the protection of public
health products such as all
rural tobacco products E.
cigarettes and so forth which
commune with meta analyses have
shown and ninety five percent
safer than combustible
cigarettes cigarettes because
it's not the nicotine that kills
people it's the top from
combustion will lead to more
people school keep the sponsors
of the bill say I'm the evidence
in value for the table said we
need to tax these products more
no we need to save lives by
helping people quit smoking and
not by taxing them for trying to
quit thank you.
Okay for the folks in opposition
now please raise your hand
if you want to speak in support
of this bill.
Okay we will start with Bill
Jordan.
Thank you madam chair Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children and today I'm also
speaking for the New Mexico
pediatric society this issue is
personal for me as my father
passed away from emphysema many
years ago if we're learning
anything from these last couple
years it's the importance of
good health habits strong
healthy loans and good public
health policy this is good
public health policy and it will
incentivize good health habits
because we know our young people
are targeted by this industry
the most effective deterrent for
young people using cigarettes or
E. cigarettes is the price
point.
We know the big tobacco will
fight to get their products into
the lungs of as many New
Mexicans as they can they're
deceptive advertising of the
industry has played out in
courtrooms across the country
for decades and they're still
targeting their advertising to
our kids to get them addicted to
nicotine.
Year after year we've seen these
tobacco tax bills water down.
I'm hoping that this year the
legislature will step up and
protect the health of our young
people thank you.
The N. N. M. P. H..
Thank you so much I'm sorry I
didn't change my name is Shelly
Man Lev from the New Mexico
Public Health Association I'm
the president thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee this issue is also
personal for me I spent twenty
years as the prevention quite
Santa Fe public school and these
at U. cigarettes and the other
tobacco products have replaced
cigarettes and are deeply
impacting our youth today and
for their future their lifetime.
Currently tobacco is the single
most preventable cause of death
and.
Is to half a million people
every year I know the numbers of
COVID there's so many public
health issues the opportunity to
do the single most important
evidence based strategy which is
to increase the price
significantly of tobacco
products is a real opportunity
to stated next New Mexico yes.
Hello everyone and especially
into the future because since we
all tobacco lies in waiting
thank you so much for your
attention.
Eight Dona Upson.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Dr for almost four years now
alone specialist and I've seen
the devastating effects of
tobacco dependence on thousands
of my patients.
I think it's interesting that
the this is back on the street.
Work stated this is a regressive
tax
is regressive disease and
attract industry has targeted
the poor for decades.
People smoke at much higher
rates than other people and they
suffer much more he's long
disease heart disease cancer and
other people.
And stand the most to benefit
from raising the prices of track
of.
You are still able to get.
Back and
Our list of it.
Age limitations thirty four
percent of New Mexico high
schoolers are using tobacco
products.
In the price of tobacco is the
best way to prevent staff
attendance thank you.
Okay Alex Ross read.
Hi thank you madam chair I'd
just like to.
echo what everyone else is
saying and and really point out
that tobacco is a health equity
issue and we now African
Americans LGBTQ folks people
disabilities people with mental
health issues all are using
tobacco at higher rates than the
general population and that is
because of targeted advertising
and marketing mostly column
product discounts and when you
see point of sale product
discounts that and shows you
that price point is really
important to the tobacco
industry and to sell these at
the drugs.
So just wanted to echo again
that raising the.
The tax on tobacco products it's
going to help us in the fight
against the cigarette use and
nicotine dependence for you
thank you so much.
Thank you next we have alley my
Rick.
Hi can you hear me yes.
Okay thank you so much madam
speaker.
My name is alley Myrick I work
with the center for health
innovation New Mexico's public
health institute and I am the
director of our director of our
prevention and community
collaborations Department
my colleagues and MPAJA and
otherwise have made some
wonderful points all try to add
on to that and leading away in
saying that policy change to
this level that has been proven
to be effective helps prevention
and if you are built from the
ground in communities trying to
help her from the health issues
around substances in tobacco
we've made great strides in the
past and the influx of these new
products it's really cause for
alarm especially related to the
use the brain I'll definitely
tell you from being one of those
boots on the ground I have been
in focus groups with young kids
and they're still able to get
it at the store the even if
they're too young for that so
thank you for your time and
allowing me to speak.
Every.
Okay Rick Dick Mason.
Madam chair members the
committee made a mistake Mason
and chair of the action
committee of the state of women
voters New Mexico not only does
the would propose a regressive
tax that we are able to support
a tax that she's a social good
that's consistent with our other
positions and I positions on
health care allow us to support
this legislation and personally
you know I was a heavy smoker I
quit thirty five years ago and
quite honestly I did sat down
and if the calculation of how
much it was costing me and what
I could do with that money
particularly my step kids and
that is what made the act quit
smoking so price is determined
it Indian spot great so thank
you but to participate.
Thank you next we have Andreas
Archuleta.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Andrea such let alone Sir
register this with chronic
disease prevention council.
Like to speak in favor of this
tax.
Tobacco products and cigarettes
are the largest preventable
cause of disease and death in
this nation and if you think
tobacco isn't reaching kids and
teens I think you to walk into
any high school or middle school
in the state ask the teachers
asked the students we'll see
this is reaching children.
That's reduce tobacco products
reaching these are these kids
for that reason I'm in favor of
the stacks thank you very much.
Thank you and our last public
comment is from laurel
McCloskey.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Laura McCloskey and I'm.
I'm sorry laurel I accidently
muted you can you on mute
yourself and we're.
What are you hear me yes that
was my fault my fault.
No worries good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Laura McCloskey and
I'm with the chronic disease
prevention council this measure
will save lives by ensuring that
children do not ever even
initiate smoking you think use
tobacco products including E.
cigarettes are more likely to
initiate using cigarettes
smokers then have higher rates
of multiple chronic diseases
such as heart disease and
diabetes and staff over about
thirty percent of cancer deaths
in New Mexico can be tied back
to smoking.
There it is predicted that forty
thousand kids in New Mexico
under eighteen will die from
smoking showing how critical
this taxes to save those lives
thank you.
Thank you for that and
unfortunately I just got a text
that Representative Montoya was
in a car accident on his way
here he's not injured but his
car is totaled so.
What a way to start and so I'm
I'm sorry I'm just a little
flustered by that but I'm glad
he's okay just five minutes ago
I texted him and told him to
stay safe and I hope it wasn't
reading my tax money so we will
go to the committee and.
And I am and shared the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee for four years and so
and and I'm quite aware of all
of this staff and I we did hear
some comments that that research
has shown that E. cigarettes or
vaping is is eight.
I stopped Matt and the FDA does
not agree with that I just want
to put that out there and before
we go to questions my hash and
Linda did you have did you want
to respond to anything.
No questions okay chair.
Thank you.
We will go to Representative
Barreras.
Sorry about that thank you madam
chair
thank you are Representative
Ferrary for a for a great
presentation and also thank you
to the the everybody that made
public comment it really really
helps help socializing with
making these decisions my and my
first question is are what is
being or the fine imposed on a
on a business that sells our
cells are tobacco products to
somebody who's under age.
you madam chair I'm sorry.
Or Linda do you have that in
Representative Ferrary had to go
she's doing a radio interview so
I'm kind of picking up the ball
for her so Linda or Behesht you
have that in front of you.
Madam chair of we we we can
provide that information I don't
want to give the wrong
information I think it's a three
tiered.
Roach I think the the first one
is is a monetary fine and second
violation is a monetary fine
plus suspension of for a you
know tobacco sales for a week or
something and the subject.
The card is like increases the
fine and then the fourth is like
you know you you lose your
license to sell tobacco products
let you know we we we we can
provide that information to the
committee.
Thank you if you could if you
win your Linda could to email it
to Emily and should get it out
to the committee.
Appreciate that thank you thank
you madam chair thank you for
for the answer
What what I'm trying to see is
how many of these and if it's if
it's three tiered it might be a
little bit hard but I'm just
curious how many how many of
these businesses are being
imposed with these these fines
or.
Your muted Brittney.
I got a phone call right right
as I was talking my my question
is around the use of going into
a business and buying
because we might just my
experience are with you know
traveling members and and stuff
is is that there's they're not
doing it that way it is is that
they're actually buying them
online where there is not
regulations and then taking them
to school and sign in to
everybody at school and and that
that is so my my question is how
many of these funds are being
imposed and and how often is it.
If we have that.
Respect we're connecting yeah
because every.
Is responsible for doing.
Okay okay so that totally makes
sense and I appreciate that
thank you madam chair
so I I just want to share my my
experience
With with with the tobacco
products I I grew up as many of
you already know I grew up very
poor and we we often times had
no food in the refrigerator but
my dad always had his cigarettes
in the freezer.
And and so that that starts to
tell me already that it doesn't
it doesn't matter what the
prices
You know if if that if you're if
you're addicted to your you're
going to buy it when I when I
personally started smoking
cigarettes for four dollars and
fifty cents I just stopped I
just stopped smoking a few
months ago and they were over
eight dollars a pack so if
raising the the the price works
why why are we seeing the the
numbers that they were seen
and also that the action is part
of it is is you know I I ran a
smoke shop for for a few years
and.
And so I kind of know you know
that side of it too and and I I
don't I don't necessarily see it
as a problem being that the
youth are walking in and buying
them and and and I'm not saying
that it never happens but I'm
just I'm just curious how many
of them are actually getting
them that way if if we're if
we're.
About the age then.
Then we raise the age from
eighteen to twenty one to buy
them and that addresses the age
we.
As and somebody from the LGBTQ
community I know that that that
I've been targeted by aggressive
marketing campaigns from the
tobacco companies.
Well but now I feel like I'm
being targeted by this tax
because it's it's gonna affect
me differently than it would
affect somebody else
it would affect me because I
don't I don't have the same
income as other people so it.
We're disproportionate.
Marketed but now we're just
first proportionally affected by
this tax and I'm just trying to
think of like eight I'm trying
to think of the future and if
this were to pass
would we actually see a drop in
in in numbers because the price
doubled while I smoked and any
digging you know it didn't it
didn't really affect
me I stopped smoking for my
daughter so I if I could just
get somebody to just kind of a
address and I was a lot but I
appreciate it thank you
Representative burst I will
start so kids kids generally
start on a whim you know they're
they're hanging out with their
friends and they say let's let's
do something and and they do it
the people who are ordering
online are already addicted and
if you're planning ahead it's
not a spur of the moment thing
and and all the research shows
that and yes this this is not
going to be helpful for people
who are already addicted except
as a Dick Mason said it but you
know you when you sit down and
look at what it's costing you or
what you could do with that
money I think that's that that's
an important point but the point
of this bill is to keep kids
from starting in the first place
we you know we would love to
wave a magic wand and have no
one addicted and as start fresh
but we can't do that so what
we're trying to do is prevent
the kids from starting and and
that's that's the main and the
rest of this bill is to keep you
what keep anyone but
particularly you from starting
up some of you if you haven't
sat on the tobacco committee
it's amazing what the tobacco
companies are doing they make E.
cigarettes that look like as my
inhalers they make you
cigarettes that look like Penn
they have flavors of you know I
can't imagine many.
Adults want to smoke something
Trix flavored I mean I may be
wrong there may be people out
there but that the.
Tobacco depends on getting a
whole new generation of people
addicted and they say they do it
they target kids and they target
L. G. B. T. Q. communities and
people living in poverty and so.
We are trying to protect the
youth and my passion Linda if
you have something else and that
you want to add to that.
Madam chair and and
Representative Barreras I think
up you know that if you look at
the U. usage right.
In terms of.
cigarettes and E. cigarettes.
I think you know when we raise
the taxes on cigarettes the
cigarettes I mean usage of
cigarettes by you has went down.
I think right now it's under ten
percent.
But at the same time you know
thank you Secretary use among
you went up to thirty four
percent.
And so you know so they have a
cheap alternative.
Which is the E. cigarettes so
you know you can see you know
the the this shift you know kids
going to the cheaper product and
and and and you know we we we
feel our position is you know
that the question is not how.
You know the question is not you
know how the kids are getting
these but the question is why.
And the answer to that is they
are cheaper than other you know
like cigarettes.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
that was a great answer I just
the the way that I'm I'm looking
at it is I'm trying to to.
To make a decision that's best
for everybody and then we have a
lot of adults who are.
Who are are not giving you the
products they're not making it
easier for them to access it
they're they're doing everything
legally and it's going to affect
them I if the problem is the
marketing why are we not making
that illegal white wire we why
are we changing that the price
of it because that's not
affecting the the people that
are doing the marketing that's
affecting us I I I appreciate
all of the answers and and again
I'm I'm only sharing my
experience and and my experience
growing up where I grew up in
the environment I grew up in and
it just seems are.
It just for me it feels it feels
like what if raising the price
was was going to work then and
it would it would be it would be
working but but I appreciate all
of the answers thank you.
Representative Lord.
Thank you doctor gonna get echo
really bad so hold on one second
my step out of the room.
Okay thank you madam chair I'm
good now and a representative so
okay so we've established that
smoking is legal.
Are we have raise the limits are
up to twenty one so somebody
over the twenty twenty one can
legally smoke cigarettes.
And people do have the right to
smoke even if it's not the best
for the help they still do have
the right.
It seems like this is a.
A bill because I know that there
was agreement with tobacco
industry before races but now we
want to racist significantly the
only people I see punishing the
poor and that's very unfortunate
I just wanted to ask a question
so there is no tax on cigarettes
on tribal that correct.
Is it that we did go ahead.
Thank you madam chair yes there
is tax on tribal land a number
of years ago we created an
agreement with with tribes as as
the state races tax that they
were regular do whatever they
want to anyway but this.
Com try to
not me the same level of tax but
but increase it so when so they
are taxing so that they can use
that money to better they're
trying situations.
Thank you madam chair
representative interesting so I
recently saw a sign on tribal
lands that we don't tax
cigarettes
so my question and it goes back
again so people have the right
to smoke it is still legal we
have done everything that we can
to make sure that our children
are not having access to
tobacco again this seems like a
punishment to the poor I do have
one last question do you know if
there's going to be any sort of
bill brought forward as anybody
now we're we're going to
increase its tax on gummy bear
more one out that seems to be
geared towards children.
That kind of tax coming out.
Representative Lord.
I don't know what that.
Thank you Justin thank you for
trying to help children that we
would also want to tax you know
the gummy bear marijuana that's
also geared towards children
anyways that's all the questions
I have thank you very much for
your time.
Okay are there any further
questions Representative
Anderson thank you madam
chairman of madam chairman this
morning I've I've had to be a
bit in and out of the committee
but I did have a question or two
for the sponsor of Madam chair I
think my first question was I I
in that time I heard I'm not
sure I heard of what the FIR is
telling us that this.
Bill as amended would generate
in New revenues to the state
question.
Sure I can answer that.
It shows that this generated a
hundred million for.
Each for the state we have right
now is about ninety million
coming in from the cigarette tax
and the other tobacco products
act so this is.
Almost doubling that.
A significant increase in state
revenues thank you for that
insurance and it's only a
confirmation that I haven't had
a chance to fully review the FY
are
on that the hundred million of
new revenue is that goes
straight to the general fund
orders at designated in any way
question.
Sure Representative yes it does
there are a whole bunch of
entities that get a percentage
of the of the tax and so that
amount sure.
does.
How much money they get
increases but the all the money
goes to the general fund.
Thank you very much for that
madam chair I've only got a
couple more questions and it
goes to follow up to previous
comment I heard relative to.
Marijuana cannabis taxation and
I'm I'm.
I guess it's a question of this
to the sponsor that my sense is
is that cannabis is not taxed as
much and let's say tobacco in
general.
And I'm really wondering where
the.
Equity of that type of taxation
policy widest widest tobacco
merit a much heavier level of
taxation from the state of New
Mexico the New cannabis does.
By my back of the envelope
calculation question.
Madam chair I think before.
We go to an answer on that I'm
just gonna leave it because it's
not going to change my mind on
house bill thirty three.
Madam chair concluding remarks
unless the sponsor cares to.
This correct me for anything yes
I think.
This type of regressive taxation
to specifically over tax a
single industry or product is
not.
Public policy that I think eight
two
always the desired result that
we all share it and that's
reduced tobacco use by under age
consumers
and I'm I'm reluctant to.
Cool with tax policy yes the.
We have our on reducing that
important
Thank you madam chair.
I will respond some
Representative Anderson so I'm
the the the main purpose of this
tax is not to raise revenue the
main purpose of this tax is to
encourage children not to start
and and and it's been said that
tobacco is the only legal
product that when used as
directed will kill you and
essentially and the same cannot
be said of of cannabis and so
you know I'm sure and well I
will leave it at that
Representative Lujan very I I'm
sorry I didn't promote you
before do you have anything to
add.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you committee members I
did sponsor this legislation
last year and co sponsor this
year and I just want to say
thank you for those words madam
chair that and that is exactly
right I also sponsored cannabis
cannabis legislation.
Last year as well so I think you
hit the nail right on the head
by what you said
we can't with this study is that
we know about cannabis right now
you are there in New there is a
lesson less risk and less
More information that supports
the the the use of cannabis net
and and
Way that helps help to the great
and to address what
Representative Lord said about
the commuters and things like
that we did address that that
type of.
Issue with cannabis products and
how in limiting the way that
they will be commercialized and
and and sent out an
commercialization of messaging
to use so there's a lot of our
prohibited ways that have been
mitigated through the
legislation that we we look at
but yes
Using cigarettes and smoking is
the and when used as prescribed
as you said it is that is a
failure and and a quick way to
health risks and to avert that
we are trying to mitigate
through the tax code right now
to state which increases and we
do know that the numbers chair
that behavior changes when we do
this this type of
Increase in taxes so thank you
everybody in and our thank you
for allowing me to speak check.
Thank you Representative and M.
we've heard through the years
that that as as has been said
but I'm gonna restate it the
single most important thing to
you whether they start or not is
price bottom line is price and
we cannot control the price but
we can make it more expensive at
by increasing the taxes and and
as I believe it was Linda said
the the amount of money that the
state pays in terms just in
terms of health care is
astronomical and that suffering
and all those kinds of things a
few years ago I was on a task
force looking at the true cost
of tobacco use outside of just
that the health costs and it
it's amazing what the research
is showing that regular tobacco
users are much less productive
at work because they're taking
breaks to to use their products
and if they don't get the break
then they fixate that mean there
it's an addiction they're
thinking about their next fix
and so the production of smokers
in the workplace is much lower
the cost to businesses to
workplaces is incredibly high.
So I'm.
There are yes you have a hello
Representative office I'm sorry.
You madam chair and and
representatives so our bill who
is presenting the builder for
our in on both of whom should I
of which Representative is right
address madam chair
just ask your question
Representative and then whoever
whether it be that the experts
or or Representative Lujan or I
am.
Just just ask the question and
we'll figure it out.
Thank you madam chair I just so
first of all I just.
On one second I wanted to tell
you know first of all I am not
I'm not in favor of smoking at
all.
I'm not I'm not in favor of of
of smoking really at all and I
just remember as a kid the the
schools having a program it was
up.
Best some your no formal it was
a frog with big red lips and I
remember that it knows I can
first grade or second grade and
that really really changed my
perception on when it came to
to.
That I want to smoke but I
remember some of my family
smoking and I remember being a
little advocate to get state no
that's not good for you and
stuff like that so those
programs definitely do our due.
You'll school programs do it
affect and and allow people to
or kids to see a perspective of
smoking is bad and other things
that are backed and so
So really really quick I I just
wanted to
thank them for bringing of the
legislation I'm totally you know
against that I do think that
District of Representative
legislation should smoking
smoking smoking and I don't like
smoking all together but it
doesn't mean that others don't
have the freedom to smoke and I
just think that kind of
should be in in somehow.
Kids are smoking cannabis just
like just like cigarettes but I
think they're even smoke anymore
I I just west of high school
kids because I've got nephews in
high schools are cannabis or or
or tobacco cannabis by four was
our answer so madam chair.
I think I am on I had a few more
questions but I'll just go ahead
and leave it at that
and so we just a I like I guess
this body for can I make a
motion madam chair.
can't.
You can not the person who
you're you're the last year you
can't and we also have questions
from Representative Armstrong so
I will come back to you with a
for a motion after she has her
questions I have no questions.
Okay what's your hand raised
representative Armstrong.
Accidentally okay okay I'm just
checking out my sanity to see if
I thought that are I did not
okay
So.
Representative I'm Linda or the
hash do you have any closing
words or Representative Lujan.
Representative.
Madam chair point of order
Representative Lujan is not
listed as a co chair on the
legislation.
Okay all right so or
Representative Ferrary over and
Linda do you have any closing
remarks.
Not knowing.
We thank you for this hearing
and the sponsor.
Representative Ferrary are you
speaking to us.
Yes I'm sorry.
Representative Lujan is listed
and and.
Right Hickey and Senator Hickey.
Not online thank you thank you.
That maybe that maybe the online
hasn't caught up yet actually
now I see I have a hard copy
with her name on it so I should
have checked that before so.
And I appreciate all of the
discussion I'm sorry I had to
gone for a little bit but this
this is so important to the
health of our youth as well as
reducing adult use if you know
If we can save the health issues
and make sure that
New Mexicans can have a
healthier lifestyle that isn't
Governed more by the marketing
of all of the pack the tobacco
products manufactures so with
that I hope that you will vote
in favor of house bill at thirty
three.
Okay and Representative office I
said I come back to you for a
motion.
You're on mute.
Madam chair I make it.
Motion table this bill.
Okay do I have a second.
Anderson will second okay so
Emily can you call the roll this
is a yes vote what table the
bill a no vote and we'll be back
to other action so go ahead
Emily.
Anderson.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative bash.
Representative.
Representative Ferrary no to
table.
Representative Lord.
Representative Matthews is not
present.
Representative Montoya is not
present.
Representative.
Yes the table.
Representative Lord.
Did you have I said yes earlier.
Madam vice chair.
Yes able to explain my vote I
can't.
Chair.
I'm sorry I will vote yes.
Yes the one hundred three.
This bill has been tabled and we
will move on Sears.
Thank you all for your
discussion we will move on thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Please explain my whole
Then vice chair go ahead.
I'm sure
I just want everybody to know
that I do this these folks I
should be so heavy I completely
understand where everybody's
coming from would like to help
and how much money goes into our
health system for smoking I just
don't see this changing that and
we're in like really really
stressful time for everybody and
as as you mentioned madam chair
you know it it affects people in
the workplace we're seeing
people treat each other really
really badly and if you can get
your cigarettes I can only
imagine that that's going to be
get worse and and that was
something that I wasn't able to
address earlier and and I just
wanted to say that so thank you.
Thank you Representative.
We will move on now to house
bill forty seven which is
Representative Chandler and
she's on and and so
Representative whenever you're
ready go ahead
thank you madam chair good to
see the committee my first run
with you all this year and
looking forward to continuing
dialogue on important issues
This bill relates to
destination sourcing which we
enacted I don't know of a couple
of years ago but what had some
delayed implementation.
The bill has an emergency clause
which I'll explain in a moment
it also we are also presenting
an amendment which we which we
didn't get to the committee
within twenty four hours it's
really a cleanup technical
amendment that was recommended
by our ace analyst Pam Stokes
who does a lot of the tax work
for all of us here in the
legislature do you want me madam
chair to go through it line by
line or do the committee members
have that our company can ask me
questions it's really up to you
madam chair.
Representative Chandler why
don't you just give us the gist
of what it is I'm actually I
will move the I will move it for
discussion okay discussion thank
you for that and if you can just
give us kind of them this is all
what your amendment does
well that is the point of it is
it which is really just to
clarify
that it's intended to be the
location where the actual
business employing the actual
workers is is engaged and there
were some you know sort of
technical things so for example
on page three it says online
three line eighteen and nineteen
the primary business location
and so instead it was
recommended that we say the
location of primary use shall
not be altered by the interment
use at different locations
we define.
That's one it clarifies the
title on page one and to change
business location instructions
to just sourcing rules and again
remember this is a destination
sourcing bills so it just it
just clarifies some of the items
throughout the bills that as I
said Pam Stokes recommended.
Thank you are there any
questions on the amendment.
Seeing none do what can I get it
a motion to accept the
amendment.
So.
And a second.
And so is there anyone in
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Okay go ahead Representative
Chandler you have an amended
bill thank you so much members
and chairwoman
so this bill adds an exception
to destination sourcing for
services they're already exist
one for professional services
and it relates to a relatively
narrow field of home help health
care providers so madam chair
members I'm sure you know the
home health care industry as a
critical health care industry
for so many of us.
It allows people who are
homebound either because they're
aging or have health concerns to
stay at home and not have to to
look to move to an assisted care
facility or move in with family
members or so well actually
sometimes they are living with
family members but it allows
them to stay in a home
environment and have their needs
care for many of the clients of
of these providers are on
Medicaid or on Medicare and as
you all know the margins on
those payment systems are very
low and you know the the the
providers have to work very hard
to ensure that their costs are
down and and can accommodate
these these payers so what this
bill does in a not show is add
to and an exception to
destination sourcing home
healthcare care services hospice
services and personal care
services performed in the state
of New Mexico and instead places
the taxing location in
the area where the the seller of
the product is and the reason
this is important I'm sure you
all know.
Health care providers move
around various counties so one
of the the person providing the
care might go from Espanola
which is in Rio Arriba county to
another place in Espanola which
is in Santa Fe County because
Santa Fe actually stress I mean
Espanola actually straddles two
counties and then up to Los
Alamos there by requiring that
individual provider to ensure
she is clocking in her services
with the appropriate tax rate
and that's very burdensome for a
critical industry it critical
business often small businesses
for them to be able to track the
differences so that's the bill
in a not show madam chair.
Thank you for that we will go to
the we will go to the poll.
So Emily's gonna put up a poll
and the public you can you can
wait in and if you're in favor
or opposed to this bill.
Give you a few more seconds.
Okay.
And so the results of the poll
I'm eighteen out of twenty or
ninety percent are in favor two
out of twenty or ten percent are
opposed so we will now go and.
To public comment so first we
will start if there's anyone on
who is I'm in opposition to this
bill please raise your hand.
Okay I see.
Brian Moore go ahead Brian.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on brand working
Mexico counties
Over the years and and.
Chair chan are discussed in in
purpose.
We created this whole
destination based sourcing to
allow our local retailers that
are in our local communities to
build competitive with online
sellers we have to change the
whole system to make that work
and it was all it was a long
battle we think it's really a
good thing to do destination
sourcing
help our local retailers we
think it'll help our local
governments we think there's a
lot of good things about it and
we're concerned with all due
respect to to the to the sponsor
and the health care at the
consent that she's working with
we know it's difficult you know
there's gonna be some challenges
and and how these things get
reported the right jurisdictions
the right rates and so once we
we get that we think any kind of
accepts Gen was.
Go to the same problem we had
with gross receipts tax in
general we created like a Swiss
cheese so again with all due
respect we propose thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you all right now if you
are here in support and would
like to speak please raise your
hand.
Okay we will start with Dennis
are.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes.
My name is Dennis are
Representative amber Care and I
I echo the comments that the
sponsor made and thank her for
carrying this this has become a
serious problem for us and not
only because our providers go to
multiple locations to see
various patients but because
it's become increasingly common
in New Mexico for families
caring for their loved ones to
shuttle those loved ones between
homes we have several instances
where single person moves
monthly to different locations
in different jurisdictions and
unless the laws change we
continue to have to track them
every time they moved change the
G. R. T. I don't know of any
other health care providers that
have been put in this situation
and with the growing importance
of home health care we urge you
to pass this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you Dan next is Megan
Lorino.
Hi I'm Meghan Marino from the
New Mexico Association for Home
in hospice care and madam chair
members of the committee we
believe that destination based
sourcing of gross tax receipts
administrative burden to
healthcare providers based on
where they provide health care
we all know that care in the
home is patient preferred and
less expensive than care and
other types of location based
facilities so we believe the
state should be working to
encourage care in the home
rather than creating punitive
tax disincentives for this
health care delivery I'm our
preliminary feedback from
agencies demonstrate that this
does create and manage and trade
of cost for providers and we
just believe that adding cost
over had that does nothing to
improve the care for New
Mexicans as a lose lose
proposition for the state and so
we released that support this
bill and thank you for your
time.
Thank you Missy career.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Missy Currier was strategies
three sixty representing the
cities of Carlsbad and Hobbs we
support Representative Chandler
is intent of the bill and
support the change we appreciate
her sponsoring this legislation
and the committee's
consideration we would also like
to request that it be noted that
this change may also be
necessary for other industries
in New Mexico the money
generated from the sourcing
rules are crucial to
municipalities abilities to
provide essential support
services thank you.
Thank you next is Jason
Espinoza.
This.
Are you on.
J. sent.
Okay I think we'll move on to at
block.
Madam chair this is Jason
Espinoza can you hear me OK okay
we'll go back we'll go back to
Jason and then cap lock will be
next go ahead Jason.
Sorry about that madam chair
Jason Espinoza in the registered
lobbyists at the national
federation of independent
business and we represent small
businesses across the state we
stand in strong support of the
legislation many of our small
businesses that members are are
home health care agencies across
the state and what we've heard
from them is similar to what the
sponsor was saying there use
Medicaid as their primary
revenue generator and what
they've had to do to comply
comply with the destination
based sourcing as they've had to
add staff an additional staff
person to ensure compliance with
that means it's last dollars
going to health care delivery
and more going to administrative
costs what this bill will do is
actually insured dollars are
going to home based health care
delivery rather than that cost
and I think that was the intent
of the state that we want to
make sure those Medicaid dollars
really are reaching the patients
that need it most so we status
from support thank you.
Thank you next if block and I
apologize for the.
That.
Cutting you off the go ahead Pat
a good morning madam chair
members of the committee and of
course no problem of that block
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico retail association we
were heavily involved with
trying to bring some equity to
the market place between local
New Mexico based sellers and the
online market places during the
twenty nineteen session with
house bill six we feel like this
change and also the one this
career spoke to I'll address
some of the unintended
consequences we really in the
destination based sourcing
trying to deal with the delivery
of tangible goods and Services
are also.
Tax gross receipts tax New
Mexico so this would be one of
the steps needed to get rid of
the unintended consequence while
still leaving equity in the
market place between New Mexico
based businesses those selling
online from out of state thank
you thank you next we have been
Moffit.
Hello madam chair and committee
thank you for your time I'd like
to see the show my support of
this bill as well and gives.
The business specifics of our
situation we have offices in
requests.
State county in Farmington in
San Juan County
this is this bill would help
prevent the added costs we've
incurred we spend about twenty
hours a month to catch catcher
this data correctly with the
administrative employee high and
in ministry of employee we also
have to implement a new EMR
which crosses price we ten
thousand dollars to implement
and two hundred dollars a month
to maintain and with this added
cost we've seen no added benefit
to the health care of our
clients or to the quality of
life of our our care givers are
employees and clinicians so so
it's just an administrative
burden that I think should be
avoided and the cost should be
able to to go back to improving
health care but rather than a
straight across thank you thank
you for the public comment and
we will now go to the
What Representative Chandler did
you have anything you want to
add before we go to the
committee for questions
he just wants to just one point
madam chair and that is this
bill will have very little
impact on the counties in terms
of revenues and no I appreciate
the the slippery slope argument
that the lobbyist for the can't
the association our guests were
called New Mexico counties now
but I appreciate that but I
think we all have to learn we're
working with a new system and
that there are going to be need
to be adjustments for good
causes and this is a very
important component of our
health care industry that needs
as much help as we can get that
and there are so many families
that rely on the services that I
think this is a very
appropriate exception to ensure
that we that the service
continues to be available for
people in the state thank you
madam chair.
Thank you we will go to
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair Robbie short to
the point of.
I appreciate the Representative
bringing this forward as I think
it has only positive impact
being someone who's had an
opportunity and it's like to see
the good work that's done in
hospice I think that anything we
can do to reduce the costs of
hospice which only birds the
service support providers
is a step in the right direction
and I think it's correcting
something that perhaps was
unintended from the beginning
and I salute her for bringing
this this year thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Anderson I don't see any other
questions so Representative my
co sponsor Rep Representative
Armstrong and are we I did
notice that I'm sorry
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative Chandler for
bringing this bill forward and
allowing me to sign on this is
been a real issue that I've
heard from many many of my
constituents in rural New
Mexico.
You know the miles are long and
the days are short
the sunlight is short I should
say and so this is really
important to rural New Mexico
and other entities so I just
wanted to say I'm I appreciate
it Representative Chandler and
all the entities that that
brought this forward thank you
madam chair.
Thank you and just as an aside
kind of I on the golden rod and
from yesterday anyway it's got
Representative Chandler and do
Armstrong as the co sponsor
thank you that's why I do it to
me yeah.
Okay.
Representative Representative
you may want to get in touch
with somebody and have that
corrected and actually madam
chair it is.
The it is the Armstrong caucus
that is signed on to okay so
you're just not on there but
it's okay I think you're just a
little confusion for Wednesday
morning and so I will entertain
a motion.
Four two passed.
So a motion by Representative
chat office and just second by
Representative Armstrong and to
the amended bill so Emily can
you call the roll please.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative been passed.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Matthews is not
present Representative Montoya
is not present Representative
cut off.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
You madam chair yes.
Nine in favor zero thanks to our
Representative Armstrong and
Chandler you have a net
unanimous do pass and thank you
for bringing this.
With that as amended its passed
as amended and next we will go
to house bill fifty two which is
Representative Lujan and
Representative Hochman Vigil so
I'm.
I see Representative Lujan on
here Representative Lujan do you
have any experts or is
Representative Hochman Vigil I'm
gonna present with you.
Thank you madam chair now
representative happened hill is
not here with us today I do have
expert witness I have
The policy director for thank
you H. area showers and they
hepatitis and harm reduction
program manager Josh.
That's what tax what Swatek
in sorry just Josh for
mispronouncing your name and
secretary Scrase.
We brought out the heavy hitters
today.
All are not permit you all go
ahead Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee members thank
you for the opportunity to
present to you today I just want
to.
Just a small house and and we
share Representative Roger
Montoya the best in this
situation is going through today
and thankfully we are all here
you know today and and
mitigating this implement
whether yes you and meeting
safely during this pandemic this
right I just want to wish you
all my best in that he's in my
thoughts right now I hope he's
OK.
So I'd like to start by saying a
few words about the New Mexico
department of health and harm
reduction program first of all
New Mexico should be very proud
to know that our state has one
of the best harm reduction
programs in the United States.
It's almost twenty four years of
continuous operations Mexico
harm reduction program staff
members have trained several
other state and county health
departments on harm reduction
program the in operation
including the states of well I
think.
Texas Oklahoma
mediano Washington R. Washington
DC Florida New Jersey New York
so their work is been pretty
incredible in twenty ten the CDC
recognized New Mexico's bishop
this bill.
Invited the department of health
to train their grants project
officers on how to best operate
harm reduction programming
model.
Of utilizing community feedback
scientific best practices the
overall harm reduction program
has grown from just a few
hundred people in the first
years.
Over fifteen thousand annually
serve today.
It operates the largest network
of syringe service programs in
the United States state which
ultimately translates to wives
state.
Die of HIV hepatitis or other
blood infections and were given
another chance for recovery.
You are discussion to the the
law proposed.
This legislation the harm
reduction act was established in
to our in nineteen ninety seven
as only the second state with
legal statewide syringe access
program and has been a
continuous operation since
nineteen in continuous operation
since nineteen ninety eight.
In two thousand one New Mexico
became the first state to enact
legislation allowing legal
distribution of naloxone to harm
reduction locations.
As the department of health has
set the standard for public
health and safety measures under
the harm reduction model we look
again for bipartisan support.
That we saw it the previous
years and we had to amend the
harm reduction act to address
what we know today as a public
health crisis just as we did
with previous data driven policy
revisions as I mentioned that
avid syringe exchange programs
and no locks and usage we have a
proven record when it comes to
stepping up and working together
to solve public health crisis
crises in our state and we are
here today to do it again.
As one of the priorities of the
New Mexico have a department of
health this is perhaps one of
the most critically urgent
pieces of legislation will hear
the session and measures that
will save lives.
House bill fifty to support a
harm reduction program and the
department of health in its
efforts to address the warming
and rising opioid overdose rates
New Mexico.
The nature of opioid overdose
New Mexico's changing.
The program again twenty five
years ago when heroin was
causing overdose and hepatitis
and HIV for spreading through
intravenous drug use and you
know sharing today synthetic
opioid adulterants such as
functional are fifty to a
hundred times more powerful than
morphine and our leasing many
street drugs not just opioids
and often without the users
knowledge.
Anyone who takes a drug they can
get themselves some of pharmacy
is is brought to this new trend.
I'm not just to not this is not
just affecting you know our hard
core opioid users.
In New Mexico opioid overdoses
began to increase dramatically
beginning in late twenty
eighteen and because of current
statutory framework that we have
in place the department of
health was prevented from
intervening with best practices.
The department have program
estimates that one third of
Sentinel opioid related
overdoses about two hundred
fifty gaps New Mexico could have
been prevented if we had updated
the current law.
So substance use disorder is a
public health crisis has only
increased during this pandemic.
It is imperative that we rely on
science based data driven harm
reduction strategies
interventions and overdose
reversal to respond to the
opioid doctrines that have taken
so many lives here in New Mexico
already.
This bill does two things which
are critical to the department's
ability to intervene effectively
one it updates the harm
reduction act to allow the
department authority to decide
on the supplies necessary for
reducing the spread of
communicable diseases into it
exempts from the definition of
paraphernalia drug testing
devices that the department of
health help will supply.
These two provisions of the bill
will allow the department to
engage people who use substances
with sterile supplies this is
not only important for reducing
the spread of disease it also
means program participants are
tested given treatments provided
with recovery options and
importantly can be given the
option overdose prevention
education and drug testing
devices to the big contest for
dangerous tainted tracks and
avoid over to.
We could have saved many lives
we would we would have updated
this bill in twenty twenty one
what was first proposed we can
save lives now.
This is the moment.
We all can make a difference in
our fight against your Regis New
Mexico we need your help New
Mexico families and communities
need our help hi.
Harm reduction is about helping
people today prevent.
Prevent them from dying.
Doing that work today so that we
can get them into recovery
programs tomorrow.
Thank you for your time and for
present today madam chair and I
will.
Thank you for that to any
comments or any information from
my expert witnesses at this
time.
Dr Scrase go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee every year I
always start by thanking all of
you it means a lot to me that
you devote so much of your time
to look over legislation that
improves the health of New
Mexicans I want to tell yet it
means twice as much to me this
year as it did this last year so
thank you for that a second you
know I'm here today as a
physician and the secretary of
health and the secretary of
Human Services because in all
those walks of life I see people
who are affected by substance
use disorders and I think you
may have a hand out in front of
you or summer that you got an
email that shows a graph that
shows that starting at a in mid
twenty nineteen that red line up
for drug overdose deaths started
to curve up.
And from fence no we knew that
and one of the many drug
adulterants and we were
completely incapable really of
intervening to stop those deaths
because of legal restrictions in
the definition as you've heard.
Representative Lujan about drug
paraphernalia and and we do want
to intervene you know that the
department this is a public
health crisis you want to use
every tool we possibly can
intervene and to reach people
much earlier as soon as we
detected New adulterant the drug
supply.
I am with materials that will
help keep them safe so that's
what this bill is about it's we
don't you know it's interesting
that these sorts of yes
Representative served perfectly
legal in my patient office and
currently illegal for anyone
need yes around supply and
that's what we really want to
change I want to highlight
Representative Lujan is coming
about the children fifty
preventable deaths we would like
I would like as a secretary of
health to have those handcuffs
I'm I'm not attached to my wrist
so that we can intervene earlier
with the next I'll turn and
there are some coming down the
pike right now and I'm and I
think lastly that when we when
we do reach out and up engage
people in these sorts of
programs it is their doorway to
more comprehensive therapeutic
strategies to actually work with
their underlying substance abuse
problem and so we have filed
with no accent other
interventions that are brings
people and that's when we start
to have those important
conversations so I am of course
speaking on behalf of both
agencies and strong advocacy for
passing this legislation we
think there's additional federal
funding and grant opportunities
already getting jury just yet
we'll be able to get through the
O. H. and and please support us
I think also I we have as you
heard Josh wrist so I think
you're today as our expert for
technical questions interim
showers are our policy lead and
she would like to make a few
comments and then we'll turn it
back to you madam chair that's
okay I don't open up for Q. NA.
That's fine secretary Scrase I
just I have to tell you I was
talking to someone recently and
I can't remember who it was or
what it was about but they
hearing in showers is the
hardest working person in state
government so I'm just throwing
that complement out there I know
there's a lot of hard workers so
go ahead area.
Madam chair members of the
committee that is really to
provide I appreciate you making
that remark
I'm I'm really passionate about
this issue and I'm just really
feeling privilege to speak to
you all today a harm reduction
program has a really long
history of effectively
addressing these negative health
issues related to substance use
disorder including overdose
we're really proud of our
history as responsible public
stewards this kind of funding
but we are as you know
Representative Lujan and
secretary Scrase suggested we
are at the total impasse right
now with this issue we can't
move through it without your
help and really the two points
that we need your support on our
this modernization of the harm
reduction act number one you
know we really turned the tide
with hepatitis and HIV in the
state and we did that with the
support of this committee in
fact because we convinced you
that you know harm reduction
programs were worth while they
were evidencebased and that we
could really manage the spread
of these diseases by
distributing sterile supplies to
people who were using now we
continue to do that but we are
at a point now where the nature
of of drug addiction is changing
it's not really about black tar
heroin and needles and syringes
anymore and we need the ability
to update
supplies that we need to utilize
for minimizing the spread of
disease additionally drug
testing devices or critical
piece of this legislation right
now
you know we are we are dealing
with the criminal statute that
characterizes them as drug
paraphernalia.
this committee supported
naloxone in the distribute to
distribution of oxen is a
powerful tool and overdose
prevention last year we were but
we refers to at least twenty
seven hundred
are overdoses because of this
committee support of that
provision we presented
previously we're trying to do
the same thing with drug testing
of devices these will be
included and a comprehensive
approach to overdose prevention
and what's important for you to
understand is also that
This bill will make these
devices completely legal which
means that we can collaborate
with first responders law
enforcement and other state
agencies that we want to work
with and collaborating on
developing this meaningful state
response to overdose
I also want you to understand
that this isn't just about harm
reduction program participants
who are managing a serious
substance use dependence this is
also about young people you know
I was once Yang we were all at
one point and we know how young
people are still developing you
know they take more risks you're
more spontaneous and they're
dying by accident because
they're being young and taking
risks that we used to take
perhaps without the threat of
death
used drug testing devices like
fentanyl test strips give people
basic information about the
presence of something that is
deadly to them so I just want to
assure you that we have taken
great care and crafting this
piece of legislation we really
do think it'll provide us with
an effective mechanism for
intervening effectively with
this issue please give us that
opportunity and thank you for
your consideration.
Josh were you are you just here
for questions.
Yes okay so we will go with the
poll so I'm Emily will put up a
family has put up a poll so
please vote if you're
Give you a few more seconds.
Okay so this is a popular bill
forty four out of forty four in
favor so and I will ask just in
case someone didn't vote is
there anyone who wants to make a
comment in opposition to this
bill.
Okay seeing none if you'd like
to speak in support of this bill
please raise your hand and we
will start with that David harm
meal.
Yes good morning good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee David economy operates
trip lobbyist with the drug
policy alliance and I was
grateful to see a one hundred
percent number on the pole that
is consistent with the unanimous
vote taken by the sentencing
commission of legislative
interim committee and it's
consistent with the good and
sound in absolute necessary
policy that this bill per shoes
as the next step in the fight
against this epidemic of
fentanyl overdoses we applaud
secretary Skase strips Graeser
director of showers Sanchez for
bringing this important
legislation and we look forward
to its swift move through the
house and swift move to the
governor's desk to sign so that
we can as a state move forward
in stopping fentanyl deaths
thank you.
Thank you David next we have
Susan Wilger.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Susan Wilger and I work for the
New Mexico.
Center for health innovation
which is New Mexico's public
health institute first of all I
really want to thank the
sponsors of this bill and our
colleagues at the department of
health for this important of
legislation and the leadership
at the center for health
innovation we work with
communities throughout the state
and we're hearing from community
coalitions and regional advisory
committees and local
representatives that they are in
full support of harm reduction
and they wanted in their
communities we really support
the intent of the legislation to
keep individuals alive and get
them treatment recovery and
prevent the sport of disease and
we are in full support of
decriminalizing these harm
reduction supplies and.
Thank you everyone we hope this
bill passes quickly.
Thank you next year's Rachel
Biggs.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Rachel Biggs but Albuquerque
health care for the homeless and
harm reduction outreach provider
since the harm reduction act was
passed about twenty years ago.
Our production program is needed
in New Mexico is something we
should all be promoting and
proud of I love bragging about
it to our national partners a
lot has changed since our
protection act was first passed
it's imperative that the act the
updated to include supplies are
devices used for testing of
controlled substances and so
this year H. more discretion in
determining the supplies
available to program
participants according to the
CDC people that utilize our
syringe services programs are
five times more likely to seek
treatment and are more likely to
reduce our and injection drug
use our retention team see
incredible success with the lock
soon and we look forward to
seeing that same success with
our drug taking the equipment in
the future and we urge your
support and H. B. fifty two
thank you to the Sanchez.
Thank you next is Ramon K. goes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Raymond I
go so I am the co owner of god's
misfits we're in a community
outreach that goes on every
Saturday night feeds and clothes
homeless we're definitely in
favor of this I can definitely
go by first hand experience with
the twenty nineteen increasing
the federal overdoses that we've
seen in the streets as I've been
serving since that time we
definitely need more access to
these types of programs for
homeless I personally have
administered naloxone twice in
the past year the fentanyl
epidemic on the streets is it's
just horrendous at this point
when we go out there in the
evenings and the homeless have
actually reached out to us and
asked or are concerned with the
drugs they're doing the drugs
they're the ones that are living
in that situation and by giving
them means to test the drugs
that they're using I think it's
definitely gonna help because
there there is a fear on the
streets of what they're actually
consuming so as Representative
guys misfits were in favor of
this bill.
Thank you next is Eric Martinez.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Eric Martinez
restrict this for New Mexico in
Albuquerque.
What between those groups are
the largest group of all pension
providers in New Mexico and we
strongly support this
legislation in the last couple
years the the impacts working on
new patient of a large amount of
talking over eighty percent
they're not just all right now
and it.
I'm very are getting very very
very scary in our hands are tied
on China released use up and all
of testing strips the people go
go in and the people special you
want to consider whether they
want.
And and and we need the
discourse these everybody for
people who are using what what
and not.
But people the access whether
they're taking the dangerous
drug you're not so with that we
strongly support legislation
thank you.
Thank you next is Barron Jones.
Good morning madam chairman.
I mean they still New Mexico and
ADA so you as well as the
problem member of the New Mexico
state coalition and we you know
really.
What is legislation because we
see that the promises why state
measure over does that sound one
hundred percent avoidable and we
need to do all we can do to
prevent those us on the current
thank you for allowing me to
speak.
Thank you next is David.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is David Burke
analyst rating Macy's recovery
center we stand as strong
support of HB fifty to ninety
percent of the young people that
come to us.
It is fourteen to twenty one R.
coming to us for a substance
abuse disorder fourth and all
carbon all and the majority of
the kids that are using our I
usually getting it through other
means where they're using math
and there's been all in math
there's been all in
canister spent all in cocaine
there's been all and all these
other drugs and a lot of it is
they're starting to smoke bills
and better described as
oxycontin so we Spanish
transported this bill as it will
give the kids means a way to
find out what they are using.
Thank you.
Next is going to one Gallagher.
K. going to Lynn Gallagher.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm gonna let
Gallagher and I'm with the New
Mexico state aging and long term
Services Department LTSE is an
active participant in the
behavioral health collaborative
and substance use disorder and
harm reduction or portent issues
addressed by this collaborative.
As you all know drug overdose
death rates have been increasing
even among older adults the most
recent data indicate that from
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
I'm drug overdose death rates
have increased for those sixty
five and older.
So therefore drug overdose
deaths and substance use
disorder
have acted families and those of
all ages harm reduction is one
way to address this public
health crisis there for LTSE
strongly supports this bill
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you next therapists
Gerald.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm cert that's
Gerald senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce and we stand in
favor of this bill today we want
to speak to one important aspect
of fentanyl has become the
leading killer of adults ages
eighteen to forty five overdose
deaths from fentanyl laced drugs
cut life short in the rehab on
families and their concerns
about gun violence and crime
which are important and valid
ones we have to realize that the
most prolific killer on our
streets right now is spent now
yes we need to take illegally
possessing illegal use firearms
off our streets but we can't
ignore the immense damage that
drug trafficking is doing in New
Mexico as well part of stopping
the waiver of overdose deaths
involved allowing drug users to
determine whether their drugs
are laced with fentanyl this
legislation will ensure it's not
a crime to possess or use
testing strips to make this
determination we know this isn't
the only answer drug abuse and
overdose prevention in our state
it is a sensible step that we
fully support thank you.
Thank you next to Lucille the
Campos.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Lucy let us well as
the chair of gold futures New
Mexico.
Work HB fifty two because we
believe that it moves New Mexico
a step closer to address some of
the key components.
Tatian and provides an Avenue to
abort the criminal legal system.
I currently live in Albuquerque
but I was raised in Espanola
until about eight.
How many in my community have
been criminalized and trapped in
the cycles of incarceration as
they walked through their
journey of recovery we know that
rehabilitation rarely initiates
with black students instead it
becomes it begins with use
reduction people should not be
incarcerated for health issue or
face harsh sentences are greater
penalties we support H. B. fifty
two thank you.
Thank you next is handout all
right.
Madam chair committee members
thank you my name is Hannah
Aubry and I'm a policy intern
with the New Mexico Public
Health Association and a
graduate student working on mask
my master's degree in public
health I think it's strong
support of HB fifty two as a
community we need to be
stigmatizing take just one away
from drug use instead we need to
provide care and support for
those who use substance to
reduce the spread of diseases
and prevent overdoses.
Mexico is the first state to
establish the harm reduction act
in nineteen ninety seven our
state is a leader in this act
not calls for improvement.
HB fifty to make it possible to
provide lifesaving drug testing
technologies such as functional
test strips to rent further up
questions of drug use and help
the long term health of the
public thank you.
Thank you and I'm sorry but if I
ruined.
Murder your name on the dust.
Hello my name is an homage to us
I'm representing New Mexico
dance State a nonprofit
organization specializing in
harm reduction in the nightlife
community of New Mexico I'm
speaking in strong support of
these amendments I'm due to the
rapid changes and risk inclusive
behavior especially amongst you
we need legislation that is
equally dynamic in order to
reduce harm not only today not
only three months from now but
even three years from now when
substance use will be a
completely foreign landscape to
us.
Are currently just legislation
requires harm reduction workers
to operate unofficially and with
fear of the law that appears
contributed to the one hundred
and thirty six percent increase
in overdose rates of fentanyl
and its analogues scene from
January to July of twenty twenty
one.
This new legislation will allow
us to change our services based
on current use patterns not that
of years ago placing policy in
the hands of frontline in client
facing workers will drastically
increase our ability to keep our
population safe specifically
marginalized people and you
thank you very much.
Thank you next is just Jericho
Salazar.
Okay and and I think that
Jericho has that older version
of them so I'm going to promote
to a panelists so I'm.
So here K. you should be able to
speak now.
Jericho are you there.
Okay I think we'll go on
hopefully we can get back to
that there may be something tech
related so caring for under.
Good morning madam chair and
members the committee very robin
brown registered lobbyists with
the New Mexico Medical Society
the New Mexico Medical Society
strongly supports this
legislation we actually serve on
the American medical association
opioid task force in addition to
the New Mexico department of
health overdose task force we
understand and know that harm
reduction is incredibly
important as medical clinicians
with in the state we believe
decriminalizing button all
strips is an important step to
making sure our patients aren't
overdosing on the streets when
it's not necessary for them to
do so we strongly support the
legislation and the department
of health also would benefit
from the flexibility to
determine the supplies that are
necessary for truly adequate
harm reductions and thank you so
much madam chair.
Thank you Karen Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee chairman walk with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we stand in strong support of
this bill based on all the other
comments but in addition I think
it we can't over estimate that
we literally put in people's
hands with the strips the
ability to save their own lives.
It is that that is such a
powerful tool and we strongly
support the use of this thank
you very much next we have alley
my Rick.
Hello alley my Rick with the
center for health innovation and
I'm the director prevention
community collaboration
regardless of your view on harm
reduction it does seem like
there's quite a bit of positive
feeling towards that here in
this room and that's great but
some people just can't get on
board with that I think that's
okay so I'd like to just address
that we can all aligned on
saving lives in New Mexico.
So there is common ground there
and just wanna tell you a quick
story so from a harm
reductionist perspective a
felony Mexican comes in to get
services whether that be needle
exchange hopefully in the future
it is yes Representative and it
burst their cold towards the
harm reductionist eventually
they warm up and there's a
relationship there.
Those interactions allow for
that fellow New Mexican to have
more access to recovery and
hopefully save that life in the
long run so just a little bit of
a view from the field I thank
you for listening and I look for
to the progress of this bill.
Thank you next to fulfill the
unique.
Okay and this also says he's
using an older.
Versions I'm gonna promote fell
to panelists so Phil you should
be able to talk now.
There we go R. good morning
thank you madam chair and
Representative Lujan in our
state leadership for this my
name is tell a beauty in the
army action program director for
the mountain center that since
two thousand and five we've been
providing production services
primarily syringe exchange and
and the last some to Rio Arriba
county real Santa Fe County in
southern house County
I don't I would like to just you
know speak as far as the
community of people we serve
you know they're they're
surprisingly resilient group of
people who have easily be
adapted changes that have come
through the program over the
years a different formulations
of naloxone
are you know other changes in
supplies and this would allow us
to respond to the changing.
The changing drug supply in real
time I also appreciate that this
bill is not just limited to
fentanyl test strips is there
are other.
Other illicitly manufactured
opioids and benzodiazepines that
are creeping into the illicit
drug market thank you.
Thank thank you next is Dr Paul
in.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee and the
director of the route Services
Division Human Services
Department and I stand in strong
support at this very
thoughtfully crafted legislation
I'll just make two quick points
one is that fentanyl testing.
Does change behaviors when
people can realize what's and
what's in the substance that
they intended to use.
Recognizing the presence of
fentanyl actually does change
their behaviors and lifesaving
kinds of ways and as such is an
essential tool in the continuing
care for people struggling with
substance use and the second
point is just I would underline
that this legislation is
perfectly aligned with the
behavioural health collaborative
strategic plan so thank you very
much and I urge passage of the.
Thank you next is Julie on the
coop.
Madam chair members of committee
Julie on a coup I work with the
New Mexico behavioral health
providers association and they
also support this bill it's
really exciting to see all of
the support today.
K. next we will try again with
chair Costello's are.
Good morning.
My name is Derek cells are a
grew up in New Mexico I know
live inside New Mexico I'm ready
Peter with both features
formally eliminated I stand in
support of HB fifty two in our
communities we have a large
number of people struggling with
substance dependence in these
services have come to save
thousands of lives.
The services have helped to
ensure that they stay as late as
possible using that they avoid
the spread of intravenous
diseases and most importantly
these services have promoted
recovery please support H. B.
fifty two thank you.
Thank you next we have
Stephanie's Crawley.
Yes good morning madam chair and
committee members thank you for
the opportunity to speak in
strong support of HB fifty two I
am Policy Committee co chair for
New Mexico Public Health
Association and speaking on
behalf of an MP J. I don't think
there's much I can say that
doesn't repeat what's already
been said but these amendments
can help tremendously to reduce
these preventable deaths and
strengthen our community
approaches so we do strongly
urge you to vote to pass on this
thank you for this time.
Thank you next year's Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
the legislative coordinator for
the New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association we often ask
our members of the Legislature
to consider the impact that
substance use and abuse has on
how people end up in the
criminal legal system for those
reasons we ask you to please
support H. B. fifty two we
appreciate you reaching out to
us with any questions or
concerns that you may have in
the criminal legal space as we
always seek to be a resource
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you and I'm Representative
Lujan in your experts do you
have anything to do you want to
respond to where should we go to
the committee for questions.
Thank you madam chair I think
you I just want to say thank you
to all the those that have
called in and and the critical
support today they're giving I'm
here today and and just say you
reducing the negative have
Sorry I I'm I'm I'm really
emotional about this because the
system this is something that is
really hit home my community and
Friend of mine as well and so I
just again thank you for all the
support to everybody that showed
up today.
Is helping out with the
messaging and getting and asking
for this to pass through I am
happy to hear to to questions to
the committee now madam chair
thank you thank you
Representative Lord.
Sorry I have to step out again
are we going to get feedback.
I thank you madam chair and
representative.
One of the first things I want
to do is.
Address the issue that fentanyl
is now the number one killer in
the United States it's
unbelievable how many people.
Are dying from that knowledge of
the beyond everything else that
is out there right now I just
also want to thank
Representative goes on her call
and I know renegade the state do
some great work they actually go
out in the streets but gods
image that's and other
motorcycle.
The groups they go out.
All the time on their own and
they literally who's on the
ground helping people that are
homeless and actually doing work
to trying to help them
and that's really what this is
very important we address that
that knowledge you because that
should be our number one issue
above everything else because
that is the main killer of
people United States right now
thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative really appreciate
your words thank you thank you
for listening Representative
Blanco.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to other community members and
leaders who came out and spoke
on behalf of the spell it so
incredibly important to hear
from you soon set to hear the
stories of how this affects
communities and thank you to our
sponsors thank you
Representative Lujan for
building this for it this is so
necessary for New Mexico I
remember doing harm reduction
right out of school and going
into drug policy alliance they
had me doing there are
supporting the needle exchange
program and being out and
communities and seeing how much
of an impact it really does have
just have these programs set up
where people can be safe and get
and the support that they need
and it and as others people have
said today it's so opens the
doors for other treatment for
them to build trust with the
public health workers for those
who are and supporting them in
that point in their lives and to
it to really
get through something else and
and to get.
Get to your point for them as
well and seeing how and the
that that you benefited from
harm reduction of pride in
themselves to you where they
could finally get to the point
where and they they could figure
out what are the other options
for them and their license I I I
don't want to say anything to
mention where I just want to say
I'm just so appreciative for
this it it's necessary and I am
so supported thank you very much
manage thank you Representative
next yes Representative todos
OS.
You madam chair thank you
Representative
I thank you for doing this so
far I mean I but excuse me I'm
sorry Representative Lujan my
neighbor so I that neighboring
office and get comfortable madam
chair you know as a fuel
director you know I I see the
worst of drug abuse and all all
of the things and it is a very
very very sad
I guess scene when you go to
home we're a family members
found from over global do.
And you know I.
I've seen it a lot of times I
you know I've been in the fuel
business since nineteen eighty
eight and it used to be I'll
call.
Driven by the desolate younger
people now it's drugs drug abuse
and so you know it it is very
very concerning the only thing
that I have is I mean I always
want to set a few questions and
one of them in this legislation
I didn't final scores running
through this
How does the exchange program
work is gonna be a one to one
needle.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative access
are you asking about the syringe
exchange or you are you asking
us about the new
Yes Representative.
Madam.
Your muted Representative sorry
Madam chair representative this
thing has a little bit late I
was talking about the needle
exchange on needle exchange I
thank you madam chair and and I
will defer and asked a Josh to
to make comment as she is the.
Chair and harm reduction Josh
yes Representative we wanted
madam chair Representative
process so the syringe service
program is designed to
collection ranges back it's not
a strict one for one exchange
because that's not best
practices from the CDC on I'm
from the World Health
Organization and the reason that
is is because many people might
have their syringes lost
confiscated thrown away and
there's also more options now
than there used to be in the
past for disposal of syringes so
when hurricane program first
started there were no sharps
kiosks in most public health
offices and and through you know
we're now we're either
throughout the city those
options now so people have the
option to dispose of their
syringes in a much more
convenient way so we don't want
people hang on to syringes used
for longer than is really
necessary we don't want to
discourage people disposing
them properly also we encourage
individuals to dispose of those
areas and so that's what hard to
account for generally speaking
we we obviously want to make
sure that we're not leaving
syringes out in the community
and all the research shows that
if there is a strong service
program that is present.
We left syringes in that
community other there would be a
there wasn't one press so so
it's not strict one form we
encourage folks to return things
and we hand out sharps
containers and give all the
education schools.
Madam chair representative
So what is the ratio.
I don't I don't read it here I
mean.
Can you give me a ratio a
different a definite number he's
taught us is that they are not
Actually amending anything to do
with that so if we could stay on
the changes that this bill
that's already existing policy
so we can stay on the bail and
and just I'm I'm sorry to
interrupt but I'm gonna jump on
another soon for just a few
minutes and Representative
Barreras is going to take over
as chair so so go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and part
of the reason please on madam
chair and representative I I I
have a personal story and that's
why I'm very concerned about
that and and and and and my had
my daughter was walking on the
beach and was her friend they
were walking on the beach with
two visits and was struck by the
levels in the sand
also Madam chair representative
we're seeing there's a little
part that we have in our in our
community call the big ditch and
it has had I mean it's just
littered with needles some I'm
real concern over that and you
know you have kids I want to go
down play at the big direction
can't can't access to park
safely and we're just we're
having a big problem with that
so that was one of my questions
the other any other questions.
Just briefly with your
permission Representative draws
us will reach out to you after
this hearing and walk through
all the details of the deal
exchange program and you have an
opportunity to ask we can we can
go through a great detail
delight thank you.
Thank you madam chair and not to
speak is a good working on some
other things thank you for all
your support and those are the
things drive us so it just was
there any anything in here that
more the scope of what printer
from India is considered in this
madam chair representative.
But you.
Are you asking about the
definition of that
paraphernalia.
It's not madam chair
representative I just it was a
specific to one thing I I think
it was very generalized can you
help me please.
So what what this.
What we have in the
The.
The controlled substance act
which were mending here what the
definition of of.
Paraphernalia is addressing the
use of
or decriminalizing the use of
the the test strips so that they
are not now considered drug
paraphernalia so it changes that
that definition to now exempts
the test strips being identified
for being
address as drug paraphernalia.
Thank you madam chair I just I
just but I think I was reading
my notes and so I was trying to
read through here and and I
didn't know if it was if it was
Madam chair representative
strictly on just a yes
Representative sport it doesn't
leave it vague enough that
other.
Devices can be are in it you
know be used and how that would
affect our of.
DPS to enforcing.
Los.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative these
are in your good questions at I
think that.
What we're looking at
specifically is just the
amending of that definition to
in here too with the yes
Representative so we're looking
at right now and would allow for
as a tool
as we do with the syringes so
what we did
and amending our.
And allowing the exemption for
syringes in previous legislation
improvement in a previous
amendment to that the hard drive
the controlled substance act was
to allow for this redistribution
saying our way that we would be
allowing test strips to be used
as well and I hope that
clarifies that because.
What we are seeing the change
and the need for this this
update into the law so that.
We are not so we are
decriminalizing that usage so
that we have and now a new tool
that we added to the controlled
substance act that does not now
criminalized us with those users
are in when it needs to use this
yes it is a tool when they're to
they're trying to identify if
there is a substance that's not
opioid and in a drug or any pill
or anything that they're using.
Thank you madam chair
representative I just I guess I
was referring to page four on he
has the department shall program
of we'll get rules as necessary
for administration of our
production act putting the
development of criteria for
types course of supplies or
devices.
Representative I'm sorry but I
think Dr Scrase may have an
answer here I thank you Mr I
just wanted to clarify that
that's all thank you no problem
then.
Thank you for specific page
thank you Dr Scrase.
Sorry I mean interrupt madam
chair members the committee I'm
is a really important question I
think I'm part of the intent of
this bill is to prevent what
happened this time when
unforeseen new
drug adulterant and new
technology for monitoring it
came on the market so actually
the bill provides broader
ability for the D. O. H. in the
future with Nero adulterants in
New Mexico tech detecting them
to expand that in to allow us
and I'm gonna ask area to
explain further to allow us to
come up with new techniques to
stop the latest public health
crisis.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee representative try
also so if you are I'm looking
at page four and I think what
you're referring to is new
material on subsection E. and
that has to do with allowing the
department of health to
promulgate rules that determine
supplies so we have one issue
what which is related to the
changing nature of drug
consumption and the supplies
that are needed to effectively
negate transmission of these
diseases so we're not seeing
that the Sentinel overdose has
are actually being driven by
needles and syringes were
talking about smoking devices
currently that are really
driving consumption of that
substance so that is going to
allow us flexibility at the
program level to go through
rulemaking process that is open
to public comment and so forth
in determining what is needed
for that intervention the other
thing that you brought up I
believe is down at the bottom on
page six we talk about brought
exemption we already have in the
criminal statute in the
definition of paraphernalia an
exemption for hypodermic
syringes and needles that's a
twenty five year old
exemption that we carved out for
the harm reduction program we
are now adding to that supplies
devices that are obtained
pursuant to that reduction
program
with the rules that we've
established those are going to
be extent that that's pretty
much you know intuitive right
we're also adding on to that
supplies or devices that are
used for testing of controlled
substances or controlled
substance analogues for
dangerous adulterants and that
right there is the language that
secretary Scrase was referring
to so today it's fentanyl patch
strips right we're all very
concerned about Sentinel today
but we're already seen analogs
to Sentinel that are not being
detected by the stress so we
don't want to.
Come back to the legislature and
back to this committee in a year
and say we need to have another
exemption for new thing that's
used to detect adulterants we
know that we need a little bit
broader authority in determining
what those devices might look
like thank you.
Madam chair.
I have one additional comment
Madam chair representative draws
I have talked with in the past
twenty four hours J. as in boy
the secretary of DPS and also to
Alicia to fire share our
correction secretary and out
while I'm not the state speaking
for them they both assured me as
we are from that sentencing
board and the very first
testimony public testimony there
strongly supportive of this bill
as well and they feel it will
help them in their work thank
you.
Thank you madam thank you
Representative that answer your
question yes ma'am it just helps
thank you madam chair
representative right I think my
big deal is I mean we yes we're
trying to help drug drug users
get off of that prevent them or
whatever I am a hundred percent
against you know I tell my kids
you know I I make a watch up
Madam chair representative.
Intervention and and and I
talked to them about that be in
their little and you know
it's so important for you know
it's it's such a sad thing I
have five kids and through the
grace of god my kids have had
any sort of abuse drug abuse or
anything like that but you know
what I've seen so many parents
are madam chair representative
at the funeral home at the
arrangement table that are.
Beside themselves just over one
with grief and you know question
themselves what else could we
have done
other parent's worst my child
tonight where they were they're
wandering the streets where they
with what are they doing and you
know it is my child going to be
a live tomorrow and it's so it's
very very this is a very good
thing that you're bringing up I
just might my biggest thing is
also keeping the public safe.
In this as I the in on you know
I do appreciate what you're
doing my biggest thing is the
middle of collection and.
Apparently we have a.
the gap in picking up needles
because there's is everywhere
and certain parts of our of our
little town and that's what
worries me for a little kid or
just someone strolling around
the park like what happened to
my friends
my daughter's friend she got lip
you stuck with a needle and it
was just literally black and
when they pull that I'd love to
market it that was we have to go
through all kinds of testing and
all that the scary you know so
that's that's why bring that up
I just hope that we're we're
being responsible with a needle
exchange program but thank you
Dr Scrase on madam chair
representative were were
answered my questions and I hope
we can all work together to do
the best we can to.
Thanks
thank you madam chair thank you
representative madam chair I
just wanted to say your
purchases reasons in your
concerns that you have been and
and our families wondering where
our kids are with that are under
substance use disorders and even
I think that the conversation
has to go to you know that the
general use of
of as we heard to some of the
the public testimony today that
you know there are there are
users are youth ages early ages
and their just huge and broad
range of those are using
substances and this.
The importance of this
legislation is to provide the
tools and.
And the forty eight at the
department of health so that
they can they can further along
how the changes in our needs are
our communities in their
addressing those those concerns
agency needs now in your we move
from syringes and still included
no votes and we were looking at
it is yes Representative what is
coming down the road what is
coming down the future and
hopefully as were opening stores
in de stigmatizing the the the
the substance use disorder and
and in the public who are using
substances general
recreationally even that we need
to we we are this.
Meets people meets our public
where they are these these
issues and that's why it's
really important to have this
piece of legislation.
Thank you madam chair okay thank
you next we have Representative
Barreras.
Thank you madam chair
I want to start by thanking the
sponsors Representative Lujan
for bringing this this
legislation this is.
Is an incredibly important
It piece of legislation to me Dr
Scrase thank you so much for
your work on this and Mysterians
hours I have also ordered you're
you're a very hard worker so it
must be true we've all heard it
It is not discriminating on our
communities it's in every single
one of our communities and it
is.
It is running rampant I I need
more than than my two hands to
count how many close friends and
family members that I've lost
two phenyl and that's
Some of realizing that they were
using it and some not right
so.
I just want to really reiterate
how in Mrs and Mrs this is going
to the Representative about us
as well it was talking about the
needles and the best this is
going to going to help that and
this is also going to help
change the stigma around it and
and and this bill is that it's
going to circle and it is
affecting all of us and so I
want to share much I really
really appreciate this and and
it's something that I hold very
close to my heart like like to
sponsor and thank you so much
thank you.
Thank you Representative and I I
have one question and so
okay thank you Sir has the test
strip find spent in all do that
what do they then use a lesser
amount do they not use it how
how how does that work.
Thank you thank you madam chair
that is an excellent question
and it's all the above I think
that when our users are given a
tool and given information we
have seen the behavioral pattern
if they can either inhibit them
from full usage depending if
it's detected that substances
detected or using less or even
using and having somebody with
them thank you decide to use the
substance so it does affect the
behavior and there are different
efforts I guess.
That they can take and how they
make that decision but it is in
the it gives them the agency to
make a decision and whether or
not they're going to use the
substance I mean we are and we
heard again to the testimony
there are substances like heroin
that are being cut you cut with
other substances in mixed and
these are drugs that are out on
the streets and there the word
that gets around to the
What amount of different types
of of mixes that are out there
that are yes they consider
either like a high end or low
end or even a dangerous type of
mixed.
This is what is going on out
there and when when this is
happening and there isn't a tool
for them to really test and
understand what they're doing
and then we know that there are
there's more risky behavior
because they're going to they're
going to go ahead and just do
that without any information
this gives them the chance to
have information at hand really
like
Your locks said it puts it in
their hands and puts decision
and upon them to the state well
maybe I'll just use less maybe I
won't use it all or have a
safety net of some sort with me
when I if I do decide to use
thank you madam chair and Marian
if you wanted to add to that in
any capacity thank you I see Dr
Scrase has his hand raised so
we'll go to him I just want to
mention one tiny fact and that
is that these adulterants
including fennel are fifty to a
hundred times more potent than
heroin itself and so when one
yes a supply and sees the
presence of that then dramatic
does flooring is indicated or
you know and also people I think
realizes it has stopped I'm
doctor Baldwin pointed out
earlier that this does change
behavior it does increase
caution it does reduce overdose
rates based on evidence.
Thank you for that thanks so I
will go to the committee for a
motion.
Madam chair I moved for to pass
for house bill fifty two.
I'm not sure who that was who
was that.
Resented it bash I will third
okay.
Okay so Emily if you can take
the role please.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Matthews is more.
Representative Montoya is not.
Representative.
Yes.
Chair yes.
And madam chair yes.
Thank you.
Nine in paper zero.
Thank you have a do pass and
from the committee thank you so
much to all of you for working
on this we're we're we gotta get
New Mexico as healthy as we
possibly can so next we have and
the timing is perfect
Representative Lara Cadena just
finished in another committee so
she will go ahead with H. B.
eighty two if you have experts
you need promoted.
Yes madam chair good morning
committee I have Wendy Strack
and Scott Nicholson thank you.
Okay we will give a second for
Emily to.
Promote them to panelists.
I'm not seeing when the shark
yeah and it's got Medical Center
has been permanent.
Eight.
Let's see if we can get started
madam chair when is it possible
that Wendy might raise your hand
when you you're listening it's
they've told me that they were
on and ready okay that would be
great go ahead you raise your
hand.
I'm yes I found here now and
different name.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I am here today to
present house bill eighty two
it's a pretty straightforward
piece of legislation what we're
doing here is making at gross
receipts tax deduction for
dialysis facilities permanent so
this is a deduction already in
place that had a sunset on it
that's set to expire so we're
doing again just to make this
deduction permanent we are also
updating and amending the
definition of a dialysis
facility with me today I have
Wendy with first and yes that
operates they also disabilities
across New Mexico including in
any of our rural communities so
if one is available I ask that
she make a brief comment to
explain the incredible working
presents they've built in our
state and if needed as a back up
we also have Scott Nichols and
tax expert that's look closely
and understands what it is that
we've accomplished and would
like to upload here thank you
madam chair.
When do or Scott do you have
if you want to make a statement
that's fine.
I thank you madam chair
representative Thompson and
committee members
just briefly will tell you a
little bit about dialysis in New
Mexico there are fifty nine
total facilities in the state
that serves four thousand
dialysis patients that number
has actually grown twenty
percent in the last decade at
dialysis patients often at a I'm
get your from diabetes and
hypertension so that's the main
diagnoses we also see a lot of
people with heart disease so I'm
our company Fresenius operates
thirty two clinics in the state
and we serve over nineteen
hundred patients and dialysis
clinics are really important
that they be closed I for
patients because they have to go
a minimum of three times a week
so driving distance is a factor
and so the tax deduction that
has been in place since twenty
fourteen has been really
important in allowing all of us
to expand our presence in
communities across the state
seventeen new facilities that I
have opened across the state in
the last eight years or so since
the deduction was in place we
opened nine with for sale with
percent yes and I just wanted to
tell you about four of them
briefly in Sapporo we opened
that one in twenty sixteen and
we serve twenty three patients
in Clovis we opened that one in
twenty seventeen and we actually
serve seventy eight patients
there and in Albuquerque we
opened a clinic in twenty
nineteen that focuses solely on
educating and teaching patients
to do their dialysis themselves
at home we actually have over a
hundred patients at that clinic
and we're hoping to open
Farmington as soon so
date is not until twenty twenty
four that it takes is a couple
of years to plan for expansions
and so the reason we're asking
for it to be with that now is so
that we know now what we can
plan for two years from now and
it's not just opening new
clinics but that the things that
we hope to do next we need to
relocate a clinic in Albuquerque
to a better location and have
better building and we also need
to expand our Roswell facility
we've gotten more patients there
and we need to expand that one
so it's not just opening new
facilities that improving the
ones that we have that that that
at the tax deduction really
helps
lastly I will just say that
seventy six percent of dialysis
patients have Medicare and
that's because of the federal a
federal requirement that
help our program that allows
them to get Medicare regardless
of their age and so that's also
why the tax deduction is so
important to us.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you madam chair.
Are you ready for us to go to
comments okay so I'm Emily will
put up a poll.
And please the vote if it in
favor of a PO or posed.
Okay it looks like nine in favor
and zero against so I'm just
again in case you didn't vote if
there's anyone who would like to
make a comment in opposition to
this bill please raise your
hand.
Okay I'm not seeing anybody so
if you're in support of this
bill please right and want to
make COVID please raise your
hand.
Okay we will start with Jeremy
van.
As when go ahead Jeremy.
Thank you madam chair and up and
have some is right and called a
lot of things so the succeeded
up just real quickly German us
with the V. that we are another
one of the providers of dialysis
services in the state we have
eight eight outpatient
facilities and serve out seven
hundred fifteen New Mexicans
across.
Just the state joined with my
colleague windy and asking for
your support this bill the
passing twenty fourteen has
allowed us to free up capital
expenditure in a way that has
allowed us to build more
facilities to treat the growing
need and so I just wanted to
register to be to support of the
bill and
Thank.
Thank representative Cadena for
the for the sponsorship bringing
this bill forward thank you.
Okay that looks like all the
public comment this is not the
fact the bell of the day I guess
so.
So I'm Representative do you
have any anything you want to
say before I go to the
committee.
You madam chair and look forward
to hearing the committee okay
all right thank you
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair I'll be really
quick because I know we're
pressed for time to get to the
we're we're starting to get on
the end of the day
Representative
I'm I I I we have seventy that
it gets it it's a question of
more curiosity because I support
your bill what if seventy
percent of the patient load is
chair I heard that statistic
somewhere this morning my
question is if.
Yes sunsets and gross receipts
taxes are David do for this
procedure.
Does Medicare pay New Mexico
gross receipts on behalf of it's
Chair of patience question.
Thank you Representative answer
Anderson I appreciate this
question and I become fascinated
with this particular dilemma in
the ways that New Mexico both
gets reimbursement for Medicare
dollars and also whether also to
facilities from dialysis
facilities to long term care
facilities have that authority
to do the gross receipts tax on
Medicare so I don't want to mess
this up so I'm gonna turn it
back to Wendy to explain this
point but yes we are New Mexico
as often we hear is uniquely
situated when it comes to
Medicare dollars thank you in
short explanation will be
appreciated thank you.
I am actually going to put this
over to Scott our tax
consultants.
Thank you yes thank you madam
chair and and Representative and
chair no if if the tax reverts
back to where this is taxed at
anywhere from seven to eight
percent Medicare does not pay
any of that portion of it so
chair being federally funded
doesn't deal with and they will
not pay sales tax and other
states are G. R. T. in your
state that cetera so short with
users now well thank you very
much because that is a very
helpful answered only supports
my to my my my boat thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
We have a representative
Armstrong.
Madam chair did not have a
question I just moved to pass.
Okay I don't see any other hands
raised so we have a motion for
two passed to have a second
second okay.
Emily we take the role.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Matthews is not
present.
Representative Matthews is on.
Here Representative then you can
talk.
I think and I have not spoken.
Full time.
Are you a yes or no on this.
Committee so Representative.
From them.
When I.
Emily can can you
hear we'll go on income.
I don't trust funding
Representative Matthews.
Can you hear me.
Okay I'll return to her.
Representative Montoya is not
present Representative traffic.
Yes.
Okay back to Representative
McQueen.
Representative Matthews can you
hear us.
I guess not we we will
hopefully madam chair.
Yes Representative.
Future if she can hear could she
indicate with her thumb how her
vote is for not only today but
perhaps future technology
malfunctions question.
That would be acceptable but I'm
not sure she's hearing us.
Representative Matthews can you
hear us.
Yes I'm sorry I had my computer
volume turned down because I
take it down to the floor and
then it makes no worries.
Okay I forgot so I'm looking at
your I realize that nobody has a
clue.
What I'm talking or not I'm so
sorry okay so we we need your
vote on health bill eighty two.
Which one I'm sorry which what
is that that's the dialysis
dialysis the gross receipts.
Yes okay thank you thank you
madam vice chair.
Yes thank you those bonds as
well appreciate it and madam
chair.
Yes thank you.
Thank you can in paper your
first okay so you have a do pass
thank you so much and I'm going
to turn the meeting over to
Representative but just for just
a couple minutes again so go
ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair and the
committee let me pull up.
Sorry I'm in I'm in my I mean my
my truck I just picked up my kid
so let me go to my my email real
quick unless somebody can help
me out with the bill number.
Madam vice chair it's it's house
bill ninety seven and it
Representative Matthews I'm
sorry.
What okay thanks so much
Representative go ahead thank
you thank you madam chair and
first I want to be sure that our
experts should carry Robin
Brunner and Marquita Russel have
been made analyst we do that
please.
Okay now pandemic.
Right I would.
I see Mr Russell.
And I see Mr Carey okay thank
you
so
Madam chair members of the
committee.
As many of you know Mexico is
experiencing a real prices and
health care workers particularly
in rural New Mexico.
The twenty twenty one New Mexico
health care workforce committee
annual report shows no County I
repeat that no County in New
Mexico that is meeting the
national benchmark for health
care clinicians.
This shortage will affect every
area of practice to the study by
the workforce committee
including primary care
physicians OBGYN general
surgeons registered nurses nurse
practitioners and part
pharmacists.
Though all counties are impacted
by this workforce shortage rural
communities are
disproportionately impacted and
accessing healthcare services in
a rural community is becoming
more and more difficult with
each year and it's not just
medical people it's status is
our health behavior health.
professionals.
Others so we need to be doing
more to create an environment
where we encourage health care
professionals to open practices
rural communities.
To expand those practices when
they are successful.
House bill ninety seven is a
bill that creates one more tool
in our toolbox to incentivize
after workers to practice in
rural communities.
The bill would reduce financial
barriers to opening expanding
and operating practices.
Low interest loans to health
care professionals.
House bill ninety seven creates
the rural health care project
loan fund at the New Mexico
finance authority and grants to
thirty four NMFA to find
qualified health care providers
with loans of up to five hundred
thousand dollars.
I know that this is a great
agency to do rock because I
worked with them on the small
business loan programs for the
last two sessions and they have
done terrific job.
These are the rural health care
loans which could be used for
business expenses they have
guaranteed low interest rates
and they would be granted for
eighteen year term with very
favorable paid back terms.
The term but.
The actors are actually.
patterned after what we did with
the small business loan act
which we were passing during the
pandemic.
Pandemic obviously but to be
sure ensure of our small
business community.
If
this applies to a range of
health care providers
We want to help you with start
up costs and this would include
as I said pharmacists dances
mental health providers and many
many others the goal is to.
Create a critical mass of well
as you create
it is incentivized.
We'll have you the addition our
rural health care providers.
We focus on strategies to
recruit and retain health care
workers and we have all
identified the need to build up
health care services in rural
areas.
HB ninety seven as one tool.
I'll turn it over to our my
expert witness Kerry robin
Bernalillo
from the New Mexico Medical
Society for short statement.
Okay Russell is the executive
director New Mexico finals
Authority is also here to answer
questions and.
input.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you Representative Matthews and
thank you to Representative Gail
Armstrong as well with sign on
as a co sponsor on this
legislation we we very much
appreciate it ask Representative
Matthews said every year The New
Mexico workforce committee
releases an annual report in
which they identify the specific
health care worker shortages by
county and all of our counties
are experiencing a health care
workforce shortage in at least
one area but usually it is in
more than one of those
specialties that Representative
Matthews busted out.
We know that this is
disproportionately impacting our
rural counties so when the New
Mexico Medical Society as a
participant in a workforce
committee report CD's these
nasty coming more and more read
every single speaker the medical
society has really work with our
partners at the clinician
coalition to say what is it that
we can be doing in the state of
New Mexico to create an
environment of business
environment where our medical
entrepreneurs can choose to open
up medical practices in a rural
community that they have either
grown up in and want to continue
practicing in once they complete
their more schooling whether
they are enters a dentist
medical help but mental health
provider or a physician on the
when they have completed a
rotation with in their schooling
in a rural community have fallen
in love with that community and
know that they want the streets
there when our medical
professionals in our clinicians
are are exceeding school they
often have sometimes hundreds of
thousands of dollars of debt
from their education and
particularly when they're
choosing to practice in a rural
community they are often trying
to qualify for a mortgage for a
new home and these other forms
of that make it very difficult
for them to qualify for a small
businesses from the private
banking institution open
practice we believe that using
the model of the small business
recovery act we can leverage the
New Mexico finance authority to
this new revolving loan program
to provide those options to our
medical entrepreneurs who want
to open practices in rural
communities and we are very
clear in the bill that we don't
want to be limited to one kind
of health care professionals so
long as you are at business
entity whether you're a
nonprofit were an LLC or S. sole
proprietor for corporations to
would be eligible under the
landing in terms of these loans
we want you to practice in these
communities the loan.
Would be limited to five hundred
thousand dollars to to be the
upper limit on practices would
would definitely need to apply
for perhaps a smaller loan and
we really trust and respect the
great work that the New Mexico
finance authority has done
throughout the years to
determine the eligibility
requirements for when someone
should receive these loans
we are open to questions that
you may have on the bill it is
not a silver bullet there is no
one saying that we are going to
be able to do to resolve our
health care worker shortage
overnight we very much view this
as a tool in a very broad
toolbox that our state is
starting to invest in and a
recognized in order to make sure
that we are incentivizing our
workers to work where they are
most needed and that we have
great access to care regardless
if you're sick so thank you
Representative Matthews securing
the bill thank you members of
the committee and I don't know
is is director Russell has has a
comment to me but I know that
she's here in case our technical
questions on the NMFA's side
about the landing.
Hi.
Madam chair I if I might just
add one one thing that I think
has been mentioned this also
would provide funding for a
practitioner to buy an existing
practice we find that there are
people retiring in the small
towns there isn't anybody to
come and take over their
practices these are valuable to
the community and of this loan
fund would also provide up to
half million dollars to buy
those practices.
Thank you Marquita did you want
to make a statement are you just
here for questions madam chair I
think the sponsor and the expert
have done an excellent job in
summarizing the bill I would
just say this sort of combines
two programs that we currently
operate one the small business
recovery loan fund as
Representative Matthews
mentioned and then also we have
to direct loan programs that
fund health care providers
either behavioral health or
primary care providers in rural
areas so we have experience in
that basically will miss this
program seems to blend of those
two but I'm certainly happy to
answer any questions okay thank
you I think we will go to the
audience for a poll.
So if you are in support vote
that way opposed vote that way.
Give you a few more seconds.
Okay it looks like hundred
percent in favor thirteen out of
thirteen so once again just in
case someone didn't vote who is
that who was on who wants to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
Okay seeing that none of those
in support please raise your
hand.
Okay I'm.
Sure re Dodson.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is sherry Dodson and I am a
volunteer advocate for a a RP
New Mexico we stand in support
of the H. B. ninety seven
because we believe that it will
help improve the lives of the
fit fifty plus population that
we serve in the in rural New
Mexico and by helping them
receive quality care near their
own homes I thank you for
allowing me to speak.
Thank you next we have Dick
Mason.
And chair members the committee
may miss Mason and chair of the
action committee up to the
voters of New Mexico and at
least supports equal access to
health care services for all
people next to for New Mexico so
we stand strong support you know
I I also want to be as
separately use personally just
from former co chair Sandoval
county health council I'm just
workforce solutions assessment
but by county sometimes Santa Fe
counties discriminated against
because of you know the
concentration in Rio Rancho and
everything and it looks like we
have a lot of service for
providers but people have to
take an overall look at center
of the road patch of Santa Fe
County sometimes our staff are
very good I'm but there are
payroll taxes and Santa Fe
County that don't have the
services I just want to point
that out thank you.
Thank you Dick next we have
careless Cheryl and I'm proud to
say careless there was one of my
clinical instructors back in the
in the dark ages before
computers were even if things so
go ahead Karen.
Okay thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for
allowing me to speak I am a
physical therapist and I have
worked with children on in the
early stages of life and early
intervention with the family
infant toddler program for many
decades now and I have seen the
lack of providers around the
state in the rural areas
including Sandoval County we
have fit providers that travel
hours to get out to Cuba and
beyond to on small areas and I
want to thank the sponsors of
the bill for bringing it forward
I think that this will be one
way one of several different
things we can do to encourage
people to practice in rural
areas we have kids that drive to
Albuquerque to get their
physical therapy.
Kids who have to go out of state
love the court el Paso to get
some sort of care and some
receive care just through
telehealth so this would be
vital in helping to bring more
more physical therapist as well
as other health care providers
into the state so thank you.
Thank you Karen next we have Tom
script some of.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and township so
I'm the executive director New
Mexico dental association we're
strongly in favor of this bill
it really represents a long term
investment in these communities
not only for their health but
economic development and we
believe it'll pay back dividends
for a long time and and much
more than what's being best
thank you.
Thank you next we have Dorothy
C..
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
thank you to the sponsors for
bringing this bill I'm speaking
today as a member of the
veterans and military families
caucus we strongly support this.
I was raised on a farm in the
small rural areas so I
understand the difficulties of
getting health services in rural
areas we didn't seek health care
unless we were in crisis.
This bill will help for all the
reasons that have already been
presented but particularly for
veterans I focus on the health
and mental health and substance
abuse issues that veterans often
experience and the veterans live
all over the state so they need
access in their local
communities.
Not all veterans receive care
from the VA.
Either by choice or by lack of
eligibility but they do seek
care in their local communities.
There's another reason for the
veterans support of this in
that.
We support veterans court
services.
And those support services often
require contracted the local
staff for mental health and
substance abuse counseling so I
thank you for your time and
thank you for allowing me to
speak.
Thank you that looks like all
the public comment and I I would
just gonna jump in here Marquita
it's good to see you I was lucky
enough to chair the
at NMFA M. over the interim and
I've learned a lot and boy do
talk about hard working and miss
Russell has so many plates
spinning at the same time into
the fabulous job this is what I
would I was one of those
traveling physical therapist
going I went as far west as that
blue water as far north as
payments Santo Domingo coach T.
as far south as the coral and
and so I I know that there's
truly a shortage and this I I I
I like this bill so I don't see
any hands raised for the
committee so I will entertain a
motion.
We would madam chair.
A second.
Okay so that was Representative
Armstrong and then
Representative Ferrary I heard
somebody else trying to say
something did I miss somebody.
Madam chair it was me once again
I never get in there in time to
make.
Sorry go ahead go ahead because
your fresh but you haven't
gotten that that that really.
Through
the practice right we just need
to seeing your freshman song
again.
I don't know about.
Okay so Emily if you can take
the role please.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Now we are you okay
Representative Montoya is
performed Representative talk
with yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
And madam chair.
Yes thank you and in paper zero
a post okay you have a do passed
good luck in your next committee
they were all the CD I yeah that
be nice.
We all we all wish that so we
just take when we get him and we
celebrate so that concludes our
agenda for today and we got
through it thank you committee
thank you for your attention and
for the public who's been
listening in I hope you continue
to be involved in your
government and with that we will
recess until Friday morning at
eight thirty thank you all thank
you madam chair.
Okay.
