That's don't fall out of your
chair, out of my chair. I've
done that in this room,
so we will start, we will start
with Senate Bill 78, um, Senator
Padilla.
And whenever you're ready,
We're trying to, trying to be
brief today. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Senator Michael
Padilla, uh, vice chair and
ranking committee member. I do
have an expert witness here with
me. I'll have her introduce
herself here momentarily. Uh, as
you know, Madam Chair, uh,
because you've been a champion
of the topic that we're
presenting today. This has moved
through your committee. I
believe this might, hopefully,
if we get through here today,
this might be the 4th time. Uh,
we do believe that we have a
winning strategy this year.
Essentially our CRNAs provide an
incredibly valuable healthcare
option in almost all of our
rural communities here in New
Mexico in.
In some cases, it's the only
option that's ever existed in
those communities. Essentially,
we would like for them to uh
have the authority and the
ability to practice
independently, uh, with
certainty. They've done this
since about the 2004 time frame,
uh, as a result of an executive
order that simply codifies that
and makes it so and it provides
that certainty to bring others
into these communities as well.
uh, this allows them to um to
have the licensure requirements
that they require to have the
scope of practice that they do
today with care teams and things
of that nature and in, in the
healthcare facility.
uh allows them for the
independent practice that we're
after here, the prescriptive
authority that they already
utilize and then an expedited
licensure standpoint. Why would
we want to do this again?
Enhanced healthcare options in
our rural communities and all
over New Mexico, but primarily
rural areas, uh, cost
efficiency, professional
autonomy, uh, alignment with
national trends and then this is
something we've been doing for
over 25 years anyway, Madam
Chair. Um, I'm gonna ask my
expert to introduce herself and
then uh just to introduce
yourself and then we'll take
questions or whatever direction
you'd like to go. Good morning.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
My name is Angela Fritz. I'm a
Sierra. I've been here for 15
years in the state of New
Mexico. I'm the chief Cerne in
Alamogordo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. We will go to the audience
if you are in Zoom, on Zoom in
opposition, raise your hand.
Anyone in the room in
opposition.
OK, see and support on Zoom if
you'd like to speak, raise your
hand, and in the room and
support.
If you'd like to speak, you can,
OK, so we will go to Julia.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Julia Ritten and I'm the
senior director of government
affairs at the New Mexico
Hospital Association. On behalf
of our 47 community hospital
members and the CRNAs they
employ and contract with, we
stand in support of SB 78. Uh,
we'd like to thank Senator
Padilla for his continued
support of CRNAs. This bill
would codify in state law the
independent practice for CRNAs
that has been allowed in our
state for more than 20 years via
executive order, CRNAs have been
vital to expanding access to
care for our friends, families,
and neighbors.
receiving surgical, obstetrical,
and pain management services in
hospitals across the state. We
thank you for your consideration
of this bill and ask for your
support. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, that's all. So
questions from the committee.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to say that I signed on to
this bill very supportive. Thank
you for bringing me. We need to
get this done. Thank you. Thank
you. Do you wanna make a motion?
I, yes, but I just I still do it
sorry I'll suck it.
Oh, OK, so we have a motion for
due pass on Senate Bill 78 by
Representative.
Chavis E. Chavis in the 2nd by
vice chair Herndon. Is there any
opposition?
You see then you have a due
pass. Thank you, Madam Chair,
for a 4th time. Thank you.
OK, next we have um
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 120 as amended, no
behavioral health cost sharing.
We have Senator Hickey, whenever
you're ready, Senator, and just
a reminder to be brief.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I will be brief. Uh,
I come before you today to uh
remove the sunset and uh what
was Senate Bill 317, which was
part of the patient care fund
back in 21. The uh essentially
cost is a barrier to seeking
care in this year we're
investing tons of money into
behavioral health, and we don't
want to see that fail as these
programs blossom around the
state because
people can't uh afford the
copays. So that's what the bill
intended, and this just uh makes
it permanent that there is no
barrier, uh, the Hicks data
shows that um it's been very
effective in increasing uptake
of services between 23 and 24,
and um the eye backs are
basically finding that it's
really not rate increasing or,
or projected to increase costs
in the future, and that.
I bring it to you for uh passage
to make this no cost sharing and
behavior health uh permanent.
Thank you.
Thank you. So we will go to uh
Zoom if you are in opposition,
raise your hand in the room in
opposition.
If you'd like to speak, you can
come forward to the middle.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans, and we stand in
opposition to this bill. We
believe that this bill is
premature. If you look to the
bill, uh, the sunset date is 2
years out, we believe that on
appropriate approach to the bill
is if there are studies going on
and there are studies going on
related to this, uh, that you
extend the sunset date out and
look to the results of the
information that comes in from
the studies, uh, the one of the
things that has been said
about this bill is that it, it
increased, it doesn't increase
premiums, and when you look to
the data that's been collected
by the OSI, which you have to
understand is that health plans
before the implementation of
this bill, built in that
differential into their
premiums, so it was before they
were looking, uh, before the OSI
looked at the data, the health
plans adjusted, so we do think
that there is a cost that is
embedded in the premium related
to this proposal, and we simply
asked that, uh, you not support
the.
in its current form, maybe
extend the sunset and look to
see what the results of the
data, uh, are the results of the
study. Thank you very much.
OK, seeing no one in opposition
on Zoom, if you were in in
support on Zoom, please raise
your hand in the room, one in
support? If you'd like to speak,
you can come to the center.
Thank you, madam. Excuse me.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Ellen
Pine's representing the
Disability Coalition, um, out of
pocket costs for at the point of
service are a barrier to getting
appropriate care, um, the, the
sponsor has clearly explained
that it's important that people
get these services and that is
not only because they need the
behavioral health services
themselves, but because getting
those services, um, facilitates
their access to other services
and ultimately brings costs
down.
So we support this measure.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Viaria Akiva. I'm, uh,
the life and health division
director with the office of the
Superintendent of Insurance,
eliminating behavior health cost
sharing ensures the individuals
have access to medically
necessary care without financial
barriers. We have been, um,
tracking the savings, um, as,
uh, and the center Hickey, uh,
uh, noted, and, um, they are
real, uh, the lot continues to
work smoothly and we urge your
passage.
This bill, thank you.
Thank you, and I don't see
anybody on Zoom, um, so I will
go to the committee.
Representative Martinez.
OK, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Doctor Senator.
Um
Is, is this gonna drive costs
up.
Um, Madam chair and uh
representative, no, actually the
data from Milliman uh in
extensive studies shows that if
you uh stabilize behavioral
health conditions, chronic
disease, exacerbations, which
are probably 30 to 40% of
healthcare costs, uh, tumbles
significantly, and so it's a
huge cost savings.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
And Senator
I'm looking at the amendment
from Senate Health and Public
Affairs.
I'm, I'm just curious why did
they
Why did they remove emergency
department visits and urgent
care visits.
Uh, there was some question that
uh
That was not in the original,
uh bill per se, and so was added
in, uh, many and, uh, of the
IBAC agencies agreed that they
already cover it, but, uh, to
Give them uh those in terms of
uh how they might do their
calculations. Uh, it was taken
out at their request, some of
them, but again, it's a mix.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Any further
questions?
I will entertain emotion.
Yes.
Oh, OK, go ahead. Thank you,
Representative Jones, I would
like to hear your response to
the request to extend the
sunset. First of all, when, when
is the sunset? Uh, the sunset is
in uh 27, uh, the issue is that
next year is a governor's call
year and so we
out of room to be able to get it
done. Uh, that's one reason and
also we're seeing that the
Uptake is very positive in this
year that we're putting all this
money into behavioral health
these programs, we don't want
people to have those barriers in
finally getting the services
that are gonna be achieved
through the regional grants.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative,
I'll do pass.
2. OK.
So we have a motion for a new
pass on um back.
They substitute for Senate Bill
120 as amended by Representative
E Chavis in the second by a
representative Anaya.
Is there any opposition?
So could you please take the
role?
Representative Benay.
Yes.
Representative case.
Representative
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, yes, 6 to 26 to 2, you
have a due pass. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
And next we will go to House
Bill 589 if the sponsor has
reorganized her files.
She's working on it.
Thank, thank you Senator.
this video.
This is your bill.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we're back before you
with House Bill 589. So you
looked at this on Monday, we do
have a committee substitute,
Madam Chair, I'd like to move
the substitute for discussion.
Thank you. If we, is it in our
books? Yes, OK, go ahead. All
right. So, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee during
our last conversation, there was
much concern about what happens
with respect to individuals who
are auto-assigned. And so one of
the things that we would try
to do is number one, preserve
choice and make sure that
families always stay together
when they're on a uh unified um
um medical program, whoever that
may be with, when you're on
Medicaid. Right now there are 4
MCOs. So, and looking at the
division of the, of the um of
people when they make, when they
are signing up for Medicaid, we
people are given the opportunity
to make a choice. Sometimes
they.
Don't make a choice. And when
they don't make a choice, the,
the rules provide for auto
assignment based upon the way
we're looking at the numbers to
help ensure that people have
equal access to healthcare if
you don't make a choice, we're
asking the healthcare authority
to, to make those assignments to
those MCOs that have the fewer
number of people assigned to
them because we want to make
sure that people have equal
access to health care when they
need it.
If you look at this, for
example, if there are 100 and if
there are 100,000 people in one,
MCO and only 2 in another, if
you're trying to get in to see
someone, uh, talk to someone
about your services, it's gonna
be more difficult where there
are 100,000 than if they're only
uh 20,000, so we're saying when
there is no choice made, we want
to emphasize that, that you,
that the uh healthcare authority
will make a
Referential assignments first to
those MCOs that have the least
amount of individuals assigned
to them. That's not taking away
anything from anybody. It's
really trying to equalize the
system. So if you look at page 2
of the substitute, um, bill of
the substitute for House Bill
589 and in paragraph 6, you will
see that the department's action
in balancing Medicaid recipients
shall preserve member choice in
accordances.
with federal law. So with that,
Madam Chair, I want to introduce
my wonderful expert. He's here
and would like for him.
To introduce himself. I'm Kim
Ross,
Campbell Public Affairs in
Austin, Texas, and I apologies,
so I, I was educated in
Oklahoma, Oklahoma State. I'm
like, my mother's like 3rd
generation, but I apologize for
that. Long story short, uh,
I worked a lot in other states
where these kinds of
consolidating issues have
resulted in significant
dysfunctions in terms of access
to care, supply of, uh, and, and
distribution of of physicians
and physician networks in and
outside Medicaid programs I've
been involved in civil RICO
cases, national class sanctions
with this sort of thing occurs
because of the sheer size and
the influence of of involved in
a case involving the uh surfing
and turfing of a disability
patients in uh San Antonio by a
health plan in a hospital
system, so I'm sitting long
term. I'm
I cannot speak to what's
happened here. your early days
here anyway, but the sheer size
of these things attracts that
sort of concern and he wanted to
just at least raise that issue
in terms of what I've been
involved with in other states
where you have a dominant market
and you have 90% of the patients
all in, in, in two systems.
So, uh, with that, Madam Chair,
we will stand for questions. We
took public comment.
the first time around, so we're
just gonna go to the committee.
Excuse me, so I have
representative Nico Nicole
Chavez, Eleanor Chavez, Anaya.
OK,
go ahead, Representative Nicole
Chavez, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I, I won't
echo the same exact comments I
said Monday cause I don't think
that.
Your amendment changed anything
really. Um, of, of what we've
already talked about. I mean,
it, it's just as balanced
Medicaid recipients shall
preserve member choice in
accordance with federal law,
which is already what it does.
So currently right now, were you
aware that the process is if an
unrollly doesn't choose an MCO,
they're auto assigned to one of
the two MCOs who have less than
30% of the total share of
members, which is United and
Molina. That already happens.
So I don't know what your bill
is trying to do, except for
completely removed Blue Cross
Blue Shield and Presbyterian. So
this is already happening. And
then again, I just want to
remind the committee that every
year when they recertify, they
get to choose again which
carrier they want.
They don't have to stick with
the same plan they're on, they
can change. And again, they just
went through that process when
the new RFP took over, and then
there was again that 6 month lag
after that to still make an
additional change if they
weren't happy. So the goal of
the bill of this or the
amendment is to really preserve
patient choice. Um, I wouldn't
change the current system and
HCA, who is not in favor of this
bill and they did speak and
they're also.
Here in the room today saying
that they are not in favor of
this bill. They have just went
through, you know, all of the
changes in their system. There's
nothing that they need to
change, and again, they would
have to, as well as all the
MCO's invest in millions of
dollars to try to make changes
and do mailers and do more radio
and do more commercials, um,
there, there, this is already
being done, so I think because
less than 30% of the
Total share members goes to
those Molina and United, um,
it's already included in the
process, um, and I will just add
that before United lost the bid.
I was working there on the
Medicare side, and um I know
that they are the ones that sold
most of their membership to
Presbyterian and and when they
were leading, having a majority
of members at the time, they
didn't have a problem with.
that at all for decades, but now
they do because they just got
the RFP bid and and their
membership isn't where they
thought it would be, and so I
just feel like that really isn't
fair, that now they have a
problem with it when they were
perfectly happy, having the
majority of members before they
lost that bid, um, and so I, I
guess for for me expert, do you,
are you hired for United or
Molina. I I never, you never
gave us that answer on Monday.
I beg your pardon, Matt Sherman,
uh uh representative. I uh I
worked for a number of national
firms. I am not being paid by
anybody locally here in New
Mexico to be here. I have a
virtual capital company that
wanted me to be sure to come
over here and, and of course I,
I have a national retainer with
Molina, but I do not work in
this state and this has to do
with broader strategic concerns
and network development, but I'm
not billing anybody for being
here if that answers your
question. OK. Um, well, Madam
Chair Representative, and, and
we don't.
I won't read you the contract
from the RFP again, but remember
that it was not promised to any
of the MCO carriers that they
would get a balanced membership
or that people would be
reassigned, um, I just know that
you have to remember that Blue
Cross Presbyterian, the two
largest carriers have been
around for almost 100 years in
the state.
Presbyterian is the only New
Mexico health plan that exists,
um, both of those have been
around since the existence in
the 90s of Medicaid coverage,
and so they're loyal members
that have, you know,
Presbyterian or loveless doctors
that align with those providers
and I think it's really
important to keep in mind that,
um, the HCA is starting the
process to align members based
on the quality of plan based on
the providers that those
patients, members may have, and
so it's just really important
that they are making it a point
to align based on quality, based
on doctors, and based on patient
choice, which is what we want
our Medicaid members in this
state to have, and so I don't
feel like that line, those three
lines that you added really
changed the bill at all. Um, I,
I, I don't wanna go back into my
comments because I'm sure we all
know what I pointed out, so I
think those those are really the
only.
comments and additional
questions I have. Thank you.
So, Madam Chair, if I could just
uh 2 quick items just based on
the conversation, Madam Chair,
uh, the representative Chavez
just made, or do you, are you
aligned or work for any one of
these or entities that are
listed as an MCO. I work for
Presbyterian, not in the
Medicaid side. That's a
completely different line. I
came from United Healthcare
before that. Before that, I came
with from Loveless when we lost
the bid there.
So I have been in healthcare
working for all the health plans
across the state for the last 25
years of my life. But no, I do
not work for the Medicaid line
of business.
Beams here, uh, I understand
that HCA is in the audience and
I uh healthcare authority who's
here? Can you come? May we ask
her to come forward, Madam
chair. I think it would be a
good idea, if you don't mind for
her to explain because we
haven't seen anything in writing
to describe what I have
described before this committee.
Would you please come forward?
Very briefly, please.
it.
So, uh, would you please
introduce yourself and then
we'll ask you to tell us how the
assignments auto assignments are
made and then where we might see
that.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for having me here today. My
name is Dana Flannery and I am
the Medicaid director here in
New Mexico, and I work for the
healthcare authority. The auto
assignment today as described.
Does favored the two smaller
plans when anyone does not elect
a choice.
For example, if I pulled the
month of December.
There was approximately
10,000 by choice.
And less than 1000 by auto
assignment. The auto assignment
up to 30%, uh, any plans to have
a membership under 30% is being
favored currently to the smaller
plans, and as mentioned, there
is going to be a quality.
Griffin, auto algorithm that
we've noticed all the plans on,
and that is the premise of
turquoise care is to reward
quality, not just any
healthcare, and that will be
starting in 2026. And we had
given our 12 months' notice to
the plan starting January.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, very much, Ms.
Flannery for explaining that. So
um what we were
So what we were doing is
actually uh looking at what the,
what the uh what you're doing, I
guess we were a little bit
under, not understanding why you
objected if we were doing what
you were already doing.
So, but that's OK. One of the
things that is important is uh
with the, as long as there is a
lesser number with respect to
any MCO 30% or less, you will
continue to make the auto
assignment to them, but in the
future, you're gonna only do it
on quality.
That's correct. And, and just
quickly, um, Miss Flannery, how
do you all, uh,
that quality.
Representative, we're, we're
trying to keep moving, so yeah,
that that doesn't really have
anything to do with it just made
a difference in terms of how
this bill is applying and how
these would be applied in the
future and with that quality be
based on just numbers or is it
based on actual work for
purposes of this bill and moving
it forward, it would make a huge
difference, Madam Chair, she
could just answer very quickly,
we will just move forward.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Quality metrics are
typically national recognized
metrics that you can also find
as performance measures and
tracking measures within the
current turquoise care.
Contract and plans are assessed
by those national quality
metrics.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I also want to point out I'm not
sure why you asked the question
if I worked for a carrier, but I
think it's very important to
know what's happened with MCOs
because I was one of the members
that got laid off when Loveless
health plan had to sell because
they lost the RFP for Medicaid.
So I am very well aware of how
health plans work, and I hope
that you weren't trying to state
that I was.
Saying because I work for a
health plan that I am taking
this. I, I know how MCO's work.
I worked for health plans for
almost 25 years and so I have
knowledge of how the process
works. And again, I lost my job
when I was at Loveless because
they lost the bid. I then lost
my job at United when they lost
the Medicaid bid. And so it's
very important that it impacts
an entire health plan when you
talk about Medicaid membership
and realignment and so that's.
That's why I have so much
knowledge and I'm so passionate
about how the process works and
how the state has aligned the
process. It's very important,
um, when you get down to
statistics and numbering and
membership and realignment,
because it affects so many
people in our community, not
just patients, but people that
work for these health plans,
care coordinators that were
hired out outreach staff, um,
directors, CEOs, so it affects
Every single part of that.
Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you. Um, I, I just do have
a question for you, um,
just a point of order. I do want
a voice.
For the record,
That
Asking a member of of private
personal
Question
I thought that was not allowed,
and it just
No, no problem whatsoever asking
a personal question. I just
wanted to voice my complete
Opposition to that line of
questioning. Thank you. So I
would just like to um I wanna
ask the, the um Medicaid
director. So the quality
assignments are gonna start, you
said in 2026. Is that fiscal
year calendar year what's the
actual date of start, Madam
members of the 1126.
OK, so,
Essentially 10 months from now.
OK, thank you. Um, and I, I.
Representative Martinez, I agree
with you. That was um out of
bounds. So Madam Chair, I think
that it is important and it has
always happened in this
committee hearings where there
was a personal line that was a
disclosure that was made. So if
you work for someone that you
are talking about, that's a part
of our conversation. It is not
out of line to ask that,
particularly when it was brought
up that she was in the
healthcare field. So, as I have
said to these committee
meetings, when people have been
aligned in any way, they have
always made to disclosure and it
was not made here, so it was not
out of line, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, then I would ask that
everybody on this committee
start admitting whose payroll
they're on.
Um, we're, we're fair,
fair is fair, and, and I'm, I, I
apologize.
Representative that that a lot
because we are not allowed to
question each other's motives,
um, and, and I will tell you,
not everybody discloses and, and
that's not practice to have
members, um, disclose. So with
that, we will move on and I will
go to uh Representative Eleanor
Chavez. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and actually one of the
questions that I had on my list
was with regard to um uh quality
metrics, and you answered that
question.
Um, thank you for that, but what
I, what I would like, I would
love to see the metrics that
you're using, um, so if you
could give, send us a I'm and
I'm sure maybe to to the
committee so that we can see
what that looks like, um, and
then the other question that I
have is with regard to the two
smaller um MCOs like the United
and um I can't remember the
other one.
Bolina
Um, so, do, do the other, this
Presbyterian, um, except, um,
Molina and um United Healthcare.
Participants MCO um
participants.
In their health plan, whoever
can answer the question. Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I could get you their
entire network assessment as far
as if each one does, I would
have to go back and look at our
network roster. Yeah, and the
reason that I'm asking, Madam
Chair, um, Representative, is
that I know that if you have
Blue Cross Blue Shield and um,
for example, UNMH accepts Blue
Cross Blue Shield, Presbyterian
doesn't. So I guess what I was
trying to do was kind of get in
a uh an idea.
No, they don't.
But you UNM accepts Blue Cross
Blue Shield. Presbyterian does
not.
No, I'm, that's not what I'm
talking about people who are on
MCO for decorum
and when, when someone is
questioning, um, we don't.
Interrupt them. Thank you.
And so the reason that I'm
asking that is that I know that
sort of Presbyterian MCO or
Presbyterian doesn't accept some
of these plans, so how does that
Um, create so more access, I
guess is the point that I'm
trying to get at.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, all MCOs are required
to meet network adequacy, how
they go about that and who they
contract with is part of the
managed care environment, and so
they have to meet the access to
care standards. However, who
they contact with.
And then also, if a provider is
in your network, your members
can see that provider directly.
If a provider is not in your
network and a member has a need
for a specific writer outside of
the network, you can enter into
single case agreements to still
cover the service, but
ultimately the plan's
responsibility all for is for
network adequacy.
And is there, Madam Chair,
representative, is there a way
for us to uh get information in
terms of what that looks like.
Adam chair members of the
committee, yes, we have
reporting Geo accesss reporting,
network adequacy reporting. We
also have the entire file of
every Medicaid registered
providers that we're going to be
working with the MCOs to do a
comparative analysis. We'll look
at the total universe of the
percentage of Medicaid
registered providers that each
NCO is contracted with. But
ultimately, the standard is.
I network adequacy. I'm, I'm
gonna ask folks to stay on the
bill. There's nothing about
quality. I know that we have
questions, but we do need to get
through, um, so, so then, um,
Madam Chair representative HCA,
um, that's the other piece of
information I would like to to
see if when you have a moment.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Anaya.
I'll reserve my comments, Madam
Chair.
Uh
Representative Martinez had to
step out, Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and thank you,
Representative for bringing this
forward. So I see the committee
sub and um and you, uh,
addressed.
Uh,
The
The personal choice, the member
choice by just saying in
accordance with the federal law.
Um, if we're already auto
signing those who do not choose.
To the lesser
Um
The lower, uh,
Uh,
amount of participants and and
their plans. Why do we need this
bill?
Well, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, one of the things
that happened, uh, it's all
about communication. I had asked
more than once how are are the
assignments made. Unfortunately,
I didn't get a, a response. And
so now, um, I have an official
response from the director of
Medicaid, that that's how it was
done, uh, with that, with
respect to that, the other
aspect of this was to make sure
that that would continue to be
um auto assignments based upon
the smaller amount on the
smaller
size until at least there was
equality among the uh terms. Now
I understand that there is a new
law that will be coming into
effect on 2026 in terms of
equality initiative. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. That would be uh
a main thing is is I'm I'm not
sure this is necessary, um,
obviously a good idea cause
we're doing it. And so, um, I
just, just for the section C,
it's not changed and
And so is that addressing uh the
last time you brought this
representative in Chavis, I
thought brought a great um
comment about if you, you wanna
make sure you're Medicaid
follows your Medicare choice,
and if you didn't make a
selection on your Medicaid. You
don't want it auto selected into
the Medicare. This especially
happens for the population you
talk about on page 2 section.
see, does this address that
issue as you are developing your
auto select plans now and in
this, this is a simple
Adding a few lines, so we're not
gonna get off into, we've
already gotten off, but let's
stay on the um on the amendment.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
am, and it was one of my issues
I had with it, and so I'm making
sure that it was addressed.
So let me, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Kate, so the idea was that they
had made a selection as
Medicaid, the, the section 6 or
paragraph 6 under B was still to
be in effect. It means that they
wouldn't change for their
Medicaid, I mean, if they made
Medicare selection because of
some disability that Medicaid
would also be the same. So the
intent was that 6 would still be
the uh overriding presumption,
and that is with respect to the
application.
of the, of the MCO. Now we have
the HCA here and we can ask if
that is something that they
actually do. Please brief. This
should have been a two-minute
hearing, so let's keep moving.
Miss Flannery, can you answer
that?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you do have options
when you are a Medicaid,
Medicare dual for alignment in
your decent plans today, I
didn't see it addressed. Thank
you. And, and I just.
The um quality selection will
start basically 6 months so
we're passing this bill for 6
months, which I think is um
kind of a waste of our time, so
I will entertain emotion.
moved the table.
OK, so we have a motion to table
by Representative Anaya in a
second by Representative um
Nicole Chavez, um, will you take
the role?
Representative Anaya.
Yes to table and explain my
vote.
Representatives, to table.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes, the table.
Representative in Chavez.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones, yes.
Representative Martinez? Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez,
yes to table.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes, and we have a real team
player out there.
So by a vote of 10 to 0, you
have a table bill. Thank you so
much.
Um, Madam Chair, I do not need
to vote. It's good.
OK, so we will go to Senate Bill
122 as amended, expand
prescription drug donation
program and um.
OK, Representative Ferrari will
present this one.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Oh shoot.
And she didn't even drop her
files this morning.
No, I thought I lost the page,
um, madam chair, the purpose of
this bill is to increase access
to prescription drugs and reduce
unnecessary prescription drug
waste by expanding the
applicability um of the state's
prescription drug donation
program.
And pretty much.
The bill.
OK, thank you. Um, so we will
go, if you are in opposition on
Zoom, raise your hand.
In the room in opposition.
King none either place in
support on Zoom, raise your
hand, and I'll come back to you,
um, in the audience in support.
OK, so I see Nat Dean.
And she may be using an
automated voice cause she's has
some respiratory issues. Go
ahead now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, in
brevity, I stand in support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Nat.
Um, so I will go to the
committee for questions.
Represented and just just as an
aside, um, this was a
A baby of Senator Tipino. He was
frequently in the interim
discussing why we weren't doing
more of this. So Representative
Naya, any representative Jones,
um,
And Chavis. OK, go ahead,
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I know it's
always a little bit hard to
speak to what happens on the
Senate side, but I was wondering
if you have any background on
this, um, what happened with um
The, the change from back to the
floor. I know the board of
Pharmacy, uh, offered some
amendments that were added in
Spa and then those same
amendments were taken off on the
floor, and so I was just
wondering if you might be able
to speak to that.
Um, yes, um, I believe what I'm
describing is um where they um
were striking the reference to
clinic.
And they redefined donor as a
person who donates unused
prescription drugs to an
eligible recipient, um, and then
eligible.
The recipient was defined as a
person who can receive donated
drugs and is registered, um, is
a registered pharmacy. Um,
And uh health care facility
licensed by the healthcare
authority, uh, pursuant to the
healthcare code, and they also
redefined uh recipient uh to
mean patient and it permits
donations from individuals from
out of state pursuant to the
board of pharmacy rules to
clarify that redistribution of
do need prescription medicine,
medications may be made only if
the patient receiving will be
able to use them before.
their expiration, um, and then
permits in state and out of
state pharmacies, um,
experienced and managed uh
donated prescription drugs it
requires the donated drugs have
been inspected prior to
dispensing.
And it also struck the $20 fee
to be charged to the patient,
replacing it with reasonable
costs of participating in the
collection of donated
prescription drugs.
I think that covers it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm not
sure if that answers my question
as to why it was added and then
taken off, but I will I'm sorry.
I,
I wasn't there. I didn't, OK, I
figured as much it's always hard
to speak to the Senate side, but
I just thought it was curious.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. I will ask, um.
Uh
Senator Stephanics and get back
with you.
Thank you. Representative Jones.
Representative Ferrari.
Uh, the only thing that concerns
me about this bill is, is if
there are any measures taken to
assure that drugs that are
donated have been properly
stored.
Is there, is that addressed in
the bill?
A representative just I just
found it. It's on page 6.
Um, starting on 9/11.
Thank you, madam chair.
I don't know that that, Madam
Chair, thank you for that. I
don't not sure if that really
answers my question, but I feel
like this is very necessary
bill. I, I have a picture. I
wish I could show to everyone
that was sent to me by the
director of a clinic. This is
one month's worth of medications
that have been, that had to be
uh destroyed and wasted.
Most of them not even opened,
and so that is a crime, I in my
opinion, and so that I think
this is very necessary. Thank
you very much for Ferrari, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Nicole Chavez, followed by
Eleanor Chavis. Thank you, Madam
Chairsentative, I think I have
the same questions on the safety
and quality assurance and the
liability um protections and the
bill doesn't really say that. I
mean, this is a great bill. it's
so needed cause so many people,
you know, don't use their.
prescriptions, um, but I was
just trying to find where the
protocols were and I
Don't think I
See it, unless you have
background information, um,
while you're looking, I guess
the question is, um,
It looks like the, the
interstate coordination is here,
so given the exclusion of out of
state pharmacies, Howell, New
Mexico coordinate with other
states just to ensure that the
other states are also following.
The same.
Guidelines that I can't see in
here to make sure we have
quality assurance that the
prescriptions are safe,
sorry to interrupt, but if you
look on page 3.
Line 7 that may answer your
question.
So it's probably on a board rule
somewhere that we can't see, OK.
We're gonna have to go back and
look at those or maybe
investigate after. OK, those are
all the questions I have, so I
know you're still trying to read
through, so if you found any of
those responses I if not, I, um,
Madam Chair and um
representative Chavez. Um, I
think that is, you know, the
board shall promulgate rules. OK
to establish the procedures and
to allow the donation.
and redistribution, so.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Eleanor Chavez. Madam Chair,
move would do pass. 2nd.
Seeing
Oh,
representative Senator Cortez. I
just hear voices. I don't know
who's like,
so is there
We're, we're on day what, 57, we
can hear voices.
So, um, by a vote of 10 to 0,
we, you have a due pass. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee.
I, yeah, I'm glad I'm not the
only one who misses the person
in front of me.
OK, so, um, so we will have the
committee substitute for the
committee substitute for SB 443,
no cholesterol lowering drug
cost sharing, Senator Hickey.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Could we
Um
Uh which number did you say 443?
443.
OK, could we do just in terms of
the logic of the bill, uh, 2781.
They go together.
OK, so we are not doing 443,
we're doing committee sub for
Senate Bill 278. Yes, and then
following that we'll do 443
because of the logic that
there's, uh, Madam Chair and
committee members, I come to you
because we're one of the good
things about New Mexico is that
the uh folks at the University
of New Mexico, uh, professors
have been on the cutting edge of
athosclerotic coronary artery
disease in the Department of
Endocrinology, uh, because
diabetics get so much of it, and
as they have studied it over the
years, they have really come to
simplify the approach to
coronary artery disease and we
are literally on the threshold
of eliminating it. Why is that
important? Coronary artery
disease is the biggest killer in
America, more than all cancers
put together 600,000 people
dying a year in the US because
of coronary artery disease and
it costs 20% of all healthcare
costs.
It's over $600 billion to treat
it. Um, when you translate that
down to New Mexico, uh, that's
about 3400 deaths per year from
coronary artery disease and 1700
of those are what are called
sudden death, and, uh, actually
about 1700 in that 4 in that
3400 are women.
We spend in total about 23
billion in healthcare in New
Mexico, all, uh, services and
coronary artery disease accounts
for 2.4 billion of the spent in
New Mexico. So the implication
and actually now we know how to
be able to find and uh through
medication literally eliminate
coronary artery disease, even
reverse it, um, is, will have a
phenomenal.
financial impact on the cost of
care. The uh solution for all
this is what we call coronary
artery, uh,
calcium scanning, and I have in
front of you, uh, two vessels,
uh, the one on the left
demonstrates a vessel where a
compound, uh, substrate called
low density lipoprotein, which
is one of the components of
overall cholesterol. It's the
bad component and above 50 mg
per decali, it can cause, uh,
it, it, it literally invades the
arterial wall muscle sets up.
an inflammatory process and in
the inflammatory process when it
heals, calcium gets laid down.
That happens whenever you have
an inflammation around the body.
So by doing the uh coronary
artery screening, uh, and doing
it in anyone over the age of 50
every, every 5 years if it's
been negative, uh, we can detect
the fact that there is active
coronary artery disease, which
leads to a shrinkage.
of the lumen in the coronary
artery and then when there is a
uh
Inflammation on the surface
after it's been narrowed, that's
what causes sudden death, and
that's what so prevailed.
Senator, if you could stick to
the bill, yeah, so I, I, I just,
this is just understanding the
logic of, of why we're
presenting the bill. So, um, it
costs about $35 to get the scan.
Uh, that's the radiologist cost.
It's a 5 minute procedure, I
and um.
CT of the heart takes 5 minutes
over and done, uh,
unfortunately, the health plans
all because it's a high-end
procedure, they charge $250
deductible, that's almost
standard in any commercial
health plan, um, and so this
would eliminate the copay and,
um, which, which is a huge
barrier to learning if if people
have coronary artery disease and
everyone over the age of 50
should have this scam, and if
it's positive, then we move on
to the.
bill for the treatment of it.
And so this bill, uh, asked to
eliminate the cost sharing, uh,
for this scan so that it's not a
barrier for a for a condition
that literally is the most
expensive and most far reaching
in terms of number of deaths
annually in New Mexico and
nationally. And for that, uh,
and that, with that, I stand for
questions. I'm sorry for the
biology lesson.
So we will go to Zoom if you are
an opposition, raise your hand.
In the room in opposition?
OK, um, on Zoom and support, if
you'd like to speak, raise your
hand in the room and support.
OK, so I will go to the
committee.
I move do pass.
Representative Jones has
questions, but whoever did the
motion first, remember, so I can
go back to you.
Go ahead, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Senator Doctor
Hickey.
I, I just have a couple of
questions. You said it's a $35
scan.
Is that, is that correct? um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Jones, when you break it down in
direct costs and whatever
altogether, it's probably
actually cost the entity about
$35 to do the scam.
OK. Um, thank you for that. So
there's a $250 deductible
associated with it, is that
correct? Yes, if, if a doctor or
provider orders it and you go
into most any institution, they
have the ability to charge you a
$250 copay because that's how
most plans are set up for
high-end radiology.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
uh Senator Hickey. So what is it
we're trying to get rid of? 2,
we're trying to get rid of that
$250 and the barrier, uh,
because the benefit is so
substantially high to the
planned financially, um, and,
and it happens right away when
you start on the next bill of
the medications, the LDL
lowering medications, it starts
to have an immediate impact, and
actually on the right you see
this is the same person two
years later with
The larger lumen in the coronary
artery. Just a reminder to go
through the chair. I'm, I'm
sorry, madam chair. I know we're
all, I'm trying, I'm trying to
to thank you, you're absolutely
correct, manager. Thank you,
Madam Chair. We're, we're
getting into this biology
discussion, but I'm gonna end it
right now. Thank you very much,
Senator Hickey. Thank you. It
took me back to um cadaver
anatomy.
So next we will go to
Representative Nicole Chavez.
Thank you, Representative, thank
you, Senator. Don't these tests
usually have to come with a
pre-screening of laboratory
blood work.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'm getting into that in the
next bill, but yes, you, uh, you
want to check and see if the LDL
is, um, the, the
The National Preventive Task
Force is at night either looking
at 70 and most of the literature
says definitely below 50, and so
we'll be going there, um, I've
only met or know of one person
who actually was a legislator
who had a natural LDL in higher
age of 52, almost have never
seen that.
But yes, you have to do it
because you have to follow it to
get the LDL down. Thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, senator. So are
you trying to also exclude that
or your, you're still OK with
the process, you're just trying
to remove, OK
madam, and yes, definitely it it
it's too hard to carve that out
of blood tests, so, OK. Um,
Madam Chair, senator, I know
high-tech radiology services
usually run anywhere from 5.
100 to
$15,000. That's why health plans
standardized high-tech radiology
services for 100 200 $150 copay,
um, so I, I don't know that we'd
want to change that, that
changes a lot cause they are
very expensive. I, I don't know
of any high-tech radiology
services that cost $30. I think
maybe 400, 500 is probably the
lowest, so I, I might just look
that up cause that's very
interesting, but I guess.
I'm, I'm a little concerned
because it shows that um
From the American Heart
Association, it says that a high
rate of false positives can lead
to additional unnecessary and
invasive testing, which is why I
shared decision making rather
than a broad screening is
recommended by them, and so, um,
for that, I, I can't.
support this bill, but, um, you
know, I will continue to just
follow with the American Heart
Association says about these
tests. Thank you.
So I wasn't sure who made them.
OK, so Vice Chair Herndon made
the motion for a due pass on
Senate tax, business, and
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 278,
and the second was
My a representative and I am.
Don't make, don't make me
translate from names into
positions, especially this late
in the session. So, uh, Karen,
will you please call the roll?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones, yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Santa Cortez? No.
Madam, vice chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, yes, 7 to 37 to 3, you
have a due pass.
On the committee substitute for
Senate Bill 278, and we will
jump back to um
Committee substitute for
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 443, no cholesterol
lowering, lowering drug cost
sharing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, 80
to 90% of LDL is produced by the
liver, um, it's a substrate
that's used in the first few
weeks of life upon which, uh,
and, uh.
sex hormones and the infants
start to develop, and then it's
not used anymore, but the liver
keeps producing it. And, um,
the, uh, the, the remainder
comes from eating, um, but with
statins, which have been around
for, 0, 2030 years now, so
they're really in a generic
category, the cost of a statin
is about 50 cents a day.
Actually, the preventive task
force says that under the ACA
that it should be free in and of
itself. I'm not sure that
everyone's following that.
Um, but this would eliminate any
copay about 98% of people will
get their LDL down to, uh,
within near 50 or under 50, uh,
with just a statin, uh, 1 to 2%
would require a second step
drug, uh, the statins in a
handful of people called myosia,
that's an aching in the muscles
proximally and um and so a
second line drug would be uh.
official PCSK9 inhibitor, um,
the originally when it those
were released, uh, they were
expensive, they're now down to
about $100 a month for two
subcutaneous injections, and
that's because of this uh
competition that's coming and,
and there are other ones that
are coming, but again, it's a
very minor number that that
can't be treated successfully
with statin.
And um with that, I, uh, happy
to answer any questions. OK, we
will go to zoom in opposition.
Raise your hand. I'll come back
to you in the room in
opposition.
OK, on Zoom in support, raise
your hand in the room and
support.
We just don't have real popular
bills this morning.
Uh
I can relate. So, um, questions
from the committee.
Representative Jones.
Go ahead, and um Nicole Chavez.
Go ahead. Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey again.
Um, so the, the innovator drug,
the original drug that's
injectable, remind me, what is
the name of that and how long
has it been out?
Rea
Go ahead. Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hickey again.
Um, so the, the innovator drug,
the original drug that's
injectable, remind me, what is
the name of that and how long
has it been out?
is one man is one in and um
probably went is the other one,
and now there's a new drug every
6 months called Inclierron.
Thank you. Um, so, and you said
there are others being
developed.
Is that correct? Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I, it's my
experience that as that happens
that these drugs becomes cheaper
and cheaper, uh, initially that
innovator drug is very
expensive, but it's, it's like a
lot of things. The more you get
in the market, the less those
costs. So I imagine that's what
we're looking at here as well.
Would you agree? Madam Chair and
Representative yes, in fact, I
am on PCSK9 inhibitor, uh,
originally was paying about
$500.
month and it's now down to 100.
Very good, glad to hear that.
Thank you, Senator Hickey. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, um,
Representative Nicole Chavez.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator, so I that was gonna be
my question. So are we talking
about those preferred generics
that are out there that a
majority of our individuals
across the state take right now,
or are you talking about those
very expensive, um, nonformulary
medications. Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I'm talking
about.
Both, uh, sometimes copays end
up on these generic drugs,
Crestor, rosuvastatin, uh,
Zetia, um,
They, they, they're not supposed
to be according to the US
preventive or the ACA, but, um,
and then about 1 to 2% end up on
the second line drugs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
cause I, I know I, I would
assume that a majority of our
population takes the preferred
generics, which is already
either $0.02 dollars, $5 copay
at the most, um, do you have a
percentage of what what we're
looking at like.
Nonformulary formulary preferred
generics versus the very high
expensive drugs, I guess that
we're trying to address here.
Uh, Madam Chair and
representative, uh, I believe uh
one of the iBA said it's about 1
to 2%.
Of the expensive 1 to 2% of
patients are unresponsive or
have complications to the
statins and therefore require
the second line drug, so it's
very minimal. OK, cause I'm
just, I'm, I'm trying to
understand.
How many people are we gonna
change their lives cause most
are, you know, paying $2.05
dollars already in order to look
at that $8 million increase
premium a year, that's what's
giving me the heartache cause I
think a majority of our state
are already paying $0 to maybe
$5 for this medication and I
don't want to adjust other
people's premiums across the
state up to $8 million a year,
so I was just trying to
understand that balance.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think that's a 25% of the
population were on the drug.
But that's not the experience.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you. Um, Representative
Martinez.
Ask and answered. Thank you. OK,
thank you. Um, so, seeing no
further questions, I will
entertain emotion.
So we have a motion to um uh for
a due pass on Senate tax,
business and transportation
Committee substitute. Is that
right?
Um
Or
Senate Bill 278.
Oh, I'm sorry.
See, that's what happens when we
go out of order. I get confused,
doesn't take much. So, um, yeah,
on, on.
Double committee substitute.
On Senate Bill 443.
Uh, Representative Chavez made
the motion, each each of us in a
second by.
Representative Freud.
OK, go ahead, go ahead and take
the roles.
Representative Anaya? Yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Pa
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Adam chair. Yes.
73. By a vote of 73, you have a
due pass. Thank you, Madam Chair
and committee.
And um, on, on House Memorial 58
since we passed the psilocybin
bill off the floor yesterday,
and it does have a study.
portion of it, um, we're the
sponsor asked that we roll it,
so we will.
We will, yeah, it was, it was
insurance.
And finally we have
representative um Velasquez
Torres. Oh, she just walked in
the door. What great timing.
Have you been here,
Representative?
Oh, OK, I didn't see you.
So whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Um,
first, I would like to ask my
expert witness, deputy
secretary.
Phoenix oily Doyle, yes, I'm so
bad with names to introduce
herself.
Madam Chair, committee, I'm
Kathy Phoenixstowell and the
deputy secretary for Behavioral
Health and Family Services at
CYFD.
Um, madam Chair and members of
the committee, we're looking
today at a memorial that is
requesting a trauma-informed
strategy for children in CYFD's
care, and so that might be
foster children or that might be
children that are still with
their families. That is yet to
be determined, and this is, um,
indeed taken from the bill that
we were going to present and
realized we weren't at that
point yet. It would be better to
create a memorial, do some.
Work together piloting some
strategies and then create a
bill once we have seen the
success that we know this is
going to bring with our, with
our children.
Um, so this strategy involves
learning to tell stories. And
one of the things that has been
found across the world.
Is that storytelling has become
a very effective strategy for
children who have endured trauma
of any kind. So right now, one
of the researchers that helped
me in constructing this bill is
traveling around the world, and
the other is in Colorado, um,
because these, these strategies
are so very effective. Um, right
now we have a lot of refugee
children.
In many countries, and they're
finding that these strategies
help them to release their
trauma and to heal.
And one of the major components
of that healing has to do with
the use of language and the
development of language, and I'm
not talking morphology or
syntax. I'm talking about things
such as coherence. They're
finding that children who can
tell a story with coherence are
able to heal better from their
trauma. And so the idea here is
to work with um speech language
pathologists and with um
psychologists or
behaviorally trained, uh, and I
forgot the wording that we used
in here, but that, that passed
through um some uh technical
reviews, um, so that we can work
with families and also work with
the caseworkers. Um,
What we'd like to do is pilot
some activities where families
and the children work together
and in activities and concrete
activities and then develop
stories. One of the projects
that um one of the researchers
that worked with me has done
recently is an exciting project
I'm telling digital stories,
creating and telling digital
stories and learning to create
coherence in those stories,
after having had an a shared
experience.
Um, so,
Um, that is
Kind of in a nutshell, what we
are looking to pilot with this
memorial. And Madam Chair, I do
stand, we do stand for
questions.
OK, if you could just introduce
yourself for the record.
I'm sorry I had to take a call.
Sorry.
Um, so we will go to Zoom if you
are in opposition, raise your
hand in the room in opposition.
OK, in support on Zoom, raise
your hand in support in the
room.
OK, so we will go to the
committee representative Senna
Cortez, Eleanor Chavez.
Nicole Chavez.
OK, go ahead, uh, Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair and
Representative, I absolutely
love this and when time allows,
I'd like to make a motion for a
do pass, please. Thank you.
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
sort of have a couple of
questions in terms of how, how
is this going to um play out.
Who is going to be responsible
for um doing the storytelling
treatment.
Um, does training need to be
done with
And there's, we know that
there's a um
Not a whole lot of social
workers at CYFD, so I don't know
who is gonna be responsible for
sort of taking kids and families
through this, through this um
storytelling treatment. Can you?
Expand on that. Um, Madam Chair
and Representative, this is a
pilot and so the researchers
that have been involved will be
working with CYFD to plan the
first stages of this project,
working with a few families. Um,
I know in the original bill,
there were questions in the um
in the in the FIR about how many
families in order to have this
be really successful. We would
like to do some intense training
with the.
language pathologist and
behavioral expert and so CYFD
would work with the the um
The researchers to create a
model and to hire maybe one,
speech language pathologist were
a handful of families, they
would create a shared
experience. They would design
this together, and so we didn't
put all the details into the
memorial because it has, there
are a lot of questions still in
terms of where exactly this
project would begin, um, but it
is a pilot and so those details
will be ironed out.
Madam Chair Representative Y
Speech pathologists.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
with the research is finding is
that one of
The skills and some of the
concepts that need to be
developed with the children that
have experienced trauma has to
do, have to do heavily with
language development. And so
when you think about a young
child, when I've worked with
young children very often, they
don't understand the world
around them, and, and yet they
have trauma traumatic
experiences. I'm sure in this
committee, we know that New
Mexico is number one in the
adverse childhood experiences in
ACEs.
And a lot of the children that
experience trauma do not have
the language to share what has
happened with them. And so they
do not have the language and,
and I'm not just talking about
vocabulary and words, but how to
put together thoughts to convey
something that has happened in
their world.
When I've worked with young
children, sometimes I have them
draw pictures and sometimes
their pictures are just a round
circle with two little sticks
for feet and two little sticks
for arms because that's what
they see. They don't, they're
still learning to develop their
perception of themselves. And so
then to put that into language
is difficult and the speech
language pathologist has
advanced skills in not only
helping the child, but also in
helping the families.
the caseworkers to develop
questions, various levels of
questions that those adults can
ask the child to help them
develop their story. And that's
why the speech language
pathologist component is very
important in developing the
skills for coherence.
So, um, Madam Chair,
representative, um, so then it's
gonna be a a small group.
Of families.
And um is there a time frame for
this proposed time frame in
terms of when it will start and
when it will end.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's a really good question.
Um, I guess when this passes the
house floor, and I believe that
it will, um, would go into
effect, I believe, as other
legislation would within either
90 days or that July 1st period,
but of course communication for
planning can occur at any time.
And um
In terms of completion of the
pilot project that would be a
year.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so you mentioned in your
presentation that.
There would probably be one
person that would be hired to
sort of um coordinate.
The Project, for lack of a
better word, is that, did I hear
you correctly?
Madam Chair Representative on a
consultation basis based on the
funds that can be used for this
project.
Madam Chair Representative has
CYFD committed those funds.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
we're gonna do, uh, it'll be
contract initially, so we can
see how this is gonna look as we
do this study and we do figure
out all the parts and pieces and
making sure we have the scopes
of practice there and um that
everyone I, I think when I
talked with um, representative,
I had a lot of the questions
that you had, um, so I was like
she's answering my same
questions that how are we gonna
do this? Who are the families?
What does that look like? Um
And I asked to consider even in
our preservation work as well in
working with biological families
on helping them.
To be able to help their
children in communication and
language development, so, uh,
we're excited about pulling
together this study and doing
some contract work to see what
would we need to take it to a
larger scale.
Oh, Madam Chair, Representative,
then it would sort of be an RFP
that would be let out.
I Madam Chair Representative, it
would be an RFA usually is what
how we do, but similar, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
think you representative um
Nicole Chavez. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I think this
is such a wonderful idea, so
thank you so much for bringing
it forward. Um, I know when my
oldest son was killed, my
youngest son was only 7 years
old and there is so much that
are going through their little
minds and and they can't really
voice it, so I can't imagine,
um, being with, you know, foster
children and all the traumatic
events they have to face, um.
I just wanna maybe do a little
ask when you're when you're
going through your studies, um,
maybe try to reach out to the
children's grief Center. They're
amazing and they work with kids
at such a young age, even if
you're gonna start small, they
may be a good group to work
with, so maybe reach out to the
Children's grief Center cause
they do wonderful work with our
our kids. Thank you.
Thank you for that plug, my
sister volunteers there, so.
Yes, Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
presenters, um, my question
focuses on the results of the
study once you finish. Are you
looking to have insurance
companies cover something like
this in the future in terms of
storytelling, or you want to
make sure that CYFD puts it in
their budget on a regular basis,
please tell us what the
long-term effect of the results
of your study will be.
I think a lot of that will
depend on us.
Um, Madam Chair, and
Representative, those are
excellent ideas. Of course, we
do welcome your input at any
point and our representative
Thompson is a co-sponsor for
this bill, and so I will
certainly rely on her advice and
on yours and every member of
this committee who is interested
in contributing would be
absolutely welcome and
contributing at any point, um,
certainly, yes, we would love to
put a strategy such as this.
in the budget because CYFD has
been asked to do some um
strategy work and so
intervention work and so it
would be important to have
interventions that we know will
work with our children here in
New Mexico. Um, these strategies
have worked very well with
indigenous populations and very
well with multicultural
populations, diverse
populations, and so we have
great hopes that this will be an
effective strategy in New Mexico
as well.
And already is an effective
strategy in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters. So
representative Senator Cortez,
you wanted to make the motion?
Yes, ma'am, so moved, Madam
chair.
So we have a motion by
Representative Senator Cortez
for a due pass on House Memorial
61 in a second by our, our
second baseman
representative Anaya. Is there
any opposition?
no, you have a due pass.
10 to 0. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and that, that was our last
bill, um, we may have to,
depending on what comes over
from the Senate, we may have to
meet tomorrow, um,
we we're running out of days,
so, so that's kind of how it
gets to be for the freshman, um,
these last few days kind of our
norms are thrown out the window
and we do what we have to do to
get legislation across the
finish line. So, so we will give
you um notice.
as much as notice as we can
give. If we don't get more
bills, this will be our last
meeting. I want to thank all of
you. I think this committee did
really well this year, and we,
we got through an amazing number
of bills and so I want to thank
each and every one of you, and
if we could give our staff a
round of applause.
Uh, a representative Herndon
wants a picture.
So yeah, good luck, good luck
