Isn't
Here.
Madam vice chair here, Madam
Chair here.
We have a quorum. So reminder,
Folks, please put your phones on
silent. Um, we don't want dings
and Dongs and ducks quacking and
things like that. So, um, And
since we have heard, um
The the House counterpart of
Senate Bill three. We are going
to abbreviate things very much
abbreviated because we have two
big bills to come afterwards and
we all know we need to be on the
floor.
So I'm going to limit questions.
I'm going to limit public
testimony because, as I said,
the border, Madam chair, you
cannot limit testimony. We all
have the right to say what we
need to say and ask questions.
We can make decisions from
Masons and the rules
representative. As I said, we
have heard this bill previously
and gone through all of that,
Madam chair. I'm sorry Point of
order.
Um, this is SP three. It is not
the same bill And I think a lot
of these people in spite of
having very little notice are
here to weigh in on this bill,
and I appreciate the same
consideration is any other bill?
Represent represent inviting
over parliamentarian
conversation.
I second that because point of
order, there must be opportunity
to debate and you point of order
you. You were not recognized.
You are not part of the
committee. You can call in
whoever you would like to call
in. We are going to take this.
As quickly as we can. As I've
said we had with there will be
time for public testimony for
10 people like we've been doing
all year.
We? There will be time for
questions.
With the panel with the
committee. But again we've gone
through all this before. So as
the chair that's my ruling, so
go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will
be brief as the chairwoman
noted, Senate Bill three is
started as a mirror image of
House Bill six.
And proceeded accordingly
Throughout the process, Madam
chair until it arrives at the
floor, and there were a handful
of amendments meaningful
amendments that
That deviate from what House
Bill six now stands at, and I'd
like to go over sort of the
The top level ones. If I may,
madam chair
Um, one of the most significant
ones is we decrease the number
of weeks available for medical
and safe leave from 12 weeks to
nine until the fund is proven
solvent and then that first and
then assessment will be done in
two years from implementation of
the program.
Um, because we did that. We
created two definitions one for
family leave and one for medical
and safe, leave so medical and
safely qualifies for nine weeks
at the moment, 12 weeks for, um,
parental leave and death of a
child. Uh,
For the next item that I think
is significant. Madam Chair is
changing the job protection
guarantee from 90 days to 180
days.
Um, this adds to the solvency of
the fund, Madam chair.
Could could you please take your
conversations out?
Side, please, Representative,
Could you please take your phone
conversation out out of the
Committee room. Thank you.
And Madam chair. Another item
that we changed is we now
require the employee to notify
their employer within for 2020
days in advance of taking the
leave or as soon as possible,
And those are the top line
items. There's some a few
technical changes as well. And I
want to note and I believe my
colleague will address this.
In a little bit more detail.
These were done in coordination
with members of the business
community, and as a result, a
number of entities have, um
Have
Are now in opposition in not in
opposition to the bill. So not
in opposition, and I want a
significant one is the hospital
association is not in opposition
to the bill. The auto
association is not in opposition
to the bill.
Um, the American Council for
Life Insurers is not in
opposition to the Bill. Good
Samaritan, which is a home care
entity is not in opposition to
the bill. I just wanted to
emphasize some of those. There
are of course, many, many
businesses who are either not in
opposition to the bill or in
support of the bill. Madam Chair
and I imagine you might be
hearing from some of those
today.
Thank you very much. If I made
hand over the mike to my
colleague, Madam chair
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Committee. Thank you for
hearing us on this bill. I know
that you all have heard
different versions of some sort
of paid family medical leave,
and I'm glad to be back again to
discuss how we really come to a
number of compromises as my
colleague mentioned here on this
truly is a compromise bill in a
number of ways, looking at what
they were able to do in HB 11
and the consideration of six
weeks. That's for for a variety
of reasons. The introduction of
a of nine weeks for medical
leave in 12 weeks for family
Leave isn't consideration of
making some
Something that we can phase in a
process that ensures the
solvency and ensures that our
businesses can handle it. Um, we
also the changes from the Senate
also changed the advisory board.
We heard considerable concerns
from again the other sponsor,
but mostly the business
community that they didn't see
enough business is on the
advisory board. Now you see,
it's much similar, simpler,
simpler, much more simple, uh,
and that now it has four
business representatives for
employee representatives to
discuss how we're effectively
putting this into place.
Um, this did not come about in
one conversation or two
conversations or text message.
This was hours and hours of
conversations with multiple
different entities over the past
3.5 weeks. These conversations
ranged from those involved. We
look at look at different
elements and what we were really
trying to achieve here. And so
what we feel in this bill and a
number of the people that my
colleague mentioned also agree
with is that this is what we can
implement in a solvent way that
ensures the fund does not have
To come back to the Legislature
and request more funding in a
way that ensures that it is
effective for employees and
employers so that we are
maintaining the good
relationships that they
maintain, um and that we were
doing so in a friendly manner.
So with that we have our expert
Tracy McDaniel here with the
South Southwest Women's Law
Center. Also secretary near with
the Department of Workforce
Solutions can answer technical
questions.
But with that we stand for
questions. Thank you.
Okay. Um, we are going to go to
the audience, and I'm gonna ask
that if you've already spoken on
this bill, the last time we
heard it that you allow someone
else to speak.
Oh, silence your own phone.
So okay, first, we're gonna go
to opposition. So if you are on
zoom in opposition, um please
raise your hand and we'll come
back to you if you are in the
room and opposition and have not
spoken. Please come to the
center aisle. You'll have one
minute and we're going to really
stick to one minute.
And there will be a maximum of
10.
Go ahead. Good morning, madam
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Terry Cole
and I am president and CEO of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce.
Here's our business concerns.
It's bill imposes a new tax on
employers and employees that
could escalate and create
continuing physical challenges.
The bill needs more guardrails
to make abuse more unlikely.
And it harms small businesses by
allowing so much leave every
year for such a broad range of
purposes and circumstances
absorbing banking vacancies,
Finding tempted employees. It's
the small employees who will
suffer a different if our
approach focusing on maternity
leave to support mothers and
keep them in the workforce we
believe is better on all three
fronts.
Lower cost impossible to reviews
and easy for businesses to plan
for.
We urge you to vote No. On the
bill this morning. Thank you
very much. Good morning, madam
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Phil, president, CEO
of the Gallup McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce. We stand in
opposition to SB three not in
opposition, necessarily to paid
family medical leave. But in in
specific to this bill.
Um, the F I, R is dedicated to
negative, significant
significant issues and most
everything in this bill points
in the direction of insolvency
and ever increasing tax burdens
on employees and employers.
And that the program will be
forced to scale back, possibly
on promised benefits. We know
for a fact after listening to
our almost 300 member businesses
in Gallup and McKinley County.
That
They are planning to make moves
to either curtail their
operations.
Close their doors or, in some
cases, move there.
Um, businesses across the state
line into Arizona, taking with
them their jobs over 200 jobs
that we know of for sure will be
impacted.
For the For these reasons and
many others we stand opposed to
the three Thank you.
Good morning counselors. Um,
Representative. My name is Mark
Hoyt. I am a small business in
Santa Fe generated millions of
dollars into our local economy,
Jewelry business, uh, generally
between five and 10 employees,
and I'm a progressive. I'm left
of all of you guys. I'm telling
you, this bill is disastrous,
Disastrous for small businesses.
5 to 10 to 15 employee range.
Who represented small
businesses and when making this
bill nobody because no small
business owner has the time to
actually participate in this
kind of thing. The people who
talked here they're all
represented big companies if you
take one of my jeweler's away
between November and December, I
am out of business. I've trained
them years to be able to do what
they do.
This completely anti business.
Anyone who supports this hates
small business between five and
10 employees. I will tell you
that, as a small business owner
is an award winning ballot.
Small business owner. This is an
anti business.
Bill for small business and
anyone who designed this is
clueless, clueless about how to
build how hard it is to run a
small business in the state of
New Mexico are going to civil
and if you are not, we can have
the sergeant's remove you.
Madam sharing committee members.
My name is Tom Patterson Service
President elect the New Mexico
Cattle Growers Association. We
oppose this bill. SB three is
amended. We have seen no
evidence that's B three
addresses a real problem that we
have in production, agriculture.
It will, however, severely
disrupt our ability to run our
operations. Section five E
allows. Leave time to be
nonconsecutive deny us the
ability to find any replacement
help their multiple drafting
problems with SB Three. Terms
are ambiguous, including the
definition of employee and the
definition of wages. Terms are
overly broad.
Section four. A doesn't allow an
employee who will never get a
benefit.
Opt out. SB three is an open
invitation to abuse these
sections to J five and two l
needs clarity and guardrails.
For these reasons. Please
opposed. SB three.
I don't care members of the
committee. My name is Kristen
Thompson and representing the
New Mexico Restaurant
Association and will keep my
comments to this version of the
bill is passed by the Senate.
It's continues to raise concerns
for us regarding fiscal controls
and solvency of the fund. Uh,
the this version actually
increases
The, uh, the solvency, which
means we know that there are
problems already.
Ah, the ability to increase the
rates is not up to this
legislature. In this version. It
is up to the department.
On a quarterly basis. If this
fund seems as if it's running
out of money that isn't tax on
our businesses. That is a tax on
our employees. Uh, this is
definitely of major concern for
all of us and should be a
concern for everyone in this
room for these reasons. We, um,
we asked for your opposition of
the bill. Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Leanna
Derek and I'm a team leader for
better together New Mexico. And
right now my opposition is and
I'm asking a question to be
asked to be answered later is I
understand this bill has no
sanctions or limitations per
incident or punitive actions
against abuse or fraud. And I am
from I am a tribal. I'm from a
multigenerational household, so
there are multiple adults
because the housing shortage who
have to reside together who can
claim this incident for one
person, and that person does
not.
Have to be here in New Mexico.
It can be anywhere in the world
and still take and still abuse
this. This fund.
Um, there also is No because a
hippo, there is no requirement
for medical proof of an actual
medical leave. So there is no
range of verify. This is really
actually being used. The funds
used will be actually used as
its designated
My concern is that we have a
bunch of a lot of open border
people coming through who are
going to be residing together as
working age adults who have
family members and other
countries who can take advantage
of this fund and use it to go
back home and spread our tax
dollars. So please ask my answer
My question if you would kindly
thank you for your time.
Madam chair members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera with
Mexico Farming Livestock Bureau.
We respectfully stand in
opposition this morning to SP
three. The amended version What
we appreciate the spirit of the
bill and the work that the
sponsors have all put into this
effort. We ultimately believe
that this approach to have paid
family medical leave program
place a large burden on our
state's agricultural producers
and small businesses, which
primarily reside in our rural
communities.
Agriculture in New Mexico and
across the country continues to
face challenges in accessing and
securing a reliable labor
source, especially in a rural
communities.
The nature of our sector
requires careful planning,
execution and training due to
the parish ability of our
products and food safety
standards that we must account
for.
We have many concerns with this
bill, including the financial
burden placed on employers and
employees, the broad set of
events that are deemed eligible
for leave and the duration of
leave offered in more for these
reasons, and many more. We
respectfully request your
opposition of this bill. Jimmy
Mason. I'm here today,
representing myself as a small
business owner in southeastern
New Mexico.
With 10 employees. To me. This
is a
Acts on our poorest.
Employees in the state or our
minimum wage.
14 $15.
Those that are working paycheck
to paycheck it as it is, and now
we add.
An extra tax on to their
With their paycheck.
On the you know, 95.
Scent of the people in the state
of New Mexico will pay so 5%
Kentucky advantage of this bill.
Also, as a state representative,
I'd like to
State also are asked also, why
Commerce bill is being heard in
the health committee today
instead of where we've heard all
the other
Ah family health. I mean, family
League bills of all went through
the Commerce Committee. Thank
you, madam Jerry.
Madam Chair, members of
committee Rob Black president
and CEO of the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, want to
start by thinking the sponsors
for the some of the amendments
that did give place in SP three,
but I want to highlight one area
that has not been addressed and
we heard in this committee last
on the 25th that HB 194 would
solve the problems regarding
Medicaid waiver based companies.
That building I'm afforded did
not get a message.
No amendment has addressed the
problems with our disability
community with our home hospice.
Committee community getting an
unfunded mandate.
For Medicaid waiver based costs.
Those companies that are based
around a contract from federal
government and our early
childhood providers contracts
with state government that is
not addressed. A have not been
fixed. It is still going to
undermine our social safety net
so because of that, and many
other reasons, we stand in
opposition. Thank you.
Chair.
Members of the committee, Ernie
said Ibaka Albuquerque Hispano
Chamber of Commerce.
We represent.
80% of our members are 1200
members.
Or less than 30 employees, 60%
or less than 10 employees.
It's very bill is going to hurt
the small businesses. Please
know that people that own small
businesses that come here
they're coming here because it's
gonna affect their very
businesses.
We're organization that
represents them, but the actual
businesses that have the time to
come here and testify should
indicate to you how important
this bill is.
I suggest, and I suggested this
last year.
Please. Let's not rush into
this.
This is something that only 14
other states have done.
And they're different than this
one.
There's a better way to do this.
We don't have to rush into this.
We don't have to do this in the
30 Day session.
I would love to host meetings.
Thank you.
We're standing up.
Thank you and and on Zoom. I
have asked that folks who have
not spoken. I'm I'm putting you
on your honor, if you would
lower your hand and allow
someone we're only taking five
on zoom.
So if you if you would like to
let someone who hasn't spoken
speak, it would be appreciated.
But we will go in the order that
you are there. So Carol
White.
Go ahead, Madam Chair members of
the committee. My name is Carol
White. I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico Restaurant Association.
I'm here representing a
coalition of 20 associations and
chambers.
Representing tens of thousands
of businesses in New Mexico that
have been working on this issue
over the in room. We formed this
group after realizing that the
business community was being
completely left out of the
paper family medical leave.
discussions were aware of the
amendment and our members
are strongly opposed. Senate
Bill three, while the intent
behind paid family medical leave
is commendable, or coalition
believes that the legislation
still has unintended economic
consequences for our working
For families and businesses and
could be improved with
alternative sustainable
solutions. We ask that you stand
in solidarity with these new
Mexico businesses.
And vote No. Our coalition
members are the associated
builders and contractors. The
Las Cruces Chamber of Commerce,
the Gallup Chamber of Commerce.
Thank you. We'll go on to Patsy
Romero.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Can
you hear me this morning? Yes,
we can go ahead. OK? I have
spoken before, but I just wanted
to emphasize to the committee,
Madam chair and also to the
sponsors. Please do not forget
the challenges that those of us
who are Medicaid providers are
facing with regard to this bill
and also our clients who work
for us are also going to be
taxed in paying on the page
family.
The medical leave and and
they're never going to be able
to take advantage of that. But
this is a critical time, Madam
chair members of the committee
and sponsors for those of us who
are Medicaid providers because
this is going to be a serious
unfunded mandate for those of us
who
Provide the services for the
most vulnerable in our our
community. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'll be brief. We have
Carlos on Tech.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the Committee I'm Carlos
Suntech, president and CEO of
the New Mexico Business
Coalition.
I would just like to point out
that I served on this task
force. There was not agreement,
There is still not agreement and
what I'm most concerned about is
the impact in New Mexico. This
bill is much more aggressive
than bills that are in other
states. And by that, I mean that
the
The ability to be on this
program and take leave is
greatly expanded. We're talking
about an issue in New Mexico
that is prevalent.
Businesses are unable to hire as
it is, this is not going to help
make that easier. We cannot use
temp agencies because they can't
hire either training will take
longer than they have available
and the points out that because
of the nature of New Mexico
And how this bill is formed.
This could be bankrupt within 3
to 4 years after it goes into
it. Thank you. We will go to
Terry Garcia.
Hi. Yes, madam. Madam Chair. Can
you hear me? Yes.
Hi. My name is Terry Garcia,
president and dealer operator,
Amigo Auto Group in Gallup, New
Mexico and I oppose this bill
for a few reasons. Number one.
It's too big and there's not
enough definition of who can
take the leave or employ the
time off.
Second, enrolling New Mexico,
which was not represented in
their panel.
We don't have the staff and the
support staff to take over for
our employees. When they leave
this. I don't have an applicant
pool that skilled enough to take
over for a master technician
that would shut my service
department down if he's gone for
12 weeks or for a finance
representative that has complete
training and privacy laws, where
your name address Social
Security number aren't available
to anybody. As a temporary
employee, we again do not have
temporary employees or companies
enrolling in Mexico, and this
would put
An absolute burden on my
business and could jeopardize
Me continuing to run my
business.
So please vote No for this.
Thank you. And the last one will
be Joe.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can go ahead. Can you
hear me? My name's job, really
own rig Outfitters and scrub
outfitters and I oppose this
bill. I I just wish you guys
would give us a small
businesses some breathing room
because right after covid you
guys did the PTO and the minimum
wage. Now this you guys are
killing us. You don't give us
any breathing room.
To get over the covid part of
it. It seems like every year
you're putting things into place
to where it's just a little bit
here a little bit there. You're
killing me, Especially. I was
going to open the store and
calls bad, which would have
employed 30 people. Now I can't
That's going to be on hold in
those 30 people I could have
employed. What are you going to
do with them?
I mean, I just give us some
breathing room. It's all I'm
asking for. Thank you.
Thank you. Now we will go if you
are on zoom in support. Please
raise your hand. We will take
the first five and then we will
take 10 in the room so first to
show of hands in the room, who
Who was here in support of this?
Okay. If if you want to speak,
please come to the center aisle.
And go ahead.
We're taking in room first or in
on, zoom in the room. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Thank you
for having me here today. I'm
Deborah Condit and I'm standing
before you as a small business
owner.
One that opened a business where
you're not going to make a lot
of money. I am an independent
bookstore owner. So we we
bookstore folks, love watching
pennies come in and dollars. Go
out. So any sort of, uh, thing
that happens here any sort of
raise that happens here in the
state publish your set their
prices on the backs of books.
I cannot raise my prices here.
So the any sort of bill that
passes what might send me
running and freaking out, But I
feel like with this bill, I have
eight employees. All of whom
that I love with all my heart
and if it gives them an edge to
be able to find a way to have
money while they're gone while
they've had a baby, then I
support this bill. This bill, I
did, the number crunching will
cost me less than my Pandora.
Subscription a month, So I stand
in strong support of this bill
and would like to thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. John
Lip shoots with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor. AFL CIO
representing around 40,000
workers in the state workers
that fight for a higher minimum
wage workers had fought for the
paid sick Leave ordinance and or
Workers that are paying for a or
fighting for a fair paid family
medical leave. We believe in
worker rights, and we believe
that this is a fundamental right
for all workers at ST not just
union members. Also, we truly
believe that in a competitive
working market right now, where
we need more workers to come in
This will give us an edge
compared to some of our
neighbors. People will want to
work for businesses and entities
that offer these kind of
benefits. For those for those
reasons. We do appreciate your
support.
So he tumbled. Good morning. My
name is Alicia Ortega and I'm
here on behalf of indomitable as
a mother to indicate you baby as
a Nikki baby myself now a small
business owner and someone who
went from a six figure salary to
food stamps last year after
spending three months in the
hospital due to serious medical
complications during my
pregnancy that nearly took my
life with no economic security
from my job.
Thousands in medical bills and a
family of private to support. We
are the only first world country
in the world that expects people
to invest themselves in
businesses, companies and
organizations in their time of
need. We prioritize profits over
people, and then we wonder why
the workforce is down when it's
a simple as if you take care of
your employees. They will take
care of you.
53 also includes safe, which is
critical to survivors in our
community, as well as helping to
combat missing and murdered
indigenous women and relatives
in our community, Um, and
economic security during our
most vulnerable points in life
is imperative. It's love. It's
compassion, and it's just good
business. Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Lansana,
policy director for the Center
Pacific Policy. As many of you
know my story. I wanted to take
the time to read the statement
of a mother, MEREDITH and how SP
three would benefit her family.
I would have loved to have a
paid leave when I gave birth to
my son, Jamie, but I took about
half of those three months
unpaid and used up all of my
bank PTO. It was worth it. At
1.5 years old. My baby was
diagnosed with leukemia and we
spent a hellish Jewish months in
the hospital, providing around
the clock care adjusting to our
new nightmare. My husband, a
third year medical student at U.
N. M. At the time of our son's
diagnosis, has taken an
indefinite leave of absence to
be the full time caregiver for
medically fragile child.
I want him to become the
excellent doctor he's meant to
be, and there's no way given our
new reality. Family medical
leave would help me to keep my
family strong, emotionally and
financially as we fight cancer.
It's crossed my mind. And I try
not to think about the fact that
I might need to take leave to
mourn the loss of my child after
a long and horrible battle, and
maybe just maybe we'll lose
everything. After all this
fighting to keep some balance in
some stability Thank you for
fighting for me and my family.
as we fight for our son with
that tired your support.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Alexandria
Taylor. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition of Sexual Assault
programs. We stand in support of
SB three are sexual assault
providers are facing a $2
million cut in federal funding
this coming year, which has not
been made up with state funding,
and we continue to support the
creation of FML.
Because we recognize the
importance of the health and
well being of those who work in
our centers beyond just their
productivity as small nonprofits
and employers many of us are
left to figure out how to
support employees when they face
serious, serious medical needs,
and for us, we needed this
critically important policy
years ago. SP three includes
critically important safely
provisions for survivors of
sexual and domestic violence.
It is also an evidence based
solution in the primary
prevention of sexual assault,
According to the CDC. We urge
your support.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Kathy
Slater, Huff and the deputies.
Cabinet secretary at the Human
Services Department Healthcare
Authority, and we stand in full
support of this bill.
I'm sharing members of the
committee. My name is Johnny
Wilson, the executive
directorate Father's New Mexico.
I just want to make the quick
point that there are
stipulations within this bill
that would prevent it from being
insolvent. I think those of you
that are paying attention have
seen that also, in the worst
case scenario, which I
I think is completely
unrealistic. There will be three
sessions before you deal with
any financial crisis that this
bill might
Pretend portend. I work with
families in New Mexico. My my
agency works primarily with
fathers, but also with mothers
and I can I just want to
emphasize this bill is hugely
important for low income
employees in the state of New
Mexico. Good morning, madam
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Joseph Sanchez, state
director of AARP, New Mexico. We
stand in support of this
important piece of legislation
also stand in front of you,
representing 241,000, a European
members from across the state.
And 419.
1000
Caregivers and our state as
well. This important piece of
legislation will put peace of
mind for those that have to care
for themselves or care for a
loved one. We urge you to move
this forward. Thank you. We will
go to zoom, so we have
Cassandra, Alexandra, Ellie,
Sarah and Lydia. So go ahead,
Cassandra.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of SB three. My
name is Cassandra Gomez and I'm
a senior staff attorney at a
better balance, a national
organization working on paid
family and medical leave for
over a decade, helping to draft
nearly all of the paid leave
laws throughout the country,
including in Connecticut, where
our team worked closely on
drafting the law and on
implementation. We urge the
committee to move forward with
SB three, which is in line with
other paid family and medical
leave programs throughout the
country. S P three takes a
balanced approach of ensuring
that workers may have access to
up
To 12. Weeks of paid leave
during some of life's most
trying moments.
Paid family and medical leave.
Programs have also been shown to
increase business profitability
and employee productivity. We've
seen that these programs helped
level the playing field for
small businesses and stay
competitive with larger
businesses. SP three will work
well for workers, families and
businesses in New Mexico, as
paid family and medical leave
laws have done around the
country. Thank you for your
consideration of S B three.
Hello, Alexandra.
Good morning. My name is
Alexandra Pettersson Green and
I'm an American Heart
Association of New Mexico Board
member and the hospice nurse.
Not a day goes by that I do not
encounter a family that would
benefit from paid family medical
leave. Imagine choosing between
financial ruin and spending your
last days or moments with a
dying parents Imagine facing
homelessness because you had to
undergo life saving medical
treatments. Imagine watching
your uncle taking his last
agonizing breasts because you
lost your job.
While caring for him.
And were unable to pay the
electric bill that supported his
oxygen concentrator.
This is the reality for many new
Mexicans only deserve better.
I urge you to support page
family medical leave because
it's what's right for New Mexico
now.
Thank you, Um, Ellie.
Good morning. My name is Elie
Rush forth. I'm the managing
attorney for reproductive rights
and gender equity at the U. Of
New Mexico.
And thrilled to be before you,
Madam chair and members of the
committee and I'm thrilled
because this legislation and
your vote and support will not
only improve the lives of all
new Mexicans, but it will
literally save the lives of moms
and babies.
The lack of access to paid
family medical use is a public
health crisis, and it is
particularly significant here in
New Mexico. Unfortunately,
maternal and infant morbidity
and mortality is on the rise in
the U. S. And it's showing no
signs of decreasing. Now we've
heard a lot of fear,
hypotheticals and maybe even
some confusion today, but rather
than focus on what we don't
know, I want to focus on what we
do know.
New Mexico has the highest has
higher some of the highest rates
of maternal mortality per capita
compared to the nation and more
people unable to access adequate
care during pregnancy.
Preventing maternal and infant
destiny. Mexico means addressing
the system as a whole, and we
know that paid family medical
leave will have a significant
impact. Thank you. Good news.
Uh, next, we'll go to Sarah.
Hi. Good morning. My name is
Sarah took Otello and I am the
owner of the Burke A bakehouse,
a small bakery in the South
Broadway neighborhood in
downtown Albuquerque.
I started the bakehouse by
myself out of a shared kitchen
selling at local farmers markets
across Albuquerque.
Over the last 10 years, we have
grown into a brick and mortar
and now provide anywhere from 12
to 15 jobs. The success of my
bakery is due to the hard work
and dedication of my staff and
the main reason why we received
a recent James Beard nomination.
My priority as a business owner
is my employees and providing
them a stable job. Employee
retention is key to the success
of my small local business. My
teeny business benefited from
wage increase thick leave and
will also from P F M L.
Please support Senate Bill
three, please vote. Yes. Thank
you, Lydia.
Good morning, madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Lydia. Tiffany and I
have been working at the
birthday bakehouse for five
years.
The owners of the bakehouse have
consistently demonstrated their
investment in our success and
well being both at work and in
our personal lives, mutual
respect and caring that my
coworkers and I have for one.
Another is one of the reasons I
have stayed at this job.
In the last few years. I have
seen several of my co workers
sustained major injuries,
forcing them to take large
chunks of time of work. This is
a huge financial burden for many
wage workers working in the
service industry is often
physically demanding and when
injuries happen, returning to
work early is not an option.
A state run paid family medical
leave program is mutually
beneficial for workers and
employers.
Wage workers are offered a
benefit, but it's almost unheard
of, especially for those working
for minimum wage, and in return,
employers will see the benefit
of increased morale and employee
retention, mitigating the costs
and stress that comes with a
high turnover rates that we see
across the service industry.
This is why I support SP three
energy or support as well. Thank
you. Thank you.
Okay. We will go to the
committee. So far. I have Kate's
harm, Eo.
Vincent.
Jones, lord. Okay, Go ahead
representative case.
And just to remind her that we
have heard this bill, so let's
try to keep it. Uh
To any questions around the
amendments or things that may
have changed. Thank you. Go
ahead, Representative Gates.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward. Um, I just I wanted to
just review a couple of things
regarding the amendments and and
and acknowledge a few of the
changes so currently in the
villas being presented eligible
employees must be employed for
six months. Is that correct?
Um Madam, Chair and
representative? Yes, okay, and
that they can access their paid
family medical leave up to nine
weeks for an illness, or, um,
some other family catastrophe in
12 weeks for
Ah, a new child or death of a
child. Correct.
Madam Chair representative.
Correct
I wanted to. Thank um uh Mr Rob
Black from the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce for
acknowledging that these
amendments that came from the
Senate have been very positive
and being able to, um
To move forward in the business
community. I very much
appreciate that. Um, I also
appreciate, uh, his concern
about our companies who are
providing services with
Medicaid contracts. I, too am
disappointed in the lack of
progress, so that Bill, but no,
I just wanted to say to the
business committee.
This is going to be my number
one concern for the next year or
two. I am going to be working
with, um
Lawyers that say yes, not
lawyers that say no and be able
to draft a successful bill.
That, um uh, has been advised to
me that doesn't just cover paid
family medical leave, but all
changes.
Um uh, that will affect Medicaid
contracts. And so I appreciate
that, Um
I want to. Also just, uh
Ah say that I've noticed that
the the organizations that
companies that are the most
concerned
Um, are ones that typically have
1099 employees instead of W two
employees? Um, I I hope to
continue a conversation to
regard that knowing as a
legislator, I am attending 99
employees as well. And I know
that, um uh, that are benefits
are, um
Are rare and um and and
employers are not used to
providing any. Um And so, um,
uh, I think that that that is a
continued conversation, but I
really commend the hard work on
this. How long have um both
representative Ortez and and and
chair.
Chandler been working on this
paid family medical leave. I
know that it's been presented in
a 30 Day session, but how long
he's been working on this, Um
Madam chair and representative,
I have been working with Senator
Stewart.
Think for about five years on
this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representative. This
iteration has been for the past
2.5 years and we've been
engaging various stakeholders.
In that time there have been
three other states have passed
more considerable. They went
directly to 12 weeks. They
didn't have some of the job
protections in place that we're
putting in. And I do want to
mention to your last point that
the conversation to ensure that
our state reimbursed
organizations are made whole in
at least this effort are
ongoing. Literally As of a text
message this morning. I'm still
working this out, because if
someone else mentioned
There are still three sessions
before or two more sessions and
tell someone until they start
withdrawing. And so there is
that ongoing commitment to
seeing our work as a living
document, So I just want to
address that, too, that that
that was not forgotten.
No. And and and thank you very
much.
Thank you, representative harm
you.
Madam chair and representatives
that, uh, I have similar
concerns, and I would be remiss
if I didn't bring this up that
there are 54,000 employees and
care facilities or care Arenas
Childcare agencies DD waivers
adults with disabilities
Children with disabilities.
Who this would be an unfunded
mandate for them reimbursement
for the majority of these
individuals from the state is 17
to $18 an hour.
We pay $15 an hour.
We can do the math and, um
You know, we're not going to be
able to keep these individuals
solvent. I do understand that
you are working on this with
with this state, and, um and I
wish that there was movement or
Or consideration in this bill
for those entities of, uh 44
54,000 people.
And and the businesses that
employ them.
So, um, for me, I would like to
see more movement on that before
I can move forward with this
bill. Thank you so much for
bringing it forward. I do
believe that families deserve
Paid family leave. I believe in
that, But I don't believe that
we can leave those 54,000
individuals off of off of this
for consideration. Thank you.
Thank you, representative
Vincent. Thank you, madam Chair.
So, madam chair.
Friday evening when this was put
on us that this was not going to
go through commerce and it was
going to come through this
committee.
Saturday. Sorry, my days are so
messed up around here.
Um
I went home and and I grabbed
this portion of the bill that
has all your amendments. And so
that's what I'm gonna be working
off of, but I did.
I did cite a lot of the
Her pages on the original bill.
So if you have the original
bill, I can give you the pages
and everything off of that. Um,
But what I what I did notice.
Madam chair is there was a
technical issue with the bill.
That will limit the bills
application to Native American
tribes, pueblos and nations.
And on Page four.
Of the original bill and Page
five of the amended amended
Bill. Um, the version in the
definition section. There is the
definition of Indian tribe.
Are you there?
Okay. Thank you, madam Chair.
This definition reads Indian
tribe means of federally
recognized Indian Nation Tribe
or pueblo, hold me or partially
located in New Mexico, a
governmental units Subdivision
agency department or
instrumentally thereof, or a
business enterprise wholly
owned, such as
An Indian nation, tribe or
Pueblo.
Madam Chair and representatives.
Does that definition look
correct to you?
Oh, madam chair and
representative. I understand
that there have been there's
been someone has raised this and
we believe it's a correct
definition, and it has been
addressed. It is a definition,
Madam chair that is used in
other parts of our statutes,
Madam Chair and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives, however, in the
bill
In Section four.
Page nine.
Lines nine through 11 in the
original Virgin.
Bottom of Page 10 top of 11 in
the amendments in Context
version.
Where a tribal entities are
given the ability to opt into
the paid medical Leave Act. The
drafter did not use the defined
term.
And instead simply stated Indian
nations.
Tribes and pueblos are eligible
to elect into the program.
Madam chair, um, the definition
for Indian tribe.
Included in this bill is
generally broader than the other
definitions included in the
statute.
Evidencing in the intent to the
to the to allow a broader group
of entities to be eligible to
opt into the F M L. A if it was
enacted, so madam chair and
representative specifically
because of the drafting error.
It is unlikely that tribally
owned businesses will
Not be able to opt in.
For example, in my district
Um, it appears tribally owned
businesses such as the end of
the mountain gods and ski
Apache.
Um and then Navajo agricultural
products industry and the Indian
Pueblo Cultural Center will not
be able to opt in as it appears.
Um
And Madam chair and
representative, I I just I have
a little heartburn with that
because I think there was a
technical glitch in that in that
bill.
Madam Chair representative. I
disagree with your
interpretation. Um
On page 10 of the marked up
version, Indian Nation tribes
and pueblos. The definition of
Indian tribe means and an Indian
nation. Tribe or pueblo. I, You
know, I failed to understand,
Madam Chair and representative
your concern, and I guess I
disagree with whoever worked
with you on that. Thank you,
Madam Chair and representatives.
So if you're going to use a
definition
Why not use the definition and
all portions of the bill?
And you used the definition in
one portion of the bill, But you
didn't use the same definition
in the in the other part of the
bill.
And I see a problem with that.
And this is not the first time
that we've disagreed on
anything. So I'm I'm okay with
that. We agree to disagree. But
there is that that in my opinion
If you're gonna have a
definition that definition
should be should be throughout
the whole bill. Madam chair.
So I'd like to offer an
amendment.
Um, I need a motion.
Madam chair. I like to bring
forward emotion to discuss the
amendment 2 to 8338.1.
In the 2nd 2nd. Is there any
opposition seeing none? No, I
don't need to hit it. We're just
discussing Go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
representative. So it's a super
easy fix. Um, the amendment
simply strikes nations.
Tribes and pueblos on Page nine
Line nine and inserts, uh tribes
to ensure that the term is used
as the definition.
And this one sure that there
aren't any interpretation issues
moving forward and assures the
broadest tribal participation.
I'm sorry.
Sorry, trying to arrange people
to go to other committees and
make sure we I'm sorry. What was
there a question for me? No,
Madam chair. I'm sorry. Okay,
So, um
Is there discussion on the
amendment?
Representative Lord
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Micro when you yield your time,
gentlemen. Yes, ma'am. Thank
you, Madam chair. Okay, So you
have to walk me through this
because I was trying to keep up
because you were going from the
original bill. I believe. Okay.
And you're using. Okay? Take me
to the point of where we're
changing.
The wording is an unpaid aged
nine.
Representative consent. Could I
ask you to you? I know this gets
confusing, but to use the
original bill, since not all of
us have a copy of the amendments
in context. Yes, ma'am, So I do
I have everything termed here.
So if you're using the original,
I've got that.
But I was mainly running off of
the, um the amended version
because I know you don't like us
to talk about the bill. Only the
amendments representative. It's
not that I don't like to talk
about the bill. I'm just saying
that in order for us to follow
along if we don't have the
amendments and context we can't
find where you're talking about.
So if you could just
Are you amending the amendments?
Yes, ma'am, Okay.
Okay, So does everyone have the
the, um, the amendments from the
Senate Finance Committee?
Okay, Madam Chair. It's online
to Okay, So, um, so let's let's
will that work for you to
explain. Okay. Okay, so we'll
work off of the amendments from
Senate Finance Committee. Okay,
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative Lord. So on Page
five of the amended bill.
If you look where it says 1230.
Yeah, There's no numbers on that
one. No numbers on it. But the
fourth paragraph.
This is Indian tribe means a
federally recognized Indian
tribe tribe or Pueblo, wholly or
partially located in New Mexico.
A governmental units Subdivision
agency department or
instrumentally there of
Or a business enterprise wholly
owned by such and Indian nation,
tribe or pueblo, So
I'm not finding that in the bill
that the amendments from the
Senate finance or are you on the
original bill, it's the original
bill, but it's the amended
portion of the bill.
Demanded portion or the
amendments and call it the
amended in context. So what? I'm
saying representative is that if
we could work off the the sheet
of amendments from Senate
finance and the original bill
because we are not provided with
the amendments in context in our
books
Okay, so I think on the
original. I think it's going to
be page four.
And I don't have that in front
of me. It should be in your
book. Okay, So if you look on
Page four
Uh, portion portion J line 11.
That gives the definition of
what I was talking about.
You hear them for you? This is
if you turn over to page if you
do have the amended portion, If
not, it's going to be on
Hey, Hey, Judge nine.
And then it's going to be online
11.
So on mine, it says Indian
nations tribes. The definition
is Indian nations, tribes and
pueblos that elect to be
covered.
Or determinate the coverage in
the program for their employees,
So it's not the same verb. It
just is not the same definition
which leaves this wide open for
interpretation.
Madam Chair, so amendment of
chair and represent, understand
if I'm understanding correctly.
So here you're saying on the
original bills on four
11.
It's a has a very specific
description.
That should have been duplicated
word for word.
Over here on page 999. Is that
what you're trying to say? Yes,
that's what I'm trying to say.
And it's not instead of
description. It's the
definition so the definitions
are wrong. One is wrong or one
is right. Right. Madam chair
represent. That's what I was. I
was trying to get at and I see
what you're saying, because if
you're not specific, we have two
different definitions and this
should be changed. Remember?
Exactly Medicare? Yeah. Sorry,
madam Chair. Um
Cemeteries and see what you're
saying. There's two different
definitions. And whenever we're
drafting a bill, we want to be
very specific because this says
one thing this is something else
and I agree with you. I think
that technicality needs to be
cleared up. Thank you.
Sponsors. I personally am not
seeing any difference. I mean on
page.
54. It's a definition Indian
tribe means a federally
recognized Indian nation, tribe
or Pueblo.
And then on Page nine, it says
Indian nations, tribes and
pueblos We don't have to put the
definition in because we've got
the definition in the
definition. So sponsors are you
Are you following what this
amendment is trying to do? And
Help me out here, Madam Chair. I
agree. Um it's very confusing.
And, frankly, I think
unnecessary. Um, of course, if
the individuals who are
suggesting the amendment wish to
support the bill without
amendment would be willing to
discuss it with them. But again,
Mr Chair and representative
If you will agree to support the
bill with this amendment,
Although it's unnecessary, we
will accept it as friendly.
Otherwise, um
We'll move forward with with the
bill as written. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam chair so
I don't like to be able at all,
and I would not be able to
support it. However, I am trying
to take care of my Mescalero
Apache tribe for sure, because
And I've heard this stated
plenty of times if there's a
definition.
This defined and later in the
bill.
It's not defined the same way
there. It's a it's a technical
error.
And that's not what I'm reading
in this and Madam chair. I'd be
glad to show you my version of
this so you can
Understand it and it just while
they're talking about that,
madam chair and representatives
and and that just leaves. It
just leaves my folks.
It doesn't state the definition
so anything could possibly
happen with that, opting in or
out?
Chair, Madam chair and
representative Respectfully, I
disagree. Many of us have, um
tribes and pueblos in our
districts, and I'm quite certain
and I that this definition will
cover those individuals, Madam
Chair and representative Well,
and Madam Chair representatives.
I just as many people as I heard
Uh, opposing this bill.
And as many people as I heard
that supported the bill, I think
that we ought to do our due
diligence to make sure that the
bill is correct when it goes
through, and it should be
I just don't agree. Now I am a
freshman, and I just I've been
taught a specific way to read
through these bills, and that
definition is different.
Representative, I'm going to say
again that the definition is on
Page four J. And there does not
need to be a definition on Page
nine. We don't put definitions
every time we use the phrase or
the
Word. We We define it once in
the bill, so I won't
representatives of pants key.
Could I get a real called vote
to Adams here? Yes.
Madam chair. I just reviewed the
language and I agree with that
interpretation. Madam chair and
representative.
The
Word tribe is defined and then
it is used later and so in the
word tribe does include
Tribally owned businesses and
enterprises. So for any tribally
owned enterprise or business
they would be included in the
usage of the word tribe.
Later in the bill, Madam chair,
so I I view this amendment is
Unnecessary. Uh
Madam chair, Appreciate the
representative wanting to make
sure his entity was included,
But I
Do not see an issue with the
bill, as as is
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair I'd
like to give that to weigh in on
this. I think this is really
simple. We're talking about
definitions. We're talking about
words have meaning.
So every other definition that's
used that is is laid out here in
a bill and every other bill we
ever see.
Is used later on in the bill to
describe what is
Put forth in the definition.
And and I know what What?
representative Vincent is trying
to convey is that in the
definition of the term that's
defined is Indian tribe.
With every other
Definition. I'll just use an
example of fund the word fund is
defined and
Every place you see fund
referred to in the bill. There's
no other description of it it
the word fund is what's used
because that's the definition.
That's what the word that's been
defined.
Indian tribe was defined.
The reference here, and I don't
know if I have the same page
number, but the reference to
Um Indian Nations, tribes and
pueblos is not the same. And
because of that, that does
potentially leave out these
individuals.
That's what it's in reference to
Madam Chair.
Reference to
Who who. The paid family and
medical Leave. Act applies to
And it says in the nation's
tribes and pueblos, which is not
the term that was defined. It is
a technical error. I understand
the intent and we all do. We all
want all those people to be
Um eligible and we wanted to
apply to them. But it is a
technical error and I That's the
way I see it. Thank you, madam
Chair.
And madam chair it if you do If
you do not agree. I mean, since
it's on the record if you don't
agree that they should match
Then I guess we just agree to
disagree, but I've always been
told that they have to match and
I've watched
That happened with bills and
that's why it
Sparked my interest. Whenever I
saw that.
Madam chair.
Thank you, Um, the way I view it
on Page nine. It's being super
inclusive to make sure that no
one is left out. And I don't
think that that that's a
problem. So, um, if there's no
further discussion on the
amendment, I will take a motion
motion Do past Madam Chair.
Second emotion substitute motion
to table the amendment. Okay,
that's pulling motion takes
precedence.
So we are on a motion to table.
Um
The representative Vincent's,
Um, amendment, which ends in
338.1. So Jennifer, will you
call the roll and a yes vote is
to table Representative Cates.
Yes to table.
Representative Chavez.
Representative harm you? Yes.
Representative Jones.
No to table.
Representative Lord no to table
with the explanation.
Representatives. Capan Ski
Yesterday, Able the amendment.
Representative Vincent the
table.
Madam vice chair back to
representative representative
Chavez.
Madam vice chair.
Yes to table. Madam Chair? Yes.
By a vote of 6 to 3. The
amendment has been tabled and we
are back on discussion of
The the new bill. The the the
amendments to the bill that we
have heard before. So Karen had
an explanation. Please. I'm
sorry. One minute or less. Okay.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I understand what representative
Harlem was saying, and that
things aren't technically
correct. They come back and bite
us. Because if you seen as a new
person that bills come back all
the time, where we have to go
back and amend what should have
been done correctly the first
time, so thank you for standing
up for the Native American
pueblos and tribes of New Mexico
to try to bring clarity so that
it was very, very specific and
very clear. So thank you for
that.
Okay. Thank you.
Representatives. You still have
the floor. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um
You know?
I'm not even gonna sound
disappointed. I just I just
wanted to make sure that
everything
I'm a procedural guy. And you
know, I like I started reading
these bills and I have been
taught how to read them
specifically, and I'm trying to
do things in a procedural way.
And, uh, I just think that
I've looked at some of the, um
models from some of the other
states and whether it's going to
happen here or not, I don't
know. It's just a prediction.
But in year three and four when
the insolvency turns upside
down, I just want to be on the
record stating that I, you know,
I tried to do something. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Um, lost my list.
Representative Jones. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Um yeah.
I appreciate what what we
Representative Vincent just
tried to do and correcting a
bill. That's that is has
technical issues. I, uh
And I also want to say first
before I get started, and I know
I said this before, I'll try to
be very brief, but we have to
frame this. We've got all these
people here, tons of input from
both sides of this issue. Be
clear that I appreciate the
intent here to help help workers
to help families help
individuals that truly do have a
need to take a leave and
And I've been one of those
people many, many times that
with my seven kids and
And taking care of my late
husband and so forth. I'm I
don't come to this without
compassion for what we're doing
here.
Um, but I do have to to look at
this from the legislators,
perspective and weigh in on
everybody's opinion. So, so with
that, I just want to say I am
concerned about
About the the effort to push
this through without making sure
that we're we are passing
legislation that is meeting the
needs of new Mexicans, business
owners and employees alike. And
also that is technically
correct.
I still believe, regardless of
what we just did that this is a
technical issue, and we should
be passing, especially when we
know that we have a problem with
a bill. We should be fixing
that. So, um
I feel like the very 1st 1st
Page. We have another issue that
is a technical problem. Um,
constitutionally were required
in the very first.
Um, opening summary of what the
bill states in the title. I
should say of the bill to, um
To show with clear
understanding what is in the
bill, and so this title.
Doesn't accurately or adequately
capture what the bill is doing.
You should be able to read the
title and know what the bill is
about, Um
So we've already seen this one
problem. This makes me wonder
what else is in here? And when
we're trying to jam this bill
through quickly and one
committee that's really not.
This is not should not be madam
chair.
In this committee this if we
have to choose one committee
that this is really applicable
to it would be commerce. My
opinion. But anyway, Madam
chair, Um, here we are trying to
jam this bill through. It makes
me wonder what else is is
technically incorrect or
inaccurate if you read the
title, it says relating to
employment, enacting the paid
family and Medical Leave Act,
creating the paid family and
medical leave fund.
Providing for the paid family
and medical leave program to pay
an eligible employee a
percentage And here's the part
that I have an issue with a
percentage of the employee's
wages to allow the employee
number one to bond with a new
child.
Number two to care for a family
member.
That's it.
That's all this bill is for.
That's what that that's the
title is nothing about medical
leave. There's nothing about
safe leave.
So another technical, Just an
oversight, which which has to
bring into question what is in
the rest of these several pages
of the bill that
We may be trying to pass through
too quickly.
Um So I guess you know I should
offer Madam chair and an
opportunity for you to to speak
to that representatives. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, it does
continue onward with further
explanations of what the program
does, and, uh, allowing
recognizing certain similar
programs, So it does acknowledge
to bond for the child care for a
family member, limiting the time
allowed, exempting certain
employees mean it, literally it
in many ways, Madam Chair and
representative.
You know, takes the section by
section really kind of explains
What the bill does.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
just don't see those words. I
think we really need to focus on
you know what's technically
correct. I just a little birdie
in my ear That said that the the
title is not chapter, so that
will not be part of the bill. I
mean, we'd be part of the law.
Essentially, it's kind of a
quickie for us to be able to
Scan so so this will not become
part of if it does become
chapter that will not be part of
it. Thank you, Madam Chair, I
will say, And I appreciate that.
Um, but I will say that I think
there is a constitutional
requirement that the title
explains the bill.
So that we can understand what's
in the bill.
Um And I wish that I had gotten
that reference to the
Constitution, but I don't have
it with me. Somebody else has it
feel free.
To let me know. Um
So you know, I I do appreciate
the amendments that were made.
Some of them made the bill a
little better.
But, um
But we still have We still have
an issue with
With this not being a
Premium. Um
And I noticed that that premium
is not used very often. Only
once or twice here in this in
this bill, but it's not a
premium. It's not. There's no
choice, um to
Opt in or opt out for the
majority of New Mexico
businesses and employees. I'm
concerned about what that does,
Madam chair to, um people who
are on minimum wage, for
instance, and how they're
already working paycheck to
paycheck pennies matter, and
they're being forced to
To pay out of their already, um
Uh, um, Small paycheck amount
into this fund, which they may
never, ever use. Um
Have you considered that?
Um Madam Chair and
representative. First of all, I
would disagree, Um, in terms of
the harm, you know, presented
that you just spoke to Madame
Cheron representative. What
we're doing is providing a
safety net for people who work
at very low wages at a very,
very low cost calculation is
it's 125.
Dollars a year for minimum wage
employees that to be able then
to have a program that provides
you, um maternity leave or
parental leave for up to 12
weeks that provides you and
provide you with wage
replacement at full amount if
you're a minimum wage worker is
an incredible benefit for those
individuals and all of us in the
Legislature should be delighted
that we're providing such an
important safety net to low wage
workers. Thank you, madam.
Chair and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative. I
appreciate your enthusiasm for
that, Um
I do think it's important that
we provide that, not we as a
state provider, or that we
mandate this sort of thing, but
I think it's important to have
an environment where that's
possible, and I look forward to
finding ways for that to happen.
I know that in my community
there are there are entities
which encourage
The sharing of PTO and that sort
of thing so that actually I
think that is such a great
thing, Madam chair when we
instead of being a government,
big government who mandates
certain taxes that may not even
be necessary for individuals,
those that accumulate PTO, for
instance, who never never would
use this fund.
Um
That are accumulating PTO when
they're offered by their
employer the opportunity to
share PTO that enhances
relationships. It's supportive.
Uh, it's a business
relationship and an employee
relationship that supports each
other rather than having a heavy
handed government mandate.
That makes you pay in and has
nothing to do with it. It's
actually unfair to those who
never use it. And and and yet.
I don't think that we're
allowing. I'm not going to move
forward that because I'm going
to get into weeds. I don't
understand. Maybe, but but I do
know that that there are better
ways to do what we're trying to
do. And that this I don't
believe this really meets the
needs and we've seen on both
sides The problems with it. I do
want to point out also, um in
the testimonies today or the the
in opening
Comments of both representatives
and the public.
Um, I'm curious about which
business communities were
consulted when we were putting
this together.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative. We've been
in ongoing conversations with
the ones that is, as my
colleague mentioned that are now
neutral. Those were have been
involved in. She can go through
those as well. We've talked with
a number of chambers across the
state, including the State
chamber We've talked with, um
long term care facilities as
well. Medicaid reimbursed
groups. Um, you know again, this
is ongoing. Now with any bill
When you're compromising no one
is 100% happy. You know, the
advocates that we were working
with. We had to take back and
say this is this is what we have
to do. Job protection cannot
start at 90 days. It needs to be
100 and 80. Because a number of
businesses felt better about
that. So these conversations
have been broad again across 2.5
years. So you know, you know,
and what I have appreciated the
opposition is they're
acknowledging. You know a lot of
the efforts we have come to, and
sometimes there is just a
philosophical difference.
Um, but they're happening began
across the state and throughout
many chambers and many different
in associations.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I
noticed in the comments to the I
don't remember which of you
mentioned this, but we We talked
about it or you. You mentioned a
lot of entities. Business
entities who are not in
opposition, Which I want to
point out doesn't mean that
there are also in favor. It
means they are silent on the
matter which
It is important to note that
they're not necessarily favoring
this.
Um, so something that point that
that jumped out at me. I have to
say this
I know that a lot of this.
What's in this bill is already
in federal statute because we do
have family, a family medical
Leave Act. We have that, um the
issues come in. When we pay
people, we will take tax money.
From everyone and we pay people
which incentivizes abuse and I
Something really jumped out at
me here, and I don't I have the
the updated version the amended
version, so I don't know if I
can
Pointed out to you, but where
it's in the amended version,
Page five or we talk about a
health care provider. This is
definitions. Hate to interrupt,
but
Most of us don't have amendments
in context.
So if you could please use the
original. I know it makes it
more difficult, but that's our
practice is to put the
The bill, not amendments in
context in our books.
Everybody's working off of that.
I'm sorry, madam Chair. I wish
that
I wish that I had known that I'm
learning. So, um, I will find my
mind the bill, and it is SP
three.
Back here under his way towards
the back. Senate bills Bills
three
Okay, so I'm looking at. I'm
looking at definitions and I
will find it here. Healthcare
provider.
Since I am one madam chair.
Um
Page for line eight. Is that
what you're referencing for?
Line eight. Yes. Healthcare
provider means an individual
licensed or certified to provide
health care in the ordinary
course of business.
So that that's very broad. That
includes me. For instance, I
could, um
I could be the individual who
Writes a note and says Yes,
you're you're eligible.
For this fund.
Um
And it it took me back, Madam
chair to when we we, uh we
passed the medical marijuana
laws because I know that
In an abuse of that, Um, there
were
There were medical providers who
set up shop and charged. You
know, I'll take you 100 bucks
for a note that says you are
eligible for. I mean no offense
to anybody who was involved in
this, but you know it was taking
advantage of the law.
I'll take 100 bucks. I'll write
you a note so that you can be
eligible to get this money You
don't have. You know you don't
have to take leave family
medical leave like we
Having the past without money,
you can get it and I will give
you a note. So that is that is
that's just huge, in my opinion
that anybody who is licensed or
certified to provide health care
in the ordinary, ordinary course
of business, um, could do that
for and and perhaps abuse. This
fund, which we've already
decided.
I mean, many people have said is
going to be insolvent in three
years and will be coming back
for more money. So can you
address that, please? Madam
Chair representative.
Madam Chair representative, If
you're saying that nurses
qualify as someone as a medical
provider, I would agree with
you.
And so then the question is
you're saying they if a nurse
provides a false certification
What will happen and we're
looking at our bill. But there
will be penalties, including I
would imagine the ability to
challenge their licensure or
certification. I would also
point out you mentioned
insolvency. Um, we're going on.
Actual analysis of solvency, not
what many people have said, but
actual economic reviews of what
will lead to solvency and I
would note madam share.
We have an updated workforce
solutions analysis and the
changes that we have made in
this compromise Bill addresses
issues of solvency and improves
on the solvency of the fund.
That fact, Madam Chair and
representatives confirmed in the
most recent updated F I. R.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I wanted
to disappoint out.
On page 20 Sorry. I forgot.
On page 29.
Like line to they talk about
disciplinary options, but I also
did want to ask if the secretary
on a technical element can talk
about, um, within her
department. If it professional
with certification does commit
fraud. What are steps that she
has essentially power to take on
at that point?
Go ahead, Madam Secretary, you
can come on up and
Just don't move the mix while
they're on.
Okay?
Can you hear me?
Can you hear me? Okay.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative Jones. You
know, we take concerns about
fraud very seriously some of the
anti fraud measures in the bill
include Section five E, uh, that
the ends an employee who has
committed Paley fraud for
applying for benefits for three
years. Section five H requires
that would require our
department. Could you give us
page numbers?
If you have them, I have the
same problem with only having
the amendments in context
that would be on page 15 from
blinds one through
Um
21 lines one through 18 talk
about if someone if I even
employee were to fraudulently
place claim why they would be
not be able to take it for three
years. Thank you. It makes it
easier to follow. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative
Jones. I'll pause after each of
these citations so we can give
you page numbers. So Section
five h.
I believe it's around page 17
Page 17 lying 21.
The department is required to
verify the employment and wages.
So a lot of the fraud that we
saw committed during the
pandemic with the unemployment
insurance, um was related to the
fact that unemployment insurance
has a pay first mandate before
we can check a lot of these
things in this bill. They've
addressed that by requiring that
verification before the benefits
are paid.
In Section six. Think it starts
on page 20?
I'm sure page 20 lines starting
at the beginning at the top.
H two, it would require third
party verification of the
qualifying event. And I You
know, when I first saw this
bill, I had the same question. I
thought
Anybody can get a merit medical
marijuana card. It's really not
that hard. Um, but what I've
seen in the other states that
we've talked to is that the
verification process and paid
family leave is actually much
more complex because it requires
the qualifying professional
healthcare provider to actually
describe with some detail that
the actual condition and also to
make a recommendation as to the
duration of leave.
Required and what what they have
in Colorado, for example, is
they have a cross check database
that insurance companies use to
make sure that if a doctor says,
you know, it's three weeks there
is an industry norm for how long
that lead would be. And in
Colorado, they cross check that,
So that's another check against
the kind of medical fraud that
you're concerned about.
Um, also under Section seven.
See, the employer has the right
to appeal the determined Oh,
sorry. Section seven C.
I think it's page 22 you need
original.
Page 2922.
The employer has the right to
appeal the determination and
this is actually unusual in
these bills, but it is really
valuable because from my
perspective as an employer, uh,
the employers in the best
position to know whether the
employee actually has a medical
condition or not right. We see
them every day. We know if
they're faking whatever this
serious medical condition is so
the ability for the employer to
appeal the determination is
actually another really
important anti fraud measure.
And then in section 10 D, which
I think is page 29 in the
original.
Yeah, madam. Sure. That is
correct Line 13.
The department can bring its own
action to pursue violations of
the act. So if we were to see a
repeat offender who was giving,
um in a inappropriate or
inaccurate, medical, um,
excuses, we would have the
ability as a department to go
after both those claimants in
this providers, of course, fraud
is already a crime and I won't
read every single fraud statute
we have, but I would point out
that we actually have, um
Chapter 30 article 40 of the New
Mexico statutes that has a
number of crimes which are
specifically related to
fraudulently obtaining public
benefits. And I'd also just note
that generally paid family
medical leave fraud is because
it's so much more difficult to
commit. We don't really see it
in the other programs in the
other states because of the
requirement, the medical records
can be checked.
New Jersey had a report where
they reported no fraud in
Oregon, they started to see
attempts at identity theft
related fraud, but they caught
all of them before any claims
were paid. Because of all the
checks and balances in this
program that don't exist in a
lot of other government
programs.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary. That was a lot,
but I think I followed the
majority of it.
And I'm glad to know that to
some degree that's been
addressed, although that is a
long process, and I would
imagine there are some employers
who wouldn't
Wouldn't go through that they
would
Um, it might be easier not to
But I appreciate all of your
explanations. Um
So I just want to move. This is
a very good example of why this
should be seen in commerce. You
know, um
What we're really addressing
here is not not so much about
health, but it is about money,
and, uh,
You know, One of my questions is
I know there are other states
that have implemented. This paid
family medical leave. But are
they are they necessarily on the
same par? As you know,
financially as we are, they are
They one of the poorer states as
we are, I think for the third
poorest state in the union if I
remember right
Are the other states that we're
comparing ourselves to
The same similar
Madam. No state is identical to
another state. But what I would
say it's certainly the case is
every state has employees who
need benefits such as these and
in terms of economics. Our wages
are also lower, so the
percentage of wages that every
week are retrieving are lower
and the payments that will be
made are lower because it's
based on the wages that we pay,
not wages that other states pay.
So in terms of comparability, we
need to recognize that every
state is unique.
I attended a conference recently
with my colleague,
representative Serato, and they
said What we do know about paid
family medical Leave is
Uh, nothing is the same in every
state. There are comparability
issues, but we do know that
nearly all all of them have been
solving except for one, and
that's when they set the
premiums too low. So, um, I
guess I disagree in terms of
Us looking and saying, Well,
this state is different. We
shouldn't be doing it because I
guess we're a poor state. Is
that the suggestion you're
making? Well, I disagree,
because we're stupid, poorer
state or have economic
disadvantages. This is just the
type of program we need to be
saying. Our our employees need
this program Justice.
As other employees and other
states do and I would hate to
think that we have to, um, deny
them that on that basis, Madam
chair and representative and
Madam Chair representative, This
is a uniquely new Mexico
proposal. Nobody else has what
we put together within
consultation in the numerous
provisions that were considered
no one else has this and this is
uniquely new Mexico to ensure
that when we mean solvent we
mean solvent.
And when we talk about ensuring
that people can take are you all
know this better than any other
committee? We talked a lot about
the sandwich generation. You all
know more about how are how are
aces numbers are these are real
tangible issues that Mexicans
face this legislation uniquely
looks at domestic violence
Survivors, Madam Chair and
representative ensures that they
can get access to get out of
that situations and get our
Children and better situation,
so this is not comparable to
other laws. In that sense that
it is more conservative. I would
argue that any
Other state that's passed it
since we began discussing this
particular version 2.5 years
ago.
Thank you very much. I know. We
all care deeply about these
people and people that are in
need. I share that with you.
Um
I I guess What I want to do now
is just
Stop focusing on the money
because I'm like I said, that
should be reviewed by people who
deal.
With
Figures more than we do here. We
deal with health. We deal with
helping people. I'm curious,
though.
Um
Where At what point did How did
we decide? Where was the data
that was used to decide that
five employees of business with
five employees would be subject
to this tax rather than four
employees, can you that? That is
nothing new in this, So we are
trying to stick with stuff that
is new. We could because we've
spent a lot of time on the
The House version of this bill,
if we could just stick on to
what's new in terms of the
amendments on this bill, Madam
chair. I appreciate that. But I
also know that this is the
question that wasn't answered
for me. And this bill is trying
to be
Passed through without answering
questions. I think this the
committees or where we decide
and we we hash this out and
decide whether we should move
forward with it. So that's where
I'm at. I'm trying to get my
questions answered you to stick
with what the changes to the
bill are.
Madam chair. I'd like to have my
question answered because I'm I
have a I have people in my
communities are asking this and
I need to answer to them.
So do you have data or did was
this just a random number that
we didn't decide to defer to
your direction? Then we're gonna
stick with the amendments. Okay?
And so I heard you say, Madam
chair. We should stick with the
amendment, so I will defer to
your ruling on this madam Chair
representative, a representative
Chandler go ahead and give a
very brief explanation and then
we will stick with the amendment
manager representative. Two
thirds of businesses will be
exempt with four or less.
That's why we wanted to exempt a
significant number of Madam
chair and representative while
ensuring the fund will be
solvent, And that is why four
lessons exempted because it's
it's two thirds majority 67 for
66 67% of businesses in New
Mexico would be exempt.
And it's based on analysis done
by Bieber at the University of
Health at the University in
Mexico.
Okay. Thank you for that madam
chair and representatives
appreciate it.
So I'll just skip to what I'm
hearing from my community, and
I've said that before, but I
think it's important since this
is a massive bill that is going
to impact every new Mexican. I
should be able to say as a
representative of district 32
what my constituents are telling
me both employees and employers
and there's a great concern that
both of them can suffer due to
this imposed tax, governmental
imposed tax.
Um
We're already suffering like
some have said here today from
um Covid the shutdowns not
covid, necessarily. But the
shutdowns that were associated
with covid from the government
imposed PTO. They're struggling
to keep their doors open
already. And this and the timing
of this this could cause many to
either close their doors or make
moves. And they told me this
And this is how our employees
are going to suffer as well, Not
because they have this
relationship. They depend on
each other, Um, Madam chair.
It. If if we pass this at there
are businesses in my community
that will have to let some of
their people go.
They will lose their jobs. They
will go more toward technology
restaurants without waitresses,
Um, grocery stores without check
with just, um, self check
instead of real people. Um,
there is a mutual
Problem here in my community, I
know for sure, and many of them
are just asking for us to wait.
Can we just wait? Wait until we
get the technical issues solved.
Wait until they can recover from
all of the recent, um, mandates
that we've put forward and and
as well, you know, the
recovering from Covid.
We don't have people. We don't
have a workforce to replace
people if they
Tended toward taking leave
because of this bill. They're
just multiple problems with it
right now. So I just asked that
we consider that and consider
the needs of my community
because
That's important. And I needed
to say that. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair and thank you
Representatives, representative
Lord
On the amendments. Yep. Got it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
have a question, though, that
the other represent brought up.
I just looked at the
Constitution on page 31 section
16.
And the title has to be very
clear. Um, there's nothing about
the no safe leave. There's some
things that are being missed in
this opening paragraph. So how
can you explain to me why this
should go through when it's
violating the Constitution Page
31 section 16,
Madam Chair representative.
This is not a part of the
amendment conversation, but I
will say I'm comfortable that
this implies with the
Constitution.
Provision was drafted in the
Legislative Council service, and
they are certainly very
cognizant of the requirements
that are needed in the
description proceeding, a bill
which will not be published in
the actual statutes, Madam Chair
and representative mentioned
representative, I would say we
have some great legislative
council, however, had to correct
numerous mistakes that I have
found and it's not on on there.
They're part is that I just
looked at things like this and
said this is not going to fly,
so that's definitely something
we'll be bringing up on the
floor because I don't think it's
going to cap passed
constitutional muster because
this opening title is not
correct.
So I'm gonna try because I know
that madam sure and represented
You guys would like me to go off
the original bill. With all my
questions are off the in context
to this easier for me to see
these so
Um, you guys have sorry, but I'm
sure you guys have it in
context, Correct.
In front of you, Madam chair and
representative, I do have, um
okay, context and we also have
one regular Bill, representative
Lord, the members of the
committee. Do not have that.
Okay? No, it's something
difficult, but we need page in
line numbers from the original
bill. Okay, so give me a second
here because I'm starting on for
you guys.
Sorry, madam chairman said. I'm
page
Two.
Um, where we have the portion a
just application year.
That looks like that was
amended. So let me go back and
find it. And here with my trusty
helper here.
Madam chair amended into the
bill. Madam Sharon
representative is that correct?
Because they won't have that in
the original bill that was
amended in Madam Chair
representatives. So on Page two
in the original bill, we have a
new a section, which includes
application year, which is
defined as the 12 month period
beginning on the first day of
the calendar week, which an
individual files an application
for family and medical leave
compensation, and this just
clarifies further clarifies the
bill.
That is a 12 month rolling
Madam, she representative. It's
not you can't take it back to
back.
Okay, so sorry. We're not seeing
that on Madam chair. It's in the
amendments. Um, so, so sorry to
It would be. It was inserted in
line to it was inserted there,
okay? And so that amendment
believe it was when we came
back, Okay? Yeah, there it is.
The floor amendment is that one
and that just defines the
rolling
Turn. Do we have a floor
amendment always have is a
Senate Finance Committee
amendment. Madam chair. There
was a four minute Yes, there was
and its floor amendment number
11. It's confusing.
Let me um
Madam Trevor clarification There
were 24 amendments. Just two
separate Florman. Yes. Do you
have copies of those?
If we could get someone to make
copies for the
Make copies for the committee.
Thank you. This will help
represent. Yeah, Representative.
Lord, if I could ask you to go
if there are any of your
questions on the Senate Finance
Committee amendments, which is
what we have in hand and then
we'll go back to when we get the
other amendments. Okay. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Okay, so
I'll go hold on to that.
So, Madam Chair representatives
with with you guys, you have
On that same page on to which is
I believe on Page two here.
You struck out client means a
person who obtains workers to an
employee. Least in arrangement.
Why was that struck out?
What was the reason for that
being struck out or did it get
moved somewhere else? Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So, um, all the
employment leasing agreement
language is for very specific
class of employer And in the
past, they had seen that this
was essentially we were working
on them. And what language The
most effective is the answer.
Um, And so we wanted to make
sure that it was clarified that
Businesses that contract ID with
these employee leasing contracts
were counting their own
employees and not counting these
separate employees. And so that
was the language that we worked
out with him the new employee
leasing language that we worked
with them on. You can see his
Senate floor amendments, which
we'll talk more about.
Okay, Madam Chair
representative, Can you just
briefly explain to me what What
is the difference between
Um, an employee and employee
leasing agreement.
Madam Chair representatives. So
there are these groups that
exist throughout New Mexico that
are usually like one person
shops and they farm out their HR
duties to a number of different
companies, groups and so, for
example, if I ran a P E 01 of
these leasing groups, and I
entered a contract with
representatives, Lord and Jones
and each of you all had 234
employees.
Well, we're clarifying here Is
that when I file and I remit my
paid family medical leave, um,
contributions that they're not
adding up two plus three plus
four and putting them all under
my business when I may have one
employee or something like that,
and this was again language that
we worked very, very closely
with that group of individuals.
Okay, Madam chair represent. I
believe that makes sense. So
you're saying If I have a
company and justice three. It's
not applicable. But if I
subcontracted out, we don't want
that to Okay, effectively. Yes.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
for Claire.
Find that because I wasn't
Wait. Sure, Okay, going on, too.
And I apologize. I'm working off
the and
I'm working off the
Um, Madam Chair the bill that
has the amendments in place. I
got to go back and find
amendment context.
So hold on to life. Find this.
This is
Okay. I will just ask the
question, and then I'll try to
go back and find an original
that you struck out.
Um and section F employee
leasing arrangement means an
arrangement which a client
contractor and employee leasing
contractor, etcetera, etcetera.
And that now you put employee
leasing arrangement means an
arrangement which client
contracts with the employee. So
that's miniature version. I'm
just understand. That's the same
question. I just asked. Is that
correct? Thank you, Madam chair.
Thank you, Representative. Okay.
Thank you. So we can move on
from that one. So I I understand
that one. Okay, so going on to
page
Four. Find this one.
Sorry, madam Sharon represent
with people at home also have
represented Harlan trying to
find the pages and original bill
at the same time to speed this
up. Um, in this you have on Page
four under Section F.
Um, no, my mom. My mom. Okay,
that's important Employee to
bond with the child employee
within 12 months of the birth or
adoption of a child placement of
a foster care and is, um with
the employee.
But then you struck out to care
for a family member of the
family member has a serious
health condition. Is that
completely struck out or is that
move someplace else? Madam Chair
and representative that's moved
to medical leave, Okay.
We've as if you were calling our
opening, we pointed out. We have
now two types of leave Madam
Chair and representative, Madam
Chair region. There's three
types of leave isn't there?
There's sorry there's safe Leave
is the third one safe Leave is
attached to metal. It's called
medical and safe. Leave medical
I count that as one definition,
but
If you want to count it as
three. That's fine. Mr. Madam
Chair, Madam Chair
representative. That language is
moved to the con in the
amendments in context one right
into Page six. Okay for
The original one. It would be in
People Page four in the original
one that languages moved onto
the section on medical leave
online. 2320. Thank you. I'm
also trying to take notes on
this two for clarity. So when I
come back to the bill, I don't
forget everything You just said,
Um, Madam Chair representative
on so the amendments and
context.
And five
There was a section that was
taken out any individual related
by blood or affinity.
I know That was a question we
had before.
Is that was that moved to
another section again, ma'am
Chair representative Or was that
just taken out? Madam
Chairperson?
Mhm. Yes.
Like Madam Chair representative
was holding it down like it was
on the floor. Real four more
were removed that language for
better clarification. So there
wasn't a concern on that. Okay,
So, Madam, Short ribs have did
you re clarify it somewhere else
or just remove it out of there.
Madam Chair representative. We
felt the language was clear and
cleaner without that blood or
affinity in there, Okay?
Okay. I'm also trying to make
sure I don't get this Madam
Chair representative. Okay. We
went through least worker.
Oh, man, I'm sharing
representative. Can you slate on
that in context where you struck
out?
Uh um.
And section K qualifying.
I don't even know what that word
is. Never since thank you. What
is that? What does that mean?
Madam chair and representative
paid family medical Leave
provides. I'm talking about the
federal program has that
terminology in it, and it
provides access to that type of
leave for military families who
need to address issues
associated with being rolled,
enrolled. And, um, a number of
business representatives came
To us and expressed concern
about including that in our
bill and as a result and in
cooperation with them. It was
removed through the Senate for
amendments. Madam Chair and
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair Robson's. I appreciate the
explanations okay with that.
Same in the next page, okay?
So
On page
Sick portion inherent page six.
Okay, So I guess we're going.
Okay. You just You just explain
that memory. I want to reread
it. I just didn't no need for
you to explain it. Just
understood what that meant.
Okay, so we went from there to
there through this.
Nothing online seven.
Okay, eight.
Okay, so that leads me to
In content on a page nine.
Think about this isn't e
So we struck out.
135. Okay, so sending premium
fallen Kelly Ability Web team
told him contribution, So we
changed for 135 to 140 wizard. A
reason for those extra five
days.
Uh, Madam chair representing.
We're not talking about days.
We're talking about the test for
solvency of the fund originally,
said 135%, so we've made it more
rigorous by adding, um 140%.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. That's on Page
eight. Line seven in the
original bill and thank you if I
would have read the next one or
said percent, I would have known
that, but I was trying to read
through these very quickly and
just stay on the highlighted
portions. I should have read the
next one that's on there.
Case. So, Madam Chair
representative.
Those are simple. We're just
saying the state of New Mexico.
I've been okay onto page 12
Foreign content. Give me one
second member servers them now.
I just want to make sure I'm not
asking a question ventures that
I really had answered earlier,
And I think this
representatives not you. I'm
laughing because I've I've
learned a lot about employee
leasing, and this is really I
hope the committee and others
understand. We really were
trying to make sure that like
people were not double paying,
You know other you know, we're
learning from other states as
well. So this was something that
came up when Minnesota past
There's that this leasing
contract concerning came up.
We're just anticipating that on
the onset, so yes, that is the
same.
Um, addressing that same concern
right up on my colleague on it.
Thank you. I know it was like
Wait. I think I know the answer
to this one. I think we just
like data who I think we just
already went through all this,
okay?
1314. Okay. So on 16 hold on, I
may be able to answer my own
question here, Madam Chair
representative.
Okay?
So on this page, I might need
help locating the original.
We struck out on C and D and
then put in a new sandy.
An employee yourself employed
individual is eligible for
maximum 12 weeks of leave during
the application year provided
the employee yourself employing
division not required to using
leave consecutively.
Which does leave me question.
Hold on, come back around it,
but they changed it. Men share
representatives to
Beginning January.
First and employers, self
employed individuals shall be
eligible for a maximum number of
weeks.
Ah, in calendar years 2027 to
28. Did you change that? Because
you want to clarify the date?
This is starting or what was the
clarification for striking the
original, then adding in the New
Amendment, Madam Chair,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, representative
on the original bill. That's
page 14, starting on line 18 and
what That is that left phase in
language that we were discussing
earlier. Um so we're clarifying
that in 22.
In 2025 rules will be
promulgated where there will be
an actuarial study will have an
advisory team that are looking
at this 26. They will start
paying into the fund in 27.
People can begin taking leave
family leave will be for up to
12 weeks and I say up to very
specifically and then, um, nine
weeks for a medical leave and
safely that might be needed. And
then this goes on to say on to
the next page.
That, Um, if that is fun if that
is solvent at 140%, then it will
move up to 12 weeks for
everyone, potentially up to 12
weeks.
Okay, so, ma'am share ribs. I
want to make sure I understand.
So I know that there's a six
month period of pain and before
this can even start is that
correct? So this is six months.
Does it begin on January 1st
when we started paying in, then
it's six months from there, or
is it six months paying before?
January. 1st 2027 Madam chair
representatives before 2026 is
when payments again and it's 12
months. It's for the year of
2026. Okay, so, Madam chair
represents what I'm trying to
understand. You want to make
sure about the solvency before
moving forward? Is that correct?
Madam Chair representative. I
believe you're saying I'm trying
understand? Question. The goal
was making it 12 weeks for a
family Twitter nine weeks for
medical safe leave.
Is to ensure the solvency and to
ensure that it's moving the
proper way we heard from many
committees and many members that
that was their concern and this
and as we actually see in the F
I R. They felt that you know,
under multiple scenarios that
there would be even a
possibility that the amount
collected would meet would be
reduced, so that is an effort in
that into phase it in to ensure
it's working.
Okay, so
Samantha represents is 12 weeks
for met. Sorry.
Nine weeks split between 12 and
I said 12 is the medical
12 is the family Madam Chair
representative. That's correct.
In bonding leaf. Okay, so 12
Madam chair represented 12 weeks
as a family and then nine weeks
is the medical
And it's a goal Madam chair
represent to eventually moved
And it's a goal. Madam chair
represent to eventually move
that then this is the one that's
nine weeks for medical to move
that up to 12. Weeks later on,
Um
Let him chair and representative
that's correct in two years
after implementation, there'll
be a solvency check at the 140%
level. If it's solved, it fits
team solvent through that, and
now actuarial analysis. Um then
it will move to 12 weeks for
medical and safely, Madam Chair
and representative. Okay, so
Madam chairman perspective on
that same page online E where it
says an employee or self
employed individual.
Is not required, but paid Family
Medical Leave act to use any
leap. Consecutively. Um
Are you saying that they can't
take two leaves? Actually. Okay,
So I do have a question, So if
you had two different jobs, and
you're working full time, which
I've done, I've had five jobs at
one time. We were trying to make
ends meet if you have two jobs
in your pain into them.
Can you take those?
Um
What's the one that's concurrent
and consecutive, So can I take
one at the same time or one
after the fact Madam
Chairperson?
Thank you for bringing experts
to answer my question.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, So from the From the
state's perspective, like from
my department's perspective,
what we're saying is you are
granted up to X amount of weeks
of paid leave for the reason
that you've given based on the
medical reasoning of your health
care provider.
Then it becomes between your
employer or your multiple
employers and the employees to
work out the details of how
that's used, and that would be
subject to the employer's
policies. So, for example, if
you had, um, say, let's say
chemotherapy at you know, in the
afternoon, right? And you're You
have one job in the morning and
one job in the afternoon.
Obviously, you're only going to
work with that afternoon
employer.
To use that leave. Um and then
you know, you can imagine all
the different scenarios having
having lived that life right? So
it is up to the employee and the
employer to determine how that
leave is used. The government
tries to stay out of that piece
of it.
Okay, So, Madam Chair
representative. Don't run away
yet. I might have more
questions bringing just singing.
It might be something more so
Oh,
The 12 weeks away. It's defined
in here in this amendment, 12
and nine
Cannot be broken up over periods
of time. Can they do a week here
Another week here?
Yes.
So that can be broken up, and
that is meant to revision Desk
between
Because they're going to the
workforce solutions, right, so
they're the ones that are
proving it.
But then is there another step
that I missing to where the
employer Because your player
can't say no, right? I mean, the
person that hired you cannot say
that doesn't work for me. I have
nobody to fill that spot. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair representative To a
degree, there has to be a
medical verification for the
type of leave that is used. So
for example, if you're receiving
chemotherapy treatment, and you
would like to work out an
arrangement with your employer
where you take the four hours in
the morning, you know to go to
the hospital or or wherever to
get that treatment.
That's what we're talking about.
When we're talking about you
don't have to take it
consecutively, Madam chair.
Okay. So Madam chairman and
representative, so
If somebody
Let's go with
Because we have we have somebody
in our and that's very close to
us. It has cancer right now. So
I'd rather not talk about that
one.
If we had somebody that
Workforce Solutions says
Yes. You're eligible for these
12 weeks.
Or nine weeks.
And
Of course, with something
cancer, you would be completely
inhumane to not say No, You
can't have them. So let's not go
with that It was
Something else? Um, an elective
surgery, something you had
anxiety Whatever.
And the employer says I can't
afford to give you that time
off. What is the
Process for the employer and the
employee. What happens next
after that?
Representative to hand the
expert who can really talk that
process in a second, But I just
want to clarify. So if you look
on the amendments in context pH
25 and if folks with the
original bill have page 22
online, 15 1 of the amendments,
we added, is that they will have
to note employees will have to
notify their employers 20 days
before the anticipate using it
unless it's an emergency, right.
So if you have a plan, you know
A planned pregnancy. That's easy
to give 20 days if you have an
emergency car accident, Madam
chairperson of that, You know as
soon as practical as what we
have put in there, Um And then,
In addition, there's some more
that I love the secretary go
into about the employer giving
more notice on that. But again,
going back to it will be a
doctor's note. They have to
explain. What will this person
be doing instead? Why is this
necessary for them to take this
time? Madam chair, so it is more
likely that
If you're going to see any
amount of time will be for a lot
of us would consider serious
illnesses. Madam Chair
representative, Okay? And and
just give me one second, So I
just wanna make sure clarify,
so.
You put in for that it gets
cleared the workforce solutions.
But if something's not
emergency, you have to or should
give. You have to. Okay. Thank
you, Madam, she said have to
Madam Chair representative, it
says in the building built 20
days before or as soon as
practical, So they you have to
give them 20 days to allow for
scheduling conflicts. But if
it's an emergency than that,
bypasses that and that you get
that right away, Okay, so you
want to dance at night
Interrupted. You apologize,
Madam Chair representative
Florida. I mean, I I understand
why you have questions because
this is one of the areas where
we had the
Those questions as well, trying
to think about how he would
administer this.
And, um, what we will say like
if an employer comes back to
that employee and says no, I'm
not going to give you this
leave. That would be a violation
of the act. And that would be
where you get into, you know
penalties and and a
investigation by our department.
What the department is not going
to get into is the employer
says, Um, yes, but can can we
work together? Because I need
you on Tuesdays and, uh, you
know, can you can we work
together to figure out the exact
scheduling, so the department is
not going to say employer you
must give leave on this specific
schedule.
The department is just going to
say Here's the amount of paid
leave that they're entitled to,
and then it's between the
employer and employee to figure
out
What is that? Leave how to sick
leave play into that. How does
PTO pay into that? How does that
Americans with disabilities Act
play into that? Where does the
accommodation go? That is all
the types of complexities that
those of us who have been
employers understand have to be
worked out between the employer
and employee and not not this
state. Right? And thank you,
Madam chair ribs, and that was
my other question, Which you
just brought up was if I worked
for somebody that has paid
sickly, but I don't want to use
it. Can I bypass the paid sick
leave and go directly to this?
Yes.
Madam Chair representative. It
would. You would have to put in
an application. You would have
to get a doctor's note. It would
have to explain why you would
need an extended period of time
off for this particular illness
that you're thinking, um, this
This is not about taking. You
know, my kid has a cold. I'm
gonna tell my cannot plan a
minor illness 20 days in
advance, right? And so just
again. This is really a
different process than that.
Okay, so, Madam chair and ribs
it So if I'm understanding they
could then bypass her sick leave
and just use this if they got
all the approval, Madam Chair
one Trump, another one. Madam
chair and representative, Um,
the employee is not required to
exhaust sick leave prior to
using their earned benefit
through this program. Okay.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair represent that
was what I was trying to get to
it.
Okay?
So
Hold on. I'm wrapping my head
around this new the way this was
written out now.
So when we go to when we when
you brought up earlier the
employer violations and of not
abiding by the act.
Are there. Exceptions in this? I
didn't because I didn't see
anything in the amendments.
Other exceptions if
Okay, let's just take. I don't
know.
We We have I live in the East
Mountains. We have a very
shortage of sheriffs.
If
Let's say a sheriff you We only
have. Let's say there's six that
are normally up there if half of
them were using this, and they
couldn't find lawn force mint
officers to fill those
positions.
How would how do we work that
Let's take emergencies off the
table? Because that's that's
emergencies emergency. But if I
have
How does workforce solutions?
No.
And can the employers say no?
Because of all three out of the
six get approved.
But that leaves us strapped for
sheriffs in my district.
Can't that employers say we
cannot grant this to you?
Because we cannot afford to not
only have three law enforcement
officers, Madam Chair
representative, Madam chair and
representative. That issue is
not addressing. Okay?
I'm Sharon representative. I
would say because we have this
new section here, but
That that is like one of my
biggest issues is, um
That I worry about this
tremendously, and I'll talk
about that in just a second, so
Let me go on to
1819 20.
Lucky for you. There's nothing
on there too. We got to page 20.
I think we
I'm not sure if we address this
when I apologize on 23.
Which is
New material. Section six A.
We struck out
The department shall require
employee.
Horse, self employed individual
who seeks family leave
conversation provide in
accordance with department rules
evidence of the birth or
adoption of a child in placement
of a
Of a foster child.
With the employee, and then we
struck out.
Or verification of healthcare
provider.
That a family member with a
serious health in this we have a
whole bunch of stuff we struck
out. Did that get moved
somewhere else or how
Would we if we're saying
Verification by a health care is
not applicable.
Then how do you show that
somebody just adopted or got a
foster child in their care?
And they need that time off.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, so that
language is more applicable, um,
specifically to medical and safe
leave, which is why it is
included in Section B. And so
that's where that was at. This
still requires those that are
seeking family leave
compensation to go through
department rules, evidence of
the birth and evidence of the
birth or adoption of a child. So
that's that's the equivalent of
Or foster. Thank you, Madam
Chair representative. Thank you
for explaining that because I
was trying to make this
connection of we'll wait. We
need some sort of verification
that somebody just adopted
somebody or
The amazing people that step
forward manager represent two
foster Children, which we
desperately need, Um
Let me look at this on page
three for Madam chair represent
real quick.
Okay, that goes back to the
military.
Mentioned represent, do have a
question. Did the military
anybody from the military
stepped forward to say, Hey, we
we would want this section
removed or you guys just figured
it out that it's not applicable
in a military situation.
Madam chair. Sorry.
You touched it. No member of any
military group that I'm aware of
objected to this removal from
the from the bill. Okay, Thank
you, Madam Chair. Okay, Madam
Chair isn't now I see here we're
we're on page 25 where you do,
say
20 days before or soon as
possible.
Which again that that portion
That has been added still leaves
me with the question.
As the workforce Solutions says
Yes, you can have this if I've
got six years and 31 off.
I am worried that that may
become a problem for like a law
enforcement issue, especially in
the East Mountain, where we are
so short on people.
And very few people are into and
I got more people leaving the
coming every time I talk to
someone they're leaving, so I'm
I understand that it should be
That they shall, but then I
worry about an employer becoming
mandatory.
And not being able to fill gaps,
especially in niche markets and
My husband is a job doesn't a
very niche market If he takes
time off. It's very detrimental
to the field that he works in,
and there's very few people that
do what he does, and there's
nobody to replace him. So that
could be a very problematic
especially in the line of work
that he does. Don't worry,
honey, I'm not going to say what
it is, um, but managed care
represented by worried that, um
He does work this extremely
niche. I mean, I think there's
like 10 of them in the whole
United States to do that. And if
he
I couldn't be there that becomes
problematic on page 34. If you
want to just
Briefly explain. We struck a
whole bunch of stuff out. Um
It starts on section 14.
Um
The first thing we went through
on a
The committee consists of 16,
and we changed that eight. Was
there a reason why we cut that
in half. Madam Chair,
Representative, Um, well
globally speaking about this
change, Madam chair and
representative is, um expert
concerns were expressed by
members of the business
community that there wasn't
adequate employer.
Representation on the board that
we the advisory committee that
we were, um
Um, creating so taking that
input to heart. We, um, model
this language I think on the
Washington program, which is
very simple and reported to be a
very effective committee to four
representative of employers and
for representatives, um,
employed Yes. And yes. Um And
this was something I believe one
of the chambers wanted.
Madam chair and representative.
Okay, Madam Chair is I just have
a couple more questions I didn't
see in here is and maybe I
missed it is there
Is there a way for an
individual? They
Like I would rather gamble and
not have this. I don't want to
be forced to have this. Is there
any way for them to personally
opt out of this? Or is everybody
forced into this madam chair and
representative? There is not an
out doubt. Um, provisions for
employees. There is the
possibility of an opt out for
employers who have substantially
similar
Um, plans and I would note Madam
Chair Um and representative if
we're concerned about solvency,
providing an opt out provision
to employees would create a lot
of uncertainty and potential
problems in terms of solvency.
It's very similar to the
unemployment insurance fund,
Madam Chair and representative.
Madam Chair, representative, Um
So we have these with these new
employees that we just talked
about Sorry on this committee.
They're all eight of them are
paid, correct? And is that
included in the FBI are these
How are these people being the
eight people?
Within the workforce Solutions
is eight extra people needed
Madam chair and representative
in the original bill explains
Indeed, members of the paid
family Committee or not entitled
to produce em and mileage,
expensive, Um, the Workforce
Solutions Department should
provide staff for the committee
Madam Chair and represent
Okay?
I think that's lost my
questions. Um the thing of it
is, I would have supported
Ubilla 1000% because I believe
that people should have that
option. But I think if people
have had vasectomies or don't
want to take the gamble of
winding this, they should have
an option to opt out. I don't
like the mandated portion
Um, but I understand you want to
give people an option House and
time off. I also worry about the
employer's getting penalized,
especially like our sheriff, so
we don't have enough people or
somebody in niche market and I'm
in Torrance County. I mean, if
you lose your dental hygienist
for a certain amount of time, it
can't get somebody else. I could
put you out of business, so
that's going to be my reasons
for voting knowing this. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Representative Chavez.
Madam tried like to move a do
pass for
Of Senate Bill three as amended,
removed to table a motion Do I
have a second, a second by
representative Vincent on the
tabling motion judges?
Um
Take a take, Uh,
It's only Monday, but we only go
to Thursday, so
be somewhat sane on Thursday, so
yes vote is to table. A no vote
is to continue discussion.
Representative Cates.
Noted. Table representative
Chavez.
For for anyone to
Table.
Damn noted table it didn't work.
Representative for Ari No to
Table
Representative Jaramillo.
Representative Jones.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord Yes to table
Representative.
Ski pants, ski
No to table.
Representative Vincent Yes to
table
Madam vice chair.
No to table.
And Madam chair. No.
By a vote of 7 to 3. The motion
to table has failed and we are
back on the motion to up.
Two.
Do pass on on
Senate bill.
Three.
As amended.
And I'll second okay and the
second from and where you take
the role.
Representative Cates Yes.
Representative Chavez? Yes.
Representative Ferrari. Yes.
Representative Harem meal.
Representative Jones.
This is a do pass on this do
pass.
No with an explanation.
Representative Lord No with the
explanation.
Representatives. Capan ski Yes,
Representative Vincent No.
Robert Madam vice chair.
Yes.
And Madam Chair. Yes.
By a vote of 6 to 4. You have a
do pass on the bill as amended.
Thank you very much, madam chair
and committee members and
explanations. Manager. Yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representatives. I think I
like I said, we've all agreed.
You know, there we have needs
and I appreciate all of it. The
Hours that you've spent putting
this together, but I still feel
like
In spite of all of that, um,
that passing this bill quickly
without taking care of technical
issues that are obvious as we
discussed and also
Recognizing the need of our
small businesses to recover from
the problems. The recent issues
that they've had that are
putting such a strain on
especially rural small
businesses is is not a good
timing. I can't say that's why I
can't support it right now.
Thank you, Lord. Sorry I'm
laughing because it's that time
of the year. Um
Again, Madam Chair
representative. If it was
optional, I would have supported
because I do believe in and
taking time off in the time that
you need, but I worry about
There's too many variables into
where somebody has somebody in a
niche market. They can't replace
them. And I mean, even at
working at Home Depot, you have
to have two weeks of training
before you can get out there on
the floor, So I just see this
being problematic where multiple
people are taking the time off
who has seniority Who's going to
get it over the other person?
What if one person takes a 12
weeks off, and another person
has an emergency and then
another person as emergency and
before? You know, I have no law
enforcement.
Up in the East Mountains, and
that is a huge concern for me,
and I mean we get all kinds of
niche people, the people who run
the rail runner.
We got people who we just can't.
I mean, if it was a receptionist
job, there's there's a whole
bunch of temp agencies that you
pull somebody, but when we get
in very specified niche markets,
I worry about that. And I don't
like the penalties being put
upon the employer. So thank you.
Thank you. Um, we I think we're
going to go a little bit out of
order, hopefully quickly because
Senator Munoz has to present
House Bill two on the Senate
floor.
So we're going to limit this, Um
Quite a bit, So we're going to
move on to, um, the committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161
Whenever you're ready, Senator
Please proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
house built our Senate Bill 161
Sorry Senate Bill 161 in its
attempt to save US six rural
hospitals, seven world hospitals
in the state of New Mexico. Uh,
every hospital is a little bit
different.
We didn't hear There's some
Issues with the bill. I think
we've kind of worked those out.
Ah, so I can only speak for my
hospitals and tell you where I
am at in Gallup.
Gallop.
Currently is borrowing money
from the city and the county to
pay for payroll.
The tune of about
$2 million a month.
In December. They could not meet
payroll. We need to back fill
them.
And help them out there $35
million in debt.
They cannot get ahead of the
debt. And then we're gonna close
in December, so this is part of
that with rural hospitals and
some Bola County trois with me
here in my expert witness and
Somalia County. I can tell you
that the cost of
Their insurance increased
threefold.
They took money from their
reserves.
To pay for the insurance.
And we're back feeling that for
them and every other hospital,
the one in in Clayton or up
north, it could not make its
payments to an M F a
Mm f a deferred the payments, So
this is an attempt to save them,
You know, the other ones.
I apologize for being late, Mr
Madam Chair and others on the
list. Uh, not knowing what
Uh, Senator Munoz just covered
Clearly, We're talking about the
financial support for the
sustainability of Holy Cross
Hospital in towns, miners,
Colfax.
Medical Center in Ah Raton.
I hope it's McKinley Uh,
Christian Hospital in Gallup. We
have the list of okay. We're
trying to get senator on his
way. So, um, so I don't mean to
be rude, but trying to
Your times is available as
mining. We got one thing we have
to do this session. It's down
there written getting ready to
go. So that will stand for
questions. Okay, Representatives
Lansky, Um I think we should
probably hear the amendments
before we go to public comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator for
Bringing forth this legislation.
Um, healthcare services in rural
areas are certainly close to all
of our hearts. Um, Senator, I
want to thank you for
The productive discussion we've
had for the last couple of days
and Madam chair ID like to move
an amendment.
Can you give us the I was gonna
say 202, but the number the
amendment is 0.228342 0.1.
Please explain the amendment.
Thank you, Madam chair. What
this amendment would do is
ensure
Compliance with the
constitution's anti donation
clause to ensure that we are
focused on care for sick and
indigent persons as a sighted in
the constitution. It also
requires reporting, um and
limits the finding two purposes
allowable under the anti
donation clause.
Um
In Madame Chair. I would, uh
That concludes my description of
the amendment.
Thank you.
Um like, oh,
Is there? I don't believe we
still have a definition of what
a
An eligible health care facility
is is is
Is that correct? Madam Chair.
This amendment does not
Impact.
That
So the language on page for
lines 11 through 13 remains.
Okay. Thank you for that. So
Go.
I'm sorry, madam Chair. Uh,
Committee. We are on the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 161. I am not sure
if that is what everyone has in
their binder.
I think I saved my copy from
Friday in my binder, and that
number is 0.227936 0.2.
Um and then
We are Madam Chair. I'm moving
in Amendment to the Senate
Finance Committee Substitute
that just do any members or
anybody have a clean copy of
the um Senate Finance Committee.
Substitute mines scratched and
written on and so that members
can
Madam Chair. I have the one
that's been corrected with the
amendment.
Madam Chair. Senator, Do you
have a copy of the substitute?
No,
I will tell you. The substitute.
just basically didn't change
Anything in language is just
inserted the hospitals and the
substitute. The language remains
in the bill. But I don't know
where that tracks on what page
and where.
Could I get someone to go online
and, um
And find the Dan is doing it.
Okay? And then get us copies of
the, um
Send it, substitute bill so we
can
I think we do have one more
amendment. I think
representative could work on.
Well, we're sitting here
waiting.
So discussion. I know it's
difficult and I'm sorry for
everyone to not have, um, all
the papers.
Uh, is there discussion on the
amendment?
Okay. Is there opposition to the
amendment?
Saying none. You have an amended
bill.
Good. Okay. Um so I think
Representative Penske. Madam
Chair. Uh
Committee. Thank you. I wanted
to propose an additional
amendment.
Um on two on page
Four of the substitute.
Strike lines three and four.
And re number.
The subsequent subsections
accordingly.
And just for those of you who
don't have it. Lines three and
four are number 9 $5 million to
the Alta Vista Regional
Hospital, And we will be
striking that with this
amendment.
And Madam chair if I might
explain
The reason for that amendment.
The reason for that amendment is
in this committee. We've talked
a lot about, um, shoring up our
locally owned hospitals. And
that is the one hospital in this
list that is not owned.
Locally. Okay, is is there
discussion on this?
Representative Lord on just to
line Amendment. Okay, Madam
Chairman, try and represent. I'm
trying to keep up with this
because I don't have the
substitute in front of me and I
also don't have the amendment.
So what is it that we're doing
is is this
That's sitting on my desk.
If you refer to the F I R and
look at the list of hospitals
that are on there.
And we would strike.
So actually in the
Okay, so the hospitals are not
listed in the original bill, I
was gonna say Let's look at
that. But they're not in there
so
Samantha Rivers so good. The
Hospitals were listed.
And the original building. Can
Can you just explain to me which
specific hospital where it's
located and why we're removing
that one venture representative?
It is the hospital in in Las
Vegas, New Mexico.
We believe in Senate Bill 17,
where we're an increase of
premium tax that will they have
enough money to make it to that
point
These are hospitals that cannot
make it to that point.
Okay, So, um, Madam Chairperson
Senator asking you the questions
specifically then
So the one in Las Vegas that's a
friendly amendment to you and to
be removed because, Okay, that's
all I need to know. Thank you,
Senator.
So is there more discussion on
this and
This is an amendment on the fly.
Essentially that we do not have
written yet, but you're going to
appropriations next. Correct
correct, And it can be added on
there. I mean,
But so is there any opposition
to the amendment?
Okay, sing. None. You have.
Twice amended Bill in here,
Madam chair. I'll work with the
committee secretary to make sure
it's correct. Thank you. And I
think now we are ready for
public comments. So if you are
on zoom and opposition, please
raise your hand and we'll come
back to you if if there anyone
in the room in opposition in
case
Larry stood up, but he's leaving
So, um, so I guess and I don't
see anybody on zoom in
opposition. So, um, in the in on
zoom in support. If you would
like to speak. Raise your hand.
You will have one minute when we
come back to you. Anyone in the
room and support
If you would like to speak.
Please come to and you will have
one minute.
Betsy.
Okay?
Good morning, madam chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Frank Corcoran and the
CEO at Syria Sierra Vista
Hospital.
And I am strongly in support of
the bill with the new
amendments, and I appreciate
your time and consideration of
this bill. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Tammy Chavez. I'm, the CEO at
Union County General Hospital in
Clayton, New Mexico. We are
component of the county and so
we have two reported the county
board as well as our board for
the hospital. We are also in
favor of these amendments and we
were due to support them.
Our hospital was almost in
close, and we have just barely
been hanging on. So this is very
much needed.
I'm chairman members of the
committee. My name is Bo Beams
and CEO of minors Colfax Medical
Center.
And, uh, we stand in support of
this bill. It's been a very
trying year for us. We've had to
make some reduction in services
mainly closing our ICU. We're
currently trying to hang on to
our O B unit in surgical
services as well as a number of
services so this bill would
prevent the reduction in
services for many Mexicans up in
the Northeast Quadrant of
Of our state traveling 170 miles
to get to the next level of here
puts a real hardship real burden
on many of our new Mexicans that
live up in that area, and this
bill would prevent substantially
prevented any reduction in
services that minors Kovacs
Medical Center. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. We will go to zoom.
We have one Guadalupe County
Hospital. Go ahead, madam Chair
members of the Committee. Um,
this is Christina compost,
administer the county hospital
centers in Mexico and the
smallest hospital state and I
want to express my complete
support word just filled with
the amendments and and also to
thank you all for the hard work
that has been done behind us.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Okay. Um, let's go to
the committee.
And we we we did have our
majority of our questions. Um,
Friday, so we'll try to stick to
the amendments and get the
senator off to pass our budget.
Go ahead, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
brief.
Thank you, Senator and Troy
Somebody's still on other than
mine. I just got too close.
Sorry. Um, I'm just curious.
I have to ask this.
Why did we never, um, define an
eligible health care facility?
Can anybody answer that for me,
Madam Chair?
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative Jones. Uh, by
listening out each of the
hospitals that is included in
there that would have been
duplicative and also defining
it. They were defined by listing
them out and representative
Jones on the Senate Finance
Committee. Substitute if you
look on page four line 11
It says Basically that eligible
healthcare facilities are the
ones that are listed in the
bill. So we do define it.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. I appreciate you pointing
that out. And thank you,
Senator. Appreciate any effort
to
Keep these hospitals going and
provide, um, care for rural new
Mexicans. That's so important,
including all of our districts,
and so thank you for bringing
this bill supporting it. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Uh, I will entertain a motion.
Representative Chavez.
Go ahead, okay?
Do you want to make the motion
it
good as amended twice twice.
Okay, that was represented her
meal. Okay, So is there any
opposition?
Okay, sing. None. You have a do
pass.
Okay. Now we will go back in
order to, um Senate Bill 135.
And as a reminder we heard this
bill. Previously I presented it
here as a house bill, so there
have been a few changes made. We
will stick to the changes that
have been made. Um, and so we
don't have to totally covered
the
The whole bill again. So
whenever you're ready, senators
and representatives, you are
welcome to join your
Your co sponsor on the health,
the health of the House side
Your co sponsor on the health,
the health of the House sides
ahead. Thank you, Madam Chair,
So there was some amendments as
as mentioned You guys heard
House Bill 185. This is Senate
Bill 135, which tracks it. With
the exception of the following
amendments, which were adopted
after negotiations with the
insurance community, and there
More than reasonable and so I'll
take you to pages 1617 and 19.
Their amended throughout the
bill because this affects five
different acts, but there's only
three amendments. So I page 16
we remove the words for the life
of the insured.
And we, uh insert, um, for no
less than the duration of the
therapeutic effect of the drug.
so that so, so it's no longer
for the life of the insured but
for the duration of the
therapeutic effect of the drug.
On page 17.
In in front of the word generic.
We insert the words biosimilar
interchangeable biologic or
generic. Madam chair. Could you
please ask the presented to tell
us what line he's on? Thank you.
Thank you on page 17.
Line 19.
Uh,
Before the word generic. We just
Add some some words to the term
generic.
And so we insert the words.
Biosimilar comma
interchangeable.
Biologic or generic equivalent.
Our prescription drug and thank
you for that, madam chair and
then on page 19 on page 19 line
eight.
Eight and nine, and we remove
behavioral health condition. So
Madam chair honorable members.
This bill includes auto immune
disorder.
And cancer and does not include
behavioral health condition.
And with that will stand for
questions. Um
Let's go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition?
It. Is it an opposition to the
amendments or in opposition to
the total bill?
Madam chair members of the
committee that total bill
We've We've had comments on the
total bill, so we're just going
to stick with comments on the
amendments.
Okay. Anyone on zoom in
opposition on to the amendments.
Jonathan are your up Is your
opposition to the amendment?
Think about it, Gereb. Our
opposition is to the bill as
amended.
Okay. Remain opposed. Okay.
Thank you so much, Alright.
Is that it?
Jonathan Buxton, the M E.
But he's from the Nationals. PBM
associated. As I said, We have
heard this bill at great links,
so we are going to just stick
with the with the amendments are
today because we are
Already do on the floor. So, um,
anyone in support of this bill?
Okay. Um, In terms of the
amendments, do you have anything
to add? Okay. Anyone on zoom and
support about the amendments.
Okay thing? None. Um, I'm sorry
about all the confusion about
this. This is what happens as we
get into this part of the
session where we
Our hours are limited. So is
there any, um, any discussion or
questions from the committee on
the amendments?
Representative.
Ferrari and then Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you senators. Um, I was
wondering why, um you removed
the behavioral health
Um, as one of the steps aren't
there? Um
Times when medications you know,
um
Could
Start out a person and then they
find out like they're
prescriber, the doctor who
prescribes it and then finds out
well, it's not. Um, in there, um
Yeah, formulary. Thank you. And
so they would have to step down
and that causes problems.
Does that not happen in
behavioral health?
Madam chair and representative.
Sorry it does, and we're still
committed to working on having
behavioral health. Ultimately.
Ah, on this list, however.
In meeting with the insurance
companies, and we do want to
Really recognize the fact that
that the insurance companies met
with us in good faith.
Uh, and meeting with the with
the insurance companies. We we
are recognized the fact that
Behavioral health drugs have a
lot of interactions with other
drugs that people are taking.
And by skipping completely prior
authorization and step therapy.
You missed the opportunity for
someone to review the
interactions with other drugs.
And so one of the things that
we're going to continue to work
on it. We have a commitment from
OS I to continue to work with us
over the next year, and they've
just been fantastic giving us
tactical assistance on this
belt.
Is is to is to figure out what
the appropriate guardrails are.
Uh, in order to make sure that
that we're able to pick up drug
interactions without having ah
which which is the positive side
of things without having the
interference in that doctor
patient relationship, which is
what we're trying to, Uh which
is the purpose of this bill is
to is to is to ensure that that
that that sanctity and
representative for just a
reminder that we did pass the
step therapy bill, I believe in
19, which
Covers some of that so that you
don't have to start on the
generic if you've already failed
and all that stuff, so that
stuff will still be in effect.
Okay? Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all representative case.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
thank you, representative
Ferrari? She asked the question.
Senator did an excellent answer.
And so I make a motion for a do
pass. Actually, you can't. You
can't because you were the last
person to speak. I don't
understand the rule, but that's
the rule. Make emotional okay,
so send it and I'll second
representative Herndon and
represented Ferrari with the
second.
Is there any opposition?
Okay, seeing none. You have a do
pass.
Adam. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you so much for making
time this morning.
Okay, representative Dela Cruz.
I had my doubts we'd get to you.
But here we are.
So this is House Joint Memorial
three.
Go ahead. Whenever you're ready,
you, madam Chair of this
memorial seeks to recognize and
to some extent, codify the fact
that we all recognize that we
have a scourge in our
communities and it is affecting
every type of community. I serve
a lower social economic
community.
But regardless of that status,
even higher socioeconomic
communities are all plagued by
the same scourge, Fentanyl and
this joint resolution memorial
seeks to also recognize that
with some simple things we can
help in that fight in that
effort against
Sentinel staffer questions,
madam. Sure. Thank you. Is there
anyone in the audience in
opposition?
Is there anyone on zoom in
opposition?
Okay, sing none. Anyone in the
room or on zoom in support.
Okay, so we will go to the
committee for questions. Are
there questions
Okay, so I will entertain a
motion.
I'd like to make motion for do
pass. Oh, actually, we need to
wait for Jennifer. She had to go
get another vote sheet. So yeah.
No, I'm sorry, Representative
Jones. These? Yeah, these mikes.
You can turn something.
So as soon as as soon as Miss
Hill gets back, we will. We will
do the motion and and and pass
it.
Just is there any opposition?
Okay, seeing none. So we will
wait for for
Miss Hill sits representative
since we're waiting there, a
question has arisen. Why?
October.
No specific reason. My amateur
Trying to pick up a month. It's
not too big. That's what happens
when you have a lot of
amendments and things flying.
We don't have enough paperwork
to keep up with.
With this efficient committee.
Thank you, Jennifer. So we have
a motion by representative
Cate Kates and the second by
Ferrari or Jones. I
Okay, Ferrari, and there is no
opposition.
So we are unanimous in a do pass
so
Yeah.
Representative Lord is not here.
So it's a 9 to 0 and thank you
for your patience.
Thank you, madam Chair for all
your committee's hard work.
Thank you And to committee
members. Um, we do not at this
moment. Have any more bills. Um
And probably, chances are good
If we get bills. We may not hear
them because it will be
Wednesday morning and that will
give them roughly 24 hours to
get it through the floor. Um, so
stay tuned. But my guess is we
will not be meeting again. This
this, um session.
So, thank you all been. It's
been a good committee. We work
hard. Thank you.
