I'm here so with.
let's let's get Representative
Lewis says
Experts promoted and will let
her start on house bill one
thirty five if they are
promoted.
yes Representative Montoya.
Nice to see you on
Representative Montoya how are
you the I I am sitting up.
That's that's progress it is
great and I couldn't somehow get
of under as a panelist but I
mean do hear you okay I think
you've been promoted to
panelists I think you're good
now.
All the at
witnesses are now also okay
Representative Lewis whenever
you're ready.
Great thank you madam chair and
committee members we sincerely
appreciate your time this
morning today we have a house
bill one thirty five which is
the Indian family protection act
it's New Mexico's version of the
Indian child welfare act
This is the bill that has been.
Is the result of years and years
of the various stakeholders
having so much dedication and
passion including tribal leaders
tribal able workers tribal
lawyers
Representatives from CYFD and so
many other advocates especially
about gold futures
I can't tell you the amount of
meetings we've had because
there's been so many hours part
into getting this bill to have
it so that it will be
really the platinum standard for
ensuring that Indian children
stay with Indian families and a
system that has treated them.
So detrimental and unfair so
today we have this bill it's
extremely urgent at this time
because the federal Indian child
welfare act is in jeopardy it's
still before the United States
Supreme Court so this is a bill
at the federal level at least
that can be.
Destroyed so it's really urgent
that you New Mexico take action
to have this Indian family
protection act as I mentioned
before we have so many
stakeholders involved in this
and I'd like to have them also
provide some brief words to the
committee of before I could just
have just a little bit time for
closing and then we can go to
committee and and members of the
public but first we have
councilman that just from the
Pueblo of non bank.
Okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee and
thank you for the introduction
Representative Lewis I'm again
my name is Philip Prez and the
current council member of the
Pueblo and we sent the governor
I served as governor for the
last ten years in brief the
federal Indian child welfare act
also known as well was enacted
to protect the best interest of
Indian children and to promote
the stability of our tribes our
customs and traditions.
It was passed in response to the
widespread removal of Indian
children from their families and
communities.
It was provided critical minimum
minimum standards of protection
for Indian children families and
tribes.
What we are witnessing take
place nationally and the
decision recently by the fifth
circuit threatens who we are as
tribal people and undermines our
tribal sovereignty.
And the problem leader I am
deeply concerned by what is
happening regarding decline.
These threats present an assault
to tribal sovereignty and the
unique relationship between
tribal nations of the United
States government.
It is for this reason I am proud
to come before you just say that
I have actively supported and
will continue to support the
efforts of the New Mexico Indian
family protection act.
To ensure that regardless of
what happens at the federal
level Indian children would
remain protected and connected
to their tribal communities and
culture.
Since twenty fifteen the pueblo
of mandate and many other
pueblos tribes and nations
decided to actively work on
codifying federal it will into
New Mexico state statute this
was done through our regular
involvement and participation
with the New Mexico tribal
Indian child welfare consortium
also known as an amendment to
it.
It is because this tribally led
process we are where we are
today.
The premise of the State Indian
family protection act is based
on the lived experience of our
frontline tribal workers and
their desire to not only
codified federal it well but to
go beyond it.
Like many other pueblos nations
and tribes the pueblo of an MBA
has committed resources and we
are not always able to retain
legal counsel representation on
our implications therefore after
tribal leader and previous
governor Adam relied heavily on
the tribal it will chair to
advocate for our children and
the families who find themselves
caught up in the state child
welfare system.
Such advocacy is aligned with
our tribal customs and
traditions to ensure states are
complying with it well on cases
involving Mandy from children's.
I recognize all tribes have had
the same opportunity to
participate and many did at
various levels to provide input
on the draft bill.
The perspectives of our tribal
workers tribal families and
others lived experience were
centered.
On this process.
Well will then be forever
grateful to have been given an
opportunity to provide feedback
and recommendations to the
provisions as we had internal
tribal discussions about
previous challenges we
encountered with implications.
That was also currently the only
problem or the only tribe who
has incorporated the use of a
cultural compact.
This agreement was developed by
number level to ensure our
children.
We'll be able to maintain a poor
in family connections I'm ships
and be able to engage in
cultural and traditional
practices now and in the future.
This is vital to the future of
my Pueblo and to the future of
our tribal children which is
important for them to know who
they are and where they come
from.
It is equally important for them
to know.
It is equally important for the
entire children welfare system.
For example state departments
courts resource center Bob of
parents and attorneys to
understand to respect.
To encourage and support a
request to keep our children
connected.
Yes truly been an honor to have
collaborated with the other
pueblos tribes and nations and
their tribal workers.
I would also like to thank the
many individuals and groups for
their dedication and
perseverance.
Specifically Representative
Lewis.
New Mexico tribal Indian child
welfare consortium New Mexico
CYFD gold futures and the
coalition to stop violence
against native women.
And the many other.
There's a participants
throughout the process.
Again this process is to protect
our culture our tradition our
language our communities our
families.
Our children.
Our children children and those
yet to be more.
So with that madam chair I think
you and the committee members
for allowing me time to speak
this morning thank you for the
off.
Thank you madam chair and next
we have Jacqueline Welch she's
with the public is Letta
Ekwall also she's the president
of the New Mexico tribal Indian
child welfare act consortium.
And Jacqueline your need to and
then.
Thank you thank you good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee as as stated by
Representative Lewis I'm
Jacqueline yields from the
public this led a director of
this legislation services and
the president of the New Mexico
tribal Indian child welfare
consortium.
And and representative the
nineteen New Mexico pueblos to
Apache nations Ramon Navajo and
is that adults are in el Paso
Texas we are tribal if
representatives to advocate to
preserve the culture traditions
and identities of all Indian
children who are protected by
the Indian child welfare act
through advocacy education and
collaboration with state
agencies.
Although these minimal standards
of protection are in place to
specifically address Indian
children in the state child
welfare system the issues of non
compliance is an ongoing
challenge for New Mexico tribes.
Indian children continue to be
over represented in foster care
and four times more likely to be
removed and in some cases where
removal is unjustified.
In children that are placed in
foster care are more likely to
stay in the system significantly
longer than any other ethnic
group our children and state
foster care are less less likely
to be placed with family or
within their native communities
resulting in the loss of their
culture their language and their
identity.
The further the child is removed
from their biological roots the
further they are from finding
their to sell.
The struggle of the lack of
belonging in the child's life at
a young age creates more trauma
the closer we can keep our
children to their biological
families and community reduces
that unnecessary trauma.
New Mexico twenty three tribal
nations have the sovereign
rights powers and loss to handle
matters involving their members
including their ability to
protect the health safety and
welfare of their children tribes
are the experts in the community
they have challenges with
specific issues with and what
they need and development of the
Indian tech and then family
protection act is centered on
the lived experiences of Indian
children and families previously
or currently in the state
system.
The provisions of protection in
the Indian family protection act
go beyond federal it well for
the purposes of holding the
state accountable for compliance
with it well and to ensure the
safety and well being of our
Indian children and families.
Since last legislative session
the work has been an ongoing
effort to strengthen if.
By entering tribal voices with
respect to their own sovereign
governments in deciding what's
best for their children we have
taken into account additional
recommendations from the tribal
representatives and listen to
our partners and other
stakeholders to strengthen the
Indian family protection act
this clear this bill clearly
defines how CYFD must make
active efforts to support
families who want to provide
care for a relative and hold the
department accountable for
making those active efforts
early on in the case.
This bill stresses the
importance of tribal involvement
in the early stages of an
application that will reduce the
numbers of non compliant out of
home placements and includes a
process for ongoing discussions
with tribes throughout the life
of the case.
They enhancements of the bill
also ensures that not only
supports in place to strengthen
the Indian family but to
establish a process in
maintaining the child's cultural
connections.
The Indian family preservation
access the concepts and
practices that there and tribal
communities that move beyond the
one size fits all approach.
Keeping children as close as
possible to their culture
extended family and tribe are
extremely important protective
factors for the cultural well
being.
Our children are the ultimate
band benefactors of this bill.
Attractions of the Indian family
protection act support this.
If positive regards our
children's right to be our
tribal leaders in the future to
come whether they are tribal
healer a governor.
A mother.
They are our future leaders.
They will be representing their
families and children in the
community.
They will teach our language and
our traditions to younger
generations.
However as beautifully
beautifully stated by our one of
our young people Veronica they
cannot be what they cannot see.
They will be our protection and
survival of tribal communities
without these protection without
these protections that are he.
Excuse me that are unique to
tribal nations to act we
preserve the Indian family
maintain extended family
relationships and promote and
provide cultural connections and
participation for children in
state care.
We as Indian people cease to
exist.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
attention and the opportunity to
come before you along with my
colleagues I stand by for
questions.
Thank you madam chair and next
we have and Rogers she's a
lawyer with the Pueblo of Aqaba.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning.
I am here.
At the request of the Pueblo
back then.
And.
I am going to speak a little bit
about why this is so necessary
right now and how.
This bill addresses the issues
that are before the Supreme
Court in a way that really
supports the Indian families and
Indian tribes in New Mexico.
One of the major reasons why the
Indian child welfare act is for
the Supreme Court.
Is that it contains provisions
directing states.
Under theory of law that has
developed since it was enacted.
Senator provisions are
challenged as commandeering
state resources for federal
purpose.
In violation of the tenth
amendment.
Now if the state does this
itself there is no tenth
amendment violation there is no
issue constitutionality.
Which made it very important.
And put into New Mexico what
these protections for Indian
families Indian children and
Indian tribes it is very
important to the survival of
tribes as into jeans in the
political world.
Without members there are no
drops.
We've also address the issues
sometimes raised by the need for
protection clause by clearly
time this to a child's political
status not racial stats not and
sestra Spence.
It is time to their eligibility
for membership in the trunk
which is a political status.
So we have attempted to create a
bill that provides the best for
Indian tribes Indian families
Indian children and the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you again madam chair and
committee members as you can
tell my experts really are more
of the boots on the ground type
of folks and they spoke more
eloquently on the matter and how
important this is to our
children and our communities and
really the cell dinner
determination of tribes and and
indigenous people so
I just wanted to briefly state I
know this is a huge bill if you
look at it as a hundred and
sixty three pages and I wanted
to point out that the new
material is within the first
forty three sections so I
believe it's in the first sixty
seven or so pages and then the
rest of that is making
revisions to the children's code
so that when an Indian child
is involved and then the
children's code points out
provisions within the Indian
family protection act so I just
wanted to make that clear for
for everyone and with that madam
chair we're ready for questions.
Thank you Representative we will
go to a poll of the public.
So please wait if whether you're
in favor or opposed to.
Wow we have great participation
today.
Once once the number starts
stabilizing all stopped the poll
but.
It people are continuing to our
okay that looks good okay so I'm
sixty one out of sixty three or
ninety seven percent are in
favor two out of sixty three or
three percent are opposed and so
we will go to the audience for
public comment if you want to
speak in opposition.
Please if it's opposition raise
your hand if you want to speak
in support and you raise your
and please lower it okay so we
will start with.
Madam chair and quick question
before public comment do you
want to go to the committee said
before or what.
Thank you Emily
Representative Lewis do you want
to move your committee stab I
will move your committee said do
you want to explain it.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Emily for pointing
that out we do have a committee
said today really
because the process takes so
long to go through proof reading
and with Legislative Council
building so extremely busy it
took awhile for us to
get the last last version that
the drafter worked on and so
this was really tightening up
some places it doesn't affect
the substantive
provisions of the bill a lot of
it I believe was re
organization and just clarifying
some issues where we found
weren't as as as correct and and
I think because the bill is so
huge we might have a couple of
amendment side in this committee
just because it's taken so long
to get the bill drafted and then
threw provided
Perforating.
Thank you Representative do you
have the two oh two number.
Yes madam chair it is point.
Jeez to to to to to to point
one.
What what the lottery with.
Before so is there any
discussion on the substitution.
Move adoption okay do I hear
second.
Second okay that was
Representative.
Representative Montoya is there
any opposition to accepting this
substitute okay go ahead did you
have questions Representative at
Armstrong or.
I'm I am in
I would prefer not to have to
adopt this committee sub only
because I didn't know there was
a committee set up and I haven't
read the committee so even if
it's just clean up and so and
was it here twenty four hours in
advance.
You madam chair yes I believe it
came in Thursday was that is
that right and Representative
Emily did that go out to folks
are ones that put in the Here
file yes in the chair file
actions I believe Thursday but
certainly more than twenty four
hours.
Okay I
I just disagree with this whole
process of the share file how
are we supposed to know I mean
right now let's see I have
Six hundred emails seven hundred
fifty seven actually and I think
it would be nice if we were
alerted via text if there's
something new coming out in the
Here file thank you madam chair
okay so I guess Emily.
Yes Representative Matthews I'm
sorry I'm I'm a little confused
to as to what's well we're happy
happening here madam chair.
I'm so last night I was
reviewing the the bill and the
F. I. R. and.
I.
And I'm.
My question is is the F. I. R.
that we're we were provided
related to.
The bill before the committee
substitute relates to the
committee I'm I'm just kind of
confused what we're looking at
and how these reports and
analysis relate to a.
And
then I wonder if we could just
get some clarification I don't
know if I object I just I'm just
not sure what what.
Whether the documents I looked
at last night of the documents
that we're talking about this
morning.
According to Representative
Lewis there are no substantive
changes that with this the sub
it's more
rearranging the sections
Representative Lewis do you want
to go over that again.
And one quick comment madam
chair analyst Karen wells yes
her analysis did cover.
Yes that was that was part of
the the rush to get again is
because it's such a long bill
and we wanted to give our
analysts adequate time to to
analyze it so the and the the
analysis is the substitute bill.
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair yeah we
did IT.
The committee right now.
Okay thank.
Use your not muted this time.
The first time in my life.
Okay and you're actually made it
madam chair but I read your lips
that said go ahead
Representative Lewis.
So we provided.
We did find the bill to the
analyst
on Thursday of last week and I
did let them know that it's
going to change because I don't
want them to take a look at the
bill and then have to go through
it again with the changes so we
were trying to make it as
efficient for everyone as
possible so I believe the and
Alistair should be on the
committee substitute and again
there were just some questions
where clarification on certain
phrases was needed for instance
like one of them was
Really clarifying that
department and by the department
I mean CYFD their responsibility
towards you know what what
happens in a certain situation
where it wasn't clear so it was
a lot of things like that and I
think actually it it breeds a
lot better but again it doesn't
change the substantive portion I
think like the substantive
questions were pretty much
completed last year and so we
had a couple of versions that we
were working on through the end
from last year
that then we.
Re organized a little bit and
and maybe clarification
provisions throughout the bill.
Other concerns or questions.
Okay and I know I will Emeli is
it too much to ask for you for
you or care and I'm not sure how
this would work to send out a
text alert if there's the an
amendment or or maybe have our
have the notice sent to our
assistance I don't know what the
answer is but Representative
Armstrong I hear you and we will
out we will discuss how best to
what because I'm you're lucky to
be only that many emails down I
think I'm at about eighteen
hundred so
As I delete they come and they
come in faster than I delete so
I hear you so we will we will
come up with some sort of a
strategy to what to get to get
that to the top of your email
are the top of your mind so with
that family can you please take
role on this the motion is to
accept the committee substitute
okay.
Representative Anderson.
Anderson to yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Sure.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative R. yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative.
This.
This is.
Representative Matthews are you
here.
Sorry.
Yes.
Representative one twenty.
Representative Montoya.
It just.
Representative capital.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
And madam chair yes.
Thank you nine in favor zero six
okay Representative Lewis you
have that a committee substitute
and now we will go to the
audience for public comment I'm
and we will start with those in
opposition.
So be sure here in opposition if
you have your hand raised so we
will start with Marci starter.
Our system are are you.
Yes.
While I am not in opposition of
this bill I am concerned about
delaying or denying permanent
state in Indian children I'm I'm
wondering how CYFD is going to
recruit recruit and retain
native foster homes as one of
the few native foster homes in
the state I have adopted I
native children outside of my
own tribe and I love that but I
fear that if they were not
placed with me what would have
happened to their permanency I'm
so my concern is how CYFD is
going to recruit and retain
native foster homes and native
permanent state for these
children.
Thank you.
next we have Pamela moody.
I'm in support.
I am public peace that's okay we
will
Lucas okay Lucas Frank.
Lucas Frank.
I'm sorry the can you hear me
now yes.
I apologize.
Good morning and let me say I
I'm generally in favor of the
state having an equal program I
agree that it's necessary I
raise my hand opposition because
there are some sections of the
bill I don't agree with I think
require changing I will say that
my wife and I are it will foster
parents here in New Mexico we
had seven kids in our care over
the last four years most of them
were native I share the last
commenter's concern about the
ability of the state of New
Mexico and frankly many of the
tribes to have adequate it will
homes to comply with this act I
will note that when it well was
federal court was passed almost
forty years ago
it applied it it allowed for
funding inclined for grants to
tribes to develop their own
social service program so that
there would need to be the state
intervening or or handling a
native kids my point is is that
The the idea at the time was to
give support to the tribe so
they can have their own system.
That has not happened adequately
in forty years I don't think
it's realistic to think it's
going to happen adequately in
the next couple of years I'm
also very Frank your your time
is up I'm sorry we do
thank you all in the beginning
tell people how much time they
have please I'm sorry.
There is a eight clock on the
I counter on the on your on the
soon so I'm sorry it's one
minute I'm not sure if stated
that I'm so sorry okay next is.
Maryland back.
Hi my name is Maryland back and
I'm a former foster parent in
New Mexico I am not an it was
certified placement but I have
it I have had it quicker for
children in my home so I'm very
familiar with this I would just
like to sit again support the
state I I'm not in opposition of
this bill in its entirety I
think it's a necessary I think
it's a wonderful move in our
direction for our state I would
just echo the concerns of the
former speaker is that there are
segments of this bill that are
concerning and and I would just
implore the state to continue
to.
Recruit and retain more it was
certified placements and that
does mean native foster parents
and so when a child is not
necessarily I'm given
jurisdiction back to the tribe
the child stays within CYFD in
that county that child needs to
provide and it was certified or
it will preferred placement like
the two former speakers and
until we can recruit and retain
more I'm very fearful that this
bill as it's passed today will.
Find prohibit permanency for the
children that it's directly
meant to protect thank you thank
you okay now we will go to the
audience who are in support so
if you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand
and we will start with the the
fabulous Secretary of Indian
Affairs winter he'll go ahead
madam secretary good morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Lynn
Trujillo and the cabinet
secretary that in Affairs
Department I stand in full
support of house bill one thirty
five we know that children fare
better one place that's family
and community and are connected
to their culture promoting
resiliency and well being our
tribal leaders and tribal
communities care deeply about
the safety and well being of
their children and families and
this act as another step toward
ensuring that native children
are protected and that native
culture and families are
respected I want to acknowledge
and thank the many tribal
leaders advocates tribal
attorneys allies and especially
Representative Lewis for their
tireless efforts to bring forth
this bill I strongly urge the
committee to support house bill
one thirty five thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee committee have a good
day.
Thank you madam secretary next
we have judge Begay and I just
want to say hi judge.
Good morning madam chair
Thompson I'm idea it's really
nice to see you.
And good morning members of the
committee I'm judge Kathryn
Begay with the children's court
and Bernalillo county assigned
to the children's court division
I am here today to convey the
New Mexico Judiciary support for
the Indian family protection act
house bill one thirty five.
This bill is vital to the future
of Indian children their
families and their tribes the
bills purpose to elevate child
welfare protections processes to
practice for Indian children is
supported by the judiciary this
bill honors our state's
relationship to our sovereign
tribal nations pueblos and
tribes.
the Indian child welfare act and
now the Indian family protection
act have the potential to set
the gold standard for child
welfare the judiciary stands
ready to work with justice
partners to assist with
administrative and procedural
implementation we ask for this
committee's vote of yes on house
bill one thirty five thank you
madam chair thank you judge next
is best Kelly.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
spectacularly and I am the
deputy secretary for the
children youth and families
department.
I won't repeat all the positive
reasons why this bill is
necessary others have spoken
quite eloquently this morning
about the need for developing
the change that will bring I am
here this morning simply to say
that CYFD stands ready and proud
to implement the full intent and
spirit of this act and we have
no concerns or hesitation about
our ability to implement this
with our tribal partners.
On behalf of secretary Vigil and
the entire department we
encourage you to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you next we have JD
Bullington.
Thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
this is JD Bullington
representing the Pueblo of the
Ghana which supports house bill
one thirty five the public gonna
supports a strong effective
state Indian child welfare act
that will hold the child welfare
system accountable for
protecting Indian children and
families a state ECWA is
especially critical now that the
federal Indian child welfare act
is under a challenge before the
U. S. Supreme Court.
Passage of a strong state it
quote will insure that
regardless of what the Supreme
Court does we can still protect
our Indian children and families
and we want to acknowledge and
thank Representative Georgene
Louis for working so hard on
this over the last many many
months and even years so thank
you so much.
Next we have Karen what block.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen will walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and while we've not read
the committee substitute we
stand in strong support of this
legislation we thank the
sponsors for your efforts on
this legislation we like that
this mirrors the language in
both the federal ECWA and
reflects language in the
cavernous settlement children
need to be placed with family if
at all possible and not it and
if not with family thank
culturally appropriate
placements this law is a pathway
to ensuring this happens again
we think the sponsors for the
bringing this legislation.
Thank you next is Jericho
Salazar.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Derek
cells are and I'm gonna get
indigenous leader up will
features four million women
United.
Here are your needed now.
should I'm sorry no.
Hold on and we thank you can you
can start over chair at.
I apologize.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Jessica
cells are nine minutes it just
indigenous leader with all
creatures.
I stand in support of H. B. one
thirty five Indian family
protection act matters to me
because I could have benefited
from this bill I was adopted at
six months old I was pulled away
from my native family and my
culture.
My whole life I've been longing
for something.
Today thirty one and I still
have a hard time reconnecting
with my people and making up for
years of lost cultural
experiences.
Through the years I have tried
to reconnect with my native
family sometimes I feel like
it's too late and many times I
feel like an outsider because I
didn't learn our native tongue
or did I follow cultural
practices as a child I support
state Indian family protection
act because I have three
children that deserve to know
their roots in need of culture
and deserved to claim the native
identity I strongly urge you to
vote for.
Indian family protection act in
honor rates to our heritage
tribes and nations thank you.
Thank you next we have and at
current.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is that
Acheron I'm the social services
director for the couple of Santa
Ana and I am here today on
behalf of governor Joe we
Sanchez all.
Was sent and I would like to
express its full support for SB
one thirty five.
And urged the committee to
support the bill as well
thank you to.
Representative Lewis for all her
great leadership and the
development of this bill and the
hopefully passage thank you.
Thank you next we have.
My bit semi and I'm sorry if I
mispronounce any of that.
Hey good morning can you hear me
yes we can yeah that was perfect
good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is Mike
about setting and then part of
the denomination I'm also policy
fellow with bold features and
I'm here to support H. B. one
thirty five.
You know removing separated
indigenous children from their
communities is not something of
the past and these practices
continuing today's child welfare
systems if that matters for
indigenous families because it
protects indigenous communities
inherent sovereignty matters
because it pulls the distinct
political status of tribes to
reclaim and regenerate healthy
children that carry on their
indigenous core values culture
and language that have sustained
their communities for time
immemorial this legislation will
honor our beautiful culturally
and rich state that celebrates
its diversity of families and
integrates grandmothers I
believe this talk does and miss
Anne's into children's lives
thank you Representative Lewis
for bringing this bill forward
please support the Indian family
protection act.
Thank you next we have J. Wasco.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Jay
Wasco and I'm with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs we think
Representative Lewis for
sponsoring this legislation and
all the groups and tribal
leadership involved you're
certain that the goal of
everyone here is to protect and
provide children with health and
safety features we know that
protecting tribal sovereignty
and preserving children's
cultural identity and
connections are important and
necessary steps to achieving
that goal we stand in full
support of house bill one worth
watching for Mr and urged the
committee to do the same thank
you.
Next we have Christian are.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
Christian record I am from
Albuquerque New Mexico and I'm
sure I can Representative loci
were in Mexican I was blessed to
grow up in a staple of beautiful
Pablo's and interamerican
culture I was thinking from my
family by the US the when I was
in the first grade I was
uncomfortable because I was
forced into a new environment
and are surrounded by strangers
nobody looks like me are spoke
like manner cultures were
completely different I even had
to wear the same clothes to the
next day
the closest thank lows the next
day to school I was afraid of
not knowing when I was going to
see my siblings who are in
separate foster homes and see my
parents again it's vital that
our family stayed together
during tough times the state of
New Mexico should allow extended
family members or tribal
affiliations to work with that
CYFD when native American
children are expected to be
taken from their homes and
placed into foster care please
vote for in favor of H. B. one
thirty five thank you.
Next we have Kurt Riley.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
Let's see.
but great though of the state
trust quickly to.
I am occur Riley I'm a member of
the public.
And during my tenure as governor
for three years under the
federal law we were able to
bring home twenty children.
Back to the public.
However in the state in the case
of the state of New Mexico.
That was called to court.
To testify as to whether a
young.
Child.
Was a member of the public.
I did so.
And hopefully house bill one
thirty five.
Alleviate this problem for
tribal leaders in the future so
I support the passage of house
bill one thirty five thank you.
Thank you governor next we have
Donna Lynne Serafino.
What's the white guy you
practitioner met do we might try
to establish what kind of stuff
where I watched you should good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is don
Alliance Harris you know I am
from the couple's Aqaba and
currently the director of CYFD
office of tribal affairs.
More importantly I am a mother
and auntie mama and a
grandmother.
And it is in this space as a
proud couple women that I am
before you today the Indian
family protection act is a much
needed vital piece of
legislation that will raise the
bar of child welfare practice in
New Mexico if they aims to keep
our children connected to their
tribe's culture and foster a
positive cultural and self
identity.
Former governor well for the
public at Comeaux Kurt Riley
whom I have the honor of serving
during his administration stated
the ultimate goal being to
provide an opportunity for the
children to become recognized
and rooted in their identity as
a member of our larger family
they're native people and it is
why I continue to do the work
and why humbly ask you to vote
yes on the Indian family
protection act thank you L. F..
Next we have Marcia vaio.
Good morning can you hear me yes
we can hear you thank you chair
good morning chairman and
members of the committee and all
my relatives my name is Marsha
vaio and I'm a member of the
Pueblo fact my mother and
grandmother daughter and and
sister and matriarch I also
surfaced the child welfare
specialist for my tribe I fully
support the Indian family
protection that I know the
importance of keeping our
children safe and within their
homes and communities to
flourish and grow I also
recognize the year some
practices systemic racism how it
place within the child welfare
system and the generation and
packet has made on our tribal
communities state a quick if
possible hold the state
accountable when in the child is
in their custody and ultimately
provides the tribal nations the
opportunity to protect their
children in multiple ways
cultural ties are important to
our children's existence our
children are secret being to
deserve to be protected on all
levels if they're caught in
state systems I'd like to think
Representative Lewis for
bringing this important
legislation forward and urge
members of this committee to
support this vital piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Marcin next we have
Pamela mom who do.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Thanks I'm sorry Pamela I was
trying to lower your hand and I
needed yourself you can start
over please.
Pamela your muted.
Thank.
Go ahead Pamela good morning
madam chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Pam on the committee and I
registered lobbyists for the
public support killing Gainey is
letter simply P. Santa Clara and
Sony and they all expressed the
same concern from previous.
Speakers and we standing strong
support of this bill and we
think Representative Lewis who
has worked a lot on this bill I
know for sure the past two years
so thank you so much and
I kindly ask the committee to
place a do pass on this bill
thank you.
Thank you Pamela next we have
the writer Rome.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you perfect good morning
chairman committee members my
name is writing her own I live
in Albuquerque New Mexico I
belong to the public decide a
and I'm also the coalition to
stop violence against the
women's policy incomes
coordinator I am here in support
of the Indian family protection
act I will be present knowledge
of federal equity I was
fortunate to have family members
who are familiar with the act
but much of my knowledge came
from meeting children my age
were failed by echo and state
workers I can probably count on
both my hands of friends and
acquaintances I maybe could all
have stories being adopted out
many of them being placed with
non native families I have
always considered the native but
I know that they had often
trouble claiming an identity and
feeling connected to their
communities the stories and
placements were complex but what
was clear was that they were
removed from their families and
communities lost ties others as
a result this is why I believe
this Indian family protection
act by legislation the
protection of Indian children's
connection to their people and
community is vital for their
their communities coping thank
you.
Thank you next we have had their
Yazzie can much training.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is heather Mr because of
cheating and I am from harpy New
Mexico and a member of the
nomination I'm also policy for
for both futures I'm here in
support of H. B. one thirty five
of the Indian family protection
act.
When we say our children are
sacred we mean that in a Navajo
ceremonies there are rules that
adults cannot perform those
rules can only be done for
children because of their
innocence.
Their meaning.
Their healing laughter sorry the
Indian family protection act
provides that way of life in our
ability to teach our children
how important they are to us.
If I will also strengthen the
relationship between state and
the twenty tribal nations in New
Mexico it will build up the much
needed quality of services and
accountability for everyone
involved dealing with our
children we need to take care of
our children I thank you
Representative Lewis for
sponsoring this legislation I
ask you to support H. B. one
thirty five.
Thank you have their next we
have angel Charley.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members what the hope
off my name is angel Charlie and
I service the executive director
of the coalition to stop
violence against native women I
am a citizen of the Pueblo of
going to come here today as a
mother and auntie and a person
whose family has been impacted
by separation this act is the
culmination of just intentions
strong advocacy and through
partnership a partnership of
tribal impacted families it was
social workers tribal attorneys
governors and presidents has
come together with one goal to
protect our children the voices
of all of these groups is
reflected in this bill in fact
it has unprecedented support
from tribal leadership tribal
families and system workers
keeping our Indian children in
tribal communities insurers
little ones are connected to
what matters most keeping our
communities together means
keeping our community strong in
New Mexico has a unique
opportunity and letting those
most impacted lead us all this
bill.
Those of us and community
continue to answer the prayers
of our ancestors and keep our
little ones home where they
belong thank you.
Thank you next we have a moral
to legal.
It says the
This person is using a an older
version so I'm going to promote
promote them to panelists.
And so camara are you go ahead.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is qi more to
later I'm from Albuquerque New
Mexico and I'm part of payments
public I support H. B. one
thirty five I was eleven years
old when I was separated from my
mom during this time I was away
from her I felt unsafe loss in a
protected.
I think again to express these
feelings to my behaviors and
soon pushed into treatment
facilities and heavy medication.
That we're simply not working it
was years later through a CYFD
social worker that was well
aware of the New Mexico federal
law that I was able to reconnect
my grandfather and be reunited
with my mom my grandfather is in
a meeting mazing medicine man of
payments Pueblo he has welcomed
me home and it's helping me find
myself I realized today that I
never needed treatment or the
medication my grandfather is
teaching you the roadways of
healing what I needed was my
family.
And love from my tribe my story
just one of the fat the stories
part of the child welfare and.
Protection act that is important
our children deserve to be whole
and the love the protected and
always that only tribes know how
to.
Thank you thank you.
I have J. D. Bollington with his
handout a J. D. did you want to
speak again.
I'm going to assume that the
notes that we are going to go to
E. M. I. T. C. conference.
However here is the key and I P.
conference are you there.
Yeah.
Thank you good morning my name
is a
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Gail the
heel the executive director of
the another any public counsel
also former governor of to
secure pueblo and another had a
we're is on the president of the
national in the child welfare
associations so thank you for
allowing us to make
representation of I just wanted
to support the statement made by
the expert witnesses former
governor pairs
directly challenge and and
Rogers they spoke eloquently
about the bill and this is the
issue at the national level and
we're addressing at the national
level and so we're working with
the state of New Mexico making
sure this legislation passes so
and then of the thank you know
there any public council passed
a resolution also supporting the
in the family protection act so
with that thank you madam chair
and I request that you all pass
this legislation.
Thank you governor next we have.
Donna can Tana.
The morning madam chair and
members of the community.
My name is Donna can Tana and I
work with the Pueblo of to
Stuckey I am from the pueblo of
Cochiti.
I stand in support of house bill
one thirty five we know the
importance of our children's
safety and within our tribal
homes and communities to
flourish and grow the end inch
family protection act will hold
the state accountable and
ultimately find the tribal
nations the opportunity to
protect our children and
multiple ways we will like to
think Representative Lewis for
bringing this important bill
Ford in order to members of this
committee to support this vital
piece of legislation please vote
yes on house bill four thirty
five one thirty five thank you
for your time.
Thank you next we have southwest
women's Law Center.
I'm good morning madam chair
members of the committee and my
name is Carolyn Massey and I am
a Navajo tribal member and
Muslim mother and daughter
granddaughter sister I live in
Rio Rancho New Mexico I am also
the executive director of the
southwest opens Law Center and I
am a licensed attorney
also in the past state who is
the director of the division of
social services so I oversight
and that public health care
system I'm so child welfare
system.
I strongly support updating our
state it will lost us so that's
why I encourage you to vote in
favor of a house bill one thirty
five.
Representative Representative
Lewis has done an amazing job
over the past year on this bill
along with hers fourteen.
We I stand in support of strong
connection to our native
children's cultures and
traditions I have had family
members of the foster care
system we were lucky that our
children were placed with their
Navajo family during a time of
uncertainty for the children
during this time the children
were able to participate in
Navajo traditions I.
Happy to say that they are now
out of that system but I do
wonder what would have happened
if they were placed in non
family settings.
Which was provided by a quick.
You madam chair that'll have
thank you.
Thank you next we have our
deputy secretary of Human
Services Angela Medrano go ahead
W. secretary.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I HSD stands in
partnership with CYFD in its
efforts to implement the L.
elements of house bill one
thirty five and towards the
protection of all New Mexico's
native American children thank
you for your time.
Thank you W. secretary with that
is the end of public comment and
I just want to jump in here that
that Representative Lewis is a
good friend and I know she has
worked her behind off she's been
working on this nonstop for four
years so I want to thank her for
all of all of her dedication and
and time so we will go to the
committee I have Representative
give me madam chair we have one
additional hand that was just
right.
Okay I I switched over to soon
then I am so sorry.
Carla Kerr lainnya I'm sorry if
I messed that up.
yes curling holiday good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Carlene
holiday and I am from money
Bally and I'm advocating for you
to support that H. B. one thirty
five I am speaking for the
younger selves since I had no
voice when I needed to be heard.
When I was placed in a group
home it was kind of hard for me
to adjust because I had no
family no nothing just myself
and at that time I had no other
native children into which is I
just got left out in when I was
in school I was in net and
Navajo class and there was
nobody there to help me and I
hope you guys think of that when
it comes to pass this bill or
not to think about.
These kids that need help to
learn their traditions and
everything like that and no one
is there to help and support
those type of things when I was
needing it and.
I hope that you guys support
this bill thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you now now seeing no more
public comment we will go to the
committee and Representative
Armstrong followed by
Representative Matthews and then
Representative Terrazas.
So go ahead Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I just
wanted to to let you know that
our analysts said that she would
update us and taxed us if she
received to the
the committee substitute so I I
told her that would be very
helpful so I think we're solving
that problem you know on tech
the all this technology we've
done this now for a while and we
still run into snafu so I
appreciate your willingness to
to help solve that problem I'm
one of the main questions thank
you so more much Representative
Lewis for bringing this
legislation forward and trying
to be a voice for for children
children in general you know in
the state of New Mexico and and
all across the US
our our future is at stake with
keeping children safe so I I
appreciate that you are are for
first and foremost trying to do
that.
one of the the most important
questions I think madam chair is
for me is if this federal law if
this is already federal law why
isn't CYFD doing this now and
what changes are you making to
employment and support the
changes that you want to make.
and and why would
Why will it take state law to
make us comply with federal law.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Armstrong
Very important questions so
first and foremost the States
CYFD has actually been doing its
part to implement federal law
that we have now the office of
tribal affairs at Donnell
answers you know spoke on on
that offices to have and they've
been really great in
implementing the current federal
Indian child welfare act
as we mentioned however that
federal act is in jeopardy right
now because it's in a lawsuit.
Pending review of the United
States Supreme Court so we want
to get it into state law in the
event that that federal law goes
away but certainly in addition
to that we are creating of this
law to actually hold a CYFD
accountable for ensuring that
whenever and native American
child is in their custody that
they notify the the child's
tried so that that child family
and tribe is aware that
something is happening within
the state court system we're
also holding them accountable to
ensure that they follow the
placement preference as so that
children are able to remain with
their families and their culture
and
Really.
That CYFD has been doing a good
job and ensuring that those
federal provisions are enacted
but really we're making them a
little bit stronger
especially because the state of
New Mexico has had a good
working relationship with the
tribes throughout the state and
we're just ensuring that were
able to have a law.
Within the state in case that
federal law goes away.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and thank you Representative
what did you bring this up
during the interim I know
probably not the health
committee or maybe it was I'm
not sure I missed a few health
committee meetings over the
rules but is this been talked
about and discussed through the
interim with whatever entity it
would be fall under.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so we first
brought the bill last year
during the session the long
session in twenty twenty one it
made it through the house but
then it didn't get through
Senate Judiciary so in our
effort to inform our colleagues
in the legislature we did take
it to the courts corrections and
courts corrections and justice
committee as well as the interim
Indian Affairs Committee we had
planned and we had hoped to also
have it at one of the joint
committees with those two
committees and help but I
believe it was just the timing
of of the bill and the work that
we were doing it didn't work out
so well again it's been just
such a an effort by so many
dedicated stakeholders that we
wanted to ensure that everyone's
input was received and so it
took us awhile to get the bills
drafted and then to go back and
forth with Legislative Council
to ensure that everything that
the tribe's one at was
included in the bill and.
It's just you know because like
it or not a long process but we
did get it
before those two committees
during the interim.
Thank you thank you madam chair
that's that's always important
to me Representative just
because you know ever the more
people that have a chance to
look at it the better the more
people that have been but the
better so I appreciate that so
much I'm one of the questions I
have is how do you what are the
qualifications for becoming an
inquest certified foster
parents.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I'm gonna defer
to Jacqueline yelp should she
can provide better information
on that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
There is a specific
certification process that CYFD
has in place to be a certified
parent overall
when having foster children in
their home.
The main focus here is not
recruiting and having an
abundance of foster placements
its first working with the
families there are a number of
families and community members
who are available thank capable
of providing care to these
children but that's not.
That being utilized in a way
that it should.
So although the tribes are
extremely grateful for the love
and care that they have provided
the many children that have
probably been in their homes the
focus of the bill is to make
those family connections at the
earliest stages so when foster
home is not necessary for the
child it's about meaning to
maintaining that family
connection and having the child
remained in their tribal
community so in the event that
there is a child that requires
an out of home placement the
state is has eight criteria to
follow with the hierarchy of the
placement preferences and if
this.
Preferred placement needs to
have a certification in place
then they to follow
the licensing process that CYFD
has in place for all south
foster families.
Okay thank you very much for
that answer so can can someone
tell me since this is I mean
most of the tribes and pueblos
are the it's a sovereign nation
so if C. R. Y. F. T. at the
state level gets involved and
we're following that the FY.
What happens who's held
responsible if something.
Dr bed something horrible
happens in a family placement
rather than a regular certified
CYFD.
Our placement.
Who's held accountable.
Madam chair I think Jacqueline
could also.
Answer that as well yes madam
chair members of the committee.
The department if the child is
in the department's custody it's
going to be CYFD that CYFD has
laws and policies to follow
whether a child is placed with a
relative or and on if we'll
preferred placement there still
standards and requirements that
they are mandated to follow that
would include the federal
background checks and other
licensing procedures that they
are required to go by so if we
place a child with a relative or
family it doesn't mean that they
are going to by pass what's
required in the placements in
the placement of certifications
nor does it bypass or lesson
that the child would be unsafe
in a relative home so what is
going to be required is CYFD
following that process of the
licensing including the
monitoring if the child is a
residing on the reservation and
that family is a license
placement within the tribe then
they would be working with the
tribal fount foster care
program.
Okay thank you so much so
ultimately CYFD is is held
responsible but there are
safeguards in place to make sure
whoever they place them with
their certain.
Guardrails for that so okay
thank you very much while I I I
would just like to say that I
hope that everyone the spoke in
support
for this bill and and everyone
within the tribes in the
nation's and the the that that
they band together and support
each other and all nationalities
what would band together and
support each other for the
children especially of New
Mexico and and god bless all the
kids thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Louis for your presentation and
to all the folks who came in and
spoke in support of this
This is an and I'm aware from
the hearings we had last year
that Representative Lewis and
others that were just incredibly
hard on putting this bill
together and I think you're
concerns about what may happen
with the federal legislation you
are legitimate and I think this
bill this may fill a really
important.
Void in the law that may occur
if there are changes in federal
law and.
Regardless of whether changes it
fails it fails in New Mexico are
on this issue
I thank you for bringing forth.
but I do have some questions.
Excuse me.
I remember from last year's
hearings that one of the that
all of the tribes or pueblos in
New Mexico we're not at that
point in time in favor of the
earlier version of this bill and
so my first question is whether
there is now unanimity among the
pueblos and tribes in support of
this bill.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so I believe
that when we presented to the
interim Indian Affairs Committee
we had the tribe's support.
Of part of the many many months
of working between last session
and this session was meeting
with the tribes to be able to
address their concerns so it is
my understanding that every
tribe is in support of the bill
I I think we're still working
with a couple to address some
minor provisions I know at least
one of them is a clarification
change so that the bill is a
little bit tighter but it's my
understanding that all tribes
are in support of former
governor of the hill from the
public of not at excuse me to
stick and also said that the
eight northern Indian Pablo's
counts so passed a resolution
just this month supporting the
Indian family protection act and
I know other.
Rebel Representative spoke as
well so if if the some of the
tribes aren't happy will
definitely be hearing from them.
Very Rev them because they are
not quiet but again you know I
just I just think so many people
for working to ensure that we
did
address though those tribes that
had concerns initially.
Thank you madam chair at
Representative Lewis thank you
my second question is I. eight.
As I go through it it's a very
long bill on certainly not as
knowledgeable as any as as you
may be and others who are on the
call on it in the committee
meeting
it it do you it seems that there
is a role for tribal courts in
this process and and substantial
Rowe you all the tribes of
guidelines have tribal courts
available to.
Here these cases
and if not for those that do
not.
How would how would those
proceedings where with those
proceedings co.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so not all of
the tribes do have tribal courts
but many of them do but in this
case each tribe at the beginning
of every year and on on the on
an annual basis and whenever
necessary does
update the contact person for
the federal ECWA and you know
that then insurers that is a
child is in the state system
that that designated person that
is designated by each tribe
will receive notification of the
child being in the system.
So it's not necessarily the
tribal court it's I
determination made by the time.
Thank you Representative Lewis
and thank in New match here
CYFD is in the process of
integrating a program called Q.
P. R. I. which means quality
parenting initiative.
And it's
It's about excellent parenting
and strong positive positive
relationships and so forth I
wonder if in the process of
developing this and working with
CYFD it is has there been any
discussion of how this statute
there went to becomes a statute
would integrate with the
concepts in pupate PI and.
how that might work.
Madam chair and representative
Jacqueline are you able to
answer that question.
Representative Lewis madam chair
and members of the committee I.
am just a little familiar with
Q. API we were presented with Q.
P. I. E..
and then take as an invitation
again basic information but the
collaboration and having that
meaningful discussion was not
followed through with so
unfortunately the tribe's are
not familiar with Q. PI as we
would want to be he I I believe
it's it's a process that will be
on the agenda for the consortium
in the upcoming months but how
it relates to
Yes hi itself I I'm not that
familiar with the contents of
QPR.
Madam chair of if I might just
is such a question about that
here are the are the tribes and
pueblos willing to work with
CYFD in terms of becoming more
familiar with the Q. P. I.
concepts and possible
collaboration.
madam chair representative I
can't speak for the tribes and
and I'm not really sure what Q.
P. I. is exactly and how that is
applicable to the tribe's so
that would be something that we
would definitely have to look at
and the tribes that have to look
at as well.
Fair enough madam chair there
are there's also in one of the
I think you C. F. I. R. it
talked about how parts of the
Kevin as Madam have been
integrated into this statute
can someone sort of just provide
a kind of an outline of the
Kevin just parts that have been
integrated.
Madam chair representative so
the process of working on this
bill had actually started before
the cabin just settlement so
there's a separate process right
now with CYFD and HSD to address
the provisions of the cattle
kept Kevin asked settlement but
that really wasn't a goal for
this bill again you know we
started this before that
litigation came into place but
one of the Kevin just
requirements was implementing a
state Indian child welfare act
so to the extent that you know
we addressed all the provisions
within the federal Indian child
welfare act that is included in
there again though we did make
this Indian family protection
act stronger there are
provisions in there that hold
CYFD accountable that ensures
that tribal input through tribal
discussions occur
and that you know really we're
working hand in hand with the
tribes and the state to ensure
that whenever and native
American child is in the system
A trial to
excuse me that the tribe.
What regardless of whether or
not that child is enrolled
member eligible for enrollment
then that tribe is notified and
that process then begins to
occur.
Thank you and madam chair
In section I believe it's
section fifteen maybe section
four of the statute that says he
going statute because I'm sure
is going to pass this test
it prohibits findings of the
Tillet E. or aggravated
circumstances in reference to.
Children and I didn't see any
definition of those terms and
I'm not sure what.
These are
and I wondered if
The are you are one of that and
experts you have with you could
talk about what the intent of
prohibiting those kinds of
findings are what those findings
mean what that means.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I'll let
Jacqueline or an answer that.
Maybe one or both.
And just just for if we can move
a lot trying make brief
questions and brief answers so
we can get through our agenda
before we need to go to the
floor thank you.
Sure this is Sam Rogers the
reason that the language
aggravating circumstances and
utility were removed.
Is because those have often
become an excuse we're really
looking at all of the factors.
Involved in the case all of the
circumstances and this was
pointed out by a court in
Washington state that really
what you are looking to is have
they perform the act efforts
that are required and if the
court looks at that.
You you don't deal with
questions of futility of what
may happen in the future because
that's very speculative you're
talking about specific things in
the situation which is the
better basis for a court's
reasoning.
That is why that language was
removed it does not mean that in
a situation where there are such
things that we might think of as
aggravating circumstances those
won't be taken into account but
they're taken into account in
another part of and now it's
analyzing the child's situation.
And appear to be is another
question that is really looking
to speculate on the future and
court should be speculating.
I'm there are clear provisions
in this act for where something
does not happen.
And what happens then it steps
in and gives a process so those
that is why these terms were
removed from this section of the
bill.
Chair thank you very much for
that explanation I appreciate
that
my last question relates to the
question of permanency which
some of the folks brought up in
it in the calm in the
audience comments.
in section thirty five there is
a presumption that if a native
child has been adopted side the
tribes it's my understanding of
how this would work that under
certain circumstances there
would be a presumption to set
aside that adoption.
And.
And I.
The concept of currency as I
understand it is trying to put
the child in a place where
there's going to be a permanent
relationship
moving forward and I just could
you talk to madam chair
Representative Lewis or one of
your experts talk a little bit
about how that perception would
work and how it would further
the concept of permanency if if
in fact
currency is a.
A goal.
Madam chair members of the
committee Georgene Louis has
asked me to answer that question
one of the aspects of this bill
is it does set.
It's very clear limits on how.
with the challenges.
Have to be made and what will be
the basis for any challenge.
one of the the very important
things is that an adoption
cannot be challenged after two
years.
Let us not be challenged by
anyone.
So that is a clear
Way.
Guaranteeing permanency to the
chart.
There are other provisions in
this bill which go to great
lengths to burst make sure that
you don't have someone coming in
late.
That's one of the things that
this bill does that is very
important is find for example in
New Mexico as governor Parris
pointed out we have several
small tribes they don't have the
resources.
To put together a CYFD of their
own.
So what this does is make sure
there are many ways that they
participate and can't
participate early in the
process.
Without having to fully take
jurisdiction advocates.
And all of the bill is here
towards doing that and
preventing the need for people
to challenge something at a
later date there by giving much
for permanency to the children
all along the way.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you for that
answer madam chair I do have one
more question the effective date
of this bill is July one twenty
twenty two which is just a few
months away and I'm wondering
it's a a large bill has a lot
of.
Morton provisions is that an
effective time period.
In order to make this effective
and transition to this the
changes in the system consistent
with the welfare of the children
and to all the people who are
not in your lives.
Madam chair representative we
believe that is a timely manner
as we mentioned earlier so many
stakeholders have been involved
in this process secretary B.
hill and deputy secretary have
been actively aware of what
we're doing and they provided
some you know implants into some
of the new processes that we've
put into place also as well
members of judiciary we've
shared the bill they've been
aware of this bill since last
session especially those judges
with the tribal state consortium
of judges so folks have been
working together to really
ensure that you know everything
that's within the federal ECWA
and now moving forward within
that tribal or excuse me the
Indian family protection act
will have a successful
transition so I'm very
optimistic that it'll be.
Thank you that's very reassuring
again thank you so much for your
incredible work on this bill and
hopefully it is going to improve
outcomes for native children and
protect native culture very
important issues thank you very
much so many questions madam
chair.
Representative next we have
Representative Ted also.
Sure can I just a the next
representative go personally I'm
in a little something.
What we what we will go to
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson are you
there.
Representative Anderson.
Well.
Now what I'm.
I hate to not take their
questions but we have two more
bills to get you I'm.
Let me see if I can text
Representative Anderson and see
if E..
Actually I'm gonna call in hold
on one.
Representative Terrazas are you
back yes I am.
Go ahead I couldn't get hold of
Representative Anderson okay
thank you madam chair so I just
had a few questions and personal
madam Charlotte thank
Representative Lewis efforts.
You know when you have a hundred
and hundred sixty three and a
half thanks bill that's a lot of
work so I commend you for that
and I know that your heart is in
the right place you're trying to
do the right things so I am
applaud you for that I am.
My questions were okay questions
and my first question I'm sure
is
Representative is I know some of
the questions that I have
already been answered one of
them is what concerns did you
change that made all the tribes
come together.
Thank you Representative oh my
gosh we've been working on this
for so long that it's been I
don't know that I could track
that I could probably.
Go through the red lines that
we've done and provide you with
some of that but
I I think a lot of it was just
I don't know does anyone does
any of the experts remember.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'd like to answer it.
a lot of conversation.
We came forward was looking at
the different practices within
each tribal community although
the original draft it did have a
consensus for the of the bill
and the provisions of the bill
to be all inclusive there was
some things that we
may have overlooked when it
comes to the different
operations nation and pueblo so
we took that into consideration
we also look at some of the
procedures that we
we had a minor oversight on that
were included so a lot of COVID
that came from the problems and
that the whole nation or
incorporated to enhance what was
previously in here the other is
the structure of the overall
bill that made a lot more sense
for practitioners that will be
using this it was easy to follow
and the sections were split up
and put in their rightful home
so it flowed well and I believe
that was the the major change
when it came to modifying this
current Committee substitute
bill.
Thank you madam chair
representative thanks for the
answer might whether question is
so.
I'm not sure if I got
verification were all of the
tribes in favor of.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative to my
knowledge all of the tribes are
in favor the last time that we
spoke during one of the interim
committees I believe it was the
interim Indian Affairs Committee
there were only a few tribes at
the time that had initially
raised opposition and so since
then I think we've heard
affirmatively from three of the
four tribes that they were in
support and I think for the most
part the tribes were in support
of the overall concept of
holding CYFD accountable of
ensuring that tribes had
notification of ensuring that
placement preferences were
it at here too but I think it
was and it was other you know as
non substantive issues dealing
with the bill so I think we've
had those communications with
the tribes and I.
Want to say that we've been
working really really hard to
ensure that they've been part of
the process so again it's my
understanding that all of the
tribes are on board.
My.
Chair representative might
might.
I I remember there being some
issues with the Navajo Nation is
has that been provided very
specific about that please.
Thank you madam chairman woman
and Representative yes so we've
worked really hard with Navajo
Nation to address there's
concerns some of the delay was
ensuring that their concerns
were included into the bill.
And
Some were accidentally omitted
as we mentioned it's numerous
pages long and so we were bound
to have some oversight a curve
it was nothing intentional so
that was part of the reason for
the delay in getting a final
revision draft that in addition
secretary Trujillo from the
Indian Affairs department as
well as secretary Vigil from
that CYFD have met with the
president.
Of the Navajo Nation I'm also in
contact with the Navajo nation's
department of justice she had
some clarifying revisions over
the weekend so we're very much
in contact with the Navajo
Nation to ensure that all of
their concerns are addressed.
Madam chair representative so
the Navajo Nation is of course
in this bill that.
I'm.
Madam chair and and
Representative
I don't want to I assume that
they are like I said we've been
working really hard with them
but I can't speak for them
obviously until they come out
to.
Publicly support or oppose it I
don't want to put words into the
mouth but I do know that you
know members of the Navajo
nation's department of justice
has been working with us
throughout this process
they're very supportive of the
concept as far as the bill and
and every details of the way
that the bill is for and
including the committee
substitute I just I just can't
say but I can definitely have
that before we have the vote on
the floor for you that way you
can have that answer to your
question.
Thank you madam chair you know
what Representative the reason I
bring that up is you know this
bills are is substantial and
compasses you know all our.
Tribal parties.
It's a blanket so cause us some
concern for that I want to make
sure that all all the more board
and if not their server
hopefully bear or whatever so
let me move on that and and I
want to say I mean I I get this
Madam chair representative
because culture is very very
important for some
of come from this Mexico the
descent and so I want my kids
hello or thanks for yes and
speak Spanish and you see all of
our culture and all together
let's let's children speak
Spanish so I I I do understand
where you're coming from when
you are.
What you're wanting to do this
my questions all minimal on is
how many certified placements
are there right now currently in
the state.
Madam chair and representative
I'll that Jacqueline answer that
I don't know if she does and now
with some of the the state
questions I think will
definitely have someone with
CYFD on board as an expert to
handle that portion of of the
questions but I don't know
Jacqueline if you can answer
that if not I can definitely get
you an answer
Representative Terrazas.
Jacqueline do you happen to
know.
Madam chair representative Lewis
I am not certain on the over all
number of
available placements for CYFD
and for a relative placement of
an Indian child not all of those
relative placements are listed
as foster placements because
there are relative placement so
they might not be counted in the
actual certified placements for
for the department I do believe
the last data that I heard was
based off of the Bernalillo
county second judicial it will
court
that they're they're placements
were actually at either at or
above seventy percent of it will
preferred placement so that
again was a very small number of
children who are outside of an
on if we'll prefer placement.
Thank you madam chair
representative of the reason I
bring that up I remember last
year are there were shortages
and there were issues with that
I remember placement being an
issue and so
so.
What you're concerns me more on
the on the level of if there is
a child and and and I don't know
if this was asked by Mister I
was provided pretty carefully
this wait for just a minute but.
Representative Matthews was on
that force what happened so a
child needs to be placed for.
Whatever our.
Issues there are with the family
and so they need to provide
faster all and we want to make
sure that the state certified
placement necessary how long do
you search if you don't find
that what happens next.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Jacqueline
I'll let you answer that if you
can madam chair members of the
committee committee I'm sorry
thank you for that question.
So typically what happens is
there there's a lack of contact
and communication with the tribe
or with the child's family so
that ultimate removal at the
investigation is it's a delay in
the process where there's no
contact made in identifying a
relative placement so if a child
is placed on an emergency hold
then they're placed with within
available foster family for that
specific time frame in in that
in our really what the bill is
going to put in place as having
that early contact with the the
tribe in hopes of identifying
family as an alternative
placement provider but the focus
again is not on relying on.
Foster parents it's focusing on
strengthening the communication
and tied for the relative
provider so whether the relative
is residing off the reservation
for on the reservation the goal
is to make that connection
majority of the relative
placements are not identified I
I I believe I said this earlier
are not identified as foster
placements the relative
placements and their certified
not license so although they
require those the mandates for
background checks and clearance
they're not going to meet that
specific quiet requirement for
an overhaul foster placement
because it's a child specific
placement for this Indian child.
Madam chair representative what
happens if so.
they're not certified and all
that but so let's just say.
That that is not available
there's no our family available
for whatever reason are
available where does it go next
is that that means that they can
go to our another possible the
reason I'm asking that is I'm
I'm concerned.
With that being.
Around a lot and and although we
want to.
The child in with their culture
sometimes.
The log in and.
Hi this.
Sure that they get from another
family sometimes just so
wonderful and I and I wonder
about breaking those
relationships not only for the
child but the attachment to that
Ostergren I mean I would have a
hard time with a little baby by
also taking care of that child
for a year or longer I know all
of this happens but.
That I had to give that baby
back not because I was worried
about because
our culture doesn't on site with
with that that's that's just I'm
just trying to find that.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative so
section twenty one which is a
new section R. yeah I knew
section does talk about
placement preferences so if you
look at that I think the easiest
way to convey it is that there
is a hierarchy of placement so
you know first it's important
that the tribe's family as our
excuse me they the Indian
child's.
Family and tribe are notified so
that they're aware and in most
instances they will have family
that will take over and watch
that child but in the event that
that doesn't occur you know
there's other placement
preference as so it could happen
that if no one was able to take
care of that child then they can
be placed in a native American
home but really the the process
to ensure that the child is kept
close to family and culture and
try is to ensure that those
placement press preferences are
followed to ensure that act
efforts have been made by a
CYFD.
To ensure that notification has
occurred so that they can follow
that process so it's it's really
a step by step process to ensure
that you know we're not pulling
away kids from from loving
foster parents because they are
part of all political
classification of a tribe that
ensures that they have certain
rights and ensures that tribes
have those rights as well to
look over and right to
responsibilities to look over
that child so that's something
that we worked on for her for
several months to ensure that we
got that
Process put into play into this
bill.
Thank you madam chair I have my
two Bluetooth certified with one
another.
The.
Thank you one and then the other
so my next question is if you
can hear me
can you hear me.
We can representative madam
chair.
Ask you to keep your questions
bring we've been on this almost
two hours and we only have an
hour left and we have two more
bills so please be brief in your
questions and answers thank you
madam chair my question Madam
chair representative is what
what takes precedence to that
point your bring it up if
there's an interracial marriage
or interracial inter tribal
marriage so to tribes or a tried
and at someone outside of you
know of the descent outside of
that what happens to the
placement of a child.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative really that's
worked into the bill we talk
about the Indian child's tribe
and tribes so that in that
instance if there is an Indian
child that's within the state's
system both the tribes would be
notified both of those families
will be notified and I think
really and having that
discussion then it's being open
to the family the extended
family to ensure that you know
if someone is able to care for
that child then they well and
usually that's done by agreement
I think tribes have been really
good at you know mediating those
efforts in ensuring that there's
a win win situation for the for
a child.
So madam chair representative if
there's someone outside of that
you know associates angle or
Hispanic or whatever and they
get it in a racially in a
relationship whether it's
marriage or not does that does
that mean that what this bill
somehow.
Remove any rights from another
parent outside of the tribal of
federal drive.
Madam chair and representative
so no we went we looked at the
termination of rights of the
parents very very closely and so
we're not removing any rates
really if there's an Indian
child that is involved then it's
really.
Like an all hands on deck effort
where the tribe's notified the
family is notified and that
family could be non tribal so
they would be notified as well
because
I think we've seen studies where
it's important that children are
placed with family members that
they know that they're familiar
with and circumstances that
they're familiar with it so it
does not
do away with any rights of a
family members.
Thank you very much credit chair
representative right I applaud
your hard work and I always try
to put myself in those
situations when you're when
you're presenting this
information so that I you know
because we all have a
our thoughts and how we care for
children and you know I I really
appreciate what you're doing I
hope that
That.
CYFD if they are following the
federal mandate or federal law
or whatever concerning this that
so closely follow this and I
hope that
I think the only other concern I
really had Madam chair
representative was that it just
specifically.
Is this just for based on.
On the native American grace and
I worry that it was I was
worried that it would affect
Other interracial relationships
and I was afraid I wasn't sure
how that constitutional.
Work with everything else that
you know if it is forced law
that was really my wife might
cause sure sure Representative.
Thank you Representative I'm
Representative Anderson.
He he is presenting in another
committee so we said if he's not
on we should just move along
without him and I'm not seeing
him.
I'm not hearing him
Representative Anderson one more
shot.
Okay I guess he's presenting his
billing tax I am open to a
motion for a do not pass on
house bill one thirty five and a
do pass on committee substitute
for house bill one thirty five
do I have a motion madam chair
I.
Okay so Representative Montoya
was that.
I'm make the motion and
Representative Ferrary is
seconding.
Emily if you could please call
the roll.
Representative Anderson is not
practical.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
She.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative burn.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes we are both.
Representative Lord are are you
here.
Madam chair I believe she's in
state government okay.
Finally madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you.
Cursed.
Presented Lewis and team you
have a do pass good luck I hope
this gets through thank you very
much next we have a
Representative Garrett house.
Due to.
Madam chair I believe
Representative that our our I
have a comment I spoke.
I am so sorry Representative
asset you wanted to explain your
vote.
I did madam chair sorry I I I
thought I'd lost you guys and
connection and so yes ma'am
madam chair I just wanted to
explain that on the support of
this so you know.
With the understanding that all
the tribes are is in support and
have.
There needs and so that's really
my only thing thank you madam
chair.
I'm sorry I I know you're trying
to move on but I just want to
thank the committee and you
madam chair everyone for your
votes and to representative to
us as point I did receive a
message that the Navajo Nation
is as part of the bill they just
couldn't make it today because
they were in another meeting and
we do appreciate that you know
everyone's trying to ensure that
any of them the state together
as you know
Those kids are members of a
political classification not a
race based so thank you again we
appreciate this hearing thank
you for your work
Representative.
Okay thank you.
We'll go on to one fifty two
with Representative Garrett do
you have experts that you need
promoted yes I do representative
Thompson I have Jason Weaks
Gabriel alt nam's and Margarita
Chavez.
Who I believe are probably in
the attendees.
Those are not permitted to Emily
you're still good before I can
even say asked them to raise
their hand at a minute ago good
for you go ahead Representative
get correct thank you and I
appreciate that I've been
following your conversation
we're doing
Lots of native American built in
education today so it's in my
synergy so I am here to speak
for house bill one fifty two at
six a ten million dollar one
time appropriation to Bernalillo
county so that the county can
work in cooperation with the
City of Albuquerque and other
local criminal justice partners
to address some of the most
significant core issues that
lead to an cause crime well the
goal of the bill is to reduce
crime the immediate purpose of
the bill is to expand access to
essential services while
promoting fairness and
efficiency within the criminal
justice system and the bill does
that by the following for items
and expand access to behavior
health services for criminal
justice involved individuals the
development of programs and
incentives aimed at recruiting
and retaining public safety and
behavior health professionals
are like behavior health
providers at the jail and crisis
triage team.
Secondly it increases access to
public safety equipment for law
enforcement that encourages
community policing and leads to
the development of deterrence
programs including body cameras
control units bicycle strong
evidence scanners mobile crime
scene gear and video
surveillance systems thirdly it
increase funding for mobile
school based health centers that
can help deliver critical
services to kids while they're
at school and finally expands
public housing options across
the entire spectrum of needs by
increasing access to permanent
supportive vouchers single site
housing and inpatient treatment
options for precariously house.
Excuse me and homeless or home
challenged individuals.
Well crime is we purchased one
of the most visible the issues
facing the metro area
homelessness.
Lack of affordable housing
staffing shortages which we've
all heard about in the media at
the jail and the lack of access
to behavior health providers
underlying are increasing crime
rate so we need to do more to
address the core issues that
lead to crime and this bill
would do that finally I want to
add a some background that the
Bernalillo county runs the
county jail and has been a
central player in criminal
justice reform and the county
over the past several decades
Bernalillo county also works
with and provides funding to the
courts the district attorney's.
the office of the public
defender's U. N. M. the City of
Albuquerque and numerous
community based behavior health
providers the county provides
several other service including
public housing options detox
facilities court based a
visionary programs inpatient and
outpatient treatment and
counseling options I think
everybody knows committee knows
that crime is a complicated
problem an effective criminal
justice reform requires all
criminal justice partners to
communicate and work
collectively and collaboratively
towards the goal of thoughtful
reform that's based on data
driven identified best practices
as a result Bernalillo county
also plays a central role in the
Bernalillo county criminal
justice coordinating council
which serves as a forum to
discuss develop and implement
effective criminal reports madam
chair I I would just like to
have some very brief remarks.
Jason Weaks Gabriel them send
more great that a child of the
burn Mexico behavior health
department if that's okay and I
will ask them to be very brief
and then will be available to
answer questions thank you
Representative go ahead whoever
whoever's first.
Thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists from
Bernalillo county we have been
working in in and kind of come
up with some aspirational
ambitious asks that cedar get at
the core issues of crime I know
there's a lot of crime
legislation out there really our
focus it really accounting is
trying to get those core issues
if you get precariously Hayes
Hey how's individuals into
housing then they have something
that stabilizes them also we
need to continue expenses is
just one quick comment nearby
are said that you know ongoing
funding is necessary is for
these programs we agree we do
have existing funding sources in
Bernalillo county it's not that
we don't have any access to
money it's that we would need a
little bit more money to to
stand some of these programs up
I'm not gonna get into the fine
details Margarita engaging
briefly go over those but you
know this is aspirational ask
and we do think that it had
would have a meaningful impact
on moving the needle forward in
terms of addressing some of
those very core issues of crime
because we don't address the
core issues of crime we're not
really truly going to reduce it
with that I threw it to the
again or a Margarita next.
Thank you chase and madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for having us today as a
sessions by Mister weeks we are
looking at the core root causes
of the number of crimes that are
happening in the community and
really working to address and
mitigate some of those issues my
name is not that Thomas I'm just
on the director of the
Bernalillo county department of
behavioral health services it's
good to see many of you again
I'm really looking at
incentivizing and recruiting
public safety and behavioral
health professionals an exam
very clear example is I have had
a clinical manager posted for
over six months with zero
applicants I'm not even not even
one applicant to screen through
and so we really understanding
the disparities in the behavior
health workforce is really
really important we really
appreciate all of your support
in previous sessions on I need
to do the the difficulty to
receive reciprocity here in New
Mexico but now we need to get
folks to stay here and come here
and so in order to do that we
need some recruitment and
incentive incentives to get
providers here and based off of
a lot of the impact that have
happened over the last decade
here in New Mexico the
behavioral health workforce is
just has been dismantled so we
are really working to build that
workforce to meet the needs in
the community COVID has taught
us that that demand for
behavioral health services have
increased significantly and if
we can barely needs them the the
the bare needs and how are we
going to be able to meet those
expanded capacity needs of the
community I'm again up Jason
mentioned increased funding for
mobile school based health
centers this allows us to
purchase almost like a mobile
mammography them right that goes
to communities that need a
mammogram this allows us to
build a school based health
center and have it go to the
schools that need that as
opposed to just invest in brick
and mortar and one location we
can invest in a mobile unit.
They can go to different schools
on different days of the week so
that school based health center
eight centers including behavior
health supports can come to
children and really work to
address upstream and mitigate
those longer term effects of
behavioral health and physical
health ailments long into the
future I'm again we mentioned
specifically housing in the
dressing precariously house
individuals this is really
important right funding that
because of to the State Farm
hired from federal housing and
urban development is really
specific to and very defined a
population right anyone who get
goes to jail and is incarcerated
they are no longer eligible for
HUD funding for housing anyone
who has been accessing services
in a specific way no longer
eligible for those funds so
identifying funding for
precariously house individuals
we know in New Mexico people
stay at their yes in their deals
and their cousins and their
friends right there couchsurfing
that's precariously house and
many of those individuals don't
qualify for the five dollars so
having a way to to serve
precariously house individuals
really helps us address now
again these are underlying root
causes that folks are not able
to have a place to stay not it
may be able to identify where
their next meal is or how
they're going to access their
medication right that often
times leads to crime so if we
can address those root causes we
really are doing a better job
than focusing on incarceration
or rest in this space so pas
there on in general or to take a
damn thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Gabriel men's I am the co
Justice Reform coordinator for
Bernalillo county and I also
help function in minister the
second judicial district
criminal justice coordinating
council which is a collaborative
body of fourteen members
stakeholders of the criminal
justice system here in the
second district.
Bernalillo county.
I have nothing much more to add
about this other than what's
been covered by.
Representative Garrett and Jason
and marketing that.
Except to say that.
The first.
Circumstances we're finding
ourselves not just in Berlin
county but across the state.
Require that we take some bold
steps to
prepare for
the demand that's coming into
the system partially and and and
perhaps largely as a result of
the COVID months have proved
allowed an intensity of need to
build up in our community and we
do anticipate there being a wave
of need and unnecessary
requirement to address those
through some programmatic
responses some that we've
already stood up and Bernalillo
county but would need to expand
to meet that demand.
Many of you may have seen the
article in today's newspaper of
the LFC journal over referencing
we're giving out a day in the
life of a high frequency
utilizes an individual who's
consuming and our many of those
in Bernalillo county consuming a
disproportionate amount of
public resources opened a
criminal justice side and our
public behavior health side and
still those services and needs
are not being met for many
individuals.
I hope with this bill and other
bills is to start to close the
gap on loans and to coordinate
communicate services more
effectively across the continuum
of care starting from the
beginning and hopefully
preventing a person's entry into
a couple justice system which
really complicates their ability
to be successful down the line
and then catching that trying to
catch individuals at every point
all the way through to re entry
and return back.
And the focus of our Lee County
and our criminal justice
stakeholder partners the city
the CACC is to try to create a
continuum that is maximally
effective and reduces the number
of individuals who are caught up
in that system in unfortunate
ways so although I'm I'm not
speaking to anything specific in
the bill this part of this bill
much that's in here is aimed at
helping to close the gap on you
did services and I guess will
stand for questions not going to
law I appreciate your time and
attention on this matter.
Thank you we will go to a poll
of the audience.
I just had one final point yes
please do madam chair committee
I want to point out that this
ten million dollars is non
recurring
it's a jumpstart as again just
sat closing the gap I think all
three experts have highlighted
points but I just want to remind
you it's nonrecurring thank you
thank thank you Representative
and so
we have five.
In favor and zero opposed so I
will go to the audience for
before you raise your hand if
you are here in opposition and
would like to speak please raise
your hand.
Okay if you're here in support
and would like to speak please
raise your hand.
Okay we will start with Dorothy
Seton go ahead Dorothy.
Good morning madam chair and
representative thank you
Representative direct for
introducing this my name is
Dorothy C. nam are retired
military veteran twenty years of
service and longer than that as
a veteran retired I worked
thirteen years of my civilian
career in a prison as a clinical
supervisor for drug addiction
program programming addiction
mental health issues and crime
are very often related this bill
addresses intervention by
trained public safety and
behavioral health professionals
at the earliest possible time
which can provide for the safety
of everyone involved in an
incident and also ensures that
the person gets the appropriate
treatment.
Portion of these people
interfacing with law enforcement
our veterans with issues related
to trauma during their military
service.
we strongly support this
legislation and I think
Representative Garrett for
bringing it Bernalillo county is
not the only county that could
benefit from this type of
support thank you ma'am.
Thank you next we have Karen
what lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen will walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter.
And we appreciate the
legislature looking at the needs
of the behavior health workforce
and attempting to reach outside
of the box to solve some of
these needs and S. W. and this
bill look to do whatever is
necessary to increase these
workforce shortages while
looking at the needs of New
Mexico citizens when it comes to
behavioral health we also hope
that this will be look at
throughout the state and take
lessons and apply to all of New
Mexico thank you Representative
Garrett for this progressive
flageolet legislation.
Thank you Karen next we have
Philip Houston or Austin I'm not
sure.
Thank you
Chair and committee my name is
still used in an exit executive
director of White House in
Carlsbad we provide mental
health and substance abuse
services I'm also a member of
the New Mexico behavioral health
providers association and on
behalf of both of those
organizations I want to express
our support for this I think the
approach of addressing
behavioral health issues and
funding there to address crime
and in the related social
processes is great progress and
I appreciate the the bill and I
appreciate your support for
thank you.
Thank you and we will go to the
committee room house of house
three fifteen.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee this is
Joanna creating hearing you're
lonely Committee ram I'm
representing the New Mexico
behavior health providers
association this is just a
really important bill we
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it forward we now how
interlinked behavioral health
issues and crime is we know that
getting at the root of the cause
of the direction we should be
going so I really look at that
says that crime prevention tool
thank you Representative
director bringing at.
Okay.
That looks like all of the
public comment so we will go to
that page the committee
Representative Matthews.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Garrett and representatives from
the county
I am a hundred percent in favor
of whatever we can do to.
Reduce crime but I have some
concerns about this bill and I
say that being a great admirers
of what the county of Bernalillo
is been doing with its programs
particularly compared to some of
the other governmental bodies
that are around but I am
concerned.
For two reasons first of all the
first point out that there is
literally millions and millions
of dollars going into behavioral
health programs and mental
health programs crime reduction
programs in the current budget
that is being debated.
And.
It.
Did this ten million dollars is
not clear to me really how it's
going to make any significant
difference in our efforts
particularly since it seems to
me we're continuing to work in
silos and that is we don't have
a statewide or even a city wide
county wide if you will
mental health behavioral health
plan how we're going to
implement it how we're gonna do
it work with it and so we keep.
Putting money into programs and
we're not seeing positive
results and that is a real
concern I have
So I just wanted to share that
with anybody would like to
respond that would be fine.
To make it up to madam chair of
course.
Madam chair representative great
question and that's why in the
central part of the bill is that
there has to be collaboration
between the county and the city
but I would like to invite my
expert witnesses to discuss that
because I do believe this is
very specifically targeted but
madam chair with your permission
I would like to invite our
expert witnesses to comment.
Yes please just remember to keep
things as brief as you can we
still have another bill to get
through.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and and
Representative Matthews you know
we've talked a lot and you know
I've talked a lot about some
what what Bernalillo county's
been doing and certainly order
is expert on this so all of
through to her next I want to be
very brief in just saying I do
think that that is changing I do
think that the silent nature of
how we're delivering services is
changing I think the counties
really trying to push forward
with that yes Representative
geared point that points out one
of the points of this bill is to
work in cooperation with the
city we also have some other
initiatives going on we have the
homeless coordinating council on
that's the city the county and
UNM I don't think that the
county wants to operate in silos
anymore that's not been my
experience as of late I think
the county really through the
criminal justice coordinating
council is trying to break those
silos down could we have a
better coordinated and delivered
effort as it relates to
behavioral health Services and
and efforts on a statewide level
we could
but I think that Bernalillo
county in City of Albuquerque is
kind of leading the way and a
lot of that a lot of services
delivered and early account
extend out from the county or
folks from other counties come
into the county and utilize the
services this is one time money
to try to address the critical
issues that are in front of us
and I think it's also not
specifically just for guests on
behavioral health services
certainly it's focused on other
issues like those Google on
school based health centers and
and dealing with some of the
housing issues that we're facing
but if Margarita can give just a
quick quick
response that focuses in on that
on this behavioral health issues
in particular what we're doing
to coordinate those efforts that
would that would be great.
Madam chair representative not
used the I think it's a great
point here which is discussed
collaboration so within the city
and the county we have a number
of things that are happening
locally city in the county are
working on a joint strategic
plan which will essentially do
that right build a strategic
plan around social services
right not just behavioral health
but the continuum of social
services to include housing food
insecurities right full cadre of
need in our community because
the the standard has been
silenced by and you're really
working to break down those
silos above and beyond that we
are including the criminal
justice coordinating council and
the state behavioral health
collaborative in our joint
strategic plan right it started
as just a plan with the city in
the county but we feel that it
is vital for the criminal
justice coordinating council
that as you know includes a wide
array of partners as well as the
state behavioral health
collaborative so we're working
with price insurance folks of
the state to make sure that we
are all working in parallel and
breaking down those silos it
really is a prioritization of
the county to assist in
navigating that collaboration
not only locally but statewide
as Jason mentioned about twenty
percent of the population that
is served by our department is
residents outside Bernalillo
county that are coming into
Bernalillo county to access
services because of this the
disparities in their area so we
are hoping to not only
meet the needs in our community
but also build the capacity to
serve constituents from across
the state and built models that
are partners across the state
can borrow it's not uncommon for
folks and you are Sandoval
County to be calling us and
asking us for policies and
procedures on things that we're
doing so we are happy to share
everything that we're learning
and provide that resource states
statewide.
Representative Matthews yes
what.
Your muted I read your but.
Madam chair I appreciate those
answers for the county and I
believe that the county has been
a leader in trying to not go it
alone on these important track
programs.
And I appreciate that they're
bringing in like the.
The cooperative and so forth and
not just the City of Albuquerque
so I with that I will vote for
this but.
I just want to say I'm watching
and we just need to start
getting some results from these
programs that help us reduce
crime in our communities and
throughout our state thank you
thank you Representative
Matthews representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Garrett for
being aggressive.
You go girl.
But my question is.
And you're probably not gonna
like it.
Why isn't every county
allocated tons of money to do
this one of the problems I have
is do you know how much are
money Bernalillo county and the
city of Albuquerque received.
Madam chair and representative
Armstrong I always expected
questions from you and mail I
don't know.
Okay well they you know the the
county of Bernalillo or the City
of Albuquerque I'm not sure
which thank you madam chair
Received a ton of our money.
Taken off the top before the
other counties actually had to
apply for the money.
And so I'm concerned that we're
running legislation.
When there's other ways to be
able to get this money into the
county through non profits
through HSD through so many
different entities that are
already doing this I just feel
as though rural New Mexico and
Representative.
I would I would personally never
run this legislation from my
personal counties because of the
other avenues of receiving this
type of money and so I'm
concerned that
Bernalillo will be getting
special treatment through this
legislation do you have a
comment
Representative Garrett.
Yes Representative Madam chair
representative Armstrong I I
think it's important to
recognize what
The service coordinator behavior
health coordinator mentioned
twenty percent of the people
September Bernalillo come from
throughout the state and so if
if you even look at the crimes
that have been committed the
number of deaths that the
murders that occurred in
Bernalillo many of those people
came from other places I feel
like if we get a quick start on
this it will truly benefit the
other counties it has to if it
doesn't Bernalillo county is
failing its due diligence to
serve the state I would like to
know K. would you like to make a
comment on that.
Yes thank you Representative
Madam chair representative
Armstrong I totally understand
your point in appreciate it
but we are also looking at some
other options to try to get some
behavioral health and criminal
justice related dollars into
communities throughout the state
on a per capita basis
this is but one approach given
the significant amount of money
that the state has this year
both in terms of one time
general fund dollars from from
increase state revenues but also
for more money we do feel like
we would we would use this money
and and the way that would not
just benefit to folks Bernalillo
county but it would have a
regional benefit these are
things that we during the
interim kind of targeted looked
at and said Katie's this is how
we're nearly going to construct
these asks meaning we got ten
million dollars it's almost sort
of a moon shot as it relates to
expanding some of these services
are fully understand Bernalillo
county and city of Albuquerque
have gotten more money fully
understand that there are other
funding streams out there but we
do believe that Bernalillo
county in that we not just as
the county but as in one of the
players in the criminal justice
community in Bernalillo county
would put this money to good use
in and that would just have a
local benefit would have sort of
a regional benefit but but I
fully appreciate and understand
your point.
Thank you madam chair I would I
would encourage you all.
To read this book.
That was given out by Dr Scrase
and it's the Human Services
Department.
Questions and comments and it
ranks the need for all of the
services and all the different
counties and I I will be
opposing this bill just because
of.
The way that the money is asked
for we will see throughout the
session madam chair legislation
that is being run.
That will affect all of New
Mexico when the problems are
really in Bernalillo county.
This book will tell you what the
problems are across the state.
And I just find it.
Very unfair that Bernalillo
county what asked for this money
in this manner and all the
entities that are already in
place that Representative
Matthews brought up and
you know it's really hard madam
chair when there's tons of money
and people are just coming out
of the work would work and being
on probation I can tell you they
are coming out of the woodwork
and so I'm I'm concerned that
this would create an Avenue for
all counties to be able to to
ask for this if we if we do this
for Bernalillo we should do it
for every county but in my
opinion we should do it at all
there's other avenues for this
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
really appreciate your remarks
which I think are.
Well taken thank you.
Thank you Representative
Terrazas and I'm gonna remind
folks we have twenty nine
minutes that we still have
another bill so please if I will
if I have to
time limit folks so please try
to keep things brief that we can
get through this thank you
Representative office.
Madam chair representative thank
you very much Representative
you're at work.
You know we were in in from we
talked at during the intro.
Really it was brought up or
Albuquerque is brought up and I
made some comments concerning
how the city
and Raul deal particularly are
in crisis because of crime.
And I you know I made mentions
of myself my family going out to
we could you know going down to
a restaurant downtown we used to
enjoy and little by little we've
just seen downtown share your
more more so I applaud you Madam
chair representative for.
For bringing this legislation
and and I also but I have some
questions and and my question is
all these ten million Madam
chair representative how much
goes to cry how much goes to law
enforcement public safety.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative losses if you
look at the breakdown it does
outline some of that
and I would like to ask Jason
Weaks to just elaborate on that
specific point.
Thank you madam chair
representative process we didn't
specify specifically how what
percentage would go to crime we
kind of want to do an evaluation
locally and and understand how
to best combat the relevant
issue in terms of addressing
some of the core problems we put
the list on there so we would
have some flexibility in terms
of coordinating with the
relevant partners through the C.
G. C. C. and with the City of
Albuquerque and so that's how we
will determine what percentage
goes where should we get this
independent appropriations and
obviously this is going to go to
a house appropriation and
finance at next and I'm sure
that that that this from that
financial standpoint but we
don't want to be overly
prescriptive in terms of what
money what where and you know I
just to emphasize this across
that spectrum behavioral health
you know transitional living
options
expansion of services and law
enforcement the group they need
is significant it is great.
It is the most significant in
some senses and Bernalillo
county because it is the largest
population center the state
because it is probably the most
urbanized area in the state so
in answer your question we
didn't specifically specified
however we will work with
criminal justice partners
locally includes law enforcement
try to figure out how to best
spend this money in an equitable
and fair way.
I'm sure Representative you know
I I'm I'm kind of in the same
realm as the other direct.
Only my colleagues in that I
have concerns and and that's one
of them I mean I don't have a
spot is public safety gonna get
ten percent and other programs
get ninety percent where is it
going on that's a lot of
questions for me I I I applaud
though Representative Garrett
for efforts because you know she
she sees we all know that
Albuquerque is is in is in a
crisis when it comes to crime
murder and support.
I think you know we do need to
make efforts in getting our the
largest city of New Mexico under
control to.
And getting that off the top of
the list of inner cities I know
that it's it's been listed as a
not a not very favorable I
believe that that purchase
overall it's all connected I
I've spoken about this before
that it's connected to us
attracting new employment.
Respect your prospect's up
because they look at the
possibly the area that led of
the prime rate all schools and I
I believe it's all put together
I also feel Madam chair
representative of that
although four walls very very
important I think we have
rhetoric in New.
Mandates where
people that are in the.
In the rental business are
getting mandates or not
Representative can you please
stay on the scrap this gonna
finish my thought madam chair
yes ma'am and at real quick what
what's happening with that I
just had this conversation in
Los crucis yes the deplorable
housing have plenty of money for
affordable housing.
Yet didn't have any houses to
pay for because they're not
available a lot of these rental
places and it goes hand in hand
Madam chair representative these
people with the with the
inflation rates all of these the
house is being.
Coming up for sale the prices
going up they're bailing out and
they're selling the rentals and
so it's causing a it's causing
a.
Shortage of a rental so those
are just things that are all
connected in one way or another
Madam chair representative and
so again I'm I'm kind of in the
same situation with the other
two I I really want to support
this the idea I just not that
I'm not satisfied or feel that
the money is it and and the
whole idea is what enough
together that public safety is
going to be first and I believe
that's that's one of the many
things that they are the City of
Albuquerque thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative I see marker
reject Chavis Sanchez with their
hand raised if you could be
brief please Madam chair thank
you I'm Representative I think
it's really important to
understand that the entire group
of funding is really dedicated
to public safety right
behavioral health services is a
component of public safety right
I know I think we think often
about public safety as funding
really going to law enforcement
but if we invest in treatment
and diversionary practices we
keep folks out of jail we keep
folks out of that need it
personal need right oftentimes
people are committing crimes
because they don't have access
to services so I really think
it's important for us to think
about this as a larger public
safety and behavioral health
bill madam chair one closing
thought is really thinking about
to your point Representative
we're sitting in the county have
funds for vouchers but no where
to voucher to so these one time
dollars allow us the opportunity
to look at identifying single
sites right purchasing
potentially old motel or
apartment complex that the
county can invest in and then
voucher to that site so that
there is a place to find these
vouchers for folks to receive
that housing right right now
against the city in the county
have money for vouchers but
nowhere to drive to so these one
time dollars help us to address
that really mitigating crime in
the long term and behavior
health supports thank you madam
chair.
True those.
Representative.
I'm sorry for the the public.
I'm sorry but we really need to
move on thank you Representative
Montoya well.
Madam chair the Representative
Garrett.
I find myself being a bit of
conflict.
I am surprised because the
premise of the bill is so on
point the work in better legal
County.
Is exemplary.
But I do have questions about
the equity across the state I
know that if we pass this bill
and the ten million dollars
moves through.
The rest of the state will
probably benefit from that data.
But I just feel like
Representative Armstrong stated
the amount of funding right now
in our state I think we would be
better suited if we had a full
court press demanding that a
comprehensive state wide plan is
put in place.
So that every county Sir retweet
receipts this critical work
Representative Garrett my
conflict isn't in that your
efforts are exemplary and so on
point so I just have a bit of
trepidation.
I will stop their madam chair I
yield back.
Thank you Representative I will
entertain a motion.
Past okay.
Okay so we have a I do pass from
Representative Ferrary in the
second from Representative bash
Emily can you go ahead and take
the role.
Representative Anderson.
We were not being can you please
mute yourself.
Thank you go ahead.
Representative Armstrong.
You know and I would like to
explain.
Representative bash yes.
Representative.
Yes.
All.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Lord is not
Representative.
Representative Matthews.
What we want your needed if
you're voting thank.
Yes.
That was a yes Emily thank you.
One point.
Yes.
Representative.
I like to explain my vote.
Representative Anderson.
What are
your muted Representative
Anderson.
I think you may still be
presenting a bill.
Finally madam chair yes.
Thank you.
Thank you for to.
And and two comments I want to
Armstrong.
Thank you for that reminder so
you have a do past six to to and
we will go to representative
Armstrong and then
representative Ted office for a
brief explanation.
I thank you madam chair
Bernalillo county received a
hundred thirty one million
dollars in our money.
And I'm like the counties that
are Representative
representative we did receive
even close to that and all of
that we had to apply for and I
just feel this is unfair to the
rest of the counties in the
state of New Mexico and not that
I don't think that they need to
help but I think the bill is
very bank gives too much
of tendency to be spent however
they want and
I am opposed to this bill thank
you madam chair.
Having served on probation for
four years I guarantee they will
law take a pic of my group micro
scope and look at what's
happening here so Representative
Terrazas.
Thank you madam chair you know
again I I I want to always
support things like this but
with the message pretty much
require words out of my mouth
not knowing while things are
gonna go in a short amount of
time we were able to debate it
ask questions
I.
The amount of money that they
they've already received of that
I was you know that I just heard
I I have a I have a lot of
caution on it I don't know where
exactly those funds are going to
go and I wanted to have a bit
more of a discussion madam chair
on the other issues.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I'm so.
Thank you so much and we will
move on to our last agenda item
Representative Trujillo house
bill one fifty five and
Representative do you have
experts that you need promoted
yes good morning madam chair and
I do I have Charlie Marcus who
should be waiting.
Emily is very has has been
committed okay anybody else
Representative no ma'am okay go
ahead okay thank you madam
chairwoman and members of the
committee we are.
Presenting this piece of
legislation on behalf of the
providers for Didi waivers and
TV stands for disability
developmental disability
services we're bringing the
legislation to attempt a
correction I think Kurt expenses
during the COVID nineteen
pandemic the legislation is
asking for an approximate six
percent increase to providers of
services that assist those
individuals with developmental
disabilities a study was
conducted by our.
PGA and they concluded
opportunities to increase
compensation several several
areas and the department is
addressing is addressing many of
those concerns however what is
not include all the expenses
incurred in the last three years
that have not been reimbursed.
There was a survey as a shared
that there have been conducted
and what the questions were in
the last year how much has your
agency spent it over time cost
what do you paying for your
nurses both are in an LPN but if
you spent for PPP costs what is
your current vacancy percentage
of direct support professionals
what is your starting hourly
wage for DS PS what incentives
are you using to fill a vacancy
positions what was unveiled is
that many of those providers
have to include sign on bonuses
retention bonuses referral
payments longevity bonuses
double pay on holidays COVID
nineteen bonuses and new hire
bonuses these costs per
individual worry approximately
twenty five hundred in addition
to this there was a revised
seller schedule to include five
dollars per hour increase for
long term staff in addition to
this there was the increased
cost of PP supplies there is but
that were as much as
five thousand dollars are
impatient up from thirty to
eighty dollars an hour and more
the LPN shot up thirty three
fifty dollars an hour overtime
costs depending on the entity
was as little as fifteen
thousand dollars increases this
much is one point one million
the vacancy rates for direct
service providers range from six
percent to as much as fifty
percent.
This piece of legislation is
asking for approximately a six
percent increase which equates
to five point one five million
in state general fund monies
this is the state match portion
after federal match equates to
approximately twenty one million
and with that madam chair I
defer to my
expert witness Charlie markets
to add any more information or
we both stand for questions.
Or do you want to go to the
this.
Are you sure members of the
committee I think the
representative has covered all
of the key points thank you.
Thank you okay we will go with
the full first so Emily if you
could put that up please vote in
favor or in opposition.
Give you a couple more seconds.
So right to your computer.
Okay it looks like it's pretty
stabilized somewhat since nine
out of ten or ninety percent in
favor one out of ten or ten
percent in opposition so now I'm
going to go to the public for
comment if you are in opposition
please raise your hand if you
would like to speak.
Okay I don't see anybody there
if you are in support please
raise your hand.
Okay we will start with Jim
Copeland.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
your today my name is Jim
Copeland I am the current
executive director for the
association of developmental
disabilities community
providers.
And we certainly want to support
Representative Trujillo and and
support her for sponsoring this
legislation our membership
across the state from Carlsbad
Farmington in Las Cruces
challenges are memberships of
supports and appreciates all of
the initiatives of the Human
Services department and the
department of health to in the
waiting list to that end there
were twelve hundred allocation
letter sent out since mid
November there six hundred more
allocation letter schedule for
March June September and
November of this year and
providers are experiencing all
of the allocate all of the
problems from COVID nineteen The
Great resignation doesn't appear
to be subsiding and just to be
real short we support quality
supports and services for all of
the New Mexico citizens with
individual and intellectual and
developmental disabilities and
their families but we to do that
we need a viable system with
funding levels that reflect
current costs of providing these
services so thank you members of
the committee madam chair for
your time.
Next is it called.
Are you there.
It can you on mute yourself
please.
Okay it looks like you may be
having some issues so we'll move
on to Patsy Romero.
madam chair I don't know if you
can hear me my name is Patsy
Romero I'm the chief executive
officer percent the money up
tell me that on my provide
intermediate care for
individuals with intellectual
disabilities and also provide do
waiver services for individuals
on general fund madam chair and
members of the committee let me
first thank Representative
Trujillo for bringing this piece
of legislation before you and
also to express my appreciation
for the department of health and
health and Human Services four
of each including funds in their
budget to increase the provider
rate at this critical time madam
chair as a Jim Copeland shared
with all of you we have got
extremely high
expenses with regard to hiring a
competent workforce to continue
to provide services for the
disability community in addition
to that the with the reduction
of the wait list we are an
extremely challenge to increase
our ability and our capacity to
provide those services and even
with the increase in the budget
the department of health has
provided on or submitted for
your approval it's still not
enough we've got to be able to
hire a competent workforce madam
chair and members of the
committee and in this current
environment with increased
inflation of COVID cost we
absolutely need this additional
support or we would not be
bringing that up before you so
thank you madam chair I thank
you members of the committee
thank you Representative
Trujillo for your support and
all of you for your continued
support in serving the
disability community thank you
madam chair.
Thank you call have you figured
out your.
Are you there ed.
Okay I'm so we will move on to
Mary T. he'll.
Yes hello thank you for allowing
me to speak my name is Mary the
lander hell Representative The
New Mexico occupational therapy
association has elected
treasurer I support each B. one
fifty five to increase funding
levels so that qualified
occupational therapists and
occupational therapy assistants
are paid a competitive wage to
do important intervention to
increase independent in the
activities of daily living and
train home staff and safe
lifting techniques and ways to
support optimal activity and
participation for people with
developmental disabilities I
agree with the concerns of the
to hire people who testified
today that with the increase of
people from the waiver it is
important to attract qualified.
Specialist to support the
population thank you for thank
you and shout out to teas from
the PTA.
Chris Boston.
Thank you madam chair hi my name
is Chris Boston and I'm the
president and CEO of Tresco in
Las Cruces New Mexico we provide
home and community based waiver
services and Sapporo in Los
crucis and I am here to support
H. B. one fifty five as well and
I would
I absolutely
echo all comments have been made
but most importantly
this crisis that we're fight
facing as a provider system is
better than this bill and I want
to just point out that there's
going to be a cost study
completed hopefully in the next
year and next year there's going
to be a large price tag that's
going to be coming to fully fund
services so that we can provide
safe therapeutic and effective
services for adults with
intellectual disabilities New
Mexico and so again thank you
for the time to comment and we
would appreciate your support
for house bill one fifty five
thank you ma'am.
Thank you next we have Michelle
Cody.
Michelle.
Michelle Cody.
Okay so we will go to Peggy
o'neal.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Peggy o'neal and I'm the
chief executive officer of the
therapy center in Alamogordo and
I'm I'm here in support of house
bill one fifty five and we would
ask your support provision and
remind you that even though
we're discussing we're
discussing rate increases that
were recently
that were recently distributed
we didn't all get those rate
increases on one of the programs
that we did not have the
specific services that were that
were carved out for rate
increases so well I'm it might
small organization is trying to
deal with all of the minimum
wage increases year after year
without any benefit of any rate
increases and we're really
struggling and really having
trouble and I'm I'm urging you
to.
to support any to support this
and any bills that are
increasing funding and the duty
waiver world and I thank you so
much.
That looks like all the public
comment and I don't see any
hands raised I will say that you
all have heard me say this
before my son is in a group home
and they are I'm desperate for
staff it's not an easy job it
can be a rewarding job but it's
a very it can be a very
difficult job so I am open for I
know a motion madam chair hand
registries hello okay okay
Representative for I'm sorry you
gotta get those hands up there
quick Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Representative Trujillo for
bringing just for we've been
talking about this for a long
time and I one thing I was
concerned about is the delay is
there a delay like six months
four that raises can go into a
fact.
Madam chairman.
report to my experts Miss Mister
Marcus.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Ferrary
The those details would be
disclosed once the appropriation
was made and it will go through
HSD.
Of.
Course there is a federal match
to this so there is there's that
the lady that has took place.
Before the federal dollars to
match to.
transfusion question.
I guess we have to just leave it
up to the process but this is
just wonderful that we're able
to
be able to add.
Match or federal funding and
leverage federal funding and
then also to do away with the DD
waiver less than I'm really glad
that this will help do that so
that's all madam chair thank
you.
Thank you to to hands raised in
public comments I'm going to go
to them very quickly Angelique
to for a very quick.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is actually two four yeah and
I'm here to stand in support of
house bill one fifty five and to
think Representative Trujillo
her leadership and creation of
this bill to support our
development our developmental
disability community providers
and our expenses statewide
services as the executive
director of all to more
specialized family services I
would like to express the
critical nature of our funding
needs as Representative Trujillo
noted overview the entire
provider community has incurred
many unforeseen costs to keep
our services running during the
current pandemic and the great
resignation we have seen an
increased amount of turnover
from our front my direct support
providers to our internal staff
are staffing concerns.
Are one of many concerns we're
also looking at including an
increase another increase the
minimum wage increase in KP
costs and increasing program
requirements I would like to
thank Representative Trujillo
for bringing this important
legislation to the committee and
I ask the committee vote yes on
a deep pass thank you for your
time.
Thank you next we have Matt
Cole.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me I'm sorry we can
hear you map okay thank you
representative Thompson and
members of the committee I just
wanted to support this bill and
everything that everybody has
been saying.
I am the CEO of the small
residential provider agency and
and.
Feeling the.
Feeling the the constraints from
not having enough resource.
Our nursing costs have more than
doubled we have.
Increased our direct care
service paid by.
At two dollars plus depending on
and we're still having
difficulty finding staff that
are willing to stay or that are
interested in this field we're
just competing with.
Incredible increases in costs
and I just think it's a great
opportunity for us to.
Turn things up with this system
that's a.
We can be competitive.
R. and.
Employment opportunities for the
state and for the people that we
serve.
Thank you.
That's.
Thank you I will entertain a
motion.
To pass.
Okay so Representative bash on
the motion Representative
Ferrary on the second and Emily
if you will go ahead and call
roll.
Representative Anderson is
returned.
Representative Armstrong the one
that.
Yes I hear a lot of background
noise or not speaking please
mute yourself.
That apologies my office mates
are also taking calls.
Back.
Yes Representative.
Representative.
One yes.
Representative are are are
usually lower wage.
Yes.
Your find
more it's not.
Representative Marty yes
Representative Montoya.
We.
Representative.
As possible we're not.
All.
And one last call for
Representative Andrea.
One.
Representative Anderson.
Yes I'm a yes.
I will yes I will I apologize
and we were.
Right.
And finally madam chair.
And madam chair.
Yes but I I I now see that
representative Armstrong has her
hand raised we will finish this
the vote would go ahead and we
announced a vote okay at we have
nine in paper zero.
Okay thank you Emily
Representative Armstrong I'm not
sure when your hand went out but
I just thought.
That's fine I wanted to thank
you madam chair I just want to
see if we could possibly get
Emily her own office.
So that we don't hear background
noise because it's very
distracted but I I have having a
really really hard time with
zoom in general but that's even
more destructive the other thing
madam chair is I just need to to
say that we are here to debate
bills we are here to at it's not
about how many bills we can get
through it's about the quality
of the bills and so I really
take offence when you cut of
questions off for the people
that are actually on the
committee and so people need to
remember that I love all the
public comments but we need
plenty of time to ask our
questions and so I just would
really appreciate having the
time to do that and I do
understand that you are the
chair and it is your prerogative
but I I would really appreciate
being able to take the time to
ask the questions that we need
to ask thank you madam chair.
We have complete.
Madam chair.
Representative Ferrary yes I
would like to on table or take
off the table HB thirty three.
The tobacco bill.
Representative you voted to
table it correct.
Only if I'm the only people who
can call it off the table are
the people who voted to table
it.
So if you voted against it.
You are not allowed to do that
bye bye are you here right madam
chair I know it gets very it
gets
complicated and sticky but since
I did both for the tabling I
will use this opportunity to
remove to House Bill
What number.
I'm sorry say again thirty three
house bill thirty three off the
table to be reconsidered so
Emily I'm I'm not sure if you're
prepared for this.
Yes role the.
All this just as a reminder we
heard everything
Yes.
I'm sure you know I'm.
I.
I have out madam chair because
representative Armstrong wrote
it might.
Is
I know we have that last that
bill that had ten million
dollars and it was a large
amount of money and had a lot of
answers thanks for me and we
didn't have time to that to do
that yet we're bringing up.
Another bill on to the on to the
committee right now when we were
hard pressed I think that's.
Not fair madam chair and I'm
trying to be very very
respectful need madam chair but
I I felt that that was
inappropriate.
Thank you Representative.
We are we are on
I'm tabling motion of house bill
house bill thirty three.
Madam chair can you explain at
that it's that you know what I'm
gonna do since we are over time
we will postpone it until
Wednesday I'm sorry for that but
but that the floor session is
scheduled to to start so we will
we will pass that on until later
and and Emily do
What can you please.
Again for the last bill for
Representative Trujillo is one
fifty five I'm not sure I we did
that.
Thank you cut out percent you're
asking for those numbers yes I
it was nine in papers here are
okay and with that we will
recess for now we will be back
on Wednesday thank you all.
