Their full scratched off on my
paper and I knew which was which
this so it's two forty four
thank you.
to the committee we actually
have a committee substitute for
two forty four and it should
have been passed out and it
should be part of.
You madam chair let's make
motion consider this.
Any opposition okay.
So madam chair what has changed
in the.
The committee substitution is
responding to the technical
issues that were raised in the
first FIR the original bill had
a set amount of and we've taken
that out to be more in line with
of what is correct practice in
terms of the department of
deception and needed based on
that of taking into
consideration the applicants of
assets all of those kinds of
things and the benefit amount
and therefore be established
based on that.
This bill of is.
Targeted towards a very
vulnerable populations stable
population of people that really
cap that seven cells.
The general assistance is a
program that's been around for a
very long time Fund but the
amount that people receive has
not been adjusted for at least
thirty years.
So that's what we are intending
to do with this legislation.
In very limited circumstances
general assistance can also
apply to children but again
that's a very small number of
children.
as I said the payment for those
receiving assistance has not
been increase for at least years
currently a person on she
receives the maximum maximum
monthly benefit of two hundred
and forty five dollars.
Many people in New Mexico are
not even aware program.
And I I'm not sure why I don't
know if income support doesn't
Given the information hi you I
don't know why but the case so
for this population is not very
high teacher.
so what we're proposing to do
this legislation that the
maximum maximum monthly benefit
to be fifty percent of the HSD
standard of need.
The seventh need is currently
tethered to the official federal
poverty rate the terms that
would need is a bit misleading
even though HSD doesn't just
this Saturday evening annually
that the added and of itself
does not mean an increase cash
benefits that figure is just an
amount that is that is secretary
Representative would be required
for a person to exist in your
forget this population again
this bill would this bill would
require the agency it just.
Benefit level Spagnoli and that
they said the maximum general
assistance benefit no less than
fifty percent of the standard of
need this bill proposes an
effective date to be January
first twenty twenty four and I
believe this would give HSD
sufficient time to prepare their
systems in order to do that.
In addition the new payment
level be effective in January
which is the same of the SSI
benefit levels are just federal
law they need a program similar
to SSI and that it is primarily
available to those who have
medical facilities madam chair I
also have with me a expert
witness on this flurry million
I'm gonna pass to also provides
incomes.
Yes yes okay.
Of where the elite and this
issue of just briefly has been a
passion of mine since of I
administration of governor
Keating in the early nineties at
that time we were in budget
crisis and they were both in the
populations of the measure and
top our regular business for
about four they are now and the
low two hundred dollar range per
month.
And I have not been on this
disability program but I have
been on general assistance
program Michigan but forty years
ago and I'm keenly aware of the
struggles and poverty but this
program here can actually pay us
back because of the
reimbursements are available
since it's so disabled
population these people are
required to understand it to
apply for supplement security
federal budget and in the state
recoup that money what the SSI
benefits for approved I think
before robust aggressive posture
trying to get the bonus benefits
for legal recoup more money but
in the financial stuff
Department provided us we're
already recruiting a significant
amount of money from the J.
focuses SSI recovers as high as
forty three million dollars and
some of the fiscal year which is
about the third falls St Onge
info that.
And I would I would say that
is just tragic for those poor
people after thirty years we
have adjusted our payments we
failed state these are people
who can't go out of the work of
medically these are for mentally
or physically.
The shape of the past okay let's
go to the audience anyone here
in opposition.
Support.
Can
anyone on soon
Take I'm guessing is in support
so go ahead T..
Thank you madam chair madam
chair my name is to consult as
from the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
We stand we want to thank the
sponsor for this bill in the
Senate support because general
assistance is the only program
that helps New Mexicans living
with disabilities meet basic
needs while they wait for
federal disability benefit
applications to be processed
increasing the benefit amount to
five hundred sixteen dollars a
month.
Well nearly double the monthly
income of people who participate
in this program from living at
twenty percent of our guideline
to forty two percent.
As the expert witness stated New
Mexico already seems receives
reimbursement from the federal
government for general
assistance budget when
participants are proved federal
disability New Mexico will
continue to recoup these funds
while helping adults with
disabilities meet basic needs
through a more fair benefit
level New Mexicans will be
better able to access housing
and economic security which
supports them in transitioning
to the federal disability
programs with that we thank you
madam chair thank you T. that's
all the public comment question
and I will say that the
Republicans are on their way
So other questions from the
committee.
Madam chair.
The other the madam chair for.
Which.
thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this forward
Representative and when I hear
the words we haven't done this
upgrade increase the amount or
something for thirty years I'm
like but if we been doing for
thirty years on so many
different issues and so I think
this is something that will be
very helpful even though we
don't have an FIR on this.
I think whatever it takes to
keep together so thank you
that's all.
Okay.
Well I guess we'll have to wait
till we get someone here
covering me Representative said
he.
This combined.
Thank you madam chair and
representative at I. to this
program how.
Offered some incredibly valuable
benefits particularly during the
COVID
we specifically funded multiple
times the general assistance
program because it was a need
for people who are receiving
unemployment or just essentially
getting some of the other tax
rebates and things like that
that we did during that time so
I'm really glad you're adjusting
it I guess I just had a couple
questions about what
You know I and I don't know if
you know if it's still.
Was going to affect.
Right now Madam chair
representative what.
I'm trying to track the fifty
percent and then the other fifty
percent so what what exactly
what that due to the.
Current.
Payment versus that under this
bill would increase it for sure
do you feel comfortable.
The intent is to Madam chair
representative the intent is to
increase that
you know if they have been
increased all along the way.
Those recipients of need it
would be receiving five hundred
and twenty seven dollars a month
in the substitute it doesn't
have a specific amount
but what we're relying on is the
departments
will the ability to basically
adjust that and.
The federal.
Just the maximum that laughed at
that recipients.
Hey
thank you madam chair in.
I will entertain a motion first
we have to adopt this a piece
of.
As a committee substitute okay
second okay any opposition.
Sorry I missed the presentation
where we are on house bill two
forty four and we've had all the
presentation so it is their
opposition to adopting this up.
Seeing none you have a.
Committee set up and now we need
a motion to on it I need
another.
I need to do for it to pass on a
do not pass on house bill two
forty four and it do pass on
Committee substitute for House
Bill to forty four.
Okay any Opeth going to call the
roll.
Okay.
Representative Kate.
Yes.
Representative Thomas yes.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative how do you she's
excuse Representative jobs.
Yes or no were regarding the I
just want to we started at eight
thirty to forty four well I I
did hear presentations some
from.
If you to vote.
Representative Lord
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Representative Vincent's.
Representative Herndon is
excused and madam chair yes I
don't so I do want to ask.
And we will move on to
H. B..
One two forty seven
Representative Matthew.
Every year right.
Madam chair and members of the
committee the.
If I could just ask a quick
question I was soon set or are
we know where the committee
we're in committee yes thank you
very much.
HB two forty seven is the first
of three bills so that's going
to be presented today features
it different but they also have
a number of similarities and so
I wanted to
So just.
Terms of reduction to talk a
little bit about the
similarities each one to forty
seven forty two forty our
called continental said
healthcare providers of compacts
and health care provider compact
is essentially a profession the
first one is medical licensing
which is positions and then the
second one to forty eight hours
from there this into forty nine
colleges.
Is the one thousand Mexico to
participate in compacts which
are which include licensed
professionals in those fields
from all across the country and
the space is our.
Fifty eight it it expands our
the the number of providers that
are potentially available to.
One of the the phrases that we
have heard frequently during
this session and that we're
going to continue to hear is
that phrase provider shortage
when the first to health care
and for variety reasons the
number of health care providers
in our state is in virtually all
fields not all this virtually
all is insufficient population
and it often takes months to be
seen by
healthcare providers and
frequently we also have.
Specialists in certain areas
even living in the state SO that
there isn't an ability to get a
a at this point with them.
the point.
This was an issue during the
interim question of how do we
grow our provider healthcare
provider networks and then the
number of our health care
providers to meet the needs of
our population as these compact
are one of the solutions that we
are proposing that will help
with that.
And with me today is
and on each each share the
compact we may have some
different experts but today
with me on two forty seven is
Troy Clark is the
Representative rector of the SS
New Mexico hospital association
and on soon we have
Representative of.
At nine and now the.
Representative a person is
I'm not quite sure of the name
of this person is because they
they keep changing it a little
bit off but we'll talk about the
view the military of how
important it is that we have
access and participation in
these contacts and then also we
will have mother of the child
with has
a very unique kind of cancer
Mexico talk about what it is
meant to their family.
Mexico.
Do not participate in these
comics.
That I'd like to turn it over to
Clark to talk a little bit about
that medical licensing compacts.
Thank you madam chair committee
members provided here again Troy
Clark president CEO of hospital
patients.
As Representative Matthews's
stated access is a huge problem
not news to anyone of us both
rural and urban it takes a lot
of time to get to a point as
with our providers.
Access is a problem with our all
levels of health care not just
physicians nurses physical
therapists occupational
therapists you need health care
it's gonna take time to get that
and I think that
Underscores the importance of
the call backs are being
presented to you today.
I need to open an obstacles for
those who are willing and able
to come to New Mexico to help
provide care treatment for our
citizens aware of the.
Of the state.
with that.
Castle and comments about the
department defense requirements
things in there that you'll hear
more about that to keep things
short I thought I'd start off
though these compacts work
Differently with each one but in
general when you drive across
the country The New Mexico and
go to Texas you don't have to
stopping in New.
You don't have to register to
there's a number of things that
you don't have to do even though
a driver's license is issued
within the state you reside.
These compacts allow for that
freedom of movement of our labor
force in a similar manner.
with the physician compact
specifically there is a
difference so that I want to
make sure we call out we talk
about is freedom the ability to
get physicians into our state
practicing that is.
Different from a driver's
license and different from the
other called actual here today
it actually is not a full
reciprocity like a driver's
license that is actually a.
Reduction of background checks
and paperwork that has to be
done through what happens when a
physician tries to come in
practice in our state they have
to fill out an application that
includes or did you go to school
for the medical school and
residency which a medical
malpractice history which
background.
All of this information is put
together in a file and then
submitted to the state.
That state medical board that
has to do independent
verification of all of that
information so I have to reach
out to everyone those schools
every institution that worked at
every insurance company that
they have
have a motion ship with the
cover them actually the criminal
background checks and waiting
for those responses to come
back.
That is a very time consuming
process and what the physician
compact allows is really for a
consolidation of that portion of
the process.
That's all that it that
verification is done then that
package goes to our Medical
Board Medical Board does their
review and decision making of
whether or not a licenses
granted to practice medicine in
the state of New Mexico that
portion would not change.
Later the physician call back is
different from other fault
accident that our state medical
boards still would maintain the
sovereignty over Cision.
Awarding a license in fact the
compact portion just illuminates
the background check.
From everyone other than the
originating State.
We rely upon the originating
state when they can at least
verified that all of that
information was correct at the
medical school and residencies
etcetera.
Once that's done that's not a
complete packet with the
physician compact allows is that
complete after the referee to
our medical for for them to do a
review.
In order to qualify and maintain
your qualifications or a
position related compact.
Of licensure for this privilege
to expedite the background
checks you have to maintain a
clean record.
Further exploits things so
currently it will take between
four and six months.
For a physician from outside the
state to obtain a license.
If you think about it from an
employer standpoint that's a
hospital an FQHC well that's an
independent practice someone who
wants to practice medicine
you're looking at four to six
months before you get your
license.
Then once you get your license
you have to get your
pharmaceutical license then you
have to get your
Credentialing with your
insurance companies thank you
can see patients of four to six
months
is just to get a license for
this call have shorten that
period of time down to two to
four weeks it's really dependent
for those positions to qualify
on having a claim background
check to move straight to the
medical board.
We strongly support us as we try
and
move forward.
This also enables what we fell
during the pandemic is increased
use of the of telehealth you're
gonna hear from one of the the
constituents here that someone
who has an experience of this
unique set of cancer cancer and
the trial or they have a
physician for accuracy out of
state.
We can no longer see that child
over video because they're not
license in our state so to
continue to care they need to
leave the state with a physician
resides to receive care I have a
son who is less that we get to
all of the state to go to
college they can no longer see
their current providers in New
Mexico without this contact as
the providers they would see
outside of the state are not
licensed here of our providers
are licensed in those states
absent this contact.
So we look forward to your
review and helpful passage of
this compact and actually past
all the way through to where we
can increase the access for
providers for the state stand
for questions hi before we go to
questions that I'd like to go
and have the two experts here
and again I'm not sure who is
here in the area issue if you
are an expert testifying on this
bill could you please raise your
hand on soon.
We have four.
Okay you do.
I see for for folks on there and
if you would please keep it
brief we have a lot of bills
still to go so and I've
contacted see that.
Mr the latest day LaRosa.
Megan delarosa is perfect okay.
It's a good way to start the
morning ladies.
Go ahead making.
That you're madam chair actually
this is Sherman McCorkle on
Megan delarosa.
Montoya.
New Mexico military base
Planning Commission Senator two
thousand and three
I would point out economically
that these for installations in
New Mexico are the economic
impact is ten point seven
billion
Five years ago the governor
received a letter from the three
secretaries in the department of
defense encouraging all fifty
states to do what we are now
proposing the state New Mexico
we have done some advancement on
reciprocity but the question is
may we do these compacts so that
New Mexico military base
Planning Commission strongly
stands in support of these
compacts because it enhances the
military value of all for
installations in the state of
New Mexico thank you very much
thank you make a.
And remember.
Wrong wrong wrong one okay yes
you're not.
To testify on the medical
compact please lower your hands
and necks with the should be
ninety all the.
the talent okay nail.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
Matthews for giving me this
opportunity to share part of my
family story and explain first
hand how the interstate medical
licensure compact would affect
our lives.
My name is Dale minutes
highlight on the proud mother to
two children Santiago just
turned five and zesty on who we
call seven mmhm result.
Thanks.
In October twenty twenty one
point seven S. was just two
years old he was diagnosed with
stage four mile at the illegal
carcinoma otherwise known as NEC
which is an altar rare and
aggressive cancer that has no
proven treatment and high
likelihood of occurrence.
Part admission to the university
of New Mexico hospital and after
his first scan which showed the
cancer spread says long we were
told that his prognosis was poor
and the situation was as scary
as it could be.
We met with our ecologist we
were told nobody you NMHA had
ever heard of this cancer much
less treated a patient with that
are in college just informed us
that she would we be reaching
out to colleagues outside of you
an image to learn more.
And she also explained that we
needed to start low and playing
and that should be recommending
a pre chemo protocol that had
been published from a study that
was over a decade old with only
seven patients and no follow up
information as to survivors.
As parents it is impossible to
describe how helpless we felt in
that moment.
We were being at CENIC what felt
like impossible medical
decisions what working with
drugs should be used H. which
can cause permanent damage on a
child's growing body and
lifelong side effects.
We also had to make the
excruciating decision of whether
or not to amputate our son's
hand which was the primary side
of this cancer and a possible
place the cancer could recur.
Desperate to talk to someone who
have experience with this cancer
we did what any parent would
do we frantically searched out
and contacted doctors who could
provide second opinions from the
leading cancer centers and
hospitals across the country.
And that was when we ran into
this roadblock that seemed
unfathomable.
C. many out of state physicians
were willing to give a second
opinion if seven seven US travel
to their facility.
But several started chemo two
days after his diagnosis and
that made him severely immune
compromised.
Our colleges strongly advised us
to avoid crowds at airports
meeting travel wasn't an option.
These doctors are willing to
speak with us via video
conference but when they learned
we were in New Mexico they told
us that we would not be able to
do so.
So upon further research we
learned that that was because
New Mexico was one of thirteen
states that was not a member of
the interstate medical licensure
compact an agreement that allows
participating states to work
together to increase access to
specialised positions and
expanding use of telemedicine
especially those that for those
in rural communities.
There are imagine being
desperate parents I'm unable to
take your son on an airplane to
get a second opinion in person
because he so immuno compromised
and then also being unable to
speak to these oncologist with
real expertise over soon without
traveling to another state.
One of the hardest parts of this
cancer journey is that because
so little is known about Michael
Padilla carcinoma we as parents
have to make medical decisions
which we feel completely
unequipped and uninformed to
make.
Doctors do not make these
decisions as much as I wish they
did.
We parents have to.
And the burden of that
responsibility.
Never ever not for one moment.
Sops waiting on us.
Last month we had to make a very
difficult decision about whether
or not to put set us on an
experimental chemo drug it was
being offered to us because at
this point we have no other
treatment options aside from
surgery but there's no evidence
to suggest that it would work
and like all human drugs to
comes with side effects are
colleges could not give us a
recommendation so what we do we
sought out expert advice
unfortunately one of the
nation's top oncologists at the
children's hospital of
Philadelphia told us that he
also had a medical license in
Texas and so that if we drove to
Texas he would speak yes yes
you.
We thought it was absurd to have
to drive to el Paso just to talk
to you soon and it added another
layer of stress in planning but
this is a decision had wait on
us so much that we did it.
This is an ecologist is treating
a patient with this cancer as
use this experimental drug
before and when we asked him
point blank if this was your
child what would you do he told
us he would hold off trying to
drug and wait until they see
another tumor is body said that
they have something to measure
the efficacy of the drug
against.
You have to understand nobody we
spoke to before was able to give
us a personal recommendation.
That was the greatest we were
given that day today my husband
and I would drive to Texas.
And my husband and I would drive
to taxes a thousand times over
to receive that type of drug
guidance.
But the question I'm asking all
of you today is why should we
have to we should it.
New Mexico needs to join the
thirty nine other states were
already part of the part compact
this bipartisan bill has the
potential to improve access to
medical care for so many New
Mexican families who need
specialized care or expert
advice and that that may not be
available where they live I do
not have the means or ability to
travel to see a provider.
Understanding first hand the
impact this compact would have
in our family allows us to
comprehend more fully the impact
that it could happen thousands
of New Mexico lives every year.
Our sister about not having
access to medical care and
expertise which we need and that
are not available to us in the
state and while most New
Mexicans may not see themselves
in the diagnosis of our story
many will see themselves in our
frustration and our desperation
and in our heartbreak.
Just yesterday we took our son
press scan to see if the cancer
is progressing our doctors want
to do them every six weeks down
census last use cancer tumors we
live scan to scan and we fight
with everything we have to stay
positive now this compact will
take my baby's cancer away but
it will certainly alleviate a
tremendous amount of unnecessary
stress in our lives and it will
allow us to make more informed
decisions that feel impossible
to make live with otherwise.
Six months after his cancer
diagnosis ten rounds of
chemotherapy and six surgeries
are set us our sweet baby is
still fighting and we're beside
him fighting to which is why I'm
taking the time away from him to
speak with you today.
No parent should have those are
the words your child has cancer
and no parent or patient should
be denied the expert advice
needed to make informed medical
decisions about their as are
their child's health we urge you
to vote in favor of this bill.
Thank you.
Okay and thank you.
Thank you Naomi and with that
stand for questions okay so go
to the audience anyone here in
opposition.
Anyone please lower your hands
if you what I'm looking for
people in opposition to this
bill.
So James burns are you in
opposition.
It Madam I think I thank Mr
burns as one of that people who
is going to talk about the
military issue but since we
already had some testimony that
we're short on time okay thank
you okay so
Mr burns if you could please
lower your hand.
Where are we looking for anyone
on zoom in opposition.
Okay seeing line is there anyone
in support in the audience.
Of care you want to speak I just
want to say that our society
supports okay thank you anyone
on zoom in support and we will
limit you to one minute.
So go ahead
James burns.
This James burns I'm a member of
the New Mexico military base
Planning Commission live in
Clovis and I'm I want to speak
regarding a cannon Air Force
base and our proximity to Texas
it's very important for economic
to have the best medical care
possible and as you know the
military is the second largest
economic impact in New Mexico
and we need to keep those guys
happy as possible and I think
this will go a long ways toward
increasing our chances of
keeping military bases in New
Mexico thank you thank you
Marshall Marshall Marshall.
With go ahead.
Thank you my name's Marshall
Smith and I'm the executive
director of the interstate
medical licensure compact
commission so obviously I'm in
favor of this bill but I'm also
really just here to answer any
questions or provide any
technical information that the
committee might request thank
you.
Okay Patricia Romero.
Madam chair members of the
committee Patsy Romero with the
National Alliance on mental
illness we are in favor and
support this legislation I don't
think I could tell a better
story than that if Naomi so
madam chair and members of the
committee with the situation in
New Mexico where we have a
limited professionals that can
provide services regardless of
what the issue is we need to
have this compact in place so
thank you very much of Madam
chair members of the committee
and representative for freeing
this bill.
Forward thank you.
Sorry you have never seen you
just Patricia.
Lest we.
Go ahead Lee.
hi and actually this is Leslie
and it's my husband Bob get on
items need to that's going to
speak to you he's coming now
okay.
Life goes.
Okay.
Go ahead by.
This is Bob Carroll I'm a member
of the military in.
Veterans and military families
called Sliq and we support HBs
two forty seven to forty eight
and two forty nine
these license portability
statute to extremely important
to the military spouses by
allowing them to easily move
among the comp that member
states and continue their
practice without significant
administrative delays off of the
defense state liaison officer
department defense office which
supports the well being of
military families considers
license portability could be one
of the ten most important
priorities at on a personal
level my daughter this graduate
of Roswell high school and the
university of New Mexico school
of medicine went to Colorado
university of Colorado to do her
residency and practice for two
years there and then try then
decided to move back to New
Mexico to occur between four and
six months to get a license and
frankly that's just not
competitive other states around
us or members of the of the.
Of the compact and the I think
we need to be also to stay
competitive and get young thirty
something docked into the state
thank you thank you very much
okay so that's
that's all the public comment
other questions from the
committee.
Madam chair like to make a
motion for due process second is
there any opposition.
On the line you have to pass.
At two thank you act.
Act two is a.
This call therapy.
I.
Actually.
I could care and it's been
around even longer.
So.
Is.
I know a number of new piece of
a Representative Kadian who work
here I think at the very
beginning so I which is very
three for a very.
Repeat that these term effects
are one of the solutions not the
only one but one of the
solutions to the provider
shortage of health care workers
in our state and of their we are
effective ID theft Fund to five
of them three of them before the
committee today the other two it
took a long time to get out of.
Council services they have
higher numbers they they they're
going to cover speech pathology
and occupational therapy
and all of those.
Have find shortages and this is
one of the ways that we can help
resolve an increasing number of
health care workers available to
people so just wanted to bring
everybody up to date to said
what we would do
and with that I would ask
And.
People.
I I would just care and zero to
do it very brief explanation of
what the.
Com is life.
Madam chairman members of the
committee I want to thank
Representative Matthews for
bringing this forward the
physical therapy community has
been behind this in the past and
we would like to see it go
through physical therapists are
also the loan benchmark in most
counties in the state
and we what made about five
hundred twenty six more physical
therapists in the state to be
able to work all as mentioned
before all others states
surrounding us are members of
compact of the content the
physical therapy compact so
we're not competitive people go
to other states to practice and
we do need both telehealth and
direct service from people who
live on the border.
That are gorgeous near some of
our cities that could be
practicing the state that find
it difficult for don't bother to
get the individual license and
compact is a privilege that
allows somebody to practice
without too much administrative
burden
we do still have jurisdiction
disk and take disciplinary
action therapists have to
Follow the state statute.
The rations and so we encourage
you to pass.
Thank you care if we have one P.
T. school in New Mexico correct
and the right to eight thirty
thirty students here and then
leave the state it would take
twenty years to grow our own
fell so okay let's go to the
audience for opposition.
Okay anyone on the opposition.
Do share a needs and support
that okay so in supporting the
rule.
workers in the back if you want
us hi.
Thank you madam chair.
You know Representative for the
regulation lies Department we
stand is support.
I.
I believe just what the Sanchez
says and the expert witness that
this will in fact help us
increase physical therapist in
New Mexico and it does not add
any additional burden or cost to
the department to have that
relationship the national level
we do stand strong.
Thank you for.
Okay and eight go ahead.
You need to you.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is Amy
Dixon I'm executive director
desert states physical therapy
network we Representative we
represent thirty outpatient
physical therapy practices in
the state of New Mexico with a
hundred and seventy therapists
and we sent strong support of H.
B. two forty eight and we
appreciate the Sanchez bringing
it forward thank you thank you
Amy okay so questions from the
committee.
Representative Chavis thank you
madam chair representative I
have a question in terms of the
whole
Our state's ability to educate
additional physical therapy
there been any conversation
about
increasing the capacity of.
Of our educational institutions
to do just that.
Madam chair representative
chairs
I have not been sorry to a
conversation like that in terms
of P. T. I know that we're doing
in terms of nursing
but hi.
I'll defer to.
Okay of I'm with the American
physical therapy association New
Mexico chapter I'm not privy to
the details of what's happening
with higher education but I do
know that they have expanded the
program office years and that it
takes accreditation through the
national board to increase the
number of students so it would
take funding and accreditation
would be a process and I look at
that my sister graduated from
UNM in nineteen seventy eight
when the at twelve student I
graduated in eighty four where
we had sixteen so we've grown
through the decades but not at
any funding faculty is also
frequently hang up
thank you Representative I I
mean I I I think that we should
need to start a conversation.
Thank you.
Any other questions
Representative Vincent thank you
madam chair representative house
listened Troy will go talk about
the compact the RLD indicates we
need to amend the physical
therapy at to allow for federal
background checks which is
required by the compact you do
you intend on and.
Madam chair representative yes
okay.
Anyone else Kael entertain a
motion so I make a motion for us
okay is there any opposition.
Casing nine two for two
days care thank you she was like
but instructor that.
Thank you madam chair she she
mentioned you are an incredible
to.
Here.
Breaking.
Court.
Share our.
Thank
okay.
So.
Share this snow storm has.
A more complex in a devotee of
people.
This I'm just sitting here
waiting.
Anyone want to sit.
Representative yes chair we're
now on H. B. two forty nine
which is a licensed psychologist
and again in the area behavior
health we have to speak huge
provider shortages
and this is known as side packs
and with that I will reduce my
experts in the state.
Is
I will enter into these.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee with a single for
our The New Mexico psychological
organization I think you need
your hand out of this.
So this is is we have doctor and
remember to.
So sorry is different from the
others from parents in that
about telus psychology.
So that northern price thirty
three states your heart of start
there.
And it enables of psychologists
to get a.
And he passed for service
certificate and then a practice
of the two.
From from their residence state
and then they are able to do
tell us psychology and also for
sure to in person in there are
other state thank you for that
that the search intersectional
practice certificate so the.
So they were very involved in
doing this all through COVID and
became standard practice to to
do this time of the.
Treatment for over time tell.
So basically we have introduced
this compact to other terms in
the Senate.
Representative least one
hundred in the Senate to serve
two committees.
About this and then you got
smart and came to the house for
a fax.
So I'm sure.
Elaborate.
And Dr Greenberg.
I'm sorry no that's okay.
Okay.
Hello.
Hi good morning hi pleasure to
be here thank you so much to
Rep Marian Matthews all members
of the committee this is a
really really important issue
as you may now New Mexico
suicide rates are the highest in
the country due to lack of
access
is the second leading cause of
death it's it's much higher than
the nation especially for the
ages of fifteen to twenty four
were people most transitional
and so not being a part of the
contact like this is deeply
problematic
because imagine if we could just
simply refer out
to a qualified psychologist and
Texas or Colorado on Arizona
Utah Nevada every single
surrounding state has this and
additionally every single
surrounding state has a higher
number of psychologists for
members of the population and so
I think New Mexico really owes
it to the public to create more
options another issue is that
even for students in U. N. M.
Marcin jobs college or any of
the New Mexico state
Colleges around The New Mexico.
This creates huge problems for
continuity of care meaning that
if a student here goes home for
a winter or summer break
we just psychologist I'm not
legally allowed to continue
without as calmly stands on a
lot of these rules and laws were
suspended during COVID but now
states are suspending them and
really the only viable option is
to join these multi state
compacts allow for continuity of
care and allow greater options
for those in the state where
there is no care
and New Mexico's unique and that
there are multiple areas
for example us crystal posso and
the four corners where
As I I think I only shared
really going like
there's really no need to have
somebody drive across the border
just so they can consult organic
care or get psychological
testing or any type of service
that they would need and the
telehealth components psychology
actually creates powerful
advantages to this being that
over comment change in standard
and personally I originally was
lessons aside actually I got to
see what that was like first
hand and in the two years that I
have the the inner
jurisdictional license before I
moved to New Mexico it was.
Any are possible concern that
was voiced about this just did
not pan out and
at this point having so many
states involved and that
psychology has been moving
towards national level licensure
for decades now I think that
there really aren't any major on
roadblocks even and you know
there's there's certain
obviously tricks are concerns
that we need to be made
but manages to consumers are are
many full for example it just
increases access to care like I
said especially in rural or
underserved areas like I said
facilitates continuity of care
my client patient relocates
travels even if the current
residence is in New Mexico it
certifies that psychologist me
acceptable standards of practice
because there's a regulating
body and it doesn't allow on
various for this story venture
capital
organizations like for example
better health dot com a good
thirty dot org
all of which have multiple class
action lawsuits against them for
basically floating markets
including New Mexico with under
qualified
mental health workers that's
what's filling the gap and it's
creating more problems and
side packs addresses those
allows access to more people
with greater qualifications
rather than last
and also this promotes more
cooperation between our states
who have side packed and those
surrounding states who also have
similar areas of regular
licensure regulation to create
more standardized systems for
mental health in this country.
Basically it's a higher degree
of consumer protection across
state lines overall and
psychologist for the most part
of pre unified in wanting this
because it one allows us to full
fill best practice policies for
example it by
taxing health psychology conduct
temporary in person face to face
across state lines if need be
for example if military spouses
or military psychologists and to
the state speaking personally it
took me five months to get
licensed here once I was here
and that's with living in Santa
Fe and being able to go directly
to the licensing board there was
one person working full time in
psychology also was tasked with
two other licensing professions
and so I was lucky if I get an
answer about whether any of a
number of different on forms of
papers or certifications diploma
have to get sent had arrived or
not within several weeks and I
was a five month process and I
was here and licensed in other
states and could not legally
practice in New Mexico with New
Mexicans
And so this would make it far
easier to fullfill hall
psychologist can move here and
also gives them more of a
motivation to say
for example if I chose to move
to Colorado I would have access
to this bill and I could work
with people in thirty three
states and New Mexico not having
a similar as it was mentioning
the department of defense
contracts and so forth Montoya
it makes a very unattractive to
psychologists and I think it
gives motivation for
psychologists to actually
continue to leave New Mexico
when we actually need so much
more people with licensure such
as myself thank you doctor very
much for your input thank you we
will go to the audience anyone
in opposition.
Okay on zoom anyone in
opposition.
K. in the audience anyone in
support.
Do you want to speak now we just
know you're that okay ponzu is
there anyone who wants to speak
in support taxi.
Madam chair good morning and
members of the committee.
Romero with the National
Alliance on mental illness you
know in Nash nami both at the
state and national level is very
concerned about access to
psychology our suicide rates as
a shared with you today we're
all familiar with that really
needs to be addressed but I'm
also the CEO of an intermediate
care facility for the
intellectually disabled adults
and our clients benefited from
tele psychology during COVID
they found it to be the we found
it to be very successful we
found it to meet the needs of
our clients and it's also
important to note that any
individual seeking E. their
mental health services for
disability services must have an
assessment by a psychologist and
some of our clients wait months
and months to be able to get
that that's that's meant so it's
very very important madam chair
and members of the committee
that your vote yes on this
legislation and again I think
Representative Matthews for
bringing this to you and glad
she brought it to the house and
hoping that this will be a
bipartisan one hundred percent
support for this legislation and
for New Mexicans who suffer with
both mental health and
intellectually disabled
issues thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you Patsy okay we'll go to the
committee questions okay so
we'll start with the Board Jones
K. thank you madam chair and
Representative I I'm glad of
that but the last three.
It's quite interesting morning
thanks all the people that
called in my heart is still
breaking about the fact that the
doctor said with the highest
suicide rate in the nation it
just hits me so hard just.
What's that I just have a few
quick questions on this so this
is
First our colleges all want to
make sure in a kind of a side no
question Madam chair
representative do we need
something like this for our
license behavioral health
counselors and stuff in the
state or is it something that
would not be this compact.
All.
You got.
I love it that way and Madam
chair representative.
This is only for psychologists I
do not believe that there are
any contacts yet formed by
other.
Behavioral health providers.
As we drive level yeah yeah
that's what I'm saying I didn't
know if that was a plug or not
chair in active at
Representative Madam chair
representative I would just add
that we did look at the
counseling market which is very
early in the stages and and we
did not feel ready to.
Yes thank you much
Representative love to see that
come forward because I think we
can do is hope because we
get so AS one thing that I got
here for your vote and thank you
for bringing this forward and
and love the public comments to
thank you madam chair.
Okay Representative Jones.
Those are questions.
Okay okay.
Representative Kate thank you
madam chair committee I'm I
guess of I have more of a COVID
and questions thank you again
The the right of self harm is
just extraordinary and I know
that and I see that you also get
your bill that you talk about
Russian being untreated like it
needs to.
And other kinds of anxiety I
would just like to bring to the
attention not only will this
help bring more providers or
more Mexicans behavioral health
R. for psychologists but I think
the trackside colleges to be
heard as we invest in
infrastructure in our
In our
Internets and be able you can
live in a rural area and not
have to have a practice that is
only from that rural area you
could potentially provide
practices across the state and I
think this could be of of of
wonderful psychological in
economic driver thank you very
much Representative Matthews for
free agency for.
Well educated motion.
Senator to pass okay sorry
Representative Lord a second a
second Representative K. is
there any opposition.
Seeing your thirty three grams.
The court we adjourn I have a I
mean you can you often go.
Some some some things to say to
the committee so so I ask here
and who is is doing the
scheduling for us and to give me
some numbers on where we are so
we are halfway through the
session.
Including for before today we
have thirty six bills that we
have to act on.
It had ten committee meetings
nine bills have been rolled.
Of that we may come back so
bills remaining is fifty one
plus the line which is sixty we
have already received three
Senate bills we have thirty days
left in the session and we will
have thirteen or fourteen more
meeting so with just doing math
we will have a chance if we
continue at the slow pace we're
going we will get to forty six
point eight bill and that's not
even all the House Bills and at
