Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez.
She's excused.
Representative N Chavez here.
Representative Ferrari, Pres.
Representative Jones.
Here
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez
here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Oh.
Pre, Madam Chair, I'm here and
Representative Kate says just
here.
Oh
You got to quit.
OK, so for, for those of you
listening or in the audience,
we, the 1st 3 bills, uh,
That we have up um 196207 and
2:30, uh, we, we did all of the
testimony and all of the
questions. So we do have a
motions on the table, so, so for
HB 196, we have a due pass
motion in a second, so Karen,
can you take the role?
Representative Anaya.
Uh, Madam Chair, quick
clarification, we're doing the
first door right now, all three
together.
I'm, I'm sorry. Just quick
clarification manager. We're
doing the first bill, not all
three together. No, we can't do
all three together. Thank you.
Yeah. Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez. Yes.
Representative Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Santa Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
She's excused, Madam Chair, yes.
To do pass. OK, so I do, you
have a do pass on HB 1968 to 0.
OK, next we will go to HB 207
adopting a child tax credit, we
have a motion for a due pass and
so Karen, can you take the role?
Man
How do we know they made the
changes that we wanted. They
didn't, we don't have that on.
Thank you for the reminder. So
we will, we will roll that one
again. Um.
And then House Bill 2:30 uh
cannabis testing certain
employees.
Um, and we do have a, a do pass
motion on the table, so Karen,
will you take the role? This,
no, we rolled to a 7 because
they were supposed to be some
changes and we didn't get the
amendment.
Sorry, I know it's kind of
Confusing. Just wait till day
59.
Representative Anaya? Yes.
Representative Kate.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez pass.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Senna Cortez? No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Yeah.
Representative N Chavez.
Um, no one I'd like to explain
my vote.
Can I explain it now?
Since we passed, OK.
Representative Martinez.
2 past 6 to 2.
So I was gonna say sponsor, but
by a vote of 6 to 2, we have a
due pass on 2:30 and and
representative and Chavez to
explain her vote.
Sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I
need to read through this a
little more and I'm just
confused on.
When we had Representative
Reeves bill up here, um.
Really talking about cannabis,
and we made sure she excluded it
out. We, you all had asked for
that because you said that there
was no way to test whether that
person was high at the moment or
if they had cannabis in their
system from 30 days ago. So I
guess I'm just confused on what
the difference is going to be
for our firefighters when
they're doing the same testing,
so I just I have to read into
that a little more to understand
what the differences are there.
So thank you.
Let's see, so.
We
Um
I'm trying to see if there's any
sponsors in the room because the
first
I think we may have confused
them by having those 1st 3 bills
on, but I, but that's what we
need to do, um.
So, would someone please mind
texting uh Rip Serato.
turned in his excused, um,
Fernandez.
And I think rather than wait and
Since I'm here and I have an
expert who flew in from Denver.
We're gonna go ahead and move to
263.
So represented Ferrari, can you
chair?
Madam Chair. Yes, I have um some
communication from the sponsor
of the 207, um, the way she
understood they were you all
were supposed to pass it to the
next committee. She has the
amendments this morning.
Wasn't the understanding that we
would pass it to the next
committee.
With the understanding there
would be amendments. OK.
That's fine with me.
Oh, OK, we will, we will take a
vote on 207.
Sorry, Karen, for jumping
around.
Representative Anaya.
1207.
I'm gonna pass for.
Representative Kate? No, and I'd
like to explain my vote.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative N Chavez.
Uh, yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes
Representative Martinez. Yes.
Representative Senna Cortez?
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair. No. So by a vote of
5 to 2, you have a due pass.
00, I'm sorry.
I mean you can if you want.
Representative Anaya.
Yes, and explain my vote.
OK, by a vote of 6 to 2, you
have a new cast.
Um, and we will go to
representative.
Takes was, and then Anaya to
explain their votes.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for this opportunity. I just
like to say I very much
appreciate Representative Dow's
um bill and providing incentives
for adoption. I just uh feel
that it's too narrowly based. It
is, uh, almost 4 times the
amount of the adoption credit
for individuals with special
needs, which would require even
more financial commitment, and I
also think that the current tax
benefit of it.
is only going to be beneficial
to a small portion of the
population. Thank you.
Even
Anaya. Yes, Madam Chair, thank
you so much. Um, I actually have
a heartburner about this because
I believed that they were
bringing the amendments back. I
voted yes to get it out of here,
but I will say I could very
potentially vote no if they
don't ensure that the amendment
to make sure that um
Kids with special needs have a
higher tax credit than those
without. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, and I will explain my
vote as well. The sponsor said
that for every kid up for adopt,
well, there were 35.
Families who wanted him, and so
we know it's, we can adopt out
the, the perfect kids for lack
of a better word, but the, the
kids who might be older or have
some significant disabilities or
emotional issues, um, so I think
those are the ones that we
really need to encourage
adoption of. So with that, we
will go on representative
Hernandez is here.
You're not here?
Someone sneaking up behind you
Yes, so we are, no, not 95,
we're going to 233.
And I understand there is an
amendment.
Um
Yes, how would you like me to do
this, propose the amendment
first or explain the bill? It's
up to you.
Do we have the amendment? Yes.
OK, give us a sec. Go ahead and
start explaining the bill and
then we'll come back to the
amendment.
And just to remind you that I'm
trying to keep things brief as
brief as possible.
Thank you. All right, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, today I'm here to present
House Bill 233, which ensures
insurance coverage for topical
oxygen therapy.
For the treatment of diabetic
foot ulcers.
In New Mexico, over 217,000
adults live with diabetes and
each year, nearly 10,000 more
are diagnosed, diabetic foot
ulcers are one of the most
severe complications leading to
hospitalization and amputation,
and even death.
Alarmingly, New Mexico has a
high rate of non-traumatic lower
extremity amputations with over
600 hospitalizations in 2019
alone.
Topical oxygen therapy has been
proven to double the healing
rates in 12 weeks, reducing
hospitalizations by 82% and
lower amputations by 73%.
get too many New Mexicans face
insurance barriers to accessing
this life-saving treatment. The
American Diabetes Association
strongly supports its inclusion
in diabetes care and research
confirms that every dollar spent
on prevention saves the
healthcare system up to $51.
The Department of Health Agency
analysis for House Bill 233
states that it aligns with their
strategic goal of expanding
equitable access to healthcare
services for all New Mexicans.
The bill addresses a significant
public health issue and promotes
evidence-based treatment options
that can prevent costly
complications, ultimately
improving health outcomes while
reducing the financial burden on
the healthcare system.
House Bill 233 will ensure that
those suffering with from
diabetic foot ulcers get the
care they need before it's too
late.
This is not just a healthcare
issue, it's an economic and
quality of life issue for
thousands of New Mexicans. And I
would like my expert to
introduce herself as well.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for taking the time to hear
such an important issue today.
My name is Christine Falaba and
I'm the director of government
affairs and advocacy with the
American Diabetes Association.
Amputation prevention is a
critical issue for patients with
diabetes, where complications
lead to 160,000 amputations each
year in the US. In fact,
approximately every 3 minutes
and 30 seconds, a limb is lost
in this country to diabetes. So
by the end of my testimony
today, someone in our country
will have undergone an
amputation just because they
have diabetes.
Here in New Mexico, we have seen
a troubling rise in
diabetes-related amputations in
recent years as well. Early
intervention, including strict
blood sugar and medication
management, access to regular
medical and podiatry services
and preventive care is critical
to stem the rising tide of
amputations in our state.
House Bill 233 aims to help meet
the needs of people with
diabetes. Coverage for podiatric
appliances and medical equipment
for the treatment of diabetic
foot ulcers, a common
complication of people with
diabetes can help prevent
amputations.
Up to 1 in 4 people with
diabetes will develop a diabetic
foot ulcer in their lifetime and
of those who do, nearly 15% of
them will go on to need a limb
amputation. But treating a foot
ulcer early can lower the risk
of infection, increased healing,
and prevent amputations.
Furthermore, every dollar
invested in podiatric care saves
the healthcare system between 27
and $51 for those with
commercial insurance. The
numbers don't lie that
preventive health is worth our
while. Investing in preventive
treatment will not only make New
Mexican.
with diabetes healthier, but
we'll, it will enable our state
to truly thrive as a whole. For
these reasons, we ask you to
vote yes on House Bill 233.
Thank you very much for your
time and I'm happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Thank you. And Representative,
do you, um, could I have a
motion to discuss the um
Amendments.
OK.
All right, no opposition. Go
ahead and explain your
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um.
So this amendment was requested
by OSI, um, so in the original
bill, uh, OSI was concerned that
topical oxygen therapy did not
qualify as durable medical
equipment. Um, so they requested
that we change the language to
this so that it would, so that
it would be covered. Um, also,
we requested that in this um
that it was to be um for private
insurance this go around.
and not um also for Medicaid.
Um, that did not make it into
this amendment before it was
sent to you. So before it gets
to commerce from the ranking
member, I will make sure that
that, um, amendment is done and
gets put on in commerce before
it goes any further than that
and representative, I would
suggest you do a committee sub
as opposed to just an amendment
just for simplicity's sake.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
Yes, so we will go to opposition
if you are on Zoom in
opposition.
your hand if you are in the room
in opposition, raise your hand.
Seeing no hands, if you are in
support on Zoom, please raise
your hand. I will take 5.
For one minute each in the room
if you are in support, please
raise your hand.
OK, um, so seeing no one in the
room, so we will go to in on
Zoom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, sponsors, and
advocates. My name is Nat Dean.
I am a person with multiple
disabilities and I'm a just
excuse me, a disability
advocate, Happy Gallantine's Day
and Valentine's Day to everyone.
Um, I
Uh, have worked with individuals
who have been referred to me for
advocacy and support who have
elected to not have an ulcerated
foot amputated and I have worked
with people who have had earlier
interventions and then been able
to heal, uh, ulcerations on
their feet or lower legs. The
people who chose to not have
their limb amputated and did not
get treatment soon enough,
passed away from sepsis, sepsis
creeps up quickly and it's
deadly. Thank you so much for
this bill. I hope that we will
be able to provide insurance
coverage through Medicare,
Medicaid, private insurance, and
other mechanisms. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Nat, and you tricked
me from um.
Admin to end, so now I know. So,
um,
I'm not sure if this is a name,
if it is, I have no idea how to
pronounce it. W A L K O. Go
ahead.
Can you hear me OK? Yes.
You know, my name is uh Doctor
William Palco Straw. I've been
uh in medical field for 40
years, uh, board certified in
family medicine and for the last
12 years or so, I've been doing
wound care exclusively. Uh, and
we see a constant uh flow of
individuals with um
Severe, uh, moderate to severe,
um, leg ulcerations of various
types, diabetic foot ulcers
being one of the more difficult
ones to treat. And um,
We have some experience now with
the topical oxygen technology. I
find it uh exceedingly helpful
and very difficult cases. Uh, I
would like to echo the
representative from the ADA and
that these kind of interventions
are um essential if we're going
to say limbs, um,
We do have a limb salvage
committee in our hospital,
looking at various aspects.
Uh, and, uh, this kind of
intervention, uh, would figure
very prominently, uh, not only
in the structure of a strategy
for the hospital, but for uh my
practice and the practice of my
colleagues in wound care in
general. Um, our point of view
is that if we can prevent a
prevent uh prevent an
amputation.
Um, we probably have saved a
life. The statistics are that,
uh, people that go on to uh
significant amputations with uh
diabetic or other uh lower
extremity wounds, about half of
those folks are dead within 5
years.
Thank you very much. Again, I am
strongly in favor of this bill.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, seeing
no further comment.
Comments and just a reminder,
please silence your phones.
That's as much for the committee
as for um so I will.
Let's go to um OK, let me, let
me start writing this down. OK,
so I have um representative
Senator Cortez, followed by
Representative Ann Chavez and
then.
Madam Chair, I'd like to,
sorry. Are you ready for me?
Yes, Madam Chair, I'd like to
reserve my comments to make it
do pass, um, for to make a
motion for a do pass, please.
I'll second that.
Before we go to um
Representative in Chavez, um.
I need a motion to adopt the
amendment. So moved.
OK.
Is there any opposition?
OK, seeing then you have an
amended bill.
And uh next I will go to
Representative N Chavez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Hernandez. Good
morning and happy Valentine's
Day, um, you were going through
the amendment and I know it's
not on this, but you said that
you were only going to include
commercials, so you excluding
Medicare and Medicaid lines of
business only on this.
Madam Chair, that is correct.
Um, that was requested to be in
this amendment, um, we will need
to go through the whole budget
process and
process which was not done this
year, um.
So this will, yes, when, when
this bill is um through
commerce, the hope is that it
will be just for private
insurance and representative,
we, we, we don't control
Medicare, so it would only be
Medicaid, right.
Mm
Thank you. So, Medicaid only
will be excluded, but the rest.
OK, thank you so much.
Uh minority whip.
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
Um
Topical oxygen therapy.
This is not a new
treatment, is it?
Uh, it is not new, but it is
relatively new. Um, I would say
20 to 30 years ago, there was no
way to easily heal a diabetic
foot ulcer, um, other than maybe
prescribing antibiotics and
having hope, but these newer
treatments um we're seeing.
Greatly improved healing,
prevention of infections, um,
and prevention of amputation.
Thank you for that and, and
Madam Chair, representative and
expert.
Is what's this is the success
rate of this.
When it's
caught early, I guess. Uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, um, if
you
Getting a diabetic foot ulcers
treated early can prevent
amputations by up to 85%.
85%. Thank you, Madam Chair and
expert.
So this, you're basically
amending existing language, your
bill is, I mean, this is 35
pages, but you're just making
simple changes to include
Uh, the oxygen therapy.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that is correct. Um, uh.
Those,
when they deal with healthcare,
are always super long, but if
you look at what's actually
being added, it is, um, on page
3, there is one sentence.
Um, which is being changed. It's
in here 4 times, um, will be
amended out and hopefully get
smaller with a com committee
sub.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and.
Seeing no further questions, I
just have a, a couple of
statements. I am a co-sponsor on
this bill and very happy about
it. A few months ago I was
involved in a a Zoom diabetes in
New Mexico, essentially, and,
and they
This was the big topic, and the,
the, the case study was a man in
New Jersey who had diabetes went
on the boardwalk barefoot.
Had decreased sensation, burned
the bottoms of both of his feet
and was really in bad shape. He
couldn't walk, he couldn't, um,
and he received this therapy and
he was able to recover because
he was very close to an
amputation. We also have a
doctor in Gallup. I'm assuming
at the Gallup Indian Medical
Center, who nationwide is
affectionately called the
butcher, because he does so many
amputations. So
it's, it's really a problem in
New Mexico and uh thank you for
bringing this, uh, so we have a
motion from Representative uh
Senator Cortez and the second
from Representative Cates.
Um, will you call the roll?
Just be patient with us. We're
juggling a lot of things. Those
of you who are regulars around
here know how that goes.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez, yes.
Representative Ann Chavez, yes.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Stenna Cortez,
yes.
Madam Vice chair? Yes. Madam
Chair, yes.
Representative Jones.
She said yes,
no.
She's so quiet, you know.
OK. OK, so, OK, so you have a,
oh, did.
We did pass the, OK, so the
motion is for a due pass as
amended on House Bill 233.
And you have a due pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee.
So,
oh,
she popped her head up. I said,
I don't see representative
Serato, but then her little head
popped up, so here we go. So we
are now moving to HB 7.
Madam Chair, thank you committee
for hearing the bill. I
apologize for my delay. You guys
are quick committee. It's
amazing representative, not
usually.
But today is a good day,
wonderful.
Well, glad to be here. Happy
Valentine's Day. Uh, I'm here to
present House Bill 7, the
Children's Future Fund Act with
me today is my expert, uh,
Michelle Gilbert, who's the
director of Partnership for
Community Action. Um, she can
talk about a, uh, pilot project
and some of the national things
we've seen around Future funds.
or as they're more commonly
known as baby bonds. So what
this bill does, it does two
things. It creates the
Children's Future Fund, and it
creates the children's fun task
force.
The Children's fund will be is a
fund where on the children's
18th birthday, children that are
born after, uh, January 1st,
2025 this year, um, once they
turn 18, they will have access
to a trust fund that's been
building for them for a long
time. And this money will have
guardrails on it to make sure
they're spending this money on
education, housing, um, you
know, really investments in
their future, and investments in
New Mexico, fundamentally. Um,
this is not a guaranteed right
to this fund. Um, that was
really
important that we put that in
there to ensure that should, uh,
the, the funds shift or they're
not enough, etc. etc. um, that,
you know, it's not a guaranteed
right, but it isn't a possible
investment for these kids. As we
know, the uh gaps in in uh in
the wealth gap, it truly has an
impact on our family's
well-being, but also their
health and and uh
long-termunities and how we're
building those. So, um, if you
look at the bill, I'll just kind
of point to a couple key pieces
in section 3, it creates the
Future Fund, and it says
specifically for education,
housing, entrepreneurship.
investment, and then it follows
the prudent investor uh rule,
which is for the 1st 18 years,
all of it will be invested by
SIC, uh, the State Investment
Council, uh, that is in our in
our finance world, that's one of
the one of the prides of of the
state, I would say, and they
really do a great job getting
returns. A lot of times they
returns are in excess of 8 or
9%, even they they do quite
well. And then after the 1st 18
years, um, 2/3 she'll be, uh,
she'll be sorry, yeah, 2/3,
she'll then be invested by the
state.
Continuing by the SIC and then
it will be used for this purpose
to maintain it. Then in section
4, there's the no guarantee, and
then I'm gonna skip ahead a
little bit just to creating the,
um, the future task, which is in
section 7. Now what this does is
over the next year, it creates
the Children's Future Task
Force, and it has
representatives from across our
financial investors, but also
our leadership in the state to
put together the guard rails
around this and to really look
at this over the course of this
year, and to figure out what
those rules, and I also want to
just point the committee, when
you really start looking at it,
it's on page 6, on page 1, on
line 3, it talks about all the
different things they're going
to be looking at. So making sure
that it fits within our scale.
It follows the laws of our state
and the statutes of our state
that it's uh fiscally
responsible, uh, and, and one
thing I do want to point to is
that children are only can only
be eligible for this in this
level, if they graduate from New
Mexico High School. Um, uh, and
so that also though, they can
develop further clarification
and uh
Uh, you're getting guardrails
around that to make sure that
we're investing in New Mexico's
kids. So I'm gonna hand it over
to Michelle, who has some more
experience with, um, the broader
implications of what this would
do.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee. Again, my name is
Michelle Gilbert. I'm the
executive director of
Partnership for Community
Action. So just wanting to
reemphasize that the Children's
Future Fund is really laying the
groundwork for these publicly
funded trust accounts that will
support young people as they
transition into adulthood. This
initiative is in direct response
to the stark economic
disparities in our state where
New Mexico ranks forty-fifth in
income inequality and nearly 25%
of our children live.
at or below the poverty line.
The bill recognizes that
generational wealth gaps are not
accidental. They are a result of
systemic barriers that have long
prevented many families from
building financial security. And
so the strength really in this
bill, HB 7 is that it's both
strategic and forward thinking
rather than rushing into
implementation, it creates a
children's future task force to
study the best methods for
financing and administering the
program, ensuring that every
dollar
that is invested is maximized
for long-term impact. The fund
itself will be professionally
managed and contributes, uh,
contributions set aside,
allowing for growth to work in
favor of our state's future
generations. And so what's
important to note here is it's
not just about financial
assistance. It's about giving
young people a foundation upon
which they can build their
futures. We've seen similar
initiatives in other states that
have demonstrated promising
results. 3 states across the
nation have adopted baby bonds.
Legislation, 16, including New
Mexico, have proposed
legislation in New Mexico is
included in as one of 9 baby
bonds pilots, uh, or small scale
programs across the nation. PCA
launched our pilot in August of
2024. There are 15 families
currently enrolled in that
pilot. The investment was an
initial $6000. Um, it will grow
over time and at age 18, based
on conservative projections, the
value of that fund is projected
to be $22,248. What's unique
about our fund and our program
at the pilot level is that we're
asking uh young people to
reserve 1/3 of that account when
they are eligible to draw down
for retirement. If an individual
does not touch that account
until age 65, the projected
growth sits at $534,967. And so
significant impact
for our young people when it
comes to education, business,
entrepreneurship, homeownership,
retirement, and investment. Um,
thank you. I urge you to support
the bill and happy to stand for
questions. And just to close out
briefly, um, so as mentioned,
this is not a new program. I do
want to point to the state
treasurer, Laura Montoya, uh,
over the summer, she ran a
number of, she had a uh a group
that came together to discuss
it, she brought in state experts
or from other states to discuss
what they're looking at as well,
best practices. So again, she
would be
one of the folks on the task
force along with members of the
SIC and others. So there is some
place of this, and again, just
pointing to that, the
limitations of that lacking
wealth place on a person
individually, what they can
perceive ahead of them. Uh,
we're hoping to remove those
from our children and give them
the potential to dream big and
invest in Mexico. So thank you
so much with that we stand for
questions. Thank you. So we will
go to opposition if you are on
Zoom in opposition, please raise
your hand, and I'll come back to
you in the room, anyone in.
opposition.
OK. If you'd like to speak,
please come forward. You don't
have to, but you are, I will
take up to
Good morning, Chair Thompson and
members of the committee. My
name is Christina Padea, and I
am the programs and outreach
director for the honorable state
treasurer, Laura Montoya. The
state treasurer's office
regrettably opposes the bill in
its current form. We support the
concept of baby bonds and have
staunchly advocated for baby
bonds in New Mexico and on
national stages. This bill is
not reflective of that initial
concept, which is what we and
our coalition have discussed in
the interim. HB 7 creates a
redundancy in the form of a task
force.
which expects to undertake
objectives which fall under the
state investment councils and
the state treasurer's office
expertise. Additionally, this
bill does not allocate the funds
to support a true baby bonds
program. Our office's hope is
that we can in strong
collaboration with legislators,
work together to create a baby
bond trust fund that will
support our children and
families and bridge the
generational wealth divide in
New Mexico. Our agencies'
analysis and the state
Investment council's analysis
contains technical details.
as to why we cannot support HB 7
and why we are introducing a
different baby bonds bill. Thank
you.
Thank you and right at one
minute.
So seeing no one online, if you
are um on Zoom in support,
please raise your hand, and
again, I will take 5 for a
minute each in the room and
support.
OK, if you would like to speak,
I will take 5 folks, so just
come to the center
and the, the, the sergeant will
hold the microphone. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Jonathan Salazar, research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
Voices for Children. We stand in
support of HB 7. In recent
years, NM lawmakers have made
significant progress in
improving the lives of all New
Mexicans through social
programs, income support, and
benefits to urge
to build on these strides, I
urge our lawmakers in this
committee to champion the other
part of the anti-poverty
equation whilst building, even
with a strong safety net. Many
families still face barriers to
wealth building due to pay
disparities, housing
discrimination, and unequal
access to resources. The wide
gap is especially wide in New
Mexico, where the top 1% of
earners, uh, make 15 times more
than the bottom 20%. HB7 can
help bridge this gap, ensuring
that all children, regardless of
their financial situation, have
the opportunity to build a
prosperous future and contribute
to more, to a stronger economy.
We thank the sponsors and
experts for this important bill,
and we urge your support. Thank
you.
Good morning, Chair and
committee members. My name is
Anne Lin Hall, and I am the CEO
of Prosperity Works. We've been
serving the Mexicans to
eliminate poverty for over 20
years. I also stand here as a
parent today, like all other
parents across the state who
want amazing opportunities for
my child to grow, thrive, and
excel in our state now and in
the future.
Prosperity Works has invested in
children through a long-term
savings account that has similar
qualities to a baby bond for the
last 15 years, because baby
bonds are new, I wanted to share
research that has been done
about these accounts, especially
the shorter term and long term
outcomes. They included 50%
lower maternal depression. The
kiddos that had these accounts
were ahead of their peers in
math and reading scores by 3rd
grade. Kiddos had a
future-focused mentality and
they had a college-going
identity. They were 6 times more
likely.
To enroll in college and 3.5
times more likely to graduate
college, and they had hope.
I stand before you today to ask
for your support of HB 7 so that
every child in New Mexico has
not only a great start in our
state, but also a strong future.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Deanna Warren and I'm
a reproductive rights and gender
equity attorney at the ACLU of
New Mexico. The ACLU supports
baby bonds and supports HP 7.
The impact of baby bonds can be
transformative. Baby bonds can
break the cycle of poverty and
make prosperity achievable for
the next generation. If
administered, baby bonds could
shrink the racial wealth gap
from 91% to 25%. By providing
targeted support to lower-income
communities, baby bonds.
Baby bonds seek to rectify some
of the systemic injustices and
disadvantages they face. Thank
you.
Good morning. My name is Reve
Mora. I am a mother to 3 kids,
1510, and 5.
Um, my oldest is now 15 and it
won't be long till he's college
ready. Um, however, he still
faces the fact that we have no
generational wealth to pass to
him and to pay for his schooling
or anything else he needs. Well,
there's more access to college
now in the state, he still faces
obstacles of him being from a
family that has no wealth, as we
live paycheck to paycheck. I've
done my best to research my own
resources, however, I feel that
my children will still face
adversity, as I cannot provide
them access to capital for
things like their first car,
their first home or.
any financial assistance to
pursue any dreams they may have
for starting a business. Baby
bonds can address these
generational and systematic
injustices. I see a future for
my community in which children
can all have wealth, even in the
family similar to mine that are
living paycheck to paycheck. I'm
working hard to provide
opportunities for my children.
However, my income has yet to
prove to be enough to generate
wealth. Um, baby bonds can do
just that and provide children
with assets to set them up for a
future that they may not have
had otherwise access to.
Uh, passing baby bonds would
create a birthright to a future
in the state of New Mexico,
maybe, uh, then more of our
graduates would stay here to
help build our economy and
better our systems. Taking
action on this wrap up. Yes, um,
again, this is a dream for
anyone who's loved and cared
about a child, um, so placing a
monetary value shows them we
place them in the highest value
for their futures.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Haley Zo and I'm the
staff attorney from Southwest
Women's Law Center. We strongly
support HB 7 because it is a
transformative investment in the
future of our children and our
state. Baby bonds are a proven
policy that help reduce wealth
inequality, break cycles of
poverty and ensure that every
child regardless of their
circumstances of their birth,
has a real opportunity to thrive
as an attorney representing
women experiencing domestic
violence, who are low income and
almost always mothers, I see
firsthand.
financial instability can trap
families in cycles of abuse and
hardship.
This act would be a step towards
giving every eligible child in
New Mexico publicly funded trust
account, ensuring that they have
a financial foundation to pursue
education, housing, or
entrepreneurship when they reach
adulthood. This policy is a
direct investment in breaking
the cycles of poverty and abuse
by giving children, many of whom
who grow up in precarious
circumstances, the resources
they need to thrive. Other
states have already recognized
the power of baby bonds and it's
time for New Mexico to lead in
the fight for economic equality.
I urge our
legislators to pass HB 7 and
invest in a stronger, more just
future for all New Mexicans.
Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom. I
have Shanae, Jennifer, Veronica,
Bernadette and Knapp. So go
ahead, Shanae.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Can
you hear me?
Yes, we can go ahead.
OK. Good morning, Madam Chair.
My name is Shana Sariana and I'm
a healthcare advocate for the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. We think the sponsor
and the early childhood
advocates for this bill. We
stand in support because every
child should have the
opportunity to pursue
fulfilling, productive,
prosperous, and self-directed
life. But income inequality
creates gaps in opportunity. New
Mexico currently ranked
forty-fifth in income inequality
and grapples with high child
poverty rates. HB
7 is a real opportunity to close
these income gaps and foster
generational wealth with funds
growing over time and becoming
accessible starting at age 18,
with wealth gene.
The fund would cover educational
expenses, provide ownership
assistance, support
entrepreneurial endeavors and
allow for other long-term
investments. These investments
in New Mexico's children would
also help alleviate racial
wealth gaps. For all of these
reasons, we stand in strong
support.
Oh, go ahead.
For all of these reasons, we we
stand in strong support for this
legislation, and we urge
legislators to pass this life
changing legislation. Thank you.
Jennifer.
Adam Chair and members of the
committee. Happy Valentine's Day
to you all. My name is Jennifer
Rafael Goetz and I'm the
director of the New Mexico
Commission on the Status of
Women.
I'm here today to speak to you
in support of HB 7.
One of the challenges that women
in New Mexico and around the
country face is unequal pay.
Studies show that it will take
Hispanic and native women 400
years to reach pay equity with
their white male counterparts.
Unequal pay means unequal
retirement savings, and even
unequal social security in
retirement.
Why am I talking about unequal
pay when we are here to discuss
baby bonds. It's because we see
that equal pay laws are not
helping women build generational
wealth.
But perhaps an economic
investment like baby bonds can
help this process.
If a small investment is made
for a baby girl at birth, that
investment can grow into a down
payment on a house or tuition
for college.
These investments in our
children can keep, help keep
them living and working in New
Mexico and contributing to the
economic health of our state.
Baby bonds could be one
strategic piece in the process
of lifting women out of poverty
and helping them down the road
to build generational wealth.
For this reason, and others
discussed today, I ask you to
stand with us in support of HB
7. Thank you. Thank you. And
just a reminder, it's one
minute. We'll go to Veronica.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee. Um, good
morning and happy Valentine's
Day. I'm Veronica Ramirez, a
young parent advocate, um, as a
parent, I know how important it
is to give our children the best
start in life, supporting baby
bonds in New Mexico is a crucial
step towards a more equitable
future. These bonds provide
every child, especially those
from low income families with
financial foundation.
They need to succeed. Imagine
our kids having the resources to
pursue their dreams, whether
it's college, starting a
business, or buying a home. Baby
bonds promotes economic mobility
and offer long term benefits to
children in struggling
communities. They also help
develop good financial habits,
improving overall well-being.
Now it's time to act. Let's
support baby bonds and invest in
our children's future together
we can create a brighter, more
equitable future.
Born in Mexico. Thank you. Thank
you, Veronica right at a minute,
um, Bernadette Hardy.
Hello, um, committee and
speaker. Uh, my name is Bernard
Hardy. I'm here with Native
Boat, but also as a single
mother, um, when children are
supported, families are more
secure. I think, uh, I wanted to
say in many in my community of
the International District, uh,
many plus myself are born into
poverty, baby bonds are a
financial head start to
adulthood, and it could be life
saving. This is an investment in
our kids, so we just urge please
support HB 7. Thank you.
You.
Thank you. And finally we have
nat.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee sponsors and
advocates. My name is Nat Dean.
I'm a person with multiple
disabilities and I'm a
disability advocate. We need to
build on the foundational
strategic teaching of financial
literacy as the cornerstone of
the building blocks so that
these funds make a difference.
I have been someone who has been
on
was on Social Security
disability, um,
Insurance for from about
1995 until I reached my
retirement age where that then
became Social Security
retirement income or SSRI. It
was very, very low because it
was based on earnings for many,
many years ago. So strategically
understanding financial literacy
is key. I even had to write a
budget when I was a child to
raise my allowance from 25 cents
a week to 50 cents a week. That
is a cornerstone that has helped
me to financially survive and
thrive.
and prosper despite being
disabled. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair. Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you, now.
So we, we will um
This is a bit of a, but I'm just
gonna make an announcement that
HB 266267, and 236 have all been
rolled at the request of the
sponsor.
So we will go to questions,
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative and expert. I
just have one simple question.
If it is not a guaranteed fund,
how will it be decided which
person receives the benefit
versus who doesn't. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That's such a
great question, um, because you
want to make sure equity in the
process. So there's two pieces.
One is that, you know, if I came
up here and said, we're going to
give every baby $30,000.
that would be presenting a
guarantee that I can't commit to
depending on the market. So
that's more about the guarantee
that we're looking at. One of
the key things that the
recommendations will be getting
back from the task forces is to
ensure, um,
equity in how we are dispersing
that, and they will provide
those. Anything that they
recommend will come to the
legislature for a vote on how
that gets shaped in the end. Um,
so again, that's like I said,
that's why we're establishing
this way, so it could be looked
at further, uh, but one of the
goal is to keep equity in the.
equation, and then we as a body
would vote on that.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and expert
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
try to make this as, as quick as
possible, but I have a lot of
questions.
Um
My first question is, why are we
making a deferred investment?
Why not invest?
Um, in targeted areas that will
actually benefit the child and
the family now.
Uh, career technical education.
Uh, there's been bills going
through on down payments for for
homes. We pay for college
education now.
Um, uh, I guess I'm just trying
to wrap my head around why are
we deferring the investment in
this, in this child. Why not
invest in the entire family
today.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, uh, uh, Mr. Whip
Martinez, uh, I, I agree with
you, and I think that's why this
body has taken so many steps to
invest in in our children and
our families and the growth
today as well. You mentioned
free uh free um college, we have
school meals that are free, uh,
we have, you know, early
childhood education that is free
for a number of folks, at least
reduced for many others. Um, we
have our, you know, working
families tax credit. There's a
lot that we're doing for, for
families and individuals today,
I would argue. Um, what this
does is it relies on
growing a fund. And so we know
understanding that the dollar
invested today is worth more
tomorrow, and really allowing
the market to play for our kids,
um, is really a big piece of
that. I don't know if Michelle,
you had anything to add to that.
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
many families in New Mexico
agree are struggling right now
and so we need for immediate
financial assistance is real and
programs like cash supports, um,
tax credits, food services,
right? Emergency relief are all
crucial to addressing short-term
hardships. And to add to that,
baby bones and the children's
Future Fund serve a different
but equally necessary purpose,
breaking the cycle of
generational poverty and
providing
long-term economic mobility. And
so when we think about focusing
only on the immediate needs
without addressing the
underlying structural barriers
to wealth building, we find
ourselves in the same position
and cycle year after year,
providing short term relief, but
not changing the economic
trajectory for families with low
incomes. So baby bonds do not at
all replace direct aid and
giving money now, they
complement it by ensuring that
children from all backgrounds
don't just survive childhood,
but they have a financial.
Foundation to thrive as adults.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um,
Is there anything in this bill
that requires financial
literacy?
Thank you, um, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Whip for
that. Uh, uh.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
that's a great question. It was
actually one of the main, um,
not one of the main, but one of
the things that I discussed with
the state treasurer when she was
looking at this over the summer
with some of her, uh, program
that she was doing. It is highly
anticipated that it will, um,
because we do point to that in
the um in the task force, and we
get a second, I'll tell you
where it says that.
Um, uh, online page 6, line 11,
it says determination of
eligibility, including possible
certification processes across
multiple state agencies, and
then also there's a part that it
also talks about.
I believe that's the big one.
But I believe that that is in
particular important because I
think we agree that there should
be a a piece of that. And when
those recommendations come back.
It will be something I think
this body will look for, and
we'll have the opportunity to
vote on it.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I think, I think
that's a key piece in any of
these investments. We can, we
can hand out checks, but if
we're not teaching them.
How to use that check to improve
their lives.
Uh, you know, I think we're,
we're throwing money out the
window.
Uh, so I think if
As, as the bill progresses, if
you would entertain.
Um, an amendment that clearly
spells out the fact that
Financial literacy has to be a
part of the program.
I think that would uh
I think that would be a good
thing.
Um, you also mentioned Madam
Chair Representative.
That one of the qualifiers is
that they have to be a graduate
of a high school in New Mexico.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that's correct.
So how does that work for
somebody that
For whatever reason had to drop
out of school.
And is, you know, struggling to
Get a job and, and support a
family.
They're, they're not eligible
because of that.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe that the intent is that
they've lived here for that
period of time, that's the
intent of it. Again, and I, I
hate to point to the task force,
but it does do that, that it
gives them the ability to look
at what would be an equivalency,
right? And in Wood in my in the
same estimate that you're you're
looking at financial literacy, I
would anticipate it would
encourage them to get an
equivalency as well.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
That that might want to be
clarified in uh
In, in the bill.
Because there's a lot of, a lot
of people that have to drop out
for whatever reason.
You know, one parent household
and the oldest kid needs to
Drop out of school to go to work
to help support the family, so
that might be.
Another thing to, to look at.
Um
Madam Chair, also, I think your
experts said that there's
They're already doing this. Did
I, did I understand that
correctly?
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
Representative and expert.
If you're already doing it, why
do we need this, Bill?
Um, our program is a, a
privately run program which is
reaching a small subset of
children in the state of New
Mexico. Right now, we're serving
15. Uh, we were able to raise
private funds to be able to do
that. Our goal is to serve 400
with a $6 million capital stack.
This bill gives us the
opportunity to consider a
statewide program, which has the
potential to reach 22,000 births
here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and expert. I
actually love the idea of
Getting
uh the private sector too.
Make more of this investment.
Um, I think it's
Cleaner, I think it's more
efficient, um.
Being a a state government
employee for 26 years and
sometimes we
do best when we get out of the
way.
So I, I would
I would love to see.
Maybe a private public
partnership.
In something like this.
Um
My next question, Madam Chair
Representative.
So the state treasurer's office
opposes this bill.
Were they not
At the table when this was
getting put together. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I believe, uh,
they were working with the, the
speaker in a number of ways with
this, um.
I believe that some of the
differences comes to
How
I, I don't, I don't want to
anticipate them.
What I will say is that we felt
that this was a pragmatic
approach that allowed for the
building the foundation within
the realm of the legislature
overseeing that process, um,
that gave uh a transparency to
it. And so, you know, this
doesn't create a $600 million
fund right now that's going to
start investing in kids tomorrow
and it's gonna be a thing for,
and I, and I'm not accusing
anyone of that. I'm just saying
that for us, in particular, we
wanted to give it that
opportunity to grow publicly.
The one other thing I did want
to mention was that
you asked about, um, openness to
adding financial lit to it. That
is the intention and that is
something that um I'd be happy
to take to my co-sponsors and,
and consider putting in an
amendment in our next committee.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I think, I think
that would
strengthened the bill.
Um
On page 2.
14.
Um
Starting line 3, whose primary
residence since birth is
continuously in New Mexico.
Um, that rule out somebody that
enters the military at 17 years
old.
Madam Chair representative, no.
Chair Representative, can you
explain how
I mean, is there something
further on in the bill that
spills out that exemption cause
it
The language seems pretty clear
that they
They have to be here
continuously.
Madam Chair Representative, so
this the child would have to be
here continuously, uh, since
birth, and then they would have
access to it at 18. And so at
that point, you know, you can't
go into the military before
then, so it would not be, you
know, affect that aspect.
representative,
you can enter the military at 17
if you get a waiver, but
something else that you might
wanna.
Kind of
Figure out how that that's gonna
work.
Um, so let's stay on page 2
line.
Lines 8 and 9.
Um, the children's
Future fund is created as a
non-reverting fund in the state
treasury.
Um
shouldn't.
Shouldn't this go to the state
investment council.
Madam Chair Representative, the
uh the fund is overseen the
investments are primarily
overseen by the SIC, primarily
in these 1st 4418 years. Um, it
is very common for funds to be
overseen by the treasurer. They,
she currently she has a plethora
of of uh portfolios that she
oversees. One thing I do want to
add to that is that you had
asked about private investment.
I will argue that the SIC is one
of the most successful. I mean,
our bond rating is incredibly
high, and it, it really is
actually utilized.
the private system to benefit
our kids in a real way. So this
just ensures that it's done in a
fair way, that it's very
transparent for folks to see it,
and that's why it be state run.
But the reason why it's held in
the treasury's treasurer's
office is that that's pretty
common for funds in the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Representative
So staying on page 2 lines 22
through 25.
And then on page 3 lines 1
through 5.
Um
You reference on line 22, 2/3 of
a transfer.
And then on
Line 25, there's another 2/3.
And my
I know I'm misreading this
somehow, cause that's 4/3.
So can you explain to me?
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
had the same question at first,
but it, it actually makes sense,
uh, for the 1st 18 years, 2/3 is
controlled by the SIC or yeah,
the state investment officer,
uh, for the 18 years. And then
after that,
Uh, that 2/3 and the income that
came from it, the interest rate
and that got interest rate that
was received, um, will be
controlled by the state
treasurer. So it's the same 2/3,
just so the 1st 1st 18 years of
it, it's controlled by the SAC
and the, and afterwards it's
controlled by the state
treasurer. And then 1/3 is
always, uh, controlled by the
SAC.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, so
Maybe I, maybe I need to like
dig a little bit deeper in the
weed. So how does the program
work?
We make an investment now at
what happens on, on the 18th
birthday.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, and again that
the details of how it would
look, um, are going to come from
the task force, the, you know,
these explicit pieces of it
because we want to make sure
that it follows New Mexico's
statute and law, and the spirit
of the law. So we want to make
sure we do that cleanly.
However, when you turn 18,
should you, um, uh, fit all
these roles. Actually, I'm gonna
hand it over to Michelle cause
I, I can give you a
hypothetical, but I would love
to hear from Michelle how they
anticipate this working for
their program right now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Yes, currently
in the pilot program that we are
running at age 18, uh, young
adults are eligible to draw down
that fund for uses in education,
business, and entrepreneurship,
home ownership, or retirement
and investment. The one thing
that's again, unique about our
pilot is that we're asking that
1/3 of that account remained
there, uh, for the private
pilots so that they can access
at age 65 at retirement. But
those are primarily the uses
that we see nationwide resting
in
education, um, business
entrepreneurship, home
ownership, and retirement
investment.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, an expert.
So at, at 18, it becomes a
targeted investment.
In
That child's education, that
child's ability to purchase a
home.
Um
And I think you, you listed a
couple of other things, so, so.
So at 18 years old, that child
does not get a.
$10,000 check.
Madam Chair Representative, no.
Um, I, I would compare it to
think of when you pull from your
Roth IRA or your, or if you pull
literally from your 401k, right?
You have to explain what you're
using it for if you're pulling
on down early so you don't get
taxed on it. Um, it has to be
for a specific purposes. And if
the child doesn't want to pull
it at 18th child, if the adult
at that point, uh, doesn't want
to pull it for any of these
reasons, Madam Chair and
representative. It can continue
to grow for them. So maybe
they're 30 and they want to
invest in a home later that, you
know, they might be able to
access it then as well. And
again, one thing I want to
When she was on page 6 line 24.
We point to contracting with a
third party. I would anticipate
that something like, you know,
an Edward Jones or someone who
can manage the, the, the process
of, you know, pulling.
Thank you for that.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um
So
There's gonna be some big giant
database that tracks every birth
in New Mexico.
And follows them through to for
life.
Where they can draw down.
Let's, let's just say it's a
similar to a Roth IRA.
How do, how are we gonna know?
If if they defer.
Drawing down at a team, they
decided at 35, OK, I've.
I'm kind of settled in now, this
is what I need.
Is there an application process
or is all that going to be
worked out and ruled by the.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would argue you worked out in
the task force, which is why I
do think that the state
treasurer is a valuable asset on
that, having looked at it over
the summer, bringing in
multiple, you know, national
experts on this as well. I would
argue that the fund is kept as a
fund.
We are estimating the number of
births, we will know the number
of births annually, you know,
those are things we know, but
it's not going to say, you know,
Linda Serato was born on, you
know, 2026. Therefore, we, we're
going to have this set aside
because we have no idea the
trajectory of that child's life.
We've no idea how it's gonna
change. But when Linda Serato
turns 18 and can apply to get
her funding that I anticipate
that is the process we're gonna
be looking at how that looks.
Does it get moved into a Roth
IRA with restrictions limited to
it, you know, how does that
growth look?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, so.
So there's obviously gonna be
some type of application
process.
Requiring certain documentation
showing eligibility.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Yeah, if we
want to call it an application
or some sort of that you have to
show verification. And that's,
you know, we see that ECCD in a
number of other departments.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Um
On page 3.
Section 4, I understand that we
can't, um,
There's no guarantees in life,
especially when it comes to
invest. Some days are good days,
some days are bad days.
I mean, if it was always
guaranteed and always easy, we
wouldn't need.
So can you explain to me?
Um, on page on line 21 and 22.
So you're, you're
Basically
Saying there's no guarantee.
This is gonna be
Available
20 years from now.
There's not line 21 does not
otherwise exist.
And is enforceable under state
law, so.
There's like I pointed out
earlier, there's already private
program that exists does line 21
means that there's no.
State program.
That that exists to do something
similar, I, I don't understand.
That provision right there.
Madam Chair Representative, that
is to say that, uh, when I sit
here today, I'm not promising
every child that's born in Saint
Christ or Saint Vincent, uh,
Chris Saint Vincent, a house.
I'm not promising them that they
will get a free out of state
college trip. Um, I'm saying
that what promises that we're
building this fund, uh, we will
see how much we'll put to it.
We, we can anticipate fairly
well, and I would argue that the
SAC and a lot of our our state
investing operators have learned
significantly from 2020.
2012, we moved a lot of our, our
investments and how we've been
doing in a property before.
I, you know, we've talked about
this stuff. Um, so, but, but
again, you want to give that
language so that we're no one's
walking out here saying I'm
getting a free blank.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, I think that's,
that's always a good.
a dose of reality is always
good.
Be read into these.
Uh, one last question on um
On my 18th birthday.
I go in and I.
Or is it gonna be merit-based?
Is it gonna be?
financially based.
Because I could have
Inherited a ton of money.
Is that person gonna be able to
go in and apply or is there
certain income limits that are
gonna.
Trigger this
Madam Chair Representative, at
this time, no, there is not
going to be a merit based or
something like that, um,
primarily because we see that
being able to invest in a, a
stable home, uh, creates not
only generate that change for
that family, for generations to
come. Uh, I would argue my
parents having a stable home
allowed my brothers and I to
actually go to be the first to
go to college. Um, so, you know,
I, I think from that
perspective, no, you shouldn't
have to earn it in that sense,
and that was the intent when
we're drafting this. It's the
intent of what we see across the
country. Um, again, when it
the equitability question that
Representative Senator Cortez
brought up. Um, that's something
we want to let, let the task
force address as well.
For, for the reasons you're
laying out exactly. But I, but
what we don't want to have is
what we often talk about the
cliff effect, right? That your
family might be middle class,
but living paycheck to paycheck.
And because they, they won't
leave you with anything. You
have hundreds of thousands of
dollars in debt, which is pretty
common, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, uh, an expert.
I'm, I'm gonna follow the debate
as it goes through and it comes
down to the floor.
Um, I'm just right now I'm not
convinced that this is
That this is the way that I
would do it if I was keen for a
day.
I think I'd make those
investments.
Now
In the families instead of
Waiting 18 years, um, but I'll
follow, I'll follow the debate
and
Keep an open mind and see, see
where we land on the floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, I appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative
Echavez.
Oh, representative Martinez
asked all the questions I had.
Thank you, Madam Cho
representative, I thought you
might have recused yourself
because you're exciting year
you're gonna have just kidding.
I'm kidding.
I think he asked all the
questions. But he made it much
clearer for us. So seeing no
further hands, I will entertain
a I'd like to make it,
I will second so we have a a
motion or by representativeates
and a second by Representative
Anaya.
Um
And will you take the role?
Representative Anaya? Yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative in Chavez? No.
Representative Ferrari.
Representative Jones.
No.
Representative Martinez.
No
Representative Senna Cortez? No,
and I would like to explain my
vote.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes. I do pass
5 to 4.5 to 4, you have a due
pass.
And Representative Senator
Cortez to explain her vote for
one minute. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, I echo some of the same
sentiments and concerns that
minority whip Martinez has, um,
I would love to see an
investment in the families now
with financial.
also grew up with very humble
beginnings, and I know a lump
sum of money doesn't necessarily
get a child above the federal
poverty level, but an investment
in financial literacy, um,
allows them to do something for
themselves and not have to
depend on the government, um,
some being from someone that
again came from humble
beginnings, but I'd love to see
where this goes, and I'll keep
an open mind. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Representative and
expert. Thank you. So,
I
OK, so next we will have, um,
and again, if those, those of
you, so the last 3 bills on the
agenda, HB 266 supervision of
physicians' assistants, 267
physician assistant supervising
others and 236 notice for
medication abortions have all
been rolled um at the request of
the sponsors, so we will now go
to HB 95.
Mo
And thank you for joining us if
you're leaving.
Representative.
Lobbyists stay out of the way,
please.
Representative I have, I
understand you have a
substitute, a committee
substitute.
Yes, Madam Chair, I have a
committee substitute, and would
you please, uh, pass it out to
the members of the committee. It
is being passed out. Thank you.
So I need a motion to um discuss
the substitute bill.
Yeah.
Any opposition, OK, see then we
are discussing this too.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The substitute bill for house,
the substitute for House Bill 95
enacts a section of the
Healthcare Purchasing Act and
the New Mexico Insurance Code to
require fertility preservation
services for enrollees whose
disease or medically necessary
disease treatment is determined
by the enrollee's healthcare
provider may lead to in uh
fertility. These new sections
would become effective on
January 26th.
Uh,
uh, January 1st, 2026, and
Representative if you could just
explain what the bill does.
So what the what the bill does
is the bill will allow uh women
or men who are going through a,
a critical uh
Medical term in their lives, and
so maybe they want to have
children, but they want to, they
can't do it now because of the
health, uh, the health incidents
that they are are experiencing,
so men can now preserve their
sperm, their healthy sperm
before they undergo any type of
cancer treatment or other
treatment that may cause them to
be in uh fertile, and then women
may be able to to preserve their
eggs in a manner.
So that they can uh also have
the opportunity to be parents at
a later time when they're no
longer being sick, so Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
that's what this does. It
preserves the right for uh men
and women when they want to have
children and to have a family if
they can't do it because they're
undergoing uh medical uh systems
and medical treatment that would
cause great harm if they tried
to have children.
uh, I, at the point that they
are going, undergoing medical
treatment.
Thank you
And Madam Chair, I have with me
3 experts, 3 exceptionally
wonderful experts. So, uh, I'm
gonna have the first one
introduce herself. She's a
well-known doctor within the
state of New Mexico and we are
deeply honored to have her with
us today.
Turn your mic on. Pardon me.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for letting
me address you today.
In the United States because we
don't have national health.
Pardon me?
Oh, I'm sorry.
I'm more concerned about you
than me. My name is Doctor
Sandra Penn. I was trained in
Hawaii at the Johnny Burns
School of Medicine and I did my
residency here at BCMC now the
University Health Sciences
Center.
Oncologists choose treatment
that's targeted to cancer cells.
Treatment options have become
more sophisticated since I began
my training in medicine.
It's now more possible to target
cancer cells, but also to assure
that other sensitive tissue is
protected.
People do not have to lose their
hair nor their fertility.
And their fertility is their
future. The cancer patient is
going through a singular trauma,
the insurance company and the
oncologist have been through it
before.
It's essential that the
insurance company not be allowed
to determine treatment. It must
include not only the correct
medication but also the
protection available for
sensitive tissue.
The patient need not lose fruit
or fertility if protection is
required, and the patient in the
midst of treatment may not be
clear and able to see the
future.
Asking the patient if he or she
wants this protection, may be
beyond their ability to
determine it. Too many
questions, too many choices, and
the patient may be young, and it
may not be possible to even
discuss it with them.
Years ago, a wonderful pediatric
oncologist lost her reputation
and her license.
Before deciding that an older
protocol was less expensive,
less likely to bankrupt the
family of the patient.
We cannot allow the possibility
that an insurance company avoids
offering the best support
because of cost.
Protection of future fertility
must be an expected part of
treatment for all patients,
whatever their age.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, we have 2 more
experts who are on Zoom. Would
you like to meet them now? Yes.
All right. Experts, uh, would
you please introduce.
So we have.
Oh, Christina Kimball, and
Joyce.
Reenicke, Roenicke, so just a
brief statement, please. Yes,
absolutely. Um, thank you so
much, Chair Thompson, the
members of the committee, um, I
can certainly go into more
details about why we support
this bill, but for now, my name
is Christina Kimball, and I'm
with the Leukemia and Lymphoma
Society, and we represent
thousands of blood cancer
patients in New Mexico.
Thank you. And um
Joyce.
Hi, yes.
Uh, good morning. Thank you,
Chairwoman Thompson, and
honorable committee members. My
name is Joyce Reinke, and I am
here before you as the executive
director of the Alliance for
Fertility Preservation. We are a
national nonprofit organization
dedicated to helping cancer
patients understand and navigate
the reproductive consequences of
their treatment. Um, and we have
over the years seen thousands of
patients, um, and talk to
families who are distressed by
this potential double blow, uh.
not only facing a cancer
diagnosis, but also uh a
challenge to their future
ability to have children.
Um, do you want me to give my
entire testimony now, or?
Uh, let's hold off on that and,
and we'll have you for
questions. Thank you.
Thank you. So Representative, do
you have anything else? Are you
ready for public comment? Um,
Madam Chair, we are ready for
questions. OK, so, um, online,
if you are in opposition to this
bill, please raise your hand and
I will come back to you in the
room, is anyone in opposition.
Thing done and seeing no hands
raised on Zoom, if you are in
support on Zoom, raise your
hand, and I will come back to
you in the room, anyone in
support.
If you would like to speak, you
can come to the center, but it's
not required.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
esteemed members of the
committee. My name is Javier
Butcher, and I work with Juliana
Kub to represent the Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains. We stand in support
of House Bill 95 because it
represents an essential
enhancement to the reproductive
freedoms we hold in New Mexico.
Thank you. Thank you and on
Zoom, um,
Susan Lubey.
Susan unmute.
Susan, you're muted.
OK, we will go to Danica and
come back to Susan.
So go ahead, Dana. Good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Donnica
Taronis and I am a birth justice
manager with World Features New
Mexico. As reproductive justice
organization, we move our work
in the full spectrum of what
reproductive care is, including
assistance for those seeking to
start a family. Medical
necessity should be assisted and
insurance coverage would remove
a barrier for families to be
started. We support House Bill
95 and urge it to pass. Thank
you.
Thank you. We will go back to
Susan.
Uh, Madam Chair, can you hear
me? Yes, I can. Thank you. Um,
Madam Chair, I'm Susan Lubey
with the New Mexico Women's
Agenda, and we are in full
support of this legislation, and
we've thanked the sponsor for
bringing it forward, and thank
you for listening.
Thank you, Susan.
And I see that two hands are
raised for our experts, so, oh,
I see one more hand. Charles
Goodmacher.
Madam Chair, members of the
community, thank you for this
opportunity. I am a registered
lobbyist with a leukemia and
lymphoma Society, but also with
NMBC Action Fund. So my comment
for NMVC Action Fund is to
emphasize the reality that in
New Mexico, all of these
services are available, but only
for those who have the enormous,
uh, the wealth to pay the
enormous fees involved. So it
really is an issue with about
equity at at its core, and I
thank the sponsors so very much
and all of you. Thank you.
please pass the bill.
Thank you, Charles, and hope you
feel better.
Um, so,
OK, um.
We will now go to the committee
for questions I have.
And Chavez.
Any other questions? OK, go
ahead, Representative Chavez.
Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, I just have a few
questions. The first one is if
you go to the bill, page 2 line
5. It says that this will be
covered by enrollees whose
disease or medically necessary
disease treatment.
Um
Have you considered?
Actually spelling out diagnosis
so that we know what this bill's
going to cover, I mean, cause
that could.
Cover a lot of different things.
If, if, cause you guys keep
referring to cancer.
Um, can you just spell out
cancer there to make it a lot
easier for people to digest and
understand what they're voting
on.
Madam Chair, I'm going to ask my
experts, um, Christina Kimball
or Joyce Rike to respond along
with my expert, uh, Doctor Pen
to respond to that answer.
We at this point know.
Specific things, but you have to
leave open the fact that
treatments improve for many
different diseases and treatment
may, in fact, although the.
Targeted
Unless we protect gonadal
tissue.
We may lose fertility.
And you can't tell that right
now because there may be new
treatments. So we just have to
leave it as a generic, saying
that.
The treatment has to include
protection.
Hi, this is Joyce Reinicky. I
just wanted to, um, say that
based on um our experience and
our medical advisors who are
really world class experts, um,
they would estimate about 95% of
the patients who need this kind
of intervention are facing, you
know, chemotherapy, radiation,
and stem cell transplants, 95%
of those typically, um, are
cancer patients, but to, to
Charles's earlier point,
As a matter of equity, we know
that some patients with diseases
like sickle cell anemia or um
very advanced cases, um, of
autoimmune diseases like lupus,
sometimes need essentially
cancer treatments like a stem
cell transplant, and those are
high-risk treatments that, that
really pose a grave threat to
future fertility. So as a matter
of equity, we would just not
like to have those patients who
are
essentially standing in the
shoes of a, a cancer patient,
um, you know, kept away from
these treatments and from, from
future parenthood.
But the bulk of the patients who
would need these interventions
are cancer patients.
Madam Chair Representative
experts, thank you so much.
Thank you.
Are there any minority whip.
Test.
Thank you, Madam chair. I was
gonna try to stay out of it.
But I, but I can't.
Um, uh, I, I just, I have a few
questions just to clarify what
The bill
States.
On page 2.
Starting at line 10.
Or starting at line 8 coverage
shall be provided regardless of
the enrollees.
Expected length of life.
So, from what I understood in
your opening, this was
The goal of this bill was to
allow.
That, that
Man or woman
To have the eggs or the sperm.
Frozen
In case they wanted to have a
child.
Once they went through
treatment.
Can you explain to me how
Line 10 fits into that overall
goal.
Mr. Chair,
Members of the committee and uh
uh oh, I'm sorry
It's been a long day, Madam
Chair, and it's only in the
morning, so Madam Chair members
of the committee, uh,
representative, uh, Martinez,
one of the things that we don't
want to do is to put an age
limit on when you have your
children. So suppose you're
going on into your, your cancer
treatment or any other type of
treatment that may take you up
to age 50, for example. We don't
want
say we're gonna put a limit on
it. You can only have your
children at age 35. That would
be wrong. And so I, I, what
we're trying to do is to be as
responsible as possible with
respect to the medical treatment
that people may be going through
and to allow them to be able to
still have the, the life that
they want with the family if
that's where they want to go.
Madam Chair, Representative
Herndon, may um Joyce and I
respond as well.
Yes, would you please? Oh, thank
you so much, Representative
Herndon, uh, Madden chair, uh,
representative, I will pass it
to Joyce. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Chair Thompson,
um, I would just say that um
that language, my understanding
of that is just to not uh
intercede into the decisions
made between the patient and um
you know, their doctor and, and
also their family. Um, so we
don't want to put up any
arbitrary discriminatory
barriers, um, often cancer
patients may have, and I will
say personally, I had a um a
pretty difficult diagnosis.
Um, and so we, but I was able to
survive my cancer and go on and
have children. So, um, the goal
here would be to just open
options up um for any patients,
um, and let them know what uh
their options are and what their
risks are and allow them to make
those decisions in consultation
with their family and their
healthcare uh provider.
Thank you Joyce, Madam chair,
representative, if I may, um,
speaking specifically to the
point about um length of life
expectancy, um, cancer is all
about beating odds, and if
someone is given 3 months to
live, we, we never know if they
might make it for the rest of
their life. Um, so I would urge
the committee to keep in mind
that um everybody is different
and every cancer journey is
different, so we do not want to
see any restrictions placed on
that. Thank you.
Madam Chair, um,
Representative
I, the explanations make sense
to me. I, I just don't see why
you would need.
That phrase, why not just leave
it open?
Um
That's, that's just my opinion.
I'm neither a doctor nor a
lawyer.
I'm just a curious guy that gets
to sit on the panel.
Um, I, I, I
Including that language.
I don't know, it's just not
clicking right for me, I'm not
sure.
why it's
Representatives. So I'm, I'm
just gonna jump in here. Um, if
it's not included in there, then
insurers can say, oh, you only
are expected to live 6 more
months, so we're not gonna cover
it. So it's put in there
intentionally so that it doesn't
leave it up to the insurer
whether to do it or not, that
it's in our law, that that that
cannot be taken into account in
terms of whether they cover it
or not.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
that. I would just think if, if
That person has 6 months to
live, they're not.
They're not gonna have time to.
Give birth to a child, so I
don't see.
Why it would be
I mean how this would work for
them as one of the experts said,
um.
That that's a guess, 6 months is
a guess, you, I mean, all of us
have heard stories of people who
outlived their diagnosis by
years if not decades, so uh
that's something that's an
unknown, and that's why it's in
there.
OK. Thank you for that, Madam
Chair. Um, I'll move on.
And just let that one, that
marble roll around for a while.
Um, the next line, actually,
let's go the next.
Three lines.
So
Regardless of the enrollee's
present or predicted disability.
I mean, how can you predict?
Someone's disability. How, how
do you know that?
I'm gonna be
I'm, you know, am I gonna be,
are you gonna be able to predict
that I'm diabetic in 10 years or
I have cancer. I don't, I don't
understand that language either.
So, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, and
Representative Martinez, you are
absolutely right. You cannot
predict it. And so doctors might
say, well, you're going to be a,
a diabetic and you're not or
you're not gonna live past 6
months, but you do, are there
are other things that they may
predict that are going to
happen, that really don't
happen, just like our, our
expert Joyce Roenicke, she had a
very difficult diagnosis of
cancer and who was, who would
ever suspect that?
She would still be alive today
to give children, to have
children, and to talk about that
experience to make sure that
others have that ability that
she now also has.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank God
that you're an expert.
Uh, is here to talk about that.
I just don't understand.
The part of a
Or predicted disability.
Representative, could I jump in
here? So that could be something
like, we know that this cancer
is gonna require an amputation
of your right leg.
And so they can't look at that
and say, well, you're gonna,
you're gonna have a disability,
and so, you know, you can't be a
parent.
Those kind of things. It's, it's
a predicted disability around
the diagnosis, not, not
something out somewhere else
like diabetes, but a disability
related to the treatment of the
cancer or the condition.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
just
Let those two marbles join each
other.
Um
The next one degree of medical
dependency.
Can you explain to me what
medical dependency is.
Thank you, Representative, Madam
Chair.
Pardon me, when we look at
patients, you often are
assessing the possibility
because of their current health
condition that they may be
looking at.
An illness based on what you
know about their history. You
can look at somebody, their
family history and say chances
are heart disease is going to be
part of your future, given your
family, given your current
situation.
And because of that, we don't
think you're a great prospect to
be a parent. We can't allow the
insurance company to use that
kind of assessment to determine
what you decide to do with your
life and your future and, and
your fertility.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Doctor Pen. So,
Hypothetically,
Somebody being dependent on
insulin, that, that's what this
is.
Talking about or.
Having to take nerve medication
or
Is that, is that what medical
dependency is
Medical dependency may be any
diagnosis where you are likely
to be in regular contact and
regular care with the medical
establishment, um,
Not necessarily that you have to
be using a medication, but you
have to be evaluated regularly.
You have to be seen regularly.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Doctor Penn, that
makes sense to me.
So we can move that marvel out
of the circle.
Um, perceived quality of life or
other health conditions.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
are you saying that?
The insurance can't.
Say, well, you live, you live in
a one-bedroom apartment.
And use that.
Or
Mm
I'm not, I'm not quite sure of.
This language either how it fits
into this bill.
Are you saying that the
insurance company can't.
Judge your quality of life.
When making the determination to
pay for this.
It
Pardon me,
uh, representative Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um
The decision about this about
care.
Again, the insurance company is
supporting.
The treatment of a disease.
And we know that the the
treatment of disease.
will often cause unexpected side
effects.
And that's what we're trying to
avoid.
We're trying to make sure that
the treatment is targeted.
And that the insurance company,
in addition, makes sure that the
targeted treatment does not
cause greater disability,
disability including
infertility.
If, for example, we knew that
the cancer treatment.
Might cause blindness as well.
Would we not want the insurance
company to make sure that if it
could be protected by blocking.
That the insurance company would
make sure that the blocking
treatment to save vision was
part of the treatment.
If they
Didn't do that, we would
consider.
Inappropriate, right?
Thank you, Madam Chair of
Representative Doctor Penn.
Thank you for that, that
clarifies it.
Um, so, let's move on to line
15.
17
So these
Everything that I'm covering
here is
delineated in, in statute so
that the insurance company is
prohibited.
From using any of these things
when making a determination, is
that correct?
I'm gonna ask um
I'm gonna ask my expert, uh,
Christina Kimball or Joyce Dylan
Reicky,
if you would like to respond to
the uh to the question raised by
Representative Martinez.
Sure. Hi, this is Joyce Reinke
again. Um, thank you, um.
Chair Thompson, if I could
answer Representative Martinez's
question, um, just
To, you know, reiterate what the
doctor has said that the, the
goal with this language is just
to make sure that these um
discriminatory, you know, um,
lines are not brought into who
is offered, um, this treatment
and, and, um, have their future,
um,
You know, reproductive choices
limited. So the idea is again to
just allow this uh decision to
be made privately between um the
patient, the patient's family
and, and the clinician.
OK. Thank you, madam chair, um,
Thank you, Representative Ms.
Roenicke.
So
I mean, you, you
It's this very,
very specific language.
So
Age
can discriminate by age.
So 5
Went through this procedure in
my twenties and I'm 75, and I
decide to
To take advantage of this at 75,
they can't sing.
Um, Madam Chair, go ahead.
Sorry. Yes, um, Char Thompson,
if I can answer again. Um, the,
um,
The uh benefit is um for
fertility preservation
specifically. So if you, if you
had a patient who was 75, um,
and they were medically
assessed, um, you know, they,
they would not have, um, that
ability necessarily, especially
a woman, right? So the, the idea
would be that these are clinical
decisions that are being made,
um, based on, as Christina
mentioned, everybody is
different, so
Um,
the goal is to preserve this
ability for the future. So
someone was diagnosed at 20 they
would conceivably then be
preserving, you know, sperm or
eggs, um, at, at that age, and
this bill does not extend to the
use of those materials, um, to
create a, a, a pregnancy. This
is not, you know, an infertility
treatment bill. It's really an
emergency measure to step in
before someone has potentially
izing treatment that, that they
need to, to have to save their
life, um, so that they can hold
open opportunity of having
children in the future, and we
know that in this pool of
patients, typically those who
are diagnosed under 45 years of
age, they face great prospects
of survival now, um, their
survival rates are about 86%,
um, and so as a result of that,
there's, there's a real need to
start addressing these long term
consequences of their uh cancer
treatments. So, um, and I just,
I wanna just put on the table
that um we've seen a trend over
the past several years where
states have have recognized this
18 states have enacted some
level of protection for these
patients and for fertility
preservation services, um, we
also see protections um and
coverage in place um at the
Veterans Health Administration
and for federal employee.
employees, um, so we would just
ask um that New Mexico joined
that group and um protect its
most vulnerable citizens from
losing their ability to become
parents.
Thank you Madam Chair and um.
Thank you, Miss Roenicke.
Um
So line 16, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status,
gender or gender identity. Can
you explain that last part to
me.
What's the difference between
gender and gender identity,
isn't that?
I mean, should that combined?
Now, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Martinez, however, a person
identifies, it should not matter
to the insurance company. If
they have sperm or they have
eggs that they're trying to
preserve. That's all that
matters. And so what we're
trying to say here in this piece
of legislation is, it doesn't
matter.
If you have sperm and you have
eggs, whatever you call
yourself, you can still
preserve, OK.
Um
just a couple of
Questions out of curiosity.
Um, how long or eggs and sperm
viable.
I, I did have somebody from the
sperm bank, but she was unable
to join us today to give us more
current information, um, but
there is quite longevity and
then the newer methods of
preserving them. However, I
understand.
Sometimes cancer treatment.
Has to be done very quickly.
And in order to collect sites
takes time. You have to prepare
the woman before, and it may be
too time consuming, and so there
are ways of using blocking.
So that you block the eggs in
the person who protect her and
her future fertility as opposed
to collecting eggs and putting
them someplace else.
So that she can use them later,
OK? So some of the, their
differences in the way you
protect fertility.
It's Easy to ask some guy to go
live a leave a sample at the
sperm bank. You can't do that as
quickly for collecting Oocytes.
So
So how, how
How long were they viable for?
Well
Presuming reminder to go through
the chair, please? Excuse me,
Madam Chair, Representative,
again, your
Leaving the eggs in the patient.
And that's a matter of how old
she is, right? Thank you, Madam
Chair, with as many questions as
you think I would already be
comfortable with that.
Madam Chair
Representative, uh, Doctor Pen,
what I'm asking is that those
eggs that are removed.
And however, cryogenic um
However, that's done. How long
are they viable?
Once they're removed.
Um, I am pretty sure they are
viable for at least 15 years.
That's my understanding.
However, it may be attenuated,
meaning it loses its fertility
over time, but very slowly past
that.
Could I come in? Sorry, madam uh
Chair Thompson, would that be
possible? Yes, please go ahead.
Sorry, um, the, the viability of
the frozen material really turns
on the quality of, of, you know,
the freezing, the freezing, um,
the, the moving the, the tissue
into freezing is what is the
critical juncture, the freezing
and the thawing, but
theoretically, um, you could,
um, the material as long as it's
stable and, and kept at a stable
temperature in the freezing
could last indefinitely, and
there have been
Um, babies born, you know, after
20 something years of of frozen.
sperm or eggs. So,
I don't know if that's helpful
to this conversation.
Thank you, ma'am. I'm sure
that's that that's what I was
looking for.
Um
And what happens when that
patient passes away. So, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative
Martinez.
I don't know what will happen. I
mean, that would be up to them,
they get to ride a wheel, they
get to have a trust, they get to
make that decision. So it's very
difficult to say what exactly
what happened to those um
Frozen sperm or eggs.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative, so there's some
type of agreement.
The sign for
Process
At the beginning of the I passed
away, please keep them.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative
Martinez, that is not a
requirement that you say what
will happen if you die, but what
I am saying is that most people
do.
wheels, and they do direct what
will happen with respect to
items that are personal to them
when they passed away. I'm
expecting that if such a
situation arose that it would be
included in a in a uh wheel or
other disciplinary uh instrument
that would dispose of the egg or
the sperm.
Thompson.
I'm sorry, Thompson, may I, may
I, um,
at least share what our
organization has encountered and
what we know of these kinds of
um situations you're kind of um
breaking up.
Briefly describe it.
Sure, um, fertility clinics
across the country and sperm
banks have, um, legal, um, you
know, directives that patients
sign, so that, that anticipate
the disposition of their
materials upon death, divorce,
that kind of thing. So they have
those legal documents in place,
you know, to protect themselves
and, and there are state laws
that govern how tissues can be
You know, uh, used in the event
that that would happen.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Blows out with this.
Is the cost, Madam Chair
Representative, is that
Paid fully by the insurance
company?
I'm going to ask my
Expert, um.
Christina Kimball, if you can
respond to the representative's
question.
OK, sorry, um.
Thank you representative at
Madam Charesentative Martinez,
um, so insurance just like how
insurance works for other
medical services, this would
work this is the same as just
saying that the fertility
preservation must be covered.
Um, you are still subject to
deductibles and regular
insurance payments. Um,
It's just subject to other
coverages just the same. We're
just asking that fertility
preservation be included a
comparable medical service
coverage.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, uh, Representative
Herndon.
A lot of marvels that roll
around all the.
Follow the debate.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez. They'll fall in the
right place, you know, you can
send in there.
Representative in Chavez, did
you have questions or was from
that, that from the last time. I
need to cross out, OK, OK, so,
um,
I will entertain emotion, Madam
Chair, I move a do pass.
Oh
Back up. We need a do not pass
on House Bill 95, but a due pass
on health health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill 95.
Correct, so moved, Madam Chair.
And the second, 2nd.
Karen, can you take the roll,
please? This is, it's one
motion, it's a do not pass on
the original and it do pass on
the substitute.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate, yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Representative Anna Chavez, no,
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Ferrari, yes.
Representative Jones, she's not
here.
Representative Martinez?
Representative Senate Cortez?
No.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair.
Yes, 63 by a vote of 6 to 3, you
have a do not pass on House Bill
95 and it do pass on the
committee substitute for House
Bill 95.
And, uh, Representative N Chavez
to explain her vote.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um,
this is heartbreaking and I
understand completely the need
for this, but just looking at
the FIR just for state employee
health insurance for 292,500 to
$975,000 a year, and then here
it says for state employee
healthcare premiums, it's
estimated at 202,500 now going
to $675,000 for three years, and
there's
nothing that includes individual
healthcare, commercial care
coverage, so I just don't want
the state of New Mexico
individuals premiums to just
skyrocket and and unfortunately,
I understand the need, but I, I
just don't want to impact
individuals like that, thank
you. Thank you.
Madam chair, if I could just say
one thing in response.
We didn't, we didn't really talk
about that aspect, those numbers
that you so excited are
incorrect. And so we could talk
about that at a later time. And
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. um, representative Matthews
and in company, and, and
reminder to the committee that
this is these, these next to um
the psychology jurisdictional
Act and the Interstate Medical
license.
License your compact. These are
more compact bills, so it's just
different professions, um, so
we, we don't need the
explanation of what a compact
is. We just, uh,
Just a, a quick, we've been
through these in 5 minutes or
less. So let's keep our record
strong.
Madam Chair, I'm Representative
Marion Matthews speaking very
quickly in support of HB 243.
Uh, I'm sorry, HB 242.
It's like, it's like
I have them right? Yeah, the
psychology.
Um
Compact and with me is Doctor
Brian Lopez, uh, very, very
briefly would allow uh
psychologists from other states.
Uh, to provide telehealth
services in New Mexico, would
the following all the rules and
uh also would uh allow them to
be in state for 30 days a year
to practice face to face.
And uh with that, we'll stand
for questions.
OK, and I just want to say hello
to your expert. He worked with
my son, um, and he's a huge San
Diego Charger fan. It's
wonderful to see you again.
Thank you. So, um,
Online, if you are in opposition
to this bill, please raise your
hand.
In the room, is there anyone in
opposition?
See none and sing none on Zoom
if you are in support online,
please raise your hand.
And in the room, anyone in
support. OK, I will take the 1st
5 if you, if you feel the, if
you feel the need to speak
because like I said, we're going
for speed here, Madam, do you
mind if I interject just a
couple of facts about this and
how it's already or how it could
impact human
OK is not to do that and we also
have Doctor Ben Greenberg, uh,
as an expert online. I just, if
we, if we need them, OK.
The seagull through the New
Mexico Psychological
Association. This will be the
4th time we've introduced the
yack, so we hope we can get it
through this time. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair. Uh, this
is JD Bullington speaking for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce strongly supports
this bill. We all know how
important it is to attract
mental health professionals as
we wrestle with rebuilding the
state's behavioral health system
and when approved this compact's
going to eliminate the need for
licensing in multiple states,
thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Oambo
only for AARP in New Mexico. Uh,
we, we support this particular
bill, especially as it uh helps
alleviate some of the workforce
shortages that often impede
access to quality care for New
Mexicans, especially in rural
areas, and so we urge you to
respectfully pass this bill.
Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Mexico Hospital Association. We
stand in strong support of this
bill. Uh, there is a healthcare
provider, a healthcare physician
or physician shortage in the
state that is pretty critical.
We think that this creates a
great pathway to expedite
licensure. We think that this
bill strikes the right balance
between protecting safety of New
Mexicans and creating a more
efficient pathway. Uh, 40 states
have joined the compact,
including all of neighboring
states, New Mexico is the donut
hole in the region that doesn't
have.
Uh, has not joined the compact,
given our state's access to care
crisis. This is a logical step
toward opening the door wider
for highly qualified physicians
to serve in New Mexico. So for
those reasons, the association
asks that you uh support this
bill and move it on to its next
committee.
My name is Fred Nathan. I'm
executive director and founder
of Think New Mexico. We
enthusiastically support this
bill and commend the bipartisan
sponsors, Representative
Matthews and Representative Gail
Armstrong. Um, I wanted to
mention since I'm the 5th
speaker, there are 2 speakers
that couldn't speak. One is from
UNM in support, and one is from
the municipal League in support.
3 quick points. The single most
impactful thing the legislature
can do this session to reduce.
the healthcare worker shortage
is to pass all 9 of these
compacts, and especially this
one.
this bill perfectly complements
this concept that's going
through the legislature to
create a $1 billion behavioral
health fund, which we
desperately need, but that won't
be effective, all that money, if
we don't have the providers,
both the psychologists and the
counselors, and you all passed
the uh the counselor uh compact
earlier this session.
And then I just want to observe
that's time. Sorry, a minute
goes fast, but we're, we're
Trying to be efficient here, so
I will go to Zoom Vicente, and
then Akana.
For one minute, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Vicente Vargas. I'm with
the New Mexico Health Care
Association in New Mexico Center
for Assisted Living. We
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this legislation forward.
We support any legislation that
will help open up access to um
much needed provider care, uh,
in the behavioral health and
psychological space uh for
residents and clients in
licensed long-term care
facilities. We urge your
support. Thank you.
Uh, good morning. Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'mma
Cone speaking for the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico. We
strongly support HB 242 along
with the other compact.
Thank you.
Um
can you,
can you hear me? Yes.
OK. Did you hear the first part?
Yes.
Oh, well, anyway, the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico
supports this bill. Thank you.
Sorry for the interruption. I, I
thought you were finished. So we
have a questions from
Representative Senator Cortez,
Madam Chair Representative, I'd
love to reserve my comments to
make a motion for a do pass,
please. OK. Representative.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. Thank you
so much for for talking to me
here on the side, um,
representative Matthews. I
brought a Representative
Matthew's attention, um.
The potential need for
protection language for
reproductive care and
gender-affirming care in the
psychology compact as well.
Thank you for considering that.
Um,
I just a quick Google search
will also show that the compacts
are being questioned in other
states, there are a couple of
lawsuits in other states. So I
want to be sure that our state
is protected to protect all of
the work that we've done over,
you know, the last however many
years to protect these critical
services. So thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. Thank
you. We will go back to
Representative Senator Cortez
for a motion. So, OK, in a
second, a Representative Anaya.
Is there any opposition?
OK, seeing none, you have a due
pass.
9 to 0.
And moving along. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and moving to HB 243,
the medical.
And my expert is Christina, uh,
Fisher from uh I think New
Mexico.
And um this is for the medical
licensing, um, and, uh, works a
little bit differently than
psychology, it's essentially a
telehealth kind of a, a
situation, um,
And um,
It's really about all I have to
say is that we're very short of
doctors and this would be a
great benefit to the state to be
able to have out of state.
Um, physicians available to New
Mexicans.
On Zoom, if you're an
opposition, please raise your
hand in the room. Anyone in
opposition.
See none and seeing no hands,
um,
If you are in support on Zoom
and um
Raise your hand.
And in the room and support.
OK, again, 5 people, I'm.
You saw how quickly the other
one went. I'm asking for the
same, please.
Only 5, I'm sorry, we just, we
have
Go ahead.
Hello, uh, Madam Chair
Representatives. My name is
Mohammed Bedawi. I'm a medical
student, uh, here in the city of
New Mexico. Um, as you know, our
state is one of the only net
exporters of doctors. We're one
of the only states in the
country that is losing doctors
year after year, uh, this
compact will greatly reduce the
blockades and barriers to having
positions, um, be able to
practice here in the state and
hopefully help with the
healthcare shortage here. Thank
you very much.
And members of the committee,
and Rick Madden, I'm a family
physician, rural, and I'm
speaking for the Academy of
Family Physicians, as well as in
New Mexico Medical Society in
support of this very important.
Healthcare access bill that
would improve patients' access
to care in New Mexico. Thank you
very much.
members of the members of the
committee, um, Madam Chair,
Marla Schulz, registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross Blue
Shield in New Mexico, and we
would have stand, we would have
stood in support for the other
uh compact as well. We stand in
support of all of the compacts
that we're trying to get through
because uh obviously it's going
to enhance the access that we
have to our uh New Mexico
residents thing, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Danielle Duran. I work
for Los Alamos, uh, County and
my counterpart.
from the municipal League has
left. Um, I put up two
resolutions to support compacts
within the municipal League and
both of them passed, and one of
them is for this compact. So I
just want to tell you that there
are communities all over the
state that support passing this
compact and having more access
to healthcare for New Mexicans
across.
All rural, urban, everywhere,
um, and we hope that you will
support this compact as well.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Hospital Association actually
mixed up my testimony for the
last bill and this bill.
So I saw some eyebrows raised
when I said physicians in my
last testimony, um, we did
support the other bill, uh, for
similar reasons. We support
this, in fact, this is actually
the bill uh that 40 other states
have passed, um, so I wanted to
clarify that, um, also, we, we,
we just think that this will
solve our access issues, not
entirely, but it is part of the
package that will get us towards
um bringing more physicians into
the state also, um, I wanted to
mention that UNM, uh, have
permission to say that they
specifically support
The Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce supports and the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce
supports. So thank you for
allowing me the correction.
Please move this bill on. It's a
really important piece of the
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. We will go to Zoom.
I've got the 1st 5 Vicente,
Michael Acana, Linda, and
Sherman. So go ahead, Vicente
and please keep your comments
brief and don't repeat.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
uh for your time. My name is
Vicente Vargas. Um, with the New
Mexico Health Care Association
and New Mexico Center for
Assisted Living. We appreciate
the sponsor bringing this bill
forward.
Thank you.
Thank you Chair Thompson and
members of the committee. My
name is Michael Cassels and I'm
the proud father of Sebastian,
who in 2021, when he was just 2
years old, was diagnosed with
stage 4 myoepithelial carcinoma,
an ultra rare and aggressive
cancer that has no proven
treatment. Nobody at UNMH had
ever seen a patient with MEC,
much less treated this rare
disease, desperate to talk to
somebody who had experience with
this cancer. We did what any
parent would do. We frantically
contacted doctors who could
provide second opinions from the
leading
centers across the country.
Unfortunately, many were willing
to speak with us via Zoom, but
when they learned we, when, when
they learned we were in New
Mexico, they told us that they
would not be able to do so. Why?
Because New Mexico is not a
member of the Interstate Medical
licensure Compact. One
oncologist in Pennsylvania who
also had a medical license in
Texas, told us he would speak to
us if we were in Texas, so we've
had to drive across the state
line to Texas 3 times just to
speak with him over Zoom. This
year, we had an
year, we have an opportunity to
fix this fixable problem by
passing legislation that would
have New Mexico join 40 other
states in the interstate medical
licensure compact. No parent
should have to hear the words.
Your child has cancer and no
parent should be denied the
expert advice needed to make
informed medical decisions about
their child's health.
We urge you to vote in favor of
43. Thank you.
Canna.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico New Mexico strongly
supports this bill for all the
reasons you've already heard,
and you, what, what can I say
but agree with the last speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you. And finally, Sherman.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, this is Megan
Dela Rosa speaking on behalf of
the Cortland Partnership
Committee, um, we strongly
support House Bill 243. This
important piece of legislation
will provide our service members
and their families with greater
access to health care by
streamlining the process for
medical professionals to
practice across state lines.
Military families often face
frequent relocations, and this
compact ensures that they can
continue to receive timely and
consistent care from qualified
providers, no matter where they
are stationed. Additionally, the
Compact benefits the state by
attracting and retaining highly
qualified health care
professionals, enhancing the
over overall health care
infrastructure. We ask that
Our legislators strongly um
passed this bill.
Thank you. Um, any questions
from the committee.
Seeing none, I will entertain
emotion.
I move for a due pass.
So we have a motion from
Representative Ferrari in a
second from Representative
Anaya. Is there any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
past. Oh, I don't have any
opposition, but I would like to
explain my vote. OK, all right.
So you have a due pass to 0.
And I was all of our bills went
like this
round here
just, just a moment to explain,
yes, um, thank you,
Representative Matthews for
bringing this and the other
compact as well. I have voted
for all the compacts. I think
that is an important piece of
what we're doing to retain
healthcare workforce, um,
physicians and everyone
involved, but I want to point
out that we're taking a chance
there because um as the exporter
of physicians, this will make it
easier.
for physicians who are
practicing in New Mexico to
leave our state, making it all
the more important that we
create an environment here in
New Mexico that makes them want
to stay, so.
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and um representative
Ferrari, will you take over the
chair and, well, I
Another chair.
Glad to, madam chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We saved
the best for last.
So this House Bill 263 is the
hospital price transparency Act,
and what the
The purpose of this bill is to
require that hospitals.
Basically give us a menu of of
what their services will cost.
We don't go buy a car and and
you know, think, oh, you know,
we'll figure out what it's gonna
cost after we've done that. So
we are attempting to do the same
thing with um
With hospitals, so it's a
consumer friendly list of the
300 most commonly performed
services that may be scheduled
in advance. Of course, if you
have a ruptured appendix, you're
not gonna go hospital shopping,
but if you need a total knee
replacement. You, you can do
that. So, um, that's the point
of this bill and there this is
supposed to be.
Level, um,
But it was reported in November
2024, that only 21.1% of
hospitals nationwide are in
compliance with the federal law.
So since we don't seem to be
able to get it from the federal
law. We're gonna try and do it
in New Mexico and I will let my
expert introduce himself and
give a few comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee for, for your
time. Uh, my name is Steve
Fenberg, and I served uh
actually in the Colorado
legislature for 8 years. I
recently turned out, um, serving
as the Senate president, so this
is a little bit of an odd
situation for me. Um, uh, just a
couple of months ago, I was in
your chairs in in Colorado. Um,
so long story short, I used to
be somebody important, and now,
uh I'm, I'm an expert, I suppose
here in New Mexico. Um, but
since I left the legislature,
I've, I've started, um,
advising on a few policy issues
that I was really passionate
about when I was serving in the
legislature, including
healthcare price transparency.
Um, the reason why I love this
issue so much is because number
one, it works and it's proven.
And number 2, it's, it's
genuinely bipartisan.
Um, more than 90% of the public,
um, according to recent polls
say that they absolutely support
this. Um, I'm not sure what the
other 10% were thinking when
they took this poll that they
don't want to know what it
costs, but we'll leave them
aside. Um, here's how I know it
works. There's a federal rule,
um, as, uh, Representative
Thompson said that um that has
its origins actually in the ACA,
but it's been built upon uh
through several administrations
and it requires every hospital
in America to post their prices
on their website.
However, as we've heard, there's
virtually no enforcement going
on at the federal level and thus
compliance nationally is only
around 21%. Here in New Mexico,
out of an analysis of 15 of the
biggest hospitals across the
state.
Compliance is actually only
around 13%. So 2 out of those
15. Some hospitals may post a
spreadsheet, but it's often full
of data that isn't easy to make
sense of, or it's inconsistent
or at times they'll post a
spreadsheet and then you open
the spreadsheet, and there's not
really any information in said
spreadsheet. Uh, Colorado passed
a bill in 2022 that did two
things. Number 1, it provides
the state, uh, the authority and
gives them reasonable tools to
enforce, uh, what is essentially
this federal.
rule. Um, and then number 2, it
gives patients a recourse for
when they're charged an
exorbitant price from a hospital
that wasn't in compliance. So
only if the hospital charged
them something that um uh that
wasn't uh previously published
in their files. The result after
passing this bill is that
compliance in Colorado shot up
to more than 70%. So, again, we
know it works. And like I said,
it's incredibly bipartisan. So
in Colorado, the bill passed in
99 to 1 and was sponsored by the
Democratic majority leader and
the Republican minority leader.
Uh, Ohio just passed this bill a
few months ago. It passed
unanimously and was signed by
the governor very recently.
There are at least 15 other
states considering this bill
this year from Pennsylvania to
Nevada to Oregon to Oklahoma.
It's popular, it's the right
thing to do to make sure that
patients are able to know the
prices upfront so that they can
make the right decisions for
their family's health and
financial well-being. When an
MRI or a joint replacement can
vary as much as 31 times between
hospitals. I think it's immoral
to
give patients the price ahead of
time, because that could mean
the difference for a family
being debt-free or literally in
debt for the rest of their
lives. You'll hear a lot of
reasons why this will cause the
sky to fall, uh, but please
don't fall for that. Uh, I'm
more than happy to chat with
stakeholders and talk about the
experience in Colorado, and I
know the regulators in Colorado
as well as other legislators
that were part of this
discussion are happy to, um, as
well, and, and think about ways
that it could be uh amended or
changed to work for.
New Mexico, if there are real
concerns. Um, so, uh, we're
looking forward to, uh, New
Mexico joining the other states
that hopefully will be passing a
very similar bill this year.
Thank you for your time, um, and
thank you to, to everybody on
the committee for your, um, your
sacrifice and being public
servants, uh, I've had a blast
just sitting here this morning
listening to the debate because
it's so reminiscent of many of
the debates we've had, um, and
Representative Martinez, I'm
looking forward to following
where all those marbles go. Uh,
I, I'm just enough of a
legislative door.
that I made tune in in the
coming days to find out. Um, but
I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you.
Oh
We we're playing musical chairs.
Oh, we love playing musical chip
and it's always fun, so thank
you. We'll now uh go to the
audience to see if there's
anyone who stands in opposition
to this bill. If you do, please
stand, come forward. You have
one minute.
State your name.
Thank you clock is ticking.
Thank you, Madam Chair, JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, uh, which
appreciates what the sponsors
trying to do, the Chamber of
Commerce has a lot of members uh
that are hospitals, several
members are hospitals. And if
this legislation was an exact
mirror of what's in place at the
federal level, I think the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce would look at this
differently. The problem is the
proposed methodology in this
bill is very different from the
federal rules. It's overlapping
and burdensome without much of
any new tangible benefit.
for New Mexico while increasing
healthcare and hospital costs
through the creation of some
some new hoops. The new price
posting framework and House Bill
263 is more strict than federal
policy, and it doesn't
adequately accommodate our
economic, regional and local
market pricing flexibilities
that are afforded by federal
rules. And lastly, as pointed
out in the analysis, there are
numerous technical, logistical,
and definitional issues
throughout the bill that will
complicate compliance and
enforcement.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks, registered lobbyist for
the Mexico Hospital Association
were all becoming very familiar
with one another this morning.
So, um, the hospital association
at present does stand in
opposition of the legislation
for much of the reasons that Mr.
Bollington outlined, I think if
this did mirror the federal
guidelines, we would absolutely
support it. We don't have a
problem with transparency in in
in in concept, I think the, the
things that I wanted to
highlight are the fees on a
federal level, uh, fee for
noncompliance is $300 a day.
this bill, it's $2500 for the
first incident, um, and the
problem with that is if there's
just one missing point of data,
that's going to incur that $2500
fine, so that's one provision
that we're concerned about.
Additionally, there's some uh
things there's those a lot of
this duplicates the reporting
requirements. There are some
additional reporting
requirements in this bill. We
worry that that's going to
create some additional
administrative burdens on
hospitals. Um, so that's another
point of concern that we have at
present. Very much appreciate
what the sponsor is trying to.
do, but we do stand in
opposition at this moment. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone uh online who
stands in opposition to this
legislation.
I see no hands. We'll go back to
the room. Is there anyone here
who stands in support of this
legislation. Please come
forward. You have one minute,
please state your name.
Happy Valentine's Day, y'all.
Uh, my name is Julian Kub and I
represent the New Mexico trial
lawyers and more importantly,
the patients that they
represent. Uh, we support this
bill because as we learn more
and more about the problem of
private equity out of state
hospitals that profits they're
making, where those profits are
going. We have to get under the
hood more, right? We need to
know where the problems are,
where they're not, and how to
at transparency with um with out
of state corporate hospitals and
with private equity owned
hospitals. We know those
hospitals have a 25% higher rate
of injury, private equity owned
hospitals for the Harvard study.
So any bit of information we can
get on what they're charging,
what the costs are, where the
money is going, helps us get at
better healthcare. Thank you.
I see no other hands or people.
Indicating that they want to
stand and support in the room.
So online, if you'd like to
speak in support of this
legislation.
We'll take the 1st 5.
You have one minute.
And, uh, so with respect to the
1st 5 in the 1 minute, uh,
please state your name and we'll
start with Nat Dean.
The dead man.
Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
sponsors, uh, advocates and
committee members. My name is
Nat Dean. I'm a person with
multiple disabilities and I'm a
disability advocate. Uh, I stand
in support of, of the bill, but
I think that's something that is
extremely important is that the
price transparency be easily
digestible and easily uh
Understandable, so that when
people are utilizing the
methodology to compare prices.
It is, there is an ease of
access and understanding,
because if I'm needing to
translate it for someone, the
likelihood of them getting that
translation may be lower if they
don't have access to an advocate
such as myself that does not
charge them additional funds to
be able to understand how to be
a more effective consumer of
their medical care costs. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. Next we'll go to
Marie Carey. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Marnie Carey,
president of Power to the
Patients, a national nonpartisan
advocacy group working to make
sure patients here and
nationwide realize their right
to know the price of health care
before they get it. Healthcare
is the only industry where the
consumer doesn't know the price
of the service until after
they've agreed to pay for it,
essentially with a blank check.
As a result, over 100 million
Americans are in significant
medical debt, which is the
leading cause of bankruptcy.
Patients are kept in the dark
about prices, then it get, get a
bill afterward when the care is
not returnable or negotiable for
too long, hospitals have
profited excessively from this
opaque pricing model HB 263
could put an end to this.
I can refute the article, the
arguments all the hospitals have
put forward as a national
advocate, as I have testified.
for states across the country to
pass similar laws, but in the
interest of brevity, I will just
say price transparency would
empower patients to shop for the
best value and provide them with
financial certainty.
We appreciate your comments.
Thank you.
Miss Peck, you're next.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm a
Conope speaking for the League
of Women Voters of New Mexico.
We believe that cost and pricing
data for medical care should be
transparent. HB 263 would be a
big step in that direction, and
we urge you do pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we'll go to PRA.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Linda Bent and I'm
representing patient rights
advocate and nonprofit seeking
price transparency in
healthcare. I am in support of
House Bill 263 because countless
patients have come to us with
their stories of overcharges,
price gouging, and medical debt
from hospitals, all because they
could not see the price in
advance. Our research found that
while most New Mexico hospitals
are posting pricing files, only
13% of them were meeting every
requirement of the federal price
transparency regulation. This
noncompliance blocks tech
companies from building tools.
help the consumers shop and
leave patients vulnerable to
overcharges, surprise bills, and
medical debt. The hospital
association may say that it's
expensive to post their prices,
but the federal HHS estimates
the annual cost at only $11,000.
And smaller hospitals like
Carlsbad Medical Center and
Mountain View Regional in Las
Cruces have posted exemplary
pricing files that are fully
compliant. There was a bout of
national media attention on New
Mexico for some hospitals
aggressively suing low-income
patients for medical debt.
There's the story of Donna who
was sued for $6000 bill. She got
it for a few bags of IV saline
which we appreciate your,
your comments. I've been
support.
Those are all the comments we
have for, uh, are able to hear
from this morning. Let's go to
the committee to sit.
Any questions. First, we have uh
Miss
Senna Cortez, uh,
representative, I'm sorry, Madam
Vice Chair. Madam Chair expert,
um, wait just a moment.
You have a question? Oh, go
ahead, please. OK. Thank you so
much, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Chair, and expert. I just have
one question. If hospitals post
their prices and then lower them
to settle with insurance? Could
they get fined?
And
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, um, Representative, I,
no, I mean, I mean, for, for
one, the, the, just a quick
reminder on the
The, the, the fines, uh, there's
obviously regulatory discretion.
So I, I don't think your
regulator would be finding uh a
hospital if they gave someone a
better deal than they originally
said, I don't think that would
be in anyone's interest, um,
but, but no, I, I think that the
bill specifically says it's only
if they charge more, um, and
then they will be maybe
considered not in compliance.
There's also a process for the
regulator to say, hey, we
noticed that we've gotten some
complaints, and we looked at
your file and there's some
issues. Can you fix this? And
there's sort of a
Back and forth, like any good
regulator will do before they
get to the point where they're
actually levying fines on the
hospital.
Thank you so much, uh, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair and
expert, yeah, I, I just see that
as an example. I was just making
sure just the incongruent
pricing if there would be any uh
possible cause for extra fines.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I don't, I don't
think so. And, and, um, I will
also say in the other states
that this is uh been in place,
um, I, I, we haven't really seen
finds, it's more of a, uh, you
know, the regulator generally
speaking, wants the hospital to
comply. So they will provide
technical assistance, um, have
conversations to make sure that
they can comply rather than just
levying a fine. Um, and then
secondly, around the, um, the
issue of a patient being able to
file a suit if they
feel like the hospital wasn't in
compliance. Um, Colorado has had
this law for several years.
We've only seen two lawsuits the
entire time, um, and, uh,
generally speaking, what happens
is the patient will reach out to
the hospital and say, hey, you
overcharged me based on the
price that you provided prior to
my surgery, and, uh, you know, 9
times out of 10, the hospital
says, yeah, you're right, and
they
They charge them less. So it's
really about empowering the
patients with information rather
than actually ending up in the
courts. Right. Thank you so
much, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Chair, and expert, I think that
all of us would love the
opportunity to price uh shop
around for the right price
before we get a procedure. Thank
you so much for bringing this.
Thank you. We'll now go to uh
Representative Eleanor Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
But I'm sure I, I think this is
a great bill. Um, but I do have
a question in terms of um
Hospitals often talk about their
charity care.
For example, um, also UNMH has a
um insurance program, um,
called UNMAs. They may have
changed the name by now.
I don't know. But my question
is, and I looked for it in the
bill and, and maybe that's not
the intent of the bill, but is
there, is there any place in the
bill that speaks to um
Hospitals providing sort of the
process, uh, or informing
patients of their um charity
care, how they can, how they
can, um, you know, have access
to that sort of what the process
is.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, there's
nothing in this particular bill.
Um, I, I don't know if it's
federal or if it's state by
state, but I do know there are
regulations that require
hospitals to provide that
information upfront or at least
provide a resource for the
patient, um, if they want to
seek charity care, uh, but that
is not in this bill because
this, you know, if you are
someone who's receiving charity
care being provided a discount
for whatever reason. Um, there's
still a, there's still a a price
to that original procedure. You
might not get charged that
price, they might
Wave it or give you a discount,
but there's still a char,
there's still a fee, and that's
what we're asking for to be
disclosed ahead of time. The,
the price for that procedure, an
MRI or a joint replacement that
was negotiated with the
insurance company. And then also
a price for that same procedure
if you're paying uh um cash. So
that's what this bill is after
is making sure that those prices
that were previously negotiated,
so the hospital, the insurance
company, everybody knows these
prices, they're in a contract
somewhere, uh, provide that
ahead of time. And then if
you are someone who can get
charity care, you would pursue
that after the procedure or
whatnot and go through those
processes that are unrelated to
the bill.
Thank you. I see no other
questions. I will take the
motion.
I'm sorry.
I
know
Du pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you, um.
Representative Thompson and
expert, uh, welcome to the New
Mexico legislature. We're having
fun here. Glad you could join
us. Um, I really appreciate
supporting, you know,
transparency and empowering
patients. Couple of questions. I
heard someone say that the New
some New Mexico hospitals are
already compliant with this.
Could you, do you have names?
Of those hospitals.
Representative Jones and Madam
Chair, I believe it was Carlsbad
and another rural hospital, I
can't remem if you want to know
that that the.
person might still be on and
could answer, but I know Carl's
bed was one of them. I can't
remember the other.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative one was
definitely Carl's bed. Um, I can
provide that information after
the committee also if you'd
like, we have a, a study, it
might be more information than
you want, but a study that
analyzed 15 hospitals. I believe
there's maybe 30 hospitals in
the state. So we did the bigger
ones, um, and, and sort of have
a, a, a spreadsheet. It's the
theme, uh, of what pieces of the
federal requirements they are or
not in compliance with, um, and
then sort of the aggregate of
that, it tells us
They are overall in compliance
and two of the hospitals out of
the 15 are doing a great job.
They, they get an A plus, um,
and the other ones for whatever
reason are not in compliance,
and I can provide that
information on what particular
issues of the federal law that
they are not complying with.
I would really appreciate that.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I have another
question. I heard that this bill
is more strict than the federal
law. Can you address that,
please?
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
um, thank you, Representative
for the question. Uh, the, the
answer to that is yes and no,
because the, the rules do
sometimes change, um, obviously
at the federal level, uh, rules
and laws are uh impacted by
lobbying just like they are at
the state level. And so, uh,
these rules have changed a bit
over time. We are essentially
So we'd be codifying, um, what I
think are the, the, the better
version of, of the rule and and
by explaining, I'll explain that
really briefly and happy to chat
offline with anyone who wants to
talk more, uh, is the, the rules
were very recently watered down.
Um, and the reason why it is not
helpful for consumers because
one of those aspects is the CMS
now will allow, uh, instead of
providing a price in that
spreadsheet, a formula.
Uh, or an algorithm. Uh, and so,
you know, there's these
aggregators that try to create
tools, so people can shop, you
know, it's kind of like kayak or
Travelocity for shopping for for
flights, and they use this data
from these spreadsheets. And
then you enter your search items
and you realize that an MRI at
one hospital costs 30% of such
and such formula.
blah blah blah, and you're like,
OK, well that's really not
helpful. But we're after and
what we want to codify is the
version of the rule that says
you got to provide a price, like
$1 and cents price that a
consumer will understand, not
something that's a, a, a formula
that references a contract that
might not even be a public
document. Um, so in those types
of ways, it is more strict, um,
because this specifies that we
want to see the actual price,
not the formula that got to the
price. Um, and then secondly,
there's some other aspects that
the bill does go, um, uh, uh for
on and, and I read through the
analysis from the hospital
association and others, uh, last
night and um I think there there
are some good points in there.
There's some tweaks that could
be made around updates and how
often they need to provide the
update to the, to the authority
and things like that, and I
would be more than happy to chat
with folks offline and think
through um how to make sure
there's discretion and, and uh
flexibility for the authorities
so everyone understands what the
rules are, um, and, and I think
those are not complicated
amendments and, uh, you know,
I'm not super familiar with your
process.
year, but happy to um help draft
those for floor amendments or in
in the next chamber or whatever
it may be.
Thank you very much for that
explanation, and I feel like um,
you know, this is such a
complicated um bill that I'm
really looking forward to to uh
talking about it in the future,
getting the information about
New Mexico hospitals and so
forth, and comparing the federal
versus this, um,
We don't spend much time doing
that in here and unfortunate
unfortunately because we do have
so many bills, but I, so I'm,
I'm going to go ahead and vote
for this with the understanding
that I need to know more, but I
mean very much in favor of
transparency, so appreciate you
bringing the bill,
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
I see no more hands for
questions. I will take a motion
move it to pass, Madam Chair.
We have a Du pass motion by
Representative Anaya, seconded
by Representative Cates. Will
you please call the roll?
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Kate? Yes.
Representative E. Chavez.
Yes.
Representative in Chavez.
Represented Ferrari? Yes.
Representative Jones. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Santa Cortez?
Yes.
And I'm vice chair. Yes. Madam
Chair, yes.
80.
But in the
positive
by motivating the positive, 0
and the negative, you have a due
pass.
Thank you.
Those are all the bills that we
have for today. The other three
have been rolled. We are in re
recess until adjourned, but
reminder to the committee, we
